





























































Hansard: May 24, 1990


 

 

May 24/90 
 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 

Standing Committee on Private Members' Bills 
 
Clerk: -- Mr. Britton, as chairman of the Standing Committee on Private 
Members' Bills, presents the seventh report of the said committee, which is 
as follows: 
 

 Your committee has considered the following Bills and has agreed to report 
the same without amendment: 

 
 Bill No. 01 -- An Act to amend An Act to incorporate Mennonite Brethren 

Church of Saskatchewan; 
 
 Bill No. 02 -- An Act to amend An Act to incorporate Millar Memorial Bible 

Institute; 
 
 Bill No. 03 -- An Act to amend An Act to incorporate Grey Sisters of the 

Immaculate Conception of Pembroke. 
 
 Your committee recommends, under the provisions of rule 58, that fees be 

remitted, less the cost of printing, with respect to Bills No. 01, 02, and 
03. 

 
Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I move, seconded by the member 
from Prince Albert: 
 

 That the seventh report of the Standing Committee on Private Members' 
Bills now be concurred in. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Swan: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to introduce to you, and to the 
members of the Assembly, the president of Bethany Bible Institute from 
Hepburn, Saskatchewan, Mr. Cliff Jantzen.  He's seated in the Speaker's 
gallery. 
 
He's been a long-time member of the educational industry in Saskatchewan.  
He has served as director of education in a number of places, as a 
principal of schools, also as a regular teacher, and today serves as the 
president of Bethany Bible Institute.  Please join with me in welcoming Mr. 
Cliff Jantzen. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. Petersen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today, to you and through 
you, I would like to introduce to all members of the Assembly 17 grade 4 
students from Wishart School at Wishart, Saskatchewan.  They're accompanied 
by their teacher, Cindy Ramler; chaperons, Edith Prisiak, Pat Kostiuk; and 
their bus driver, Ed Weldon. 
 
I would like to just say that I'll be meeting with you at about 2:30 in 
room 218 for some discussion and some refreshments.  I hope you have a good 
stay here today and do learn something, please. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'd like to 
introduce to you, and through you to all members of the Assembly, 42 grade 
4 students from King George School in Moose Jaw.  They are seated in your 
gallery today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And immediately following question period today, they'll be taking a tour 
of the building.  And I look forward to meeting with them for pictures at 3 
o'clock, and after that, a brief visit and refreshments.  Mr. Speaker, I 
would ask all members of the Assembly to join me in welcoming these young 
students from Moose Jaw to this, their Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Saskatchewan.  And I would also like to 
join with the member from Rosetown in welcoming Cliff Jantzen to the 
Assembly this afternoon.  I know that Cliff and the Bethany Bible Institute 
in Hepburn, which is in my constituency, has for many, many years been a 
stabilizing influence to many of our young people in satisfying their 
spiritual needs, not only people in Saskatchewan, but in our surrounding 
provinces as well.  So Cliff, I welcome you here on behalf of the members. 
 
And on a more personal note, Mr. Speaker, while I'm on my feet, I haven't 
taken this opportunity before but I would like to introduce three members 
in your Speakers' gallery on the top row as well, that are very near and 
dear to me and I'd like to introduce them to all members of the Assembly at 
this time. 
 
They have been here on a number of occasions because of their interest in 
politics.  And one of the people that I would like to introduce to you is 
my good wife Alma -- if you would stand so that they could recognize you; 
my eldest son Dean, and a friend, Brenda Enns.  They've come here to 
witness the proceedings this afternoon and will be going back tonight.  So 
please make them feel welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Saskatchewan's Credit Rating 
 



 

 

Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  My question today is to 
the Minister of Finance.  Mr. Speaker, citing the reasons of heavy debt and 
weak economy, Moody's of New York, a copy of the report I have in front of 
me, yesterday lowered Saskatchewan's credit rating for the fourth time 
since 1982, from AA1 in 1982, one of the best ratings; according to 
yesterday's Moody's ratings, we're now at one of the lower ratings. 
 
I would say, Mr. Speaker, a searing indictment of this government's 
incompetence and economic policy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, my question to the Minister of Finance 
therefore is an important one but a simple one.  When will this government 
get on the right track?  What will it take to get this government back on 
the right track, to stop adding to this mountain of debt that you've 
accumulated since 1982, to stop adding to that debt, to get off the 
privatization kick, and to get your priorities away from the Cargills of 
the world, to the ordinary people of the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, I say to you and all members of the 
legislature, that we take yesterday's credit downgrade by Moody's as 
serious.  Obviously we're disappointed.  But having said all of that, it's 
not totally surprising, Mr. Speaker. I think as they have observed, as has 
anybody who's lived in Saskatchewan for the last while, that this is 
largely a reflection of the impact on our economy of drought, of trade 
wars, of low commodity prices, especially in the agri-food area, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
It's also a reflection of our government borrowing on behalf of 
Saskatchewan farmers, rural communities, to maintain livelihoods, whether 
they are in rural or urban Saskatchewan, that are so dependent on that very 
important agriculture sector in our province, Mr. Speaker.  There's no 
denying that our economy in the agriculture sector has been hard hit, and 
this downgrade is largely a reflection of that very event, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question for the Minister of 
Finance.  While the Minister of Finance expresses his regret, 
unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, judging by his answer to my first question, he 
does not understand, I would argue, what Moody's clearly says is the cause 
of this problem.  Moody says, and I've got a copy of his statement in front 
of me, says that this downgrading is due "to increasingly high levels at a 
time of economic weakness and relative financial stringency."  That's what 
Moody says.  A question of high debt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to the Minister of Finance is simply this:  if 
you're not going to listen to the official opposition, if you're not going 
to listen to the business community, if you're not going to listen to the 
farmers, all of whom are worried about this mountain of debt that you've 
amassed since 1982, for goodness sake at least will you listen to your 
friends in New York, Moody's, and do something about these kinds of 
policies? 
 



 

 

Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well as I said, Mr. Speaker, the observation that 
Moody's makes about our economy is the same one that I have made and I 
think that any reasoned thinking person would make about what's happened 
over the last two years in the agriculture sector, is that we have had some 
difficult times -- weather, the high interest rate policy of the federal 
government, the trade wars I talked about.  There's no question we do have 
. . . have had some difficult times in the agriculture sector. 
 
The other thing is, Mr. Speaker, and we don't apologize for this, Moody's 
in New York does not by itself determine our public policy.  We also made 
the conscious decision to back up farmers.  And although the opposition 
members may be against our government making available $500 million to get 
the crop in this spring, we thought that was important, Mr. Speaker, and we 
stand behind that kind of decision, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question for the Minister of 
Finance.  Mr. Speaker, I ask you to consider, sir, the record since 1985.  
Our debt in this province has skyrocketed -- skyrocketed from 5 billion to 
nearly 14 billion.  Since 1985, we've lost over 50,000 people.  Since 1985, 
privatization a p√† la PC style is going ahead at a breakneck speed.  And 
since 1985, we've had a downgrading of this province's credit rating for 
four times in the last five years.  That's a searing indictment, Mr. 
Speaker.  And more importantly than that it's saying that the New York 
investment community doesn't like this government any more than the people 
of the province of Saskatchewan like this government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, my question to the Minister of Finance 
therefore is simple.  Since because as the result of your policies of waste 
and mismanagement and privatization we are now, in terms of credit rating, 
below the province of Manitoba, below the province of New Brunswick, at a 
par with the province of Nova Scotia, when at one time we were a shining 
light in Canada, in the face of those facts, why don't you admit you simply 
don't have a game plan to lead us out of this mess that you've created?  
Why don't you simply admit that you've blown it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member tries to draw the long 
bow and make the bridge that somehow it's waste and mismanagement and 
privatization that have led to this credit downgrade. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- And yet he himself, Mr. Speaker, read from Moody's 
commentary just a moment ago.  And I challenge him, the honest, honourable 
person that he is, to cut past the political posturing and tell us where in 
Moody's it says that . . . Moody's commentary that it said the downgrading 



 

 

is due to privatization and waste and mismanagement.  It isn't there, Mr. 
Speaker.  It isn't there, because Moody's is too of the view that our 
economy has been in difficult times, Mr. Speaker, and we've had to back up 
the farm sector.  And we don't apologize for that, albeit we're 
disappointed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question for the Minister of 
Finance.  And, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the Minister of Finance that 
this morning on CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation), Mr. Speaker -- the 
Minister of Finance would know if he'd have listened -- that Mr. William 
Streeter who is on this statement that Moody's has published, has said that 
in part the downgrading is due to the fact that the privatization policies 
of this government which it's embarked on at a breakneck speed, have not 
resulted in a reduction of the debt, but in fact, as we pointed out 
yesterday, an increase in the debt when they privatized the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- That's what Mr. Streeter said on CBC radio.  And I say and 
I ask the Minister of Finance:  in the light of the statement by Mr. 
Streeter and Moody's that your privatization policies result not only in a 
reduction . . . not a reduction of the debt but an increase in the debt; in 
the light of the fact that you've lost the population and you've got our 
debt up to $14 billion, what in the world is it going to take to get you 
people changing your priorities for people instead of the big corporations 
that you're favouring? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- I thought the hon. member might have heard the 
interview on CBC radio this morning, which I did, and so I asked for a 
transcript of it.  And I wonder what the hon. member will do if he's proven 
wrong and has taken Mr. Streeter, who is the assistant vice-president at 
Moody's, Mr. Speaker, if he has taken him out of context, will he apologize 
to the House and to Mr. Streeter. 
 
Because what he said, Mr. Speaker, as I understand it, is this in response 
to a question from the interviewer, that: 
 

 Some of this is just because of the borrowing by the province for some of 
the Crown corporations is not being offset by privatization proceeds as it 
was in the past. 

 
What he is saying, Mr. Speaker, is -- Mr. Streeter's observation -- is 
perhaps we should have more privatization to offset the debt that they 
accumulated, Mr. Speaker.  What he is saying, Mr. Speaker, in my mind is 
when we enjoyed that double A rating, when the hon. member was a member of 
the government and they used to go to New York city with that double A 
rating, what did they do with the proceeds, Mr. Speaker? 
 



 

 

They bought potash mines, Mr. Speaker, existing potash mines that got us 
the debt.  That's what they did, Mr. Speaker.  And what else . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question for the Minister of 
Finance, and I thank him for confirming what I said with respect to the CBC 
interview.  Because as Mr. Streeter says, in the words of the Minister of 
Finance, part of the debt is due to the fact that the debt is not being 
offset by privatization -- the words used.  And that's my point.  It's not 
being offset by the privatization because the privatizations result in net 
losses like in the potash case: $440 million . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- . . . $440 million loss on that privatization -- no wonder 
they can't offset the debt.  And my question to you, Mr. Minister of 
Finance and Mr. Premier: who's got the money?  Where's the money gone? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Where has the money gone? 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well I'll tell you where the money went.  That $1.4 
billion that was on the books, or $1 billion-plus that was on the books -- 
the potash corporation, Mr. Speaker -- that money went to New York and 
elsewhere to buy out existing mines from companies that were across this 
North American continent, Mr. Speaker.  That's where that money went. 
 
And it went, Mr. Speaker, to buy up farm land that was existing in this 
province under their administration, under that ill-fated land bank, Mr. 
Speaker.  That's what they did with that AA credit rating.  And at the same 
time farmers and home owners were suffering 22 per cent interest rates. 
 
And what did they do with their AA credit rating?  They bought potash mines 
and they bought the farm land of this province, Mr. Speaker.  That's what 
they did with the money, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the Minister of 
Finance.  And I note to you, sir, and the other members of the House, that 
the minister still refuses to answer the question, which was: what in the 
world did you do with the money?  Did you pump the money into GigaText?  
Did you pump the money into Mr. Childers' salary?  Did you pump the money 
into Weyerhaeuser?  Did you pump money into Cargill?  Where in the world 
did the money go? 
 
Would the Minister of Finance tell us where it went, because the loss on 
the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan privatization was larger than the 
amount of money that the people invested to get into the potash business in 



 

 

the first instance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- So my question to the Minister of Finance and the Premier, 
who is aiding the Minister of Finance in the answer, anybody who wants to 
answer there, tell the people of the province of Saskatchewan, what have 
you done with the money?  Why is our credit rating going down? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- As I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, the drop in the 
credit rating, as Moody's has suggested, is largely a reflection of our 
economy on the one hand . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  There are a multitude of people wishing to 
answer the question.  Now let us allow the Minister of Finance to answer 
the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- I just would reiterate, Mr. Speaker, that the tight 
economy plus the fact that we made the conscious decision to back up 
farmers, and we don't apologize for that, because it's the farming 
community and all those who make their living directly and indirectly 
across this province, Mr. Speaker.  And we don't apologize for borrowing to 
put rural natural gas into communities and farm homes across this province.  
And we don't apologize, Mr. Speaker, for borrowing money to put individual 
line service into farmers so that the children living in those farm 
communities can have access to computer data bases just like people in town 
do, Mr. Speaker.  And we don't apologize for having individual line service 
across this country so our farmers and farm families can have access to 
business privacy in their phone discussions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we don't apologize for going to the wall for farmers in this spring 
with a spring seeding program of $500 million.  We don't apologize for 
that.  We do apologize, Mr. Speaker, for the folly of the NDP spending $442 
million too much to buy potash mines.  That we apologize for, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much.  Mr. Minister, in groping around 
for excuses to cover this embarrassing failure, you focus almost 
exclusively on agriculture.  Mr. Minister, the public of Saskatchewan don't 
believe that, and now we have it in writing that the New York investors 
don't believe it either because Moody doesn't believe it. 
 
Mr. Minister, one of the primary reasons given by Moody's for this 
province's lower credit rating is your massive borrowings for economic 
development.  Mr. Minister, in this province economic development has 
become a byword for massive hand-outs to some of the world's wealthiest 
corporations such as Cargill and Weyerhaeuser.  And, Mr. Minister, a 
by-product of those hand-outs is rising unemployment, massive 
out-migration, and farmers who have in fact gone to the wall. 
 



 

 

Mr. Minister, is it your contention that Saskatchewan should suffer all of 
these problems so that we can give hand-outs to companies whose credit 
ratings are better than ours? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member objects to some of the 
joint ventures that we have pursued to diversify our economy, to add value, 
to increase our manufacturing and processing of some of our raw resources, 
Mr. Speaker, so that our young people will have jobs and opportunities in 
the future, so that we can have stability and growth in our rural 
communities.  And we think that is a wise strategy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the hon. member will raise again the example of Cargill, but he will 
also not acknowledge the fact that we joined hands with the Saskatchewan 
Wheat Pool at Biggar Malt.  They will also not acknowledge that we joined 
hands with the Co-op and built the upgrader in here to process heavy oil, 
Mr. Speaker.  They will acknowledge that we joined hands with Lloydminster, 
Alberta to build an upgrader up there, Mr. Speaker.  They won't acknowledge 
the project in Weyerhaeuser in Prince Albert. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they have a very selective view of the world.  It's driven by 
totally partisan political motives.  If you want to have a reasoned 
discussion about an economic development diversification policy, let's have 
it. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we're going to continue the course of economic 
diversification anchors in our economy so that our young people will have 
jobs, Mr. Speaker, so our communities will grow, be stable, and so our 
young people will enjoy a quality of life that we've come to enjoy, Mr. 
Speaker, in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- A supplementary to the minister.  Mr. Minister, why 
should the Government of Saskatchewan put up most of the money for Cargill 
when their credit rating is better than ours?  Why don't they just borrow 
the money themselves? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, we have . . . our process . . . the 
tools that we have used to increase economic diversification in this . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I'm sure the hon. member will want to allow 
the minister to answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, because we are not driven by any 
ideological dogma, we have used the entire range of tools to build and 
diversify this economy in partnership with the people. 
 
I used the example of the co-op, the wheat pool, they happen to not like 
the Cargill example, the Indian bands in Meadow Lake.  Where it made sense 



 

 

we put together Crown corporations, the Saskatchewan Water Corporation.  
Where it made sense to do joint ventures we did joint ventures, and where 
it made sense to privatize, like Sask Oil and Gas and others, we did so, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The key question we should ask on fertilizer plants in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, is this question, is this question, and I pose it to the NDP to 
come forward with their policy on this.  Saskatchewan farmers buy $300 
million of fertilizer a year here, and I ask him: why was there never a 
urea or ammonious hydras plant built in this province during their entire 
regime, Mr. Speaker?  That's the question.  Why never a plant, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Agreement with Weyerhaeuser 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- I direct my question to the minister responsible for the 
Crown Investments Corporation.  And, Mr. Minister, will you confirm that to 
the end of 1987 Weyerhaeuser owed the province $63.5 million in dividends 
as a result of the sale of PAPCO (Prince Albert Pulp Company), and that of 
this amount only $53.5 million has been paid?  Could the minister explain 
why the total amount has not been paid, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, relative to the questions on 
Weyerhaeuser and their financial commitments to the province, as far as I'm 
aware, they're up to date, Mr. Speaker.  And I think that is another 
shining example of taking . . . of diversifying our economy, very good 
jobs, high quality jobs, important, not only to this province, but 
important to the people in and around Prince Albert. 
 
And if it's not important, stand in your place and say so.  Don't argue one 
viewpoint here and another in Prince Albert like you do with the Cargill 
plant, where for the Moose Jaw MLAs they're all in favour of it, but when 
you're in this legislature either they duck it or you argue a different 
standpoint.  Come clean with the public of Saskatchewan.  I say come clean 
if it's anything less than partisan politics. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- New question, Mr. Speaker.  No wonder we're $14 billion in 
debt, Mr. Minister, with that type of an attitude. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Mr. Minister, will you confirm that the Weyerhaeuser 
Company has paid not one penny on the $236 billion price of the province's 
assets -- not one penny?  Will you confirm that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- In so far as the exact details of the financial 



 

 

commitments to date, Mr. Speaker, I'll get those details and bring them 
back to the legislature, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- New question, Mr. Speaker, to the same minister.  Mr. 
Minister, will you confirm that in 1989 Weyerhaeuser paid not one cent 
because it had a cash flow problem that year?  And I maintain to you, Mr. 
Minister, that Weyerhaeuser pleaded cash flow problems and you let them off 
from their commitments, their financial obligations to this province.  
Isn't that the case, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, what I'm aware of relative to 
Weyerhaeuser is the tremendous success that that project has been for 
Prince Albert and area and indeed for our province in terms of taking a raw 
resource, adding value to it, giving us a larger manufacturing and 
processing base, jobs for our young people, giving us some breadth in our 
economy so we are less susceptible to drought and the agri-food industry, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I'll tell you, the only projects that these people, these people who 
are, as my colleague said yesterday, stuck between Marx and the 
market-place, the only projects that they're ever against, Mr. Speaker, 
they never raise questions in here if we're joining hands with the Wheat 
Pool or the co-op -- any of those, Mr. Speaker -- but if it's a 
multinational, vertically integrated, North American company, it is 
automatically bad.  Mr. Speaker, for the sake of Saskatchewan people, our 
young people, and community stability, growth in our communities, can't we 
move beyond this petty ideological debate of the NDP's, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Mr. Speaker, the minister knows full well that 
Weyerhaeuser has not paid one cent on the $236 billion that it owes this 
province because of a cash flow problem. 
 
My question to you, Mr. Minister, and by way of preamble, can you tell this 
House how many Saskatchewan farmers were excused from dealing with their 
financial commitments to this province because they had a financial cash 
flow problem, or business people in this province.  And can you tell us how 
many Saskatchewan workers were excused from paying income tax because they 
had a cash flow problem. 
 
Mr. Minister, these days lots of people are having cash flow problems.  My 
question: why do you give Weyerhaeuser preferred treatment while at the 
same time you're policies devastate Saskatchewan people? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, first of all . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- First of all, I don't accept at face value the hon. 
member's accusation, Mr. Speaker. And the only other thing I would say is 
that I don't think the Saskatchewan people, I don't think the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan, I don't think the Prince Albert people want us to go back to 
the NDP way where that plant under them was bleeding $91,000 a day, Mr. 
Speaker.  I don't want to go back to that.  I don't think the people do, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 39 
 

Saskatchewan's Credit Rating 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day, pursuant to rule 
39 I would move, seconded by my colleague, the member from Regina Centre 
that this Assembly by leave, I would move: 
 

 That this Assembly regrets that the credit rating of the province of 
Saskatchewan has again been lowered as a result of the growing economic 
crisis and the government's continued mismanagement of the provincial 
economy. 

 
Leave not granted. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- Before orders of the day, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to ask 
leave of the House to introduce a group of students. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise on behalf of my colleague from 
Saskatoon Fairview, who is unavoidably detained from being here today, to 
introduce a group of students from Confederation Park School in Saskatoon. 
 
A number of years back, I had the opportunity of representing that area of 
the city, which is now called Fairview, in this Legislature.  This group, 
situated in the east gallery, Mr. Speaker, is 54 students, grade eight, 
from Confederation Park School. 
 
I know that members will want to wish them the best of luck in their trip 
to Regina, an enjoyable trip.  They're accompanied here today by Ford 
Mantyka and Dianne Selby, and I'll be, on behalf of the member for 
Saskatoon Fairview, taking the opportunity to meet with the students and 
answer any questions they may have about the legislature.  Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- I'd like to ask for leave to introduce some students. 
 
Leave granted. 



 

 

 
Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, it's indeed my pleasure to introduce to you, 
and through you, students from northern Saskatchewan from the Churchill 
High School.  There are 16 grade eight students accompanied by their 
teacher, Martina Cain and Leslie Moffatt.  Could I have the House please 
welcome the guests? 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
Bill No. 19 -- An Act respecting the Promotion, Development, Control and 
Regulation of the Production and Marketing of Agricultural Products and 
Certain Amendments to Certain Acts resulting from the enactment of this Act 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'd just like to make 
a few short comments on the Bill, basically being a reorganizing Bill.  And 
I just want to start out by saying that there are a number of things that 
happened between 1971 and 1982 when the New Democratic government was in 
Saskatchewan, and most of these -- and pertaining to some of the 
reorganization of this Bill -- most of these were very positive in nature 
for farmers in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Things like The Natural Products Marketing Act was rewritten and 
established marketing commissions and producer marketing boards.  The 
Saskatchewan grain marketing control Act was amended to enable regulations 
to prevent distressed selling prices of feed grains.  The Milk Control Act 
was amended to authorize the entry into national milk marketing.  The 
Saskatchewan Hog Marketing Commission was set up.  The SHARP (Saskatchewan 
Hog Assured Returns Program) program which farmers greatly benefitted from 
as was the sheep and wool commission, as was the vegetable marketing 
commission, as was the beef stabilization plan.  And the agricultural 
return stabilization Act was put in place. 
 
And all of these things, Mr. Speaker, are very, very important.  And I just 
want to say that a Bill of this nature, reorganizing the departments, 
incorporating a couple of the existing Bills into one, is fine and well to 
proceed with.  But I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, and I tell the government 
opposite, it takes more than that to ensure that marketing boards' supply 
management is maintained in Saskatchewan, one of the mainstays, an orderly 
return for farmers where they can budget on. 
 
But the problem as I see it, Mr. Speaker, is that this alone will not stop 
the erosion of orderly marketing in Saskatchewan.  The free trade agreement 
is putting inordinate pressure on orderly marketing. 
 
And I say to the government and members opposite, although this Bill is not 



 

 

controversial to a large degree, there is a great amount of controversy 
around the orderly marketing of products in Saskatchewan.  And orderly 
marketing in Saskatchewan has proven itself to be an instrument which 
farmers can depend on.  They can organize and budget and plan their 
operations in such a manner that they could provide themselves with a 
reasonable return.  But this government's promotion of the free trade 
agreement, Mr. Speaker, is putting that today in jeopardy. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Oh wake up and get your head out of the sand. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Well the minister says, wake up and get my head out of the 
sand.  Well maybe I could just give him a couple of examples. 
 
This government did away with the red meat stabilization plan and went to 
the tripartite system with hogs and with beef, and that plan is not being 
well accepted by farmers.  But that is one step into the erosion of orderly 
marketing in Saskatchewan. 
 
This government supported the federal government's move to undermine the 
Canadian Wheat Board, which is another orderly marketing instrument for 
Saskatchewan farmers.  And he says that I should get my head out of the 
sand. 
 
Well I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, the facts speak for themselves.  Every 
time there is a move against orderly marketing, this government supports 
it. 
 
And I say it's going to take a lot more than introducing a Bill such as 
this in order to protect the livelihoods of farmers in Saskatchewan.  The 
Premier himself, if you read back in his writings when he was a professor 
at the university in agricultural economics, says that supply management 
systems are not the right way to go. 
 
And I've read those comments in this legislature.  So he doesn't have it in 
his heart, Mr. Speaker, to go forward and develop these orderly marketing 
systems.  Instead they're being eroded. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with that I think . . . or I would just ask this 
government, it's fine to put forward legislation like this, but you must 
have it in your heart to support the orderly market supply management 
systems that we have established in this province.  They are so crucial to 
what is basically a crisis in agriculture today, though that orderly market 
supply management system provides stability. 
 
And that's what we need in agriculture -- stability.  That's the only bit 
of stability that we have, the only long-term programs they had that we, 
when we were government, put in.  And they are being beneficial to farmers 
thus far, but are being eroded by the Tory government.  So, Mr. Speaker, I 
just would say that I will now allow the Bill to proceed. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee 
of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 



 

 

(1445) 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Energy and Mines 
Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 23 

 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, do you have any 
people working on your personal staff or in the department on a contractual 
basis? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Yes, we have people that work for the department under 
contract. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- How many people do you have on contracts and in what 
capacities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, I might ask a clarification from the 
member.  Is he talking about the people that have personal services 
contracts with the department or all the people that have had contracts 
over the last year? 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- I'm interested to know, Mr. Minister, how many people 
you've had on personal services contract in the last fiscal year and how 
many you have on the current fiscal year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- If I might, Mr. Chairman, I'd like to send . . . 
there's a number of pages here and we'll send it across to the member.  
It'll indicate in a commentary whether the contract is current or has 
expired. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister.  I appreciate that.  These 
are individuals and companies who are in personal contract with the 
department in the previous fiscal year, in the current fiscal year.  And is 
there also . . . Oh, there is also a reference with respect to where they 
work.  I appreciate that.  Thank you very much.  I'll have a look at that 
at a later time. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to draw your attention to some work done and published 
by Sask Trends Monitor and reported on Saturday, May 12 in The Globe and 
Mail, and I'll have a page if I might take this copy over to the minister 
and he can have a look at it.  But the figures used by the Sask Trends 
Monitor are all taken from publications of your department, the annual 
report, the mineral statistics year-book, and budget estimates, and they 
are, Mr. Minister, in essence the government's figures.  In case you 
haven't seen them, you've got a copy there. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, this business publication has come to the conclusion, 
the conclusion that the opposition arrived at some time ago, as you will be 
aware, that, and I quote: 
 



 

 

 Even with the declining prices, had the royalty and taxation levels 
remained at their earlier levels, the current provincial operations debt 
of $4 billion would simply not exist. 

 
That's the conclusion of this Sask Trends Monitor.  Back in 1982 you will 
recall that the Premier loudly and proudly announced that the province is 
so rich in resources, and I quote the Premier: that we can mismanage the 
economy and still break even.  Mr. Minister, on the basis of these 
statistics, how does it feel to have the Premier proven wrong? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, in all due respect to the hon. 
member, and I do thank him for sending the article across, but it simply is 
not an accurate piece of information.  And I'll give you a number of 
reasons, give the committee reasons why not. 
 
Saskatchewan's rates, royalty rates -- and no one argues this point either 
in the industry or outside -- continue to be the highest of any province in 
Canada.  In other words, the royalties that we take here on oil and gas 
production are higher than any other jurisdiction. 
 
This government, and the member is correct, has been far more responsive to 
the ups and downs of the market-place in price than the previous government 
was.  And I believe that the net result of that responsiveness has been 
evident in a number of areas.  We've kept many wells producing in this 
province that would have been shut under the previous regime.  It has meant 
that new drilling has been maintained, levels of drilling have been 
maintained. 
 
And by maintaining that production and the drilling, you obviously maintain 
jobs and you keep revenues flowing even when the price of oil goes from $35 
a barrel to 10.  And I think that our royalty system is one of the best in 
North America.  When oil prices go down, the royalty goes down; when oil 
prices go up, the royalty rates rise. 
 
When the oil prices return to the 1985 levels, the royalty rates will also 
return to the 1985 levels.  And I think that's all that needs to be said in 
regards to the particular article, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Well, Mr. Minister, the article, from what we can gather, 
reflects accurately the statistics that have been provided by the 
department.  The minister may not recall this, but in the '70s the price of 
oil was a lot less than it is now.  As a matter of fact, if you'll talk to 
your officials they will tell you that in 1972 and '73 the price of oil was 
$3.54 a barrel.  And I might add that the royalty revenues that we received 
in the '72, '73, and '74, and '75 period were quite significant when you 
consider the prices that we're now getting for oil. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, your policies and that of your government have been 
basically disastrous for the people of this province.  In many respects the 
debt that your government has saddled on the people of Saskatchewan has 
been a direct result of your mismanagement of our provincial resources and 
in other areas. 
 



 

 

And we've seen today in question period the Minister of Finance respond in 
a most incompetent fashion to questions with respect to the dropping of the 
province's credit rating.  Mr. Minister, you sat in that chair during 
question period and I saw you wince more than once at the Minister of 
Finance's responses.  Moody's has downgraded the province's credit rating 
five times since you've been government, four times in the last four or 
five years. 
 
And we've seen, Mr. Minister, the result of the privatization programs of 
your government and some of the other programs, one of which is the 
resource program.  The resource program is not the major reason for where 
you guys are at right now with respect to debt in the economy and the 
mismanagement and the patronage and the corruption.  But certainly the 
resource sector is very important and that's the estimates we're covering 
right now.  But since 1982 the value of sales of our resources has 
increased from approximately $2.2 billion to approximately $3 billion in 
1989, and yet the government revenue as a per cent of the value of those 
sales has decreased from approximately 35 per cent in '82 to 12 per cent in 
1989.  The forgone revenue would have eliminated the debt crisis you are 
now experiencing, even with all of the mismanagement that you've practised.  
It wouldn't have eliminated the Crown corporation capital debt because that 
has gone to over $9 billion, but it would have helped out the operating 
deficit of this province. 
 
And even with the mismanagement of your government, you would have been a 
lot closer to having a balanced budget than which you now have, somewhere 
around 4.4 or 4.5 billion, depending on which numbers you look at. 
 
It would have enabled your government to deal with the current agricultural 
crisis as well, which you seem to be ignoring in spades, and if nothing 
else, you may not be ignoring it, but you're certainly playing cruel 
politics with the farmers and the farm families and the small-business 
people of this province. 
 
It would have, Mr. Minister, provided your government with the means and 
wherewithal to facilitate the continued diversification and strengthening 
of our total economy. 
 
And in that regard, I note from your department's '88-89 annual report that 
your officials have been undertaking reviews of all of the resources, 
including uranium, oil, coal, potash, and natural gas structures that are 
now in place.  My question, Mr. Minister, to you is, what further changes 
are planned or contemplated in regard to those five areas? 
 
(1500) 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Well I believe, Mr. Chairman, that first off we don't 
dispute the figures that were in that particular article.  They haven't had 
time to totally go through them, but they seem reasonable.  The problem is 
that the article comes to the same erroneous conclusions that the members 
opposite had been making for years.  And it's that the world never changes, 
shall we say, in the oil business.  And I'd like to point out to the member 
-- and I know this has been pointed out to him in other years -- that if 



 

 

you allow, for instance, for the inflation factor on a barrel of oil which 
was worth $19.34 in 1981, that's the equivalent to $29 in 1990 dollars. 
 
Costs of production -- profit margins have continued to shrink.  You can't 
collect the same level of royalties that you did in 1980-81 if that 
profitability isn't there any more.  The production of the average well in 
Saskatchewan -- and this has been pointed out to the member year after year 
-- has declined from an average of 20 barrels a day in 1981 to a projected 
average of 15 barrels a day in 1990. 
 
New oil in Saskatchewan will account for probably 75 to 77 per cent of 
production in 1990, compared to 30 to 35 per cent in 1981.  Under both the 
previous government's system and ours, the higher costs of new oil were 
recognized as far as royalties and relationship to old oil. 
 
I'll leave it at that, Mr. Chairman, and see if the member has further 
responses. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Mr. Minister, I would appreciate your response with respect 
to my question pertaining to the changes in royalty structures for uranium 
and oil and natural gas and coal and, I think it was potash.  Do you have 
any . . . or are you now considering any particular changes?  And if so, 
what are they? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- In response to the member's question, Mr. Chairman, we 
don't anticipate any changes in the coal area; as the member knows, potash 
had changes last year; there will be revisions in the uranium area coming, 
and those will be announced at the appropriate time. No major changes are 
planned in the oil and gas area. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- With respect to uranium, Mr. Minister, what sort of changes 
are you contemplating at this point?  What are your options? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, as I said in my initial remarks to the 
member, I don't believe it would be appropriate to get into a 
long-drawn-out debate on this stuff.  But I can tell the member that the 
royalty component, which, by the way, the member knows is 5 per cent of 
gross sales -- the basic royalty -- which was raised from 3 per cent in 
'88-89.  So the royalty system will still have the two components; the 
basic royalty which will be at 5 per cent, and the graduated royalty which 
is tied to profits. 
 
As before, the system will provide for capital recovery.  There will be 
brackets on that graduated royalty and they will go to a maximum of 50 per 
cent which they were before. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  One final question on that.  What 
prompted the review of the uranium royalty structure? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, I think, as once again the member would 
be well aware that most of the uranium structure, as the same as the potash 
structure, had been around since the mid-'70s.  And as time has moved on, 
certain realities have come to light about capital expenditure, these types 



 

 

of thing, in the industry.  And there were certain administrative hurdles 
that over the years have become evident to both departmental people 
responsible for collecting royalties and taxes and for companies unable to 
do their bookwork. 
 
And I think it is generally recognized across the piece, as it was in the 
potash industry, they update.  And modernization, in some cases, 
streamlining, was necessary in that particular industry.  And I think, with 
the consultive process that has gone on over the last couple of years, that 
that is the end result. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Would the change in royalty structure or the royalties 
themselves be undertaken by order in council or by regulation or by an Act 
of this legislature? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- It would be by regulation. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Would this change be prompted at all by the merger of SMDC 
(Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation) with Eldorado into the new 
company, Cameco? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- No, I don't think so.  This discussion on 
modernization has been going on since '80-81 because of problems that had 
occurred before. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Mr. Minister, as you'll recall, the last federal election 
was fought primarily on the question of the free trade agreement with the 
United States, and one of the major objections to the agreement by the 
majority of Canadians, and I might add by the people of this province, was 
in the field of energy. 
 
In the energy sector, we had many objections.  The most significant, the 
overriding objection was the establishment of an integrated energy economy 
in North America -- a continental energy policy, if you will.  Indeed, you 
will know as well that as recently as the most recent western premiers' 
meeting in Portage La Prairie just a couple of weeks ago, Governor Sinner 
of North Dakota, has advocated a common currency, a common monetary policy, 
and a common exchange rate.  That in my view, is a logical extension of the 
free trade agreement that you and your government have so stoutly and, in 
my view, so mistakenly defended. 
 
At the time the FTA (free trade agreement) debate was raging, many 
Canadians were suspicious that the position of Governor Sinner was in fact 
the unspoken position of the government opposite and the federal government 
as well, with your efforts to maintain a high value of the Canadian dollar 
in relation to the U.S. dollar. 
 
Such a policy only benefits the United States as we know, as it becomes 
increasingly prohibitive for Canada to proceed with necessary and desirable 
economic development projects, and indeed realize the energy export 
potential that was available to us regardless of the FTA. 
 
(1515) 



 

 

 
Jerry Protti, the executive director of the Independent Petroleum 
Association of Canada (IPAC), estimates that: 
 

 Depending on the exchange rate, the Canadian industry can lose between 25 
cents and 35 cents per barrel for each 1 cent in the exchange rate. 

 
This was in a speech that he gave in February 1990. 
 
And you know very well that the destructive impact on 86 cent dollars has 
had on the financial position on other projects in this province as well as 
the -- in particular I guess the NewGrade upgrader.  A 1 cent change in the 
Canadian dollar affects the cash flow of Saskoil by $1.5 million, and that 
comes out of the annual report, page 39. 
 
Mr. Minister, in view of this increasing value of the Canadian dollar 
vis-a-vis the U.S. dollar, what representations have you made to the 
federal government regarding this destructive impact of the high dollar, 
which has had and continues to have on this province and in the energy 
sector. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, as the member knows, the question of 
interest rates and exchange rates have been raised many times in this House 
in the last few months.  And I think it's on the record very clearly that 
the Premier of this province has made representation to Ottawa because, as 
a resource exporting province, as a producer of many natural resources, we 
naturally are affected by exchange rates.  And that goes right on from the 
grain farmer on down. 
 
And those representations have been made.  The Premier of this province, I 
believe, was chosen by his fellow first ministers to make representation on 
behalf of all of them to the federal government who have, no question, had 
a monetary policy primarily aimed at coping with inflation in central 
Canada.  And that certainly isn't the wish or the policy of this 
government.  And as the member knows, when he was a member of a government 
that had interest rates running at some 22, 23 per cent in the early '80s, 
that their particular first minister of the time had very little success 
negotiating with the federal government, even though they had many similar 
similarities in their outlook on life at the time. 
 
And it's one that we will continue to press for, and I think our Finance 
Minister and our first minister will ably do that representation for us. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Well, Mr. Minister, times have changed, as you said earlier 
in your response to one of my questions.  And the times indeed have 
changed, not just with respect to the price of oil, but times have changed 
with respect to monetary policy and in governments. 
 
In the early '80s when there was an NDP government in this province, there 
was no operations deficit; there was a surplus, as you know, of $139 
million.  We had a Heritage Fund that had assets of a billion dollars, and 
we had a Crown corporation capital debt of $2.3 billion. 
 



 

 

That compares now to an operations deficit of $4.5 billion that you and the 
ministers of Finance in your governments have put together, and your 
Premier.  You've spent far more money than you could raise, even though 
taxes increased and services declined.  You have a Crown corporations 
capital debt of over $9 billion, which is up from $2.3 billion eight short 
years ago, or in some people's view, eight long years ago.  And times have 
changed, and we made representations at that time with respect to interest 
rates, almost on a regular basis. 
 
The other thing that's changed, Mr. Minister, is that we now have 
Conservative government in this province and you have a Conservative 
government in Ottawa.  And we all know that the Premier has been a yes-man 
to Mr. Mulroney's act of Prime Minister.  He's agreed with everything the 
Prime Minister's ever said.  And now you're in the position whereby, since 
the Premier has supported the Prime Minister in such a loyal and blind 
fashion over the years, should perhaps have some influence with the Prime 
Minister, his cousin, Mr. Mulroney, who's also a Conservative. 
 
And my concern is, Mr. Minister, is today on behalf of the energy sector, 
whether you, as minister responsible for Energy and Mines and the natural 
resources, the non-renewable resources of our province, have made a 
representation to the government or has your officials at least conducted 
an evaluation with respect to the impact of the current monetary policies 
of Ottawa on the resource industry in Saskatchewan?  And what has been the 
impact, for example, in the business on employment and revenues to the 
province and industrial expansion and exploration development. 
 
Can you share with us today: (a) what evaluations have been done by your 
staff and by your department with respect to monetary policy on the items 
that I've raised?  And (b) why have you not undertaken to have a little 
more influence with respect to monetary policy, because it does affect our 
province, in particular in the resource area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, I think in response to the member's 
statements about the plenty which abounded in this province under his 
administration, I think the reply from the Finance minister today was most 
appropriate in question period.  I mean it was quite obvious what their 
resource policy was, was they paid 440-some million dollars too much for 
the potash mines that they bought, and we won't go on to any more of that. 
 
I think when you talked about the evaluation of exchange rates, certainly 
we know very well in our department here that a 1 cent change in the 
Canadian dollar can result in three and a half million dollars of return to 
the province of Saskatchewan on oil. 
 
I think more importantly, our policies that we develop in Energy and Mines, 
we want policies that are successful in promoting investment, development, 
and jobs in this province, irregardless of what happens in Ottawa. And I 
think a good example of that is the natural gas industry in this province. 
 
Saskatchewan led the way in the deregulation process in Canada, and the net 
result for Saskatchewan by leading the way has been the proving up of 
reserves that 10 years ago no one imagined were there.  It has meant 



 

 

expanding the horizon of that particular industry to the far reaches of our 
province.  It has meant thousands of jobs and a very significant royalty 
return.  And that's because Saskatchewan led the way regardless of what 
Ottawa was doing at that particular time.  And I think that's been the 
hallmark, the corner-stone of Energy and Mines' success in the 1980s in a 
period of very much difficulty in other parts of the world. 
 
And I think at the end of the day when we talk about financial policy 
within the country, the best people to make representation as far as 
interest rates, exchange rates, and that type of thing, on behalf of all 
the people of our province is our Finance minister and our Premier, because 
they are the people that have the best background in that particular area 
and are the ones that should carry the ball. 
 
And Energy and Mines will do as I recently did at Kananaskis where you make 
specific representations to the federal minister of Energy on specific 
areas and keep promoting your areas of endeavour.  And certainly I had 
lengthy discussions with Mr. Epp about the natural gas business and our 
concern that it continue to be allowed to grow and provide those things 
that I just mentioned. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Well let's indeed set the record straight, Mr. Minister.  
The Finance minister's response today in question period was a shotgun 
effort filled not with gunpowder but filled with a lot of misinformation 
and inaccuracies.  The record will show, and your officials will confirm 
this, that the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan was set up and by 1982 
there was less than $441 million spent on the entire nationalization of the 
industry. 
 
And as matter of fact in 1982 the member for Qu'Appelle-Lumsden will know . 
. . and I wouldn't take  
 Dmy advice from him if I were you, Minister, because he has been the most 
inaccurate politician in the entire history of the province when it comes 
to outlining figures. 
 
(1530) 
 
But we see, Mr. Minister, in 1982 when you guys took over, the total debt 
of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan was $150 million or thereabouts.  
And what we have, Mr. Minister, is a total debt of far less than what it 
was worth by 1982, of about $150 million.  We saw when the PCS (Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan Inc.) was nationalized after six or seven years 
of the member of Qu'Appelle running this thing into the ground and going to 
the markets and borrowing money, hundreds of millions of dollars over and 
above that, a debt of over $900 million of Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan.  When you sold it off, the taxpayers took the gas for that 
$441 million on your incompetence, on your building of the debt of the 
potash corporation, and as a result of your privatization policies. 
 
So that's the first fact which the records will show unless of course the 
former minister of Finance, the member from Qu'Appelle-Lumsden, has 
rewritten some of those history books.  But I'm afraid he couldn't write 
them all.  There are some books of that nature in the libraries around the 



 

 

province that he wasn't able to recall and burn and rewrite. 
 
But he's trying to write history in this legislature.  And you repeating 
the inaccuracies of your Minister of Finance which were provided mostly by 
the former minister of Finance who has put this province on the brink of 
bankruptcy, is not a very good strategy on your part. 
 
And I guess the second thing we get from your response, Mr. Minister, is 
that your department has not done an evaluation with respect to the impact 
to the monetary policy on the resource business in this province. 
 
And I would advise you, Mr. Minister, that perhaps you'd better start 
undertaking some review and some evaluation and coming up with some kind of 
a plan.  And I'm curious to know, Mr. Minister, if you could outline the 
effect of this monetary policy of high interest rates and high Canadian 
dollar vis-a-vis the American dollar on the royalty structure for the oil 
and gas business?  And I'd also like to know what your view is as a result 
of these monetary policies.  What is your estimate with respect to the 
volume of production this year, and will the $19.50 a barrel that you've 
estimated in your budget for oil, is that still a forecast that you stand 
by? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, as far as the member's question about 
analysis, I mean, it is fairly simple arithmetic, and you can sort of do it 
like this: a 1 cent change in royalties . . . or a 1 cent change in 
exchange rates can cost the provincial treasury $3.5 million in oil; if 
it's 2 cents, it's 7 million.  And you keep going up the ladder. 
 
That analysis is quite evident to everyone, I think, involved in the 
industry.  Our blue book figure of WTI (West Texas Intermediate) 1979 U.S. 
in Chicago is what we believe to be accurate and true.  And that will be on 
a volume of some 71 million barrels of oil, which will be within about a 
million barrels of last year.  Those are the figures that we are using and 
believe to be true. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- I appreciate that.  Thank you, Minister.  And I think the 
people of Saskatchewan are thinking highly of you for not taking the advice 
of the former minister of Finance with respect to the potash, in response 
to my comments. 
 
Mr. Minister, I notice from the estimates of this year that projected 
growth in natural gas revenue is up about $15.5 million.  My question is 
this: how much of the increase is premised upon the increased production 
directed to the exports into the U.S. market, and how much of this increase 
is dependent upon the National Energy Board decisions regarding pipeline 
expansions into the California market and the north-eastern and mid-western 
states? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd like to inform the member that 
Saskatchewan does not ship natural gas to California.  The volumes that 
would go into the eastern U.S. market, the mid-west market, are very 
insignificant amounts.  Our blue book figure which he's referring to there 
will be predicated by higher sales volumes primarily to eastern Canada, 



 

 

anticipated higher well-head prices and naturally higher royalty rates 
because price goes up and the royalty is tied to price.  Price goes up and 
. . . So naturally we don't believe that these predictions, estimations are 
anything to do with National Energy Board considerations of new pipe. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Mr. Minister, the policy branch of Energy and Mines reviews 
take-overs in the oil and gas industry, I am told.  What is it that the 
department really does in that regard? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- I believe, Mr. Chairman, that all take-overs of 
companies, for instance, by foreign firms are done through Investment 
Canada who then, through Consumer and Corporate Affairs on a national 
level, consult with provincial ministries of Energy and Mines. 
 
During those consultations, naturally our views would be in the area of 
changes and investment patterns.  For instance, in one of our oil fields, 
jobs.  Generally questions that would involve stability in the oil and gas 
sector, for instance, in our province.  And they don't necessarily 
communicate everything that Investment Canada goes through when they do 
their decision-making process, but we do make our views known through 
Consumer and Corporate Affairs on the federal level.  And generally the 
process has been quite satisfactory to us. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Mr. Minister, on page 9 of your annual report it states 
that, and I quote: 
 

 Takeovers of Canadian oil and gas companies by foreign companies are 
reviewed by the branch . . . (policy section, oil). 

 
Could you provide us with a copy of those reviews and reports generated by 
that department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, I made one small mistake in the chain 
that I was explaining to the member there, that we do not communicate 
directly with the federal Department of Consumer and Corporate Affairs.  We 
in fact would communicate any concerns that we may have through our own 
provincial Department of Consumer and Corporate Affairs.  They in turn 
would talk to their federal colleagues in Investment Canada. 
 
Any reviews that we would do would have pieces of commercial information 
attached to them, and we don't believe it would be appropriate to release 
those reviews because of the commercial stuff that is attached to them.  
And I'm sure that if the member has questions pertaining to this particular 
area, that Investment Canada or the individual companies concerned would 
probably be the best place to access information, vis-a-vis take-overs or 
amalgamations. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Is the minister saying . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order.  Why is the member from Yorkton on his feet? 
 



 

 

Mr. McLaren: -- Mr. Chairman, I would ask for leave to introduce some 
students. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. McLaren: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  It's my pleasure today to 
introduce to you and to members of the Assembly some students that come 
from outside our boundaries of Saskatchewan, Mr. Chairman.  They're from 
Alonsa School, Alonsa, Manitoba, and they're a grade 12 class, seven in 
number.  And they're accompanied today by their teachers, Lesley Goodhand 
and Ronald Lund.  And one unique visitor with us is the teacher, and she's 
a niece of our Sergeant-at-Arms in the Assembly here.  And Bill isn't in 
the House right at the moment, but he was here a little while ago, and I 
understand that he's meeting with you later. 
 
We hope you enjoy your visit to the Saskatchewan legislature, and we thank 
the teachers for doing this sort of thing to bring the students to see how 
democracy works in our legislatures.  We commend you for that, so I would 
ask all members to please welcome these students from Manitoba. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Energy and Mines 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 23 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I'd like to join with the member 
from Yorkton to welcome the students from Manitoba.  I hope you enjoy the 
visit to Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, you're saying then that your annual report which reviews . . 
. which says one of your branches in the department reviews oil and gas 
company take-overs by foreign companies, have not reviewed any such 
take-overs in this province in the last fiscal year or the current fiscal 
year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- I didn't say that at all, Mr. Chairman.  I said that 
in doing our review process we pass on our . . . if there are concerns on 
our behalf as a province, we pass them on to Consumer and Corporate Affairs 
who then would deal with it on a federal level.  And it's been our view 
that that review process, because of potential commercial applications 
which may be part of that review process, it wouldn't be proper for us to 
publicize them, but that is an ongoing process. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I know you're trying your 
best to get us answers, but I just want to make an observation that your 
response time is very slow.  You're using up a lot of time in getting 



 

 

briefed for every single question that we've raised and I would hope that 
this is not an indication of the lack of interest in your department.  I 
don't think you've done your homework at this point. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, what I want to do is I want to ask you if you can get 
for the opposition at least a list of the reports that you've done, with 
maybe a half a page pre p√©cis as to, not confidential information, but an 
outline of what the report undertook, what was the topic, and basically 
what was the recommendation or the status of that topic.  Is that possible 
to get? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- We'll certainly make a list of the reviews that we've 
done available to the member.  And he wants details.  I've explained where 
he can go get them. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  At the current rate of production 
and exploration and development -- I should say production and demand and 
use of the oil and gas reserves in this province -- what are the most 
up-to-date figures that you have with respect to our oil reserves and our 
natural gas reserves in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, in response to the member's question, 
the latest figures that we have are December 31, 1988.  For oil that will 
be 760 million barrels, and the same date for natural gas would be 2.64 
billion cubic feet.  Our updates for 1989 will be available this fall and 
we'll have them . . . those updates will bring it up to December, end of 
December of '89. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  How does that translate into 
years, to cover off our current consumption and selling rate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- I should have said when I was giving the member the 
natural gas figures that that's trillion. 
 
At current consumption rates we would be 10 years-plus on the oil side, and 
the natural gas would be 13 years-plus.  That would be assuming no 
additions of course. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I draw your attention to an 
article in oilweek dated September 11, 1989, and the title of the article 
is, "Leaner, meaner industry emerges from the year of the takeover."  The 
article reports on a study contained in the Woodside Report -- 1989, and 
I'll quote from the report. 
 

 . . . the top ten companies survey for oil reserves now hold 71.2% of 
those reserves.  The top ten companies in gas reserves own 59.9% of 
natural gas reserves. 

 
 Capital spending -- which increased by 45.8% in 1988, was . . . 

concentrated in a handful of companies, especially senior producers who 
recorded a 91.3% increment in reinvestment. 

 
 The 1989 takeover of Texaco Canada Inc. by Imperial Oil Limited redefines 



 

 

the term "big" for every other company in the industry . . . 
 
 . . . Imperial Oil now holds 31% of the oil reserves and 23% of oil and 

natural gas reserves . . . on a BOE basis (10 thousand cubic feet of gas 
per barrel of oil) . . . 

 
Mr. Minister, could you comment on the trend in these quotes?  Do you 
believe that this is a healthy situation for the Canadian industry?  Do you 
believe that it's a healthy situation for the Saskatchewan industry and do 
you believe it's a healthy situation for the Saskatchewan consumer? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- I think the trends, Mr. Chairman, that the member 
talks about would probably be just the opposite in this province here.  We 
have seen a major shift away from the major companies and definitely 
increased opportunities for the small and mid-sized companies.  And we went 
into that in great detail yesterday when we were talking about Saskoil 
because that's from whence Saskoil came, and obviously have had tremendous 
growth.  And there are a number of companies having those opportunities. 
 
I think when one looks what happened in 1986 in the world petroleum 
industry, naturally there is a realization by companies that financial 
stability and strength is a requirement when you take those sudden dips and 
dives that OPEC (Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries) have not 
been able to control. 
 
My concern from the point of view of Saskatchewan is that we keep the 
production up, we keep those wells pumping even though they are low 
producers, that the investment, the jobs, stay here.  And I think the 
opportunities that have been presented to small and mid-size companies, 
certainly in this province in the last couple of years, fit right into that 
particular plan. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- I understand as well that the smaller independents, even 
the large and mid-size independents, are doing a lot of exploration in this 
province.  But my question to you, Minister, is this.  There has been this 
increasing of reserves or increasing the amount of reserves being held by 
fewer and fewer companies.  Is it your contention then today that you don't 
believe this is a serious problem for the industry in Saskatchewan and for 
the Saskatchewan consumer?  Is that what you're saying?  Or do you feel 
that because of the involvement of the independents in the business in 
Saskatchewan that the large nationals and multinationals won't affect our 
position with respect to oil and natural gas? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Oh, I think the article the member's referring to, Mr. 
Chairman, shows that the majors have to look for the elephants around the 
world in order to justify their investment on their drilling side. 
 
I think the case in Saskatchewan vis-a-vis the consumer here is that more 
and more of the companies here have a wider portfolio, things that they're 
interested in, and you have the case where Saskatchewan today is 
experiencing probably more horizontal well drilling than anywhere else in 
the western sedimentary basin.  Most of that horizontal drilling being 
carried on by mid-sized companies, IPAC-style (Independent Petroleum 



 

 

Association of Canada) companies, which shows that this diversification 
that these types of people are entering into means strength for our 
province and less reliance on the major companies in this particular 
province who obviously did most of the development back in the '50s.  Most 
of the development going on today is the Sceptres, the Bow Valleys, the 
Saskoils, the Huskys, these kind of people.  And I think that's a plus for 
our province. 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Mr. Minister, I want to now turn to the upgraders, and I 
guess the Minister of Finance was almost a 100 per cent incorrect in his 
responses in question period today with respect to the provincial financial 
rating going down.  He also said that the opposition hasn't acknowledged 
the NewGrade upgrader or the bi-provincial upgrader.  And that was his 
quote, I believe, because I wrote it down when he said it. 
 
And I want to say, first of all, that indeed both projects are acknowledged 
by the opposition.  We're very concerned that any development of our heavy 
oil resource is undertaken wisely in the province as much as possible.  And 
as the record will show, we do support . . . have supported over the last 
number of decades the co-op movement, in particular, the Consumers' Co-op 
Refinery, which has been a real major undertaking by the people of 
Saskatchewan and a very successful undertaking for the people of 
Saskatchewan.  It's an example in our view of a co-operative that has been 
undertaken by local people, has been operated by local people, and has 
proven to be successful as a result of this local initiative.  And that's 
been the whole basis of difference in terms of our economic development 
approach as compared to the government's. 
 
You believe that Cargill and other major multinational corporations 
existing outside of this province should run our economy, and we see as a 
result of your belief in that policy, the near bankruptcy situation that 
we're in and the near devastation of our economy that we've witnessed over 
the past two or three years by having out-of-province people run our 
economy. 
 
But getting back to the NewGrade upgrader, I want to start with that, Mr. 
Minister.  We believe in the co-op movement.  We believe that CCRL 
(Consumers' Co-operative Refineries Ltd.) has been a very good corporate 
citizen; they've employed people in this province. 
 
And I want to start out by just asking you a general question with respect 
to that monetary policy that I raised earlier.  And I want to ask you what 
has been the impact on NewGrade?  What has been the impact on the NewGrade 
upgrader as a result of the fact that the 80 per cent of their start-up 
costs is debt as opposed to equity?  But what's been the impact of the 
monetary policy that your government supports with Mr. Mulroney? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the member is absolutely right on 
one point -- that as the debt portion of the upgrader is financed with 
borrowed money -- when interest rates go up, it will cost more money to 
service that debt. 



 

 

 
I guess, as the member well knows, upgraders were talked about in this 
province for a long time.  We built them.  This government is on its second 
one.  We believe in the heavy oil resource of this province, that it will 
be the future of the oil industry down the road and that our commitment to 
manufacture our own gasoline, diesel fuel from that resource.  That 
commitment is there producing, in the case of the one here in Regina and 
under construction with the one in Lloydminster, and in both cases employed 
an awful lot of people.  And we believe that the benefits are there for the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
As the member knows, the upgrading of heavy oil depends on the differential 
between heavy and light.  If the member wishes exact figures on both 
refineries, I think probably getting into contact with CMB (Crown 
Management Board of Saskatchewan) or CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) would be the place to do those particular financial things. 
 
I believe in the case of the upgrader here in Regina that $5.50 was sort of 
the range of the spread.  The differential for most of last year was in the 
6 to $7 dollar range and probably right now is closer to $7 a spread, which 
for the purposes of upgrading is certainly good news because they have a 
better margin to work with on their synfuel at the end of the day.  So 
right now I would say the differentials are in favour of the heavy oil 
upgrading process. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Mr. Minister, when the project was first announced and the 
sod-turning took place just prior to the last provincial election, the 
numbers that were talked about were, I believe, $670 million for cost of 
the project.  Since that time the numbers have been upgraded for the 
NewGrade upgrader in Regina here to $700 million. 
 
And I'm wondering if the minister would have access, through his officials, 
as to where we're at with the financing of the NewGrade upgrader.  How much 
money have we put into the NewGrade upgrader as taxpayers in terms of 
equity, what percentage of equity, and how much money have we loaned the 
NewGrade operation?  And has there been any cost overruns and what are 
they? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- I have some information here, Mr. Chairman, which I'll 
share with the member.  The capital cost of the upgrader was to be covered 
20 per cent equity contribution, Government of Saskatchewan; and the 
remaining 80 per cent was in the form of guaranteed loans, I believe around 
56, 57 per cent by Saskatchewan, 43, 44 per cent by Government of Canada.  
Total capital of the cost of the project, including start up and capitalize 
the interest - 
_ I believe the member mentioned it -- it's about $770 million.  
Saskatchewan's equity investment in that is 154 million, which is 20 per 
cent of that figure. 
 
As everyone was aware, there have been technical problems in the start up 
-- some of which were anticipated, some which weren't.  The two fires in 
question certainly weren't anticipated, and they've resulted in, I believe, 
a further around $60 million in equity advances.  These equity advances are 



 

 

repayable with interest from cash flows of the operation.  It's currently 
up and running and producing about 55,000 barrels a day. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- So, Mr. Minister, you're saying that this is now another 
change in numbers: from 670 million to 700 million to now up to $770 
million, which includes 154 million of Saskatchewan's equity, the balance 
being debt.  And then you're saying that there's another 60 million on top 
of that.  Does that mean the total now goes to $830 million? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- That's correct, Mr. Chairman.  The 60 million is 
separate from the 770 figure which I gave the member. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- So we're now looking at $830 million on this project, and 
you say that the final 60 million which was advanced is an equity advance, 
payable from operations when it becomes profitable, I take it.  And the 
minister confirms that. 
 
Mr. Minister, does this include the recent announcement of an additional 75 
million which was forwarded to the NewGrade project for . . . I believe it 
was for shortfall in revenues because of the last problem they had over the 
Christmas period and into the new year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- It's our understanding that there was a ceiling of 75 
potentially provided, and what they've drawn is 60 of it in order to fix 
all the problems and get back on stream again. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- So then they've taken 60; they've drawn on that and they 
have an option to draw another 15 million, which would take it up to about 
$845 million in total.  Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- No, I don't think that's fair, Mr. Chairman.  It was 
75 was felt to be a number that would cover all eventualities.  Operation 
is up and running at capacity as I mentioned -- 55,000 barrels a day - 
_ and should have no need for any more. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- So you're saying that the NewGrade upgrader has been 
provided with, in terms of equity and  
 Ddebt, $830 million to date; that it's now up and running, which we 
confirm, and that there will be no more requirement for additional 
government assistance.  Is there . . . is that the assurance you can give 
this House?  What other arrangements do you have, Mr. Minister, with 
NewGrade and CCRL.  Is it possible to table any documentation with respect 
to this financing in the House today, or some time soon? 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- I believe that's a two-part question, Mr. Chairman.  
We don't anticipate any more money being required for the project.  Things 
can happen. I guess they wouldn't have made a blast-proof control room over 
there if they weren't taking prudent precautions that something can happen 
on an upgrader site. 
 
As far as the other part of the member's question, the financial stuff, 



 

 

I'll give him the undertaking that anything that hasn't . . . I'll find out 
anything that hasn't been tabled in this House already that is on the 
financing side that doesn't infringe on the commercial nature of the 
project, and endeavour to make that available to the member. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  This $830 million which is up 
from the 650 million original estimate, Mr. Minister, is that the total 
figure including the phase one costs of the upgrader, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- As far as I know. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- So your officials and you, Mr. Minister, confirm that 
that's the maximum amount of money that's been committed in terms of loan 
guarantees, equity advances, and share purchases and other types of 
financial instruments.  That's what you're saying, Mr. Minister?  Is that 
correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- To the best of our knowledge, yes. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- With respect to the $60 million equity advance, Mr. 
Minister, what kind of terms have you with the NewGrade upgrader with 
respect to that $60 million?  Is this going to be something that's paid 
back first?  How does it stand in terms of the other creditors? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- I believe, Mr. Chairman, I would have to review the 
documents and see what I can provide to the member in that particular 
regard. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Mr. Minister, we have a project here that we're trying to 
get some information about which has the province on the hook for . . . and 
the taxpayers of Canada on the hook for $830 million -- $830 million.  This 
makes it the largest economic undertaking of the government in financial 
terms since 1982 -- $830 million. 
 
And you're standing in the House today saying that the largest economic 
project which has suffered some problems -- and I might even agree beyond 
the responsibility of this government -- with some outside problems.  But 
you do not have, Mr. Minister, in this House for the members of the 
legislature and the taxpayers of the province, the financial details with 
respect to this operation. 
 
Now that concerns me, Mr. Minister.  It concerns me because this is not 
something that's rare among your colleagues and yourself.  We witnessed 
today in question period the Minister of Finance who didn't have a clue 
about the 248 million deal with Weyerhaeuser, didn't have any figures 
available either on his desk, in his briefing notes, or in his head.  And 
that's using the term loosely. 
 
And now we see the former minister of Finance briefing you earlier in 
response to my questions with respect to the potash deal, and he's the last 
guy you want to take briefing instructions from in terms of financial 
dealings because he's the guy who misled the province and misled the 
taxpayers of this province to the tune of a billion dollars in his budget 



 

 

in 1986. 
 
And now you're telling us that you don't have all of the details with 
respect to an $830 million project.  Mr. Minister, I'm wondering if you 
could get the information for 7 o'clock this evening, through the supper 
break, and bring it back to the House. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, it's been a long-standing practice of 
this House that commercial applications of . . . and I might remind the 
member that the financing for this particular project is carried on between 
CIC and the Co-op and that anything to do with a commercial nature never 
has been tabled in this House.  I gave the undertaking that anything that 
we could review and find pertaining to the financing arrangement of this 
particular deal that isn't of a commercial nature that hasn't already been 
tabled or is public information that we would dig it up and make it 
available to the member.  And I give him that undertaking. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I'd like you to have somebody look into 
this for us, if you could, with respect to the public documentation, 
because the numbers that I have don't seem to jibe with the $830 million, 
and we've gone over some . . . and I don't know whether these numbers are 
100 per cent accurate, but our numbers don't jibe with the $830 million, 
with respect to the public documentation. 
 
And I'd like your officials to check and get back to us with respect to the 
public financial end on the following items, and I guess one is with 
respect to phase 1 costs which totalled $140 million in a government loan 
and $1 million in equity for class B shares.  And then from that, phase 2 
costs, which we're told as a result of reviewing some of the orders in 
council, additional costs of equity of $234.751 million, a loan guarantee 
by Saskatchewan for $360 million and a loan guarantee by Canada for 
$274,652,700.  And I believe those numbers include the $75 million you 
referred to, so we may be out by $15 million.  But that number, phase 2 is 
869,652,700. 
 
And I'm not 100 per cent sure on these figures, but if I added them up 
properly by adding phase 1 and phase 2 the total costs reach a little over 
a billion dollars Canadian.  And I'd like the officials to kind of check 
that -- 830 million is very high; a billion is a little higher -- and I'd 
like to have some confirmation from you and your officials as to what the 
actual number might be for phase 1, phase 2, equity, debt breakdown, and in 
particular the loan guarantee stuff.  Could I have that assurance, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- We'll certainly undertake that review for the member. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Mr. Minister, do you have the information in the House 
today for phase 1 by any chance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- No, Mr. Chairman, we'll have to get this information 
from CIC. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- How soon could you do that, Mr. Minister? 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Just as soon as we can do it.  It may be a day; it may 
be two days, but we will do it as quickly as possible. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Okay, Mr. Minister, I appreciate your sincerity in trying 
to get the answer for us.  And I'd like to ask the minister if he could 
undertake to have someone do that between now and 7 o'clock.  That's about 
two and a half hours, and I'd appreciate getting it at that time.  I know 
the information is there.  There's a whole list of orders in council which 
adds to our figures, and I just want to make sure that we haven't double 
added. 
 
But I'd like the minister to have a quick phone call made to the person 
who's in charge of the orders in council for the Government of 
Saskatchewan.  I'm sure they could just total them up on the computer.  And 
if not that, certainly the Crown Management Board or somebody in that 
government would have some idea how much money they've committed in terms 
of guarantees and loans and equity pay-outs.  Is that possible, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, our figures show that the totals that I 
gave are cumulative.  We believe the member is double adding something with 
his figures, and we will check them as soon as possible. 
 
I believe by prior agreement I'm not in the House this evening at 7 for 
estimates.  But I can't get that in any case, that confirmation that that 
isn't the cumulative total, by 7 o'clock. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Well, Mr. Minister, first of all, there's been no prior 
agreement about 7 o'clock, and I hope the minister hasn't hired a plane to 
fly him out of town.  But in any event, we wish to pursue this this 
evening.  I have some other questions I wish to raise at that time, and I 
believe there's others in our caucus that want to raise some questions at 
that time as well.  So I'll get back to that then, Mr. Minister. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, I'd like to now give up my place for my colleague, the 
member for Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, I have 
some questions for the minister with respect to plans for new uranium mines 
in the province of Saskatchewan, particularly in light of a number of 
factors, many of which are environmental, but one important factor is the 
future price of uranium, Mr. Minister. 
 
And I see the government is planning, through its investments in Cameco, to 
significantly expand the number of new uranium mines in the province of 
Saskatchewan.  And you're planning that, Mr. Minister, at a time when many 
countries are abandoning the nuclear option. 
 
You must be aware of the fact, sir, that the Dutch for instance have 
deferred plans for the construction of new reactors in their country.  You 
must be aware of the fact that Italy has decided, as of September 1989, to 
close down all of its nuclear power plants there -- three reactors are 



 

 

being dismantled and the fourth is being moth-balled.  You must be aware of 
the fact that in Britain the government has failed in its attempt to 
privatize the nuclear industry there, and in light of that failure has 
decided to scrap plans for three reactors that it was intending to build in 
the l990s. 
 
In the United States there's not been a new order for a nuclear reactor now 
for approximately a decade, and the financial institutions that monitor the 
future of the industry in the United States, and particularly the very 
prestigious publication Nuexco is saying that it is highly unlikely that 
there will be any new orders for reactors in that country between 1990 and 
the year 2010.  And nine reactors in the United States that are either 
partially or fully completed have been deferred for financial or political 
reasons.  And as you know, two others that are currently under order have 
also been deferred. 
 
(1630) 
 
Now your department obviously has access to all this information, Mr. 
Minister, and a good deal more that I don't have time to make reference to 
today. 
 
Now clearly in light of that information, and in light of the very 
significant stockpile that exists currently in the world, a large uranium 
stockpile that is regularly drawn on, it should be clear to you, sir, that 
the price of uranium is not going to rise in the decade ahead.  And 
currently we have an all-time low in the price of uranium fuel, Mr. 
Minister, an all-time low in the history of the civilian nuclear industry. 
 
And my question to you is, how can you justify an expansion of uranium 
mining in the province of Saskatchewan in light of the fact that uranium 
prices are going to stay low?  Very significant capital investments will 
have to be made by Saskatchewan people with absolutely no prospect of any 
financial return on those investments? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- First of all, Mr. Chairman, in response to the 
member's question, the Department of Energy and Mines does not build any 
type of mine in this province. 
 
And vis-a-vis the outlook for the royal uranium market, I don't think the 
member can draw quite so conclusive conclusions from the figures that he 
just listed off.  Certainly some countries are re-evaluating their 
electrical  
 Dgeneration options, but other countries are going full steam ahead, shall 
we say, with the nuclear option.  And I believe as the environmental 
question grows over time with the environment, quality of air, that type of 
thing, that certainly it will be a re-evaluation that many people are going 
to have to take. 
 
And certainly the nuclear option is one that, because it doesn't produce 
any of those greenhouse gases, is one that certainly will be looked at in a 
big way.  And we don't anticipate anyone to wish to open a uranium mine in 
Saskatchewan to lose money, and they mine uranium to make a profit.  And 



 

 

certainly we collect royalties on those profits and they return to the 
province and to the people of this province.  So I don't anticipate anyone 
undertaking such a venture if they can't make a profit out of it. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Well, Mr. Minister, let me make two points with respect to 
the comments that you have made and then ask you an additional question.  
You say first of all that countries are going to opt for nuclear power in 
light of concerns about things like the greenhouse effect.  But as you 
should know, and all you have to do is look at utilities south of the 
border to witness this, U.S. utilities are not opting to build new nuclear 
power plants in light of the greenhouse effect, Mr. Minister.  What they're 
opting to do is invest in energy conservation.  All you have to do is look 
at the record of utilities in Maine or in Washington to see that, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
And second, with respect to your claim that investments in the uranium 
industry are unlikely to be made unless there are profits to be reaped from 
them, your government's record over the last several years, Mr. Minister, 
runs in the face of that. 
 
All you have to do is look at the returns this year to Saskatchewan Mining 
Development Corporation, which are less than 3 per cent of your equity, Mr. 
Minister.  And you can see that that's not the case, because it's your 
government that is the major investor in uranium mining in the province of 
Saskatchewan.  And you're not even able to reap a return on that 
investment, Mr. Minister, that would be 30 per cent of the return you could 
have obtained if that money had been placed in a credit union or a 
financial institution in this province or any other, Mr. Minister. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I want to ask you another question, and that is in light 
of the fact . . . there are obviously many considerations here other than 
simply financial ones, and one of them is the future of the environment in 
northern Saskatchewan and the future of our lakes in northern Saskatchewan, 
and also, Mr. Minister, a concern that I think a lot of Saskatchewan people 
have about the unresolved problems with respect to high-level nuclear waste 
that all uranium that is mined in northern Saskatchewan will become. 
 
And my question to you, sir, is this: how can your department justify 
licensing new uranium mines in the province of Saskatchewan in light of the 
fact now that at two of the existing mines we have had major spills of 
radioactive materials, the most recent of which has contaminated a spawning 
ground outside one of our most valuable commercial fishery resources in the 
North, namely Wollaston Lake?  How can you justify proposed new mine 
developments at Wollaston Lake in light of those kinds of activities? 
 
And how further, Mr. Minister, can you justify the licensing of new uranium 
mines in the province of Saskatchewan in light of the fact that an 
all-party committee of the House of Commons just over a year ago 
recommended to the House of Commons that new nuclear power plants in Canada 
should not be licensed unless, Mr. Minister, the problem of disposing of 
high level radioactive waste is resolved in this country and globally, Mr. 
Minister.  And obviously that logic should apply to new uranium mines as 
well.  The logic of the committee clearly should apply to new uranium 



 

 

mines, just as it applies to nuclear power plants. 
 
So in light of the problem of high level nuclear waste disposal, and in 
light of the risk that new uranium mines poses to the northern environment, 
how do you justify licensing new mines in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, as the member well knows, this 
government inherited its uranium investment in mines from another 
government.  Licensing is not done by Energy and Mines; licensing is done 
by the Department of the Environment and the federal government through 
atomic energy commission and their federal Department of the Environment. 
 
The member knows full well that through an extended public process in this 
province that the containment of waste at the mine sites is monitored.  
It's probably the best in the world, I would say, because of the public 
inquiries that were held, the method that we use here. 
 
And he also knows that wastes from reactor sites are contained at . . . the 
small amounts of highly radioactive wastes are contained at the reactors in 
very safe conditions.  And once again, through the atomic energy commission 
of Canada, there are very stringent rules applied to the storage of that 
waste.  And Canada has a very exemplary record in that regard vis-a-vis 
other countries in the world. 
 
So I certainly haven't heard of any conclusive contamination of a spawning 
ground in northern Saskatchewan.  But if the member has some documented 
evidence that this spawning ground is contaminated for ever and ever, I'd 
be happy to see it. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Mr. Chairman, to the minister.  Mr. Minister, really this 
is a very inadequate defence.  First of all, Mr. Minister, you know full 
well that monitoring at uranium mines in northern Saskatchewan is far from 
satisfactory.  In fact, Mr. Minister, your government has even gone so far 
to do away with the monitoring committees that had previously been set up 
under the former NDP administration. 
 
All you have to do is ask yourself the question, where is the monitoring 
committee today at Key Lake or at Wollaston Lake, that were supposed to be 
there by way of the original lease agreements, Mr. Minister.  And you will 
find that those monitoring committees which were supposed to provide 
opportunity for community representation were never set up after the 
government changed, Mr. Minister. 
 
So don't talk to us about good monitoring.  You will recall, Mr. Minister, 
that the monitoring being done by your government at Wollaston Lake was so 
inadequate in fact that the major spill that occurred there last year went 
undetected for almost a full day after it occurred, which is unbelievable, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
You will recall, going back five or six years to the Key Lake spill, that 
your officials were so incompetent, Mr. Minister, that after that massive 
spill occurred at Key Lake, your officials couldn't find the spill for 
three days, Mr. Minister -- three days they were measuring and monitoring 



 

 

the wrong body of water.  They couldn't actually locate the spill that had 
occurred which is very difficult for any member of the public to 
understand, let alone believe, Mr. Minister.  But that in fact was the case 
and you know that full well, so don't talk to us about adequate monitoring. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I want to ask you one more question and it relates to a 
commitment that the former minister of Energy made in this House, when 
estimates were last being reviewed, with respect to the question of the 
sale of uranium to nuclear weapon states and specifically to the United 
States, Mr. Minister.  And I have said several times in this House before 
and I repeat it again this afternoon, that your government is turning a 
blind eye to a flagrant violation of the agreement that exists between 
Canada and the United States with respect to a promise by the United States 
not to use Canadian uranium for nuclear weapons. 
 
And this promise, Mr. Minister, is being broken every day.  In fact, Mr. 
Minister, it has been acknowledged now by U.S. officials, and your 
department knows this full well, that approximately one-quarter of all the 
uranium in U.S. nuclear weapons today is of Saskatchewan origin.  And 
Saskatchewan uranium day after day continues to go into the U.S. nuclear 
weapon system, Mr. Minister.  And you know that full well. 
 
Now the former minister of Energy promised us last year, Mr. Minister, that 
there would be an examination of this issue.  And I want to know today from 
you, sir, what examination has your department undertaken of this matter; 
what conclusions have you reached; can you table a copy of that examination 
in the House?  And unless, Mr. Minister, you can prove to us that 
Saskatchewan uranium is not going into U.S. nuclear weapons, I say it is 
incumbent on you, sir, to cut off sales of uranium from Saskatchewan to the 
U.S. immediately. 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, we went through this discussion 
just a week or so ago in Crown corporations when I was in to do the SMDC 
report.  The member knows full well that the federal government monitors 
those exports. 
 
Canada, since 1965 has had a policy in place as far as the 
non-proliferation treaty.  In fact I have since found out since that 
particular meeting that the member and I were at, that he raised the 
country of France in regard to this, that France has gone so far as to sign 
a separate agreement with the Canadian federal government vis-a-vis uranium 
exports from Canada to that particular country.  And no one can trace 
uranium at the molecular level, but Canada's record in this whole procedure 
is well-known, well founded, and I think basically one of the leading 
lights in the world today as far as the export of uranium. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, last day we talked 
about quarrying leases in gravel pits.  I'm wondering if you can tell me 
today when the quarrying lease was issued on quarry lease number Y-7406, 
the exact date that that quarrying lease was issued, and who it was issued 
to. 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- I believe that lease agreement was done on March 6, 
1990, with a Mr. Allan Wagman of Meadow Lake, Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Sir, could you provide me with a copy of that quarrying 
lease that was issued on, you said March 6, 1990? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- I will endeavour to do that. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Well I'd prefer you didn't endeavour to do it; I'd prefer 
you gave me a copy of the quarrying lease. 
 
Mr. Minister, I can't believe how blatant this deal is.  You issue a lease 
on March 6, 1990, and I have here a letter from the director of mines 
branch dated March 9, which is three days after you've issued the lease. 
 
And I'll just read the letter to you.  It's to the RM of Meadow Lake.  It 
says, Dear Mr. Wilkinson -- he's the administrator of the RM -- and the 
letter from the director of the mines branch says: 
 

 Thank you for your letter of March 7 requesting a meeting to discuss 
concerns with respect to the issuing of quarry leases.  As we are in the 
process of revising quarrying regulations, we will be interested in 
hearing your comments.  With the House resuming session, the minister will 
not be available to participate in the meeting.  As per my telephone 
conversation, the meeting is scheduled for 9 a.m. on March 16, 1990.  The 
meeting will be held in the board room of the 12th floor of our offices.  
It can be found at 1914 Hamilton Street, Toronto-Dominion Bank Building. 

 
Mr. Minister, you lead the rural municipality to believe they still have 
interest in the gravel pit, the quarrying lease that we're referring to 
here, and you've already issued a quarrying lease to an individual over the 
request of the rural municipality. 
 
Mr. Minister, how do you explain that, that you deceived the RM by leading 
them to believe they can still gather their interest in this quarrying 
lease when you've already issued it at a time earlier, in fact three days 
earlier than the letter was written, Mr. Minister?  How do you come clean 
on that and explain that to the rural municipality? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, as the member well knows, and I believe 
he got this package of correspondence this morning.  I sent it around.  It 
was all the stuff he requested yesterday, the documentation.  That as of 
March 26 . . . or February the position of the department was clearly made 
to the RM in question, and the various quarrying leases which they had were 
reviewed.  That particular RM did not ask for cancellation of their leases 
until March 7 which was afterwards. 
 
I don't have anything to square away.  The procedure was followed to a T.  
The member has the correspondence, and this department just did normal 
procedure. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- This procedure is not normal.  I want to quote to you now, 



 

 

Mr. Minister, from a statement of fact issued by the Rural Municipality of 
Meadow Lake and signed by the rural municipality.  Now I want you to listen 
to this, Mr. Minister: 
 

 On or about January 24, 1990, Liz Turley of Rural Development lands branch 
called to say they needed a release from the rural municipality for their 
quarrying rights to the north-east 10 acres of LSD 5, 14-61-21-W3.  She 
explained that she needed it right away and that the original request had 
gone to the wrong rural municipality.  At this time there was a reference 
made to LSD 6.  I said I would have to make a phone call to Highways in 
North Battleford and get back to her. 

 
The statement of fact goes on to say: 
 

 I called Liz Turley and told her I would stick my neck out and send her a 
release for the quarrying rights to LSD 5 as Mr. Wagman had always leased 
this land, and I didn't think the RM would interfere with his lease.  But 
I didn't send a release for LSD 6 as I did not know what the council's 
reaction would be. 

 
The letter goes on, Mr. Minister, but in this point I point out to you that 
they say in a statement of fact that the letter was sent to the wrong rural 
municipality, and I appreciate also that you were so diligent in sending me 
a copy of the information.  I call into question what you've sent, and 
we'll deal with that later, how the carbon copy is typed on the bottom of 
the letter, Mr. Minister.  I'd like you to explain that one. 
 
But I'll go on by this statement.  During the week of February 5, 1990, 
Kelly Klyne from Energy and Mines phoned and asked for a release of 
quarrying rights for LSD 6 (legal subdivision).  I said I couldn't give it 
to her because it required council's consideration.  Okay?  February 5, 
that's your department; they're informed that the RM can't make the 
decision because the council hasn't met yet.  You had that verbally over 
the telephone. 
 
On February 12, 1990 George McLeod phoned to say that Energy and Mines 
people were telling him that the RM was going back on the deal for LSD 6.  
I explained to Mr. McLeod that the RM did not have an opportunity to go 
back on the deal as they had no knowledge of the deal in the first place, 
and that the request to release the RM's quarrying rights was to go to 
council on a meeting today, but because of a snowstorm the meeting was 
called off and rescheduled for February 14, 1990. 
 
Now in conclusion, Mr. Minister, it says here that this matter was brought 
to council's attention at their meeting of February 14, 1990, at which time 
council decided not to release their quarrying rights on LSD 6, and in fact 
assure their rights to the gravel by applying to the Rural Development 
lands branch to purchase or lease the west 20 acres of LSD 6, 14-61-21-W3, 
and also apply for a quarrying lease from Sask Energy and Mines for this 
land. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I would ask you first off, who is it in Energy and Mines 
when the statement refers to Energy and Mines people, who was it that 



 

 

informed the hon. member from Meadow Lake that the RM was backing out on 
some kind of deal that they had made to let their gravel go? 
 
Mr. Minister, I ask you who were those individuals in your department who 
informed the hon. member from Meadow Lake that the RM in fact is backing 
out on a deal that the member felt compelled to phone the rural 
municipality and inquire as to why they weren't releasing their quarrying 
rights? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, as per the correspondence which I 
sent to the member yesterday, we did contact by letter the RM in question.  
They did respond to us twice, on February 16 and 20.  We responded back to 
them on the 26, I believe it was, of February.  The RM in question may have 
had several meetings in between.  We would have no knowledge of that and we 
would have no knowledge of any conversations that the hon. member from 
Meadow Lake might have with an RM council within his riding.  That wouldn't 
enter into Energy and Mines' procedures at all. 
 
The RM -- I believe the question came up yesterday about whether this 
letter in fact did get to them -- and the RM were able to identify Miss 
Kelly Klyne as the acting supervisor in their reply within a week.  And the 
only way that they could have got Miss Klyne's name would have been to get 
it off the copy of the letter which they received.  And they were very 
prompt in getting back to Miss Klyne.  So in fact they did receive the copy 
that the member questioned yesterday. 
 
And as far as the cc (carbon copy) part on the other, I believe that was 
recognized as not being on the original and was put on to ensure that the 
cc went out with a different typewriter.  But in fact the RM obviously knew 
who they were dealing with because they got back to Miss Klyne and they 
wouldn't know her from a hole in the wall if they didn't have her names. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order.  Being near 5 o'clock the committee's recessed till 
7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


