





























































Hansard: June 11, 1990


 

 

June 11/90 
EVENING SITTING 

 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Social Services 
Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 36 

 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Would the minister introduce his officials, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- Yes, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  It's my 
pleasure to introduce a few of the officials that will be with me during 
the course of these estimates.  And I would like to introduce the deputy 
minister sitting on my left here, Judy Moore, who is the deputy minister; 
and then we have the associate deputy minister on my right here, Dr. Allan 
Hansen; and sitting behind me, behind Ms. Moore's seat is Robert Blackwell, 
who is the assistant deputy minister; and beside him is Elizabeth Smith, 
the executive director, support services. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, there are a goodly number of other officials with us 
during the course of the estimates.  They will be called forward as their 
particular speciality is being questioned.  And I might just indicate to 
you, Mr. Chairman, that essentially what you see here is literally the tip 
of the iceberg, as it were, because this department is the third largest 
department that the government has.  And there are literally, Mr. Chairman, 
thousands of workers working in the Department of Social Services.  And so 
we have certainly a complement of very efficient, very effective personnel 
that will in no doubt be assisting us very well during these estimates. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, I want to 
welcome the minister's officials to the Chamber.  I've been looking forward 
to questioning the minister in a wide variety of areas for some time. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to begin by asking you a set of questions with respect 
to the wage exemption policies that you have pursued in the Department of 
Social Services.  And if I could, Mr. Minister, I'd like to begin by asking 
you how it is that you can justify your claim that you're encouraging 
people on social assistance to take work when you look at your wage 
exemption policy, Mr. Minister. 
 
First of all, Mr. Minister, I want you to explain to this Assembly how you 
justify creating policies in which someone who is self-employed, for 
instance, who establishes a landscaping business over the summer to try to 
get themselves off social assistance, is not allowed to keep one penny of 
the earnings they make from self-employment; every penny they make is 
deducted off their social assistance cheque unless they reach the point, of 
course, where they don't have to rely on social welfare at all. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you claim that you support the work ethic.  You claim 
that you're encouraging people to get off welfare.  How is it then that 



 

 

someone who is self-employed is not allowed to keep a penny of their 
earnings, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Chairman, in answer to the hon. member's question, 
I think it should be pointed out quite clearly that for every social 
assistance recipient that we have there are exemptions for the people who 
are earning money.  And so whoever is on social assistance is encouraged to 
go to find a job to supplement, to support his income, in addition to what 
he would be getting from Social Services.  And there are exemptions to the 
amount that he would be able to earn. 
 
So for the member to say that there is no incentive to go out and work, I 
think is overstating the situation somewhat.  There are exemptions; there 
are incentives built in for the social aid recipients to go and seek 
supplementary income. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the minister, with all his staff, 
doesn't understand his own regulations. 
 
Mr. Minister, look at the regulations with respect to earnings exemptions 
and read to me where it says that someone who is self-employed and on 
social assistance can keep anything.  You read the regulation, Mr. 
Minister.  You don't know your own regulations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman.  I have to indicate to you that as 
far as my answer previous was concerned, I was talking more about wage 
earners than I was about self-employed.  And I accept the critics point 
that I did not follow completely what he was getting at.  And as far as 
self-employment, Mr. Chairman, the exemptions are there, in so far as the 
expenses incurred in the self-employment.  I think it's an accepted fact 
that if you're going to be self-employed there are going to be certain 
expenses involved in coming up with a net income.  And so any expenses and 
so on that are incurred in that process of making this earning, whatever it 
may happen to be, those expenses are taken into consideration as 
exemptions, although be it, the net income as such is not exempt.  You were 
correct there. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Yes, Mr. Minister.  And that's my point, Mr. Minister, that 
in fact, your government provides no financial incentive whatsoever for a 
social assistance recipient who seeks self-employment to get off welfare, 
Mr. Minister, other than the incentive that comes with the self-esteem of 
working, which I think is very significant, Mr. Minister. 
 
But I think it's shocking that your government, Mr. Minister, doesn't allow 
someone who's self-employed to keep any of their net earnings.  That is 
unacceptable and surely even you must admit that. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I want to look at your wage exemption policy, turning to 
wages now rather than income from self-employment, and point out to you 
that again, contrary to your rhetoric with respect to encouraging people to 
work,  what your government has done, Mr. Minister, is discourage people 
from working by, in effect, reducing the amount of money that they are 
allowed to keep when obtaining part time work but on social assistance.  



 

 

And I remind you, Mr. Minister, that prior to October of 1987, for 
instance, a single person who was earning, for instance, $100 a month was 
able to keep $93.75.  Now, Mr. Minister, they're only able to keep $40, Mr. 
Minister.  If you take a single parent with two children before you changed 
the wage exemption policy, if they were earning $300 a month, they were 
allowed to keep $241.25.  Now, Mr. Minister, they're able to only keep 
$120. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, these are just a couple of examples of how you've 
changed the social assistance regulations.  Your government has changed the 
social assistance regulations to, in effect, discourage people from 
working. 
 
Now at the same time, Mr. Minister, we have in the Government of Ontario an 
example of a government that has allowed social assistance recipients to 
keep more of their earnings as a result of a policy change that took effect 
in December, 1989.  And my question to you, sir, is:  when are we going to 
see a policy change that you introduce that, in effect, creates some 
incentives for those on social assistance to go out and take part-time 
work, incentives by way of allowing them to keep a reasonable percentage of 
their earnings, Mr. Minister? 
 
Because right now there is no incentive.  When you consider the extra costs 
that are associated with travel to and from work, when you consider the 
extra costs that are associated with buying clothing for work, when you 
consider the extra costs of child care, Mr. Minister, there is no 
incentive, financial incentive, for people to go out into the work place. 
 
And I want you to explain, Mr. Minister, how you can justify, for instance, 
a single individual who's on social assistance only being able to keep the 
first $25 that they earn a month and then only 20 per cent of the rest up 
to a maximum of $75.  You explain to me, sir, what kind of incentive there 
is for that individual to go out and take work.  How can that be 
financially rewarding to that person, Mr. Minister? 
 
(1915) 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Chairman, I think one of the key issues that we're 
discussing here is making sure that we have a balance.  And I recognize 
that it's a very difficult task to have this balance between adequate 
benefits, sound work incentives, and also keeping in mind fiscal 
responsibility. 
 
And going back to the way the system was, we find that it was based, and 
the exemptions and so on were based, I think, on an erroneous impression 
that the more financial assistance that you as a recipient were receiving 
under the old method, the more exemptions that you were allowed to keep.  
And this was felt not to be conducive to creating incentives to work. 
 
In other words, what it did is it created the incentive to get more 
assistance because the amount of the exemptions that you were allowed would 
then depend directly upon the amount of assistance that you were receiving.  
In other words, comparing that to the system as it is now, the more money 



 

 

you make, the more assistance you are . . . or the more money you are 
allowed to keep, albeit there is a cap.  And I think what we are discussing 
at this moment is the cap as to how much you are allowed to keep of your 
earnings. 
 
And I think that is basically where our argument or our discussion this 
evening is centring around right now, and perhaps that is something that 
can be looked at in terms of increasing the cap or the flow-through so that 
the person who is doing the working is allowed to keep that much more of 
the money that he is earning.  And I think that's what our discussion is 
centring around right now. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Well yes, Mr. Minister, of course it is.  And the point 
that I'm making is that your government has intentionally created 
disincentives for social assistance recipients to work.  You know that's 
the case, Mr. Minister; the former minister knows that's the case, Mr. 
Minister.  And this flies in the face of all the rhetoric about encouraging 
people to get off welfare. 
 
This, Mr. Minister, gets at the real motivation behind your government's 
policies which has been, from the beginning, to make life tougher for those 
who are poor rather than to assist them in advancing their financial 
circumstances, Mr. Minister. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I want to give you another example of this.  And this 
time, Mr. Minister, it's with respect to people who are studying in 
post-secondary education institutions.  Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could 
explain to the Assembly why it is, for instance, that . . . Just to give 
you a specific example: I was visiting with a group of families in Yorkton 
a few months ago.  And there I met several women who last summer -- these 
are women with large families, anywhere from four to seven children -- and, 
Mr. Minister, these are women who are involved in adult upgrading programs. 
 
And these women, several of them, had had the following experience.  They 
successfully completed their adult upgrading program during the academic 
year.  They have large families, as I mentioned.  They, Mr. Minister, 
sought part-time employment during the summer.  In some cases they were 
successful in getting it, in other cases they weren't.  Several of them had 
to go back to the Department of Social Services seeking social assistance 
during the summer.  In almost every case, Mr. Minister, they were denied 
assistance, and they were denied assistance because of the policy that your 
department has in place whereby student loans are considered to be income. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, because these women had student loans during the winter 
months, they were not allowed to obtain social assistance during the summer 
months.  Several of them, Mr. Minister, went without money for two or three 
months.  They had to obtain assistance from neighbours in order to survive 
and in order to feed their children, Mr. Minister.  And these are women who 
are trying to upgrade themselves.  Now you explain that policy to the 
members of the public watching this evening, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Chairman, the incidents that the hon. member is 
referring to, I'm not familiar with the particular instance, so I think, 



 

 

without committing myself to any particular instance, when these women that 
you were talking about are taking an upgrading and when they are taking a 
course, in terms of education, and are eligible for student loans, they 
automatically would, I would imagine, apply for those student loans and 
receive them.  And having received those student loans, we know that these 
student loans are based upon need.  So I think it would be fair to assume 
that the needs of those women at that time were met through the auspices of 
the student loans. 
 
And having said that, then even if at that time they would have applied for 
social services, they would not have been eligible for social service 
assistance at that time because they were then still accessing the student 
loans as such.  And it is my understanding that at the time when the 
student loan funding would have run out and if the women then were 
destitute and needing assistance and needing help, at that time they 
should, in my opinion, and I can say again, without understanding the total 
circumstances, should have been eligible for social assistance at that 
time. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Minister, of course they should have been, under any 
reasonable set of government policies.  But the point that I'm trying to 
make to you is that they're not, and again you don't understand your own 
regulations, Mr. Minister. 
 
You have created a set of regulations, you see, in which the department, 
your own department officials, look back at those women's income over the 
last six months, and they are of course during the previous six months 
receiving more in student loan moneys than they would have been on social 
assistance.  Your department, Mr. Minister, by way of your own policies, 
has determined that that student loan money is income, even though that 
loan money has to be repaid back, Mr. Minister.  And these women are then 
denied assistance after they've completed their adult upgrading and after 
their student loans have run out, Mr. Minister.  In the intervening summer 
months until they go back to school in the fall, they are being denied 
assistance by your department. 
 
Their children are starving, Mr. Minister.  I want you to explain and to 
justify that policy.  I say it can't be justified, and therefore I'm asking 
you this evening, sir: will you change it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Chairman, the situation as outlined by the critic.  
I think there's one important element that we have to keep in mind here, 
and that is that during the time when that student loan was approved, a 
period of time was taken into consideration for whatever the length of that 
course was going to be, and a certain amount of money based on the needs 
assessment was allocated.  In other words if it was a three-month course, 
so and so much money was deemed to be necessary in order for that family to 
have a credible standard of living. 
 
Now it can be assumed then that if that was not enough, I think there's 
probably one of two alternatives that we could look at.  Number one, 



 

 

perhaps the needs assessment was not conducted properly and an appropriate 
amount was determined, or the funding having been allocated to that 
particular family may not have been used in an appropriate manner. 
 
But regardless of what the situation was, we have to remember that Social 
Services is a service of last resort.  And if the funding is not enough for 
whatever reason, I suggested two possible alternatives for the reasoning 
behind that.  We must not forget that all of these individuals do have the 
right, and we would encourage -- I would personally encourage the right of 
appeal to have the case looked at once more and to give a second opinion as 
it were, by the appeal board to see whether that individual is properly 
treated. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you and I are living in totally 
different worlds.  First of all you don't understand your own regulations, 
which I find it difficult to believe. 
 
I'm talking, Mr. Minister, about what happens after the loan money runs 
out.  And I'm telling you something you don't appear to understand, Mr. 
Minister, and that is you as the Minister of Social Services are denying 
hundreds of women across this province, and their children, the right to 
social assistance, Mr. Minister, if they cannot find work after their 
student loan runs out and they have children to support.  That's your 
policy, Mr. Minister, and it's a policy that must be changed.  It's a 
policy that it is unjust, Mr. Minister, because you are penalizing people 
who are attempting to upgrade themselves, and that is unjustifiable. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I want to turn to another example of how you're doing 
this.  I want to give you a couple of other examples, Mr. Minister.  One, 
Mr. Minister, about the unfairness of your policies with respect to 
encouraging people to pursue an education or to get part-time work are 
these: first of all, Mr. Minister, if someone applies for social assistance 
and they have been holding down a part-time job but they have many children 
to support and they still qualify for some assistance, your department 
deducts, Mr. Minister, all of the money that they earn for the first three 
months they're on assistance.  And I say that can't be justified. 
 
And secondly, Mr. Minister, your government has changed the policy with 
respect to the family income plan, and this is a change that you personally 
oversaw, Mr. Minister.  You changed the regulations at the beginning of 
this year, Mr. Minister, so that a student loan under the family income 
plan would be considered income.  Now I don't have any problem, and members 
on this side of the House, Mr. Minister, don't have any problem with the 
notion that a forgivable loan ought to be considered to be income, Mr. 
Minister.  We don't have any problem with the idea of a forgivable loan 
being considered income. 
 
(1930) 
 
But, Mr. Minister, when money is borrowed, for instance, for tuition, and 
that money must be repaid, you explain to me, Mr. Minister, why money 
borrowed for tuition and for books that is loan money should be considered 
as income under the family income plan.  And you justify for me, Mr. 



 

 

Minister, a situation that I say is unjustifiable, and that is that once 
again there are many, many, particularly women, around this province who 
have been cut off the family income plan and who have lost those benefits 
for their children, Mr. Minister, because they are attending university or 
they are attending a post-secondary education institution, and the money 
that they borrow for tuition and for books is being considered as income.  
Can you explain to me how that's justified, Mr. Minister.  I ask you again 
to cancel that change in policy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- There's a number of issues here, Mr. Chairman, that I 
would like to discuss a little bit. 
 
And that goes back to the other issue, and that is, when these women that 
we were talking about are finished with their particular education classes 
and for whatever reason they are not able to access a job so that income 
would be available to them. 
 
It is false and it is wrong to say that they are not then going to be taken 
care of or that they would not be able to access the normal avenue of 
social aid for those particular people, because they would then, if the 
resources are not there, they become eligible automatically for social 
assistance once more.  And that is the whole point that I think we're 
trying to make here. 
 
Now as far as the student loans are concerned, I think what we have to do 
is . . . First of all the change in regulations were necessary as far as 
the CAP (Canada assistance plan) is concerned with the federal government 
to bring it in line with CAP. 
 
Secondly, it was an attempt to make all recipients of FIP (family income 
plan) on an even basis, because student loans, particularly the forgivable 
section of those student loans, have to be considered as a resource.  And 
the student loans, being based upon living needs, the needs and so on to 
carry on with the normal process of living, would then in actual fact allow 
those people who are accessing student loans to have a double source of 
income.  And to avoid that, to make sure that we treated all recipients 
equally, this student loan then would and was and will continue to be acted 
upon as a resource. 
 
Now I made mention of the forgivable portion.  There's one thing that I'm 
looking at and one thing that I'm beginning to recognize, that there is 
perhaps a need to look at the unforgivable part in so far as the . . . 
particularly the tuition fees, textbooks, and the actual mechanical 
expenses of going to school.  And I think I would agree with the critic 
that this is an avenue that should be looked at and we are in the process 
of doing that.  So I'd give you credit for coming up with that suggestion 
and it's seriously being considered. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Mr. Minister, I appreciate those latter comments very much.  
And I wonder if I could receive a commitment from you this evening that you 
will look seriously at no longer considering the non-forgivable portion of 
the student loan as income, and that if you could give me also a commitment 
tonight that for sure, with respect to moneys that are borrowed for 



 

 

tuition, for books, for all other education-related expenses, that you 
will, as of tonight, give me a commitment that you will immediately go 
before cabinet and repeal the regulation that you introduced and ensure 
that those changes are made, Mr. Minister, so that moneys borrowed for 
educational expenses are no longer considered income. 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- One concern I have, and that is what I will reiterate 
to the hon. member, and that is that the basis of the changes was on the 
equitable aspect of it.  And I'm having a little bit of a problem making 
the commitment at this time about the total non-forgivable portion.  But in 
so far as the exact and direct expenses involved in attaining an education, 
textbooks and the like, I would reiterate the commitment that -- without 
making a positive because there's nothing too positive in our whole system 
here -- but I am committed to making that change, I would go so far. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I thank you very much for that.  I want 
to urge you to do it quickly.  Get that in place, Mr. Minister.  Make sure 
that that policy change is in place so that when students go back in the 
fall, students who are supporting children, Mr. Minister, that they are no 
longer being penalized in the way that they were in the spring term of this 
year, Mr. Minister. 
 
I know of some women, in fact, particularly single women supporting 
children, who had to drop out of school as a result of the policy that you 
instituted, Mr. Minister, and I urge you to change it. 
 
I want to turn to a different area, Mr. Minister, but it's another example 
of your government's failure to give enough support to preventative 
programming, to preventative social programming, Mr. Minister.  Some of 
these things that we've been talking about so far are good examples, Mr. 
Minister, of how your government has in effect failed to give people 
support to advance themselves. 
 
With the same theme in mind, I want to look at quite a different area now, 
and this is families who have children who have serious handicaps, 
particularly mental handicaps, Mr. Minister.  And I'm thinking here of the 
early childhood intervention program.  And I asked you during question 
period some time ago about the waiting-list for the Regina early childhood 
intervention program.  And you will recall, Mr. Minister, that some 26 
children a few weeks ago were waiting to get into the Regina ECIP (early 
childhood intervention program) program, and they weren't able to get in, 
Mr. Minister, because there was no space for them.  All that was required, 
Mr. Minister, to eliminate that waiting-list was an investment of about 
$2,700, of space, the financing of an additional two and a half staff 
positions. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, when you think about the cost that can be associated 
with a child that doesn't get the necessary help early on in life, later on 
having to get large amounts of expensive assistance, and perhaps having to 
be institutionalized, Mr. Minister, if they don't get help early on in 
life, I want to ask you now whether in light of those costs, unnecessary 
costs for the taxpayer to bear, and in light of the fact that these 
waiting-lists are robbing these children of an opportunity to at least 



 

 

partially overcome their disability, will you give us a commitment tonight 
that you will provide the finances for the Regina early childhood 
intervention program to eliminate its waiting-list. 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Chairman, in response to my hon. critic's comment 
here, yes, I full well remember the question that he asked me in question 
period on the early childhood intervention program a while back, because 
that's the only question I have received, so it's hard for me to forget 
about that one particular question. 
 
However having said that, I don't want to belittle the importance and the 
significance of the early childhood intervention program.  And I recognize 
your concern and the people out there because of the preventative nature of 
such a program.  And I think my department over the years -- no credit 
necessarily to me as an individual, but to this government and to previous 
ministers who have recognized that. 
 
And I could indicate to the hon. member that as far as the early childhood 
intervention program is concerned, in '90-91 we are going to be spending 
$1,231,000 on this program.  So there is a significant commitment, 
significant sums of money being spent on that.  If you want to say, well 
it's not enough, well that's a fair comment.  I'm not quite sure what 
enough is until and such time as every one of those cases would have been 
properly brought to a conclusion. 
 
Having said that, as far as your comments on the waiting-list, my 
information that I have just received from my officials is that it is no 
longer a waiting-list of 26 individuals in Regina here but rather four of 
those that were on the waiting-list have graduated and have gone on to 
further programs.  And I have had it indicated to me that another four are 
now going to be dealt with in another field, that of foster care, and they 
will be accessing different programs there. 
 
And there is some indication, although I would not want to make any firm 
commitment on this, that there will be further movement come fall.  But the 
26 is apparently down with eight less than that at this stage.  Although we 
could be doing more, I would suggest to you that there is a significant 
amount of effort and money being put into this very worthwhile project. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Well thank you for those comments, Mr. Minister, but 
they're not good enough.  First of all, let me just say a word about this 
being the so-called only question.  Mr. Minister, I've asked many questions 
during question period with respect to matters like poverty, hunger, your 
$740,000 budget for fighting child hunger in this province, and every time 
I asked one of those questions you duck it, and the Minister of the Family 
answers it, Mr. Minister.  I don't know when we've seen a circumstance 
where a Minister of Social Services declines to answer questions about 
items in his own budget and leaves it to the Minister of the Family to 
handle it.  But that's indeed a unique situation. 
 
(1945) 
 
Now I might say, sir, with respect to the waiting-list at the Regina early 



 

 

childhood intervention program, that just because the waiting-list, as you 
inform me, is now down to 18, doesn't make the waiting-list, sir, any more 
acceptable.  Mr. Minister, I'm asking you to establish a policy that 
whenever a child is, upon examination, thought to be able to benefit from 
the early childhood intervention program in this province, that that child 
automatically becomes eligible for services under that program.  That's the 
way the system should work, Mr. Minister. 
 
It is much more cost-effective, Mr. Minister, for the government to spend a 
few thousand dollars assisting the family and the child in their home to 
overcome some of their disabilities at an early age than it is to spend 
much larger amounts of money later on, much less effectively, in helping a 
child deal with their handicap, Mr. Minister. 
 
And I ask you to look at some of the children that are on the waiting-list.  
Several of the children, Mr. Minister, are visually impaired; one has a 
seizure disorder; three have Down's Syndrome; one is missing part of her 
frontal lobe; one child is on oxygen all the time with serious feeding 
problems; many children are suffering from fetal alcohol syndrome; and some 
have cerebral palsy, Mr. Minister. 
 
Now you explain to me, sir, and you explain to the people watching these 
estimates this evening, and to the Assembly, how you could justify denying 
these children, with the difficulties that I've described, $2,700 each for 
a space in the early childhood intervention program in this province.  You 
explain that, sir.  What are you going to do to provide the funds to 
eliminate this waiting-list? 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- First of all, Mr. Chairman, we do not deny anyone the 
opportunity to have their situation addressed.  And again I can empathize 
with the hon. member and the parents of children who are experiencing 
difficulty and stress and so on.  But I would like to indicate to the 
member that this is done on a prioritization list, and the needs assessment 
is done by a committee of professionals who priorize these individuals. 
 
But having said that, I would like to indicate to the member that we are in 
the process of having a review being done on this matter.  We're very 
serious about it.  Let me assure you of that.  And we are having a 
provincial review about . . . with the whole situation, with the possibly 
of realignment of programs, realignment of funding, on a provincial basis 
to address the need that we have been talking about. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Well I'm glad that some review will be undertaken, Mr. 
Minister, but I want to just close this particular subject by saying I urge 
you, once again, to look at immediately providing the dollars that are 
required to eliminate this waiting-list in Regina, where it's the most 
serious in the province. 
 
And I also urge you, Mr. Minister, to look in co-operation with the 
Minister of Health at dealing with the problem that many children in the 
early childhood intervention program and their families are having in 
accessing support services that must be delivered in conjunction with the 
ECIP program in order to assist children. 



 

 

 
For instance, Mr. Minister, it is unacceptable that children in the 
north-west part of this province must travel all the way from 
Ile-a-la-Crosse to Saskatoon, and bearing in mind these are children with 
handicaps, that their families must travel those distances in order to 
access services like physiotherapy or speech therapy.  That is 
unacceptable.  I realize that this is partially in the hands of the 
Minister of Health.  But I'm saying to you, sir, this issue needs to be 
urgently addressed. 
 
We owe it to these children to give them whatever support we can as a 
society, and to provide that assistance to them and their families at the 
earliest possible moment so that they can . . . You know, a child, sir, 
with Down's syndrome can do a great deal if they get help in the first few 
months of their life.  When they have to wait six or seven months to access 
this program, Mr. Minister, they then learn many behaviours.  For instance, 
they sit up improperly and they learn to walk improperly, because they're 
not getting the kind of help that they could get if they could access the 
early childhood intervention program.  And that is wrong, sir, that is just 
plain wrong.  And I don't think there's a taxpayer in the province that 
would deny you spending money to help those children, Mr. Minister. 
 
Now I want to give you, sir . . . I want to turn to another topic.  And I 
want to give you another example of an area where your government has 
failed to provide the kind of preventative social services that are 
required to save the taxpayer money and to help young people who are in 
need to become self-reliant, Mr. Minister.  And I speak here of the very 
high drop-out rate that we have in this province among teen-age women. 
 
If you look at the statistics, Mr. Minister, which I invite you to do, you 
will find that there's approximately 1,250 young teenagers in this province 
who have children each year.  And if you look at the figures over and above 
that, Mr. Minister, you'll see that these young women are getting pregnant 
when they're in high school.  So 1,250 teenagers in high school who are 
pregnant each year -- 1,250. 
 
Then I invite you, sir, to look at the number of day-care spaces that are 
available to these young teen-age women and that are specifically geared to 
teens in high school, Mr. Minister.  So I'm talking here about day-care 
spaces that are either located in a high school or that are located 
immediately adjacent to a high school in the day-care centre.  And, Mr. 
Minister, when you look at that figure, you'll find that the figure is 22.  
Only 22 day-care spaces that have been specifically set up for teen-age 
mothers and 1,250 teenagers a year who are getting pregnant while in high 
school. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I then invite you to examine what is happening to these 
young women because 80 per cent of them are dropping out of high school, 
Mr. Minister, 80 per cent -- four out of five.  It is the largest single 
cause of school drop-out among young women in the province of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
And so, Mr. Minister, I realize that your government has done something 



 

 

positive in this area.  You have provided funding for these 22 day-care 
spaces, which I commend you for.  Ten of them are at Balfour Collegiate in 
Saskatoon; 12 of them are at the MacKenzie Infant Care Centre in Regina.  
We appreciate the steps you've taken in that area.  But I ask you to look 
at the discrepancy between 1,250 young women each year who need day-care 
assistance to stay in school and the 22 day-care spaces that exist.  And I 
ask you, sir, when are we going to see in your budget significant new 
initiatives for day-care spaces that will allow teen-age mothers to 
continue their high school education? 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- The particular area that we're discussing right now is 
a great deal of concern to me, not only as Minister of Social Services, but 
also a former teacher who has spent many, many years in a class-room.  And 
there was really nothing that was so disillusionary for me to see young 
kids quitting school.  And just, you know, they tend to just kind of cut 
off at the base of their legs any possibility that they would have of 
bettering themselves and getting that base of support in terms of education 
that they will need later on in their life. 
 
So I couldn't agree with you more that it is essential that we keep these 
young gals in school as long as possible so that they can get that 
foundation, as it were, with a proper education that they can go out there 
and compete in this wide world of ours. 
 
In order to do that, again I suppose what we're talking about is resources 
available.  You're bringing up a lot of things tonight and I imagine you 
will continue to do so as we go through these estimates.  And each one of 
those issues that you're bringing up does have a price-tag to it, so 
eventually we have to do a certain amount of priorization and do as much as 
possible for the resources that we have available. 
 
Teen-age girls who have children when they're 14, 15, or 16 years of age 
are really up against it if they don't have that education, and I think we 
recognize that.  And what we have been trying over the last couple of 
years, which was instituted and really begun under the auspices of the 
former minister, and what I have been encouraging and continuing on, are 
such things as the MacKenzie day-care centre here in Balfour in Regina -- 
not in Saskatoon -- and also at the Mount Roya1 one in Saskatoon.  I've 
gone through that one and I've talked to the young parents and to the 
day-care workers that are there, and it's very encouraging to see the kind 
of response that we get to a program like this.  It can either be having 
these facilities and having this program within the school . . . I can see 
a lot of advantages of moving it out of school into homes within the 
region, easily accessible to the moms. 
 
And of course we have also an initiative that was taken in Moose Jaw in 
Chisholm.  In Moose Jaw, even as we speak, we are coming close to making a 
deal, as it were, with La Loche.  I've been up in La Loche a number of 
times since becoming minister, on different occasions, and I've visited the 
Dene school that is in La Loche.  A very encouraging sign when you walk 
through that school, and I would encourage you to go through that -- maybe 
you have already -- to get the flavour of the northern community and the 
flavour of the people who live there and some of their aspirations and some 



 

 

of the needs, desires that they experience.  And even there I'm very glad 
to say that this is a concern that the leaders of the community have as 
well.  And we're working very closely together in La Loche right now to set 
up a program that will encourage young girls to stay in school and get that 
solid basis of an education that will be so necessary for them. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Mr. Minister, I'm pleased to hear that you think that 
having these day-care programs is a good idea, but of course the reality is 
that your government isn't expanding them. 
 
Mr. Minister, what is needed in this province, just for starters, is at 
least 100 such spaces, day-care spaces for teen mothers in high schools or 
nearby high schools, as you say, in Saskatoon, and another 100 in Regina, 
and at least another 100 to 150 around the rest of the province, Mr. 
Minister.  That's what we need for starters. 
 
Now that can be done, Mr. Minister, and you know that will be cost-shared 
through the Canada assistance plan so in terms of moneys that have to be 
put up, half of the money will come from Ottawa. 
 
But more significantly, Mr. Minister, you know that it is much less 
expensive to assist a young woman in completing her high school education 
while she's under 21 than it is, Mr. Minister, to help her return and 
finish her high school after she's 21, after she's an adult.  You know it's 
much more expensive, Mr. Minister, to do it when she's an adult than to do 
it while she's a teenager.  So the cost of providing day-care services to a 
teenager is minuscule in comparison with the student loan moneys that have 
to be paid to assist someone with children after they've become 21 years of 
age. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, my question to you is: are you going to provide funding 
to expand these day-care spaces to these teen mothers who badly need these 
services around the province?  And, Mr. Minister, moreover, are you 
prepared to provide transportation assistance to these young women to be 
able to get to school because it's very difficult, Mr. Minister, to travel 
to school when you've got a squirming 10-month-old that you're trying to 
look after in one hand, and you're carrying books and a lunch and a diaper 
bag and a change of cloths for the baby in the other hand, Mr. Minister.  
These women, its very awkward for many of them who have to travel long 
distances to get to the one high school in Saskatoon or Regina that offers 
the service, so they need transportation assistance. 
 
(2000) 
 
And also, Mr. Minister, there needs to be a day care for these children of 
the teenagers that I'm making reference to, when they're past 18 months of 
age.  Because right now, Mr. Minister, once their child turns 18 months, 
they're no longer able to benefit from the program at MacKenzie Infant Care 
Centre, or at Balfour, even if they've been able to get into the program.  
Once their child is 18 months they can no longer keep their child in the 
program. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, what are you going to do about addressing these obvious 



 

 

needs?  Will you provide some financial assistance that would help these 
young women to complete their high school education? 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Chairman, I have already, I think, agreed to the 
importance of such a program for these young women.  Furthermore, I think 
that we have to take a look at what we are already doing, and if you say, 
well we have to do more, I'm not going to argue with you on that one.  I 
guess what we have to do, as I tried to indicate to you on one of my 
previous answers, is we have to take a look at this particular situation 
within the parameters of the whole government program. 
 
And I think you would recognize, sir, that somewhere along the line you 
have to priorize in terms of the services that you can offer.  And we 
cannot, with deference to what you've been saying, do everything for 
everybody all at one time, kind of thing.  And as much as I would like to 
say to you and make a commitment that yes, every need is going to be met, I 
can't do that because I have to be fiscally responsible at the same time as 
I am responsible to these individuals. 
 
But to talk only about the teen parenting program as it relates to child 
care for these -- as important as it is, we have to go beyond that.  And I 
think we have programs that have been established to help these young moms 
not only with the child itself, but other programs that we have available 
on the teen and young parent program such as, for example, the birth parent 
counselling programs that we have, parent education programs that we have, 
which work around the theme that nobody's perfect. 
 
And this is important for these young people for their own self-esteem and 
for their own . . . Well I don't want to get into some of the emotional 
problems that parents like this would meet, but one of the problems is the 
lack of self 
_esteem and lack of self-worth because of the situation that they have 
found themselves in, the blame that they're putting on themselves and so 
on.  So I think parent education, birth parent counselling, life skills 
education is another situation that we're involved in as well as education 
and vocational training. 
 
So I'm not trying to underplay the significance of what we've been talking 
about, but we have to take that into the picture of the total context of 
these support services that are available for these young teen parents.  So 
taking a look at it from that point of view, maybe there is more going on 
for these than we have been led to believe so far by our discussions 
centring only on that one particular aspect, as important as it is. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Mr. Minister, you know we on this side of the House share 
your view about the importance of fiscal management.  The difference, Mr. 
Minister, when we were in government, was that we had sound fiscal 
management; we didn't have a deficit. 
 
Your priority, Mr. Minister, the priority of your government -- I don't 
want to direct this specifically at you -- but the priority of your 
government has clearly been deficit financing to the point where the 
interest on the debt is the third largest expenditure of government.  There 



 

 

was no category for interest on the debt when we were in government, Mr. 
Minister, as you well know. 
 
But the point I want to make with respect to this program is that, Mr. 
Minister, you try to explain to me the economic common sense of your 
policy, which as you say, well we don't have additional financial resources 
to provide day care for these young people.  Therefore, Mr. Minister, the 
consequence of that is that four out of five of these teen-age women drop 
out of high school.  That's 1,000 teen-age women a year out of the 1,250 
that become pregnant. 
 
Mr. Minister, you know what happens to many of these women.  Many of these 
women, Mr. Minister, live isolated existences, often relying on social 
welfare, Mr. Minister, if they live away from home.  If they live at home, 
Mr. Minister, they're not eligible for any assistance from the Department 
of Social Services by way of social assistance at all, Mr. Minister.  And I 
just don't understand the common sense of that. 
 
You look at the MacKenzie infant program in Regina, Mr. Minister.  Look at 
the women who have gone through that program; 13 out of the 14 women who 
were in that program, Mr. Minister, last year completed their high school 
year successfully.  That's a drop-out rate, Mr. Minister, of only 7 per 
cent versus the regular drop-out rate for these teen-age women, of 80 per 
cent. 
 
You look at the program at Balfour Collegiate, Mr. Minister.  And in the 
first semester of the 1989-90 academic year, every one of the teen-age 
women who was in that program completed their semester successfully, versus 
the 80 per cent drop-out rate among those who didn't have the benefit of 
the program. 
 
And you explain to me, Mr. Minister, the economic common sense that you 
espouse of letting teenagers drop out of school and having to rely on the 
welfare system.  And then you compare that, Mr. Minister, with the 
teenagers, for instance, who graduated and who benefitted from the 
MacKenzie infant program in Regina, where only 16 per cent of those women, 
Mr. Minister, are now relying on social assistance.  The rest have 
successfully gotten off welfare.  Now that saves the taxpayers money, Mr. 
Minister, but those are the kind of policies that your government just 
doesn't seem to understand.  Why don't you use this as an opportunity to 
invest in a preventative social program, save the taxpayers of the province 
a great deal of money by reducing the school drop-out rate in Saskatchewan, 
and at the same time supporting these young women to complete their 
education and get on with their lives, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm not quite sure how to respond 
totally to the member's comments because I'm sure he is and I am, as well, 
trying to keep this on a reasonably high level of discussion.  But it's 
tempting, because you seem to be baiting me a little bit here.  I'm going 
to respond a little bit just to chastise you and just put this whole thing 
into a proper perspective, and then I hope that doesn't lead to a 
counter-attack by you and then we're into it. 
 



 

 

You start talking about deficit, and I think we could get into a discussion 
on deficits and who could hide deficits the best and all that kind of stuff 
but I don't know . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I hear the member 
from Quill Lakes starting to react a little bit, and that's what I was 
suggesting to you that will happen if we get into that and I know we don't 
want to. 
 
But I want to put one thing into perspective, and that deals with child 
care . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The Health critic talks about 
honesty and so on.  Let's take a look at the . . . I have a report here and 
this particular report deals and I'm going to quote from Graham Riches' -- 
I don't know if some of you might be familiar with that name, Graham Riches 
and George Maslany taken out of the Canadian Social Work Review article -- 
and the article that I'm referring to, if the member wants to look up and 
to see if I've picked out a quote that's speaking on my behalf.  That's the 
social welfare and the New Democrats' personal social service spending in 
Saskatchewan, 1971 to '81.  And I just want to make this one quote, and 
then I'd like to have your reaction to this: 
 

 In terms of child care (and I'm quoting) the critical preventive sections 
of the family services legislation had not been implemented in the six 
years following enactment.  And the 13,500 day-care spaces promised by 
1979 in the 1974 budget speech were to be 10,000 spaces short of the 
target. 

 
Now I recognize that maybe, perhaps we had not met all of the targets that 
we had set, but I suggest to you that in times past, there was a previous 
government that did say that they were going to have 13,500 spaces by the 
year '79 in a five-year period of time.  Now when that five-year period of 
time was up, unfortunately, the spaces were 10,000 short.  So history, I 
suppose, in a sense, does tend to repeat itself. 
 
But let me just give you an indication of the commitment that this 
government has had to child-care spaces, and again, there is a need out 
there, and again, perhaps we have not met that need totally.  And I would 
be the first one to admit that. 
 
But in the year 1981-82, there was a total funding for $6,692,000. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- And now it's up to 13 million. 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- And now, in 1989-1990 . . . No, I say to the member 
from Saskatoon Nutana, it's not 13 million; now it is $17,899,000, almost 
18,000, which is getting close to tripling over that period of time.  And 
so there is that growth and certainly the inflation factor can be 
compounded many times and there's still a greater commitment to child-care 
spaces than there was in 1981-82.  We've got lots left to do.  I grant you 
that. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you don't seem to want to talk about 
your policy with respect to day care for teen-age moms because, frankly, 
it's indefensible, Mr. Minister.  But you seem to want to talk about your 
larger day-care policy, so let's get into that for a minute. 



 

 

 
I hadn't planned to, but since you raised it, Mr. Minister, I wonder if you 
can therefore explain to this Assembly, in light of the comments that 
you've just made, why it is that in the province of Saskatchewan, when you 
look at Saskatchewan's record relative to the record for all of Canada, 
that only 7 per cent of the children under 13 years of age whose parents 
are in the work place, Mr. Minister, in this province, only there are . . . 
when you look at the numbers of children who are under 13 years of age and 
then you look at the number of day-care spaces, Mr. Minister, there's only 
licensed day-care spaces for 7 per cent of those children, in contrast, Mr. 
Minister, with a Canadian average of 13 per cent. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, that's your record, not ours.  Your government's been in 
office now for eight years.  During those eight years, Mr. Minister, not 
only have you had a dismal record with respect to the creation of spaces, 
as I've just indicated, but you've also frozen the day-care subsidy for an 
eight-year period.  It remains at $235 a month, just like it did in 1982, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
Now my question, Mr. Minister, to you then is: can you tell us, will there 
be an increase in the day-care subsidy in the current fiscal year?  When is 
that subsidy at long last going to be increased?  When will the eight-year 
freeze come to an end, Mr. Minister?  And how do you justify a record, sir, 
in which, among Canadian provinces, with the exception of the province of 
Newfoundland, no other province has a lower percentage of licensed day-care 
spaces for the percentage of children under 13 years of age whose parents 
are working than does the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
(2015) 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Chairman, since 1982 the amounts of money and 
funding and so on for child-care spaces has increased by over 48 per cent.  
At the same time, the cost of operating a space -- although the $235 per 
space has been in place for a number of years already -- the cost per space 
has not remained the same.  Now when I say cost for space, the amount that 
has been funded for through the government has increased by 35 per cent 
during that period of time. 
 
So in other words, with the start-up grants, the start-up grants of $600 
per space, it is a one-time grant for centres.  Homes, at the same time, 
receive a start-up grant of $200 when they are licensed and, at the same 
time, a northern home would receive a start-up grant of $300. 
 
Then there are operating costs that were -- I'm not quite sure what year 
the operating costs were started, but I believe it was somewhere in the 
year of 1986 or thereabouts -- when we had the operating costs of $20 per 
space per month.  So that would be 20 times 12 to give you $240 a year for 
operating costs that have been implemented as well. 
 
And so we do have a large amount of money being spent per space, more than 
was in times past.  So granted the $235 per space per month will have 
remained constant; it is not that the total cost to the government for this 
particular space has remained constant because there is additional funding 



 

 

being provided for them. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you haven't answered my question with 
respect to when we can expect an increase in the day-care subsidy.  It's 
simply not fair to work start-up grants into the annual operating costs of 
the day-care centre. 
 
I do think it's fair, Mr. Minister, as you did, to make reference to the 
$20 per space per month that your government's made available by way of an 
operating grant.  Yes, that has helped a little, although now it's been at 
least five years, if my memory serves me correct, since that was increased. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, we're looking at a long-term freeze on the operating 
grants of day-care centres and, Mr. Minister, that has had very serious 
consequences with respect to the low salaries that those day-care centres 
are able to pay their staff.  Mr. Minister, because of your long-term 
freeze on funding to centres, the staff at those centres are being, I 
think, badly underpaid.  You know, Mr. Minister, it is just unacceptable 
when someone who is caring for animals at the SPCA (Society for the 
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals) or at a zoo is making a good deal more 
money an hour than a day-care worker, Mr. Minister, who is caring for our 
most precious resource, namely our children. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I won't pursue that any more at this point.  I think 
your answer is on the record and I regret that we're not seeing any policy 
change in this area from the one pursued by the former minister of Social 
Services. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, I want to ask you another question, and that's in the 
area of legal aid.  And I wonder if you can indicate to the Assembly 
whether we can expect that the current policy, which I'm happy to see being 
pursued despite the legislation that was passed last year, can we expect 
that in fact there will be no user fees for legal aid services reinstituted 
in the province of Saskatchewan?  Can you confirm that that will be the 
case, Mr. Minister, or is it your intention to introduce a user fee?  I'm 
asking for a commitment from you that there will . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Ask the first part of that question again.  I didn't 
catch it quite at the end there. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Okay, the minister is asking me to repeat the question.  
I'm pleased to do that.  Mr. Minister, what I'm saying to you is that last 
year your government passed legislation that enabled you to charge user 
fees again for legal aid services.  I've been happy to see, to the best of 
my knowledge, that no such user fee has been reintroduced.  I'm seeking a 
commitment from you today, sir, that in fact that will continue to be the 
case, and that we will not see user fees for legal aid services in the 
current fiscal year and beyond the current fiscal year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Chairman, perhaps at the outset I should take this 
opportunity to introduce to the member opposite Mr. Don Morgan, who is the 
chairman of the Legal Aid Commission. 
 



 

 

And with respect to your question for my . . . I'm glad that you recognize 
the fact that the user fees have not been applied to this stage.  And quite 
frankly, I don't know if I can at this time make a firm commitment as to 
what's going to happen in the future because right now we are waiting upon 
a recommendation from the commission as to what their stand is going to be.  
And as yet, we have not received this recommendation.  But certainly, 
whatever that recommendation is going to be, I would look very, very 
seriously upon following it.  My inclination is to follow whatever 
recommendation they make. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Sir, you are the minister responsible for the Legal Aid 
Commission.  Obviously you are the person who finally decides on whether or 
not there will be a user fee or not and, of course, your cabinet 
colleagues.  And my question to you is: sir, will you give us your 
commitment tonight that you will, as minister responsible for the Legal Aid 
Commission, not reinstitute user fees in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
I ask you to bear in mind, sir, that we are talking here about people who 
are eligible for legal aid, of course, are by definition, people who are 
living at less than 70 per cent of the poverty line.  If you're living at 
more than 70 per cent of the poverty line, as a matter of policy, your 
government has not permitted persons whose incomes exceed 70 per cent of 
the poverty line to be eligible for legal aid at all. 
 
Now we argue, Mr. Minister, that those who are living at 70 per cent of the 
poverty line or less simply can't afford to pay the user fees that your 
government previously instituted.  And I'm asking for a commitment tonight 
that you will not reinstitute user fees in the legal aid system. 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- I can't make that commitment.  And the reason I cannot 
make that commitment, as I'm sure that the hon. member would understand, is 
that we do have the commission.  I am waiting for a report from that 
commission.  And for me to unilaterally at this stage say this is the way 
it's going to be, then there's not much point in having the report coming 
down from the commission to see what they would recommend. 
 
I've already indicated to you the inclination that I on a personal basis 
have, but you're quite right in assessing the situation that it is not up 
to me as an individual alone to make that determination.  And as far as I'm 
concerned I cannot speak for cabinet itself.  I can certainly indicate that 
my inclination is going to be voiced in cabinet, but how that's going to 
turn out, because it's going to be a cabinet decision when this comes down.  
It would be rash for me to make a commitment of that type that I may not be 
able to keep. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Well I accept that, Mr. Minister.  I just want to make a 
commitment from members on this side of the House that in the event that 
we're elected government there will not be user fees under the legal aid 
system as it operates now . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, Mr. 
Minister.  The minister says, well there are none now, but he's not giving 
us a commitment that there won't be again.  And, Mr. Minister, we find that 
unacceptable. 
 



 

 

Now I want to turn to a different and very important topic, Mr. Minister.  
And I've intentionally left the questioning on this to estimates rather 
than question period because of the seriousness of the matter.  I don't 
want to in any way imply that, you know, I'm interested in politics here.  
I just want to get some policy commitments from you with respect to the 
events surrounding the death of Joel Mike.  And of course you'll be very 
familiar with that case, Mr. Minister. 
 
Now this of course was the unfortunate death of a two and a half year old 
boy on the Beardy Reserve.  This child was being . . . his mother had, you 
know, had basically made arrangements for him to be cared for by one Edward 
Spence and his common-law wife.  And of course you will know, Mr. Minister, 
the tragic events that occurred when that took place.  The young boy was 
severely assaulted by Mr. Spence and died.  And, Mr. Minister, there are a 
number of very important policy issues associated with this that must, I 
think, be discussed in order to ensure that this kind of a tragedy does not 
occur again. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I want to begin by asking you a question with respect to 
police checks.  And I understand, Mr. Minister, I want to say from the 
outset that I understand that it was not your department officials that 
placed this boy with the family on the Beardy Reserve.  So I don't want to 
hold you totally accountable for this situation or your officials.  I do 
think the department has some responsibility to bear but I don't want to 
say it's the primary responsibility. 
 
But during the course of the discussions with respect to the Joel Mike 
case, your associate deputy minister indicated on CBC radio that in fact as 
a matter of policy, a police check was not done on all prospective 
foster-parents and adoptive parents in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So in other words, when someone is applying to be a foster-parent or 
applying to be an adoptive parent, at the time that the . . . as of earlier 
this year when these statements were made, which I think was back in March, 
if my memory serves me correctly, as a matter of practice there was not a 
police check done on these applicants to ensure that they did not have a 
criminal record that included violence or that included assault against 
children. 
 
And I'm not implying here of course that anyone with a criminal record 
shouldn't be able to adopt a child or be a foster-parent, on the contrary.  
There are many situations where somebody, for instance, may have had a 
drinking and driving offence or something like this, and that doesn't 
necessarily make them a bad foster-parent or a bad adoptive parent. 
 
But I'm asking for an indication from you this evening, sir, about whether 
this policy has now been changed.  Can you tell me: are police checks now 
being done on prospective foster-parents and adoptive parents?  And if so, 
what kind of scrutiny is being given in the event that a criminal record is 
found to be part of the background of the applicant? 
 
(2030) 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Chairman, and hon. member, I know that you and I 
have sat down and discussed this case privately in times past, and we both 
have, I think, a concern about the situation that you've described, and of 
others that have occurred, perhaps not of the prominence of this particular 
case, but there is that underlying concern, I think, that we have to keep 
in mind.  And you are correct. The placement was not done with my 
department alone as such. 
 
Having said that, I think I made a commitment to you on a private basis 
before, and I will do that publicly right now, that this police check and 
so on I think is something that we have to look at very, very seriously, 
and I think beyond just the scope that we were talking about here.  I think 
it's something perhaps that we should consider on a much broader base 
throughout government. 
 
And I'm not quite sure how the final thing is going to shake out, but we 
are pursuing it.  We're looking for a policy that will be liveable by 
everyone.  And I make that commitment to you, that in the not too distant 
future there will be this policy of automatic police checks for people that 
are going to be in a position of authority and have a responsibility, so 
that recurrence of that tragic event that you described on the Beardy 
Reserve will have less chance of occurring again. 
 
I don't know if we can be totally definitive that it will never happen 
again, but certainly we can't leave too many stones unturned in trying to 
prevent a recurrence of that tragic event. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Well I'm glad to hear that the policy is being planned.  
I'm disappointed that it's not already in place, Mr. Minister, although I 
realize that consultations with the foster parents association and other 
groups are required.  I want to urge you to get it in place as quickly as 
possible, particularly for individuals, Mr. Minister, who have the care of 
a child for a long period of time when they're alone.  I think we have to 
distinguish between people -- staff persons, for instance in a day care -- 
who have contact with children but who have it under the eye of many other 
individuals, and persons who are caring for children alone, in effect, 
where their behaviour can't be scrutinized by others over prolonged periods 
of time. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to deal specifically now with the Joel Mike case, and 
I want to ask you, how many months before the children were placed with the 
Spence family were the children in the care of your department, Mr. 
Minister?  I know these children were from time to time wards of your 
department.  I wrote you a letter about this.  To my knowledge I've not yet 
received an answer unless it's just come in the last day or two.  I'd like 
to know, Mr. Minister: when were these children wards of the Department of 
Social Services and what was the distance in time, what was the period of 
time between the time they were last a ward of your department and the time 
they were placed with the Spence family? 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Chairman, my officials and I have been discussing 
the question and the concerns raised by the member opposite.  My hesitation 
is a reluctance on my part to go into too much detail on this particular 



 

 

case.  I know the court case is over and all that but there are other 
children involved, and we have a concern about confidentiality and airing 
the case like this in public and some of the potential effect that it could 
have perhaps, on the other children that are involved. 
 
I think, Mr. Chairman, that I would be willing to indicate to the member 
opposite that, as we have done on other cases and other discussions that 
we've had on a private situation, if you would prefer to sit down, and I 
can discuss the situation with you rather than going public in this case, 
if that would be acceptable to the member. 
 
And I understand that the letter that you sent me that you have not gotten 
a response to -- I'm not aware that that letter was not answered, and 
certainly at the same time, we could pursue any of the concerns that you 
had in that letter at that time. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Mr. Minister, unless the letter has gone astray -- it may 
have been answered and gone astray -- but I've not received it.  I did ask 
to meet with you and your officials some three months ago to discuss the 
case.   At that point you declined to involve your officials in the 
discussion.  And it's difficult to have a discussion on the case with your 
officials . . . I mean it's hard to discuss it with you when your officials 
aren't present because obviously you need a briefing from them during the 
discussion. 
 
The point I want to make, Mr. Minister, is I have reason to believe, 
although I don't have all the details -- that's why I asked you the 
question -- that in fact these children were a ward of the Department of 
Social Services just a short time prior to being placed with the Spence 
family.  I'm asking you if you can confirm whether or not that's the case.  
And if it was the case, I wonder if you could explain to the Assembly why 
the Department of Social Services wasn't monitoring what was happening to 
those children and where they were being placed since they had been wards 
of yours, sir, only a short time before. 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Chairman, I am informed by my officials that they 
were not in care at the time of the placement. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- No, I realize they weren't in care at the time of the 
placement.  That's not what I implied.  My question to you is: shortly 
before the placement, months before the placement, is it true that these 
children were wards of the Department of Social Services, and your 
responsibility, sir?  Was that the case? 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- My officials are not completely sure on that at this 
time, and instead of me saying yes or no, we're going to go back, we're 
going to check the records and find out.  And I would offer to give that 
commitment to you, that you will get the answer to that as soon as we can 
ascertain as to yes/no, and the time period, as you're indicating that you 
would like to know, as well. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Mr. Minister, I'll accept that reluctantly, I must say, 
because this is after all a very important public issue.  And I'm surprised 



 

 

that your officials don't have the information. But there's not much I can 
do about it. 
 
I would also appreciate an indication if in fact the children were wards of 
yours, sir, whether you could indicate at precisely what time they were no 
longer wards of the minister.  What period of time, then, took place 
between the time they stopped being wards of yours, and the time that they 
were placed with the Spence family.  And if that period was only a few 
months, an explanation, in writing, of what type of monitoring the 
Department of Social Services was doing to ensure the well-being of these 
children.  So I'd be grateful for a commitment from you that that will be 
done. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I want to ask you another question associated with this, 
and that is with respect to the larger question of a lack of native 
child-welfare policy in your department.  Basically you don't have a native 
child-welfare policy, in my view, Mr. Minister.  And I would like to ask 
you a question and that is why it is that Saskatchewan is one of the only 
provinces in Canada without a provincial federal agreement on child and 
family services on Indian reserves.  Can you answer that for me please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, I think we have to take a look at 
this particular question in its historical perspective as well. 
 
And if you look back in the 1970s, you will find that there was no 
agreement signed during that time for the fundamental reason that the FSIN 
(Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations), the Saskatchewan Indians 
themselves did not want us to sign an agreement exclusive of the federal 
government because of their insistence and their recognition that the 
Indian affairs and so on are a direct -- and sole, might I add -- 
responsibility of the federal government.  And I believe that that is the 
stand and that is the commitment that they still have currently today. 
 
(2045) 
 
And I could perhaps point out that we as a provincial government have been 
trying to get agreements in place.  As a matter of fact and a case in 
point, we have an agreement with the Meadow Lake Tribal Council that the 
Meadow Lake Tribal Council and the provincial government have an agreement 
in place.  But there's a reluctant partner that is not willing to sign, and 
that is the federal government. 
 
And so the federal government basically has frozen their funding right now.  
And what we're trying to do in conjunction with the FSIN and the provincial 
government and other provinces is to get the federal government to make a 
commitment in this particular area that we're discussing right now so that 
. . . 
 
I guess there's two problems to summarize for you. One is the reluctance of 
the federal government, and at the same time the reluctance of the Indians 
of this province to allow, I suppose, the federal government to abrogate 
their responsibilities in their view that it's a federal responsibility and 
the Indians, and that is by preference of the Indians themselves. 



 

 

 
Mr. Prebble: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I realize that there's been a five-year 
freeze on federal funding for child-care services on Indian reserves.  And 
I appreciate some of the difficulties that you're talking about.  But we 
also can't then allow a situation, in the case of the Beardy Reserve, in 
which there is no federal dollars for child-care services. 
 
I know there are some foster homes on the reserve, but there is lack of . . 
. there is not a sufficient number of foster homes on the reserve.  I know 
that the Beardy Reserve has been very anxious to get a group home on the 
reserve because many of the homes on the reserve, of course, are not large 
enough to allow more than one child to be cared for in the home.  So if you 
don't want to divide up families with several children, it's difficult to 
find many houses on the reserve that could accommodate several children at 
once. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, there's no group home on the reserve; there's a lack of 
foster homes on the reserve.  Clearly there are not adequate resources in 
place to do all the monitoring and checking of applicants to care for 
children that are required, and in the absence, Mr. Minister, of federal 
funding and in the absence of adequate provincial resources, we've got a 
ready-made situation for the events that led up to the death of Joel Mike 
to occur, Mr. Minister.  Because basically, ultimately, no one is taking 
full responsibility. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Minister, I want to know what actions you are planning to 
take and what negotiations you have since the death of Joel Mike, what 
steps have you taken and what discussions have you had with the federal 
government to end a situation in which there is a lack of adequate 
resources for child care on reserves?  What steps have you taken in 
co-operation with the FSIN to meet with your federal counterparts and get a 
resolution to the lack of child-care resources that exist, not only on the 
Beardy Reserve, but in most Indian reserves in this province?  And when, 
sir, from you, are we going to have a well-defined, native child-care 
policy in this province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- It is a concern of mine as much as it is of yours, I 
would say to the hon. critic.  And that is that subsequent to that 
unfortunate tragic event on Beardy Reserve, I did . . . actually what I did 
is I had the Hon. Kim Campbell, when she was the federal minister of Indian 
and native affairs, in my office right in Regina here.  And I in no 
uncertain terms expressed my disappointment in the lack of funding and lack 
of initiative that the federal government was giving in this particular 
matter.  And I might indicate to you that I've had my deputy minister as 
well, in consultation with the federal deputy minister on this very, very 
important issue. 
 
And I think what I would do to you, sir, is just indicate to you that I 
would urge you to join with us in expressing our disappointment, and urging 
the federal government to live up to their responsibility.  I think if you 
would do that and if you would make that commitment, so that in concert 
with myself and with the FSIN, Chief Roland Crowe, that we could make 
representation to the federal government as one united voice from 



 

 

Saskatchewan expressing our concerns and getting them to live up to the 
commitment that they had made in times past, which they are not living up 
to right now. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I'm glad to see that you did have 
discussions with the federal minister.  I want to say on behalf of the 
opposition that we appreciate that you did that and commend you for that.  
That doesn't exclude, however, the need for a well defined provincial 
Department of Social Services native child-welfare policy.  And that is 
seriously lacking in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to move on to another area.  And I want to ask you a 
couple of short questions with respect to the problems that Cheshire Homes 
has been having in the city of Regina.  As you know, the board of Cheshire 
Homes has taken decisions basically to let go the registered nursing staff 
component of their care.  And in the view of many, they therefore were 
jeopardizing the safety of the 20 residents who live in Cheshire Homes when 
those services were cut off.  Now as I understand it, they're being 
replaced by contractual services so that at least in this interim period, 
the SRNA (Saskatchewan Registered Nurses' Association) is satisfied that 
the legislation governing the registered nurses in the province of 
Saskatchewan is, in fact, being upheld. 
 
But the Cheshire Homes board has indicated that they don't receive adequate 
funding to deliver level 4 care in the Cheshire Homes facility which, as I 
understand it, was never designed for level 4 patients but, in fact, now 15 
of the 20 people who are being cared for at Cheshire Homes are level 4 
cases. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I want to go back a few months because this question of 
medications being given by registered nurses in Cheshire Homes has been an 
ongoing issue.  And prior to June 1989, as I understand it, there were no 
trained nurses in Cheshire Homes who were giving the medications to the 
residents.  And this, Mr. Minister, must have been a violation of the 
provincial legislation that we have in this province that makes it very 
clear that medications are to be given by a qualified registered nurse. 
 
Now my question is, sir: why in 1989 was it not a condition of funding by 
your department -- because after all, you Cheshire Homes -- why had you not 
set as a condition, Mr. Minister, that, for Cheshire Homes to receive 
funding, they had to uphold the provincial laws of this province, and that 
medications given to patients at Cheshire Homes had to be given by properly 
qualified nursing staff?  Why was that not a condition of funding, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Chairman, this particular issue that we're 
discussing now has been an ongoing thing for a number of months right now, 
and I would just like to go on record, as minister, indicating that in my 
opinion, the board has been acting responsibly on this issue.  My 
information that I have is that almost all of the board members -- I'm not 
sure if all of them -- do have relatives, siblings, in the home itself. And 
to me it just makes eminent sense that no one on the board would do 
anything that would jeopardize the health and the quality of life for the 



 

 

inhabitants, the 20 people that you're talking about in the two homes, in 
any way, shape, or form. 
 
And I will say that when the board hires a new director, that director will 
be either a registered nurse or an RPN (registered psychiatric nurse), so 
that the director, her or himself, will have the nursing qualifications. 
 
Having said that, I can indicate further that the home will be contracting 
out whatever services are needed in terms of qualified personnel nurses to 
operate the home in a safe manner.  And the funding to accommodate that 
particular expertise that is required is in place and will continue to be 
in place to ensure quality service and quality care for the individuals in 
Cheshire Homes. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I appreciate what you're saying about 
the board members.  And as you indicate, many of the board members have 
family members in Cheshire Homes and obviously have their best interests at 
heart. 
 
On the other hand of course, the large number of staff resignations can't 
be ignored.  Nor can it be ignored that prior to June 1989, if my 
information is correct, in effect The Registered Nurses Act of the province 
of Saskatchewan was being violated, because the qualified nursing staff 
were not in place to give medications to patients. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, the questions that I have are these. First of all, since 
15 of the 20 patients in Cheshire Homes are level 4 patients, why is 
Cheshire Homes not receiving funds that reflect the fact that it's caring 
for level 4 patients? 
 
And secondly, why is the matter of larger policy, to look at the larger 
policy issue here now, why, when your department funds homes like Cheshire 
Homes -- I'm just using it as an example -- why do you not as a condition 
of funding set standards of care?  And surely one of the standards of care 
that you must set is that The Registered Nurses Act of the province of 
Saskatchewan be complied with and that a reasonable quality of nursing care 
is being provided to residents.  And I don't understand why that's not just 
a standard that is attached to all of the funding arrangements that you 
have with similar homes around the province.  So could you answer those two 
questions for me, please. 
 
(2100) 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- In response to the hon. member, he is right when he 
says that a number of those patients now are levels 3 and 4.  Not always 
has that been the case because when these individuals got into the homes 
they may have been at whatever level, if we can use that jargon.  And I 
heard the Minister of Health in his estimates starting to use different 
terminology.  But being a layman, level 1, 2, 3 and 4 is something I can 
understand a little bit better. 
 
But when they were initiated into that home, levels 1 and levels 2, and 
over the course of a number of years a number of these residents have 



 

 

deteriorated in terms of their health to perhaps, using that jargon, level 
3 and level 4.  But I think also we have to be careful that we can 
differentiate between level 4, the different kinds of level 4's. 
 
One is a level 4 of a personal care nature where the person has personal 
problems perhaps, whether it be bladder irrigation or whatever it may 
happen to be, that's a personal care nature which does not necessarily need 
the services of a nurse.  So you may have a level 4 patient being able to 
be cared for by someone who not necessarily would need the qualifications 
of a registered  
 Dnurse.  Then of course there's the level 4 medical care.  And I think 
this is probably the concern that you are expressing.  And it's a different 
level certainly. 
 
And I think what we're doing here is taking a look at a situation that we 
have to assess on a broader perspective as well, and it's part of the 
Directions on Health Care, when they're coming down, as to how to relate 
and how we're going to assimilate all of the different kinds of situations 
and problems, whether it be attendant care, whether it be those of head 
injuries, disabled because of head injuries, or autistic problems and these 
kinds of things. 
 
So we should be looking, I would suggest to you, at it from a broad 
perspective, including many more things than just the health issue that I 
think that you were raising. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Mr. Minister, I regret that you didn't answer my question 
with respect to the setting of standards.  I note that, but I want to move 
on to another topic. 
 
And that is, Mr. Minister, with respect to . . . I want to look at a number 
of important issues that are affecting handicapped people in the province 
of Saskatchewan.  And I want to begin, Mr. Minister, by saying how 
shockingly inadequate the social assistance payments to disabled persons, 
in the province of Saskatchewan, is. 
 
Mr. Minister, I just don't know how you can defend a basic allowance 
covering food, clothing, personal and household items, for a disabled 
person, of $225 a month.  But that's what it is, and it's remained at that 
now for several years, Mr. Minister.  And that is completely unacceptable, 
sir.  In fact, that is just disgusting. 
 
And you know full well, sir, that a very high percentage of disabled people 
rely on social welfare in the province of Saskatchewan because they have no 
other means of supporting themselves.  And it is just not good enough to 
force those people to rely on an allowance for food, clothing, personal 
items, and household items, of $225 a month.  You know, sir, that you 
couldn't live on that kind of an allowance if you were a single individual, 
and there is no reason why someone who's handicapped should have to live on 
that kind of an allowance. 
 
And my question to you is: when you increased the allowances -- this 
allowance, by the way, if my memory serves me correctly, has been frozen 



 

 

for at least six years now by your government -- you announced, finally, 
small increases in social assistance rates for persons with children, a few 
weeks ago.  I'll have more to say about those in a few minutes. 
 
But I want to focus now on those who are disabled, because they did not get 
an increase, and I want to know from you, sir, why was their allowance not 
increased, and how do you justify this highly inadequate $225 a month basic 
allowance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Chairman, the hon. member was correct when he says 
that the basic allowance for a handicapped person is not the 195 it would 
be for a normal person -- "normal" in quotation marks, I guess -- but $35, 
I believe, higher than that making it $225 a month. 
 
And were that all, as the member is suggesting, that this person was 
entitled to, then of course it would be a drastic situation for them.  But 
however that is the basic allowance, that's the starting point.  And on top 
of that, a person who is disabled will get a higher shelter rate because we 
recognize that a person such as this may be finding himself in a 
circumstance where he has to pay more for his accommodation because of 
access ramps or any of the special facilities that may be required.  So we 
recognize that and this individual then would be eligible for higher 
shelter aid. 
 
Special needs are also in place for these individuals where we pay the 
actual costs of transportation to allow this disabled person to show up for 
employment purposes, for education, for medical, or rehab needs.  So we 
recognize that as well. 
 
And there is of course special recognition also given further yet for 
laundry, for clothing that may be necessary due to whatever medical reason 
this handicapped person might have.  And mobility disabled allowance of $20 
per month is also available for them plus an issue that we talked about a 
little bit before.  There is also a higher earnings exemption where instead 
of having, let's say, a $25 exemption on the first $100 earned, this person 
actually would be able to keep the entire amount. 
 
So the special needs of a disabled person is being recognized in addition 
to the $235 that is just their basic allowance. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Mr. Minister, you've outlined all those policies correct. 
And aren't you ashamed of those policies, sir?  Those are shocking 
policies.  You allow a shelter allowance of, if my memory serves me right, 
in the range of $310 a month.  In addition to that, a disabled person then 
has the basic allowance of $225 a month, and this is all they get to live 
on. 
 
And I just want to ask you as Minister of Social Services: could you live 
on that amount, Mr. Minister, because I don't think you could.  Why don't 
you think about what you need to live on as a single individual, then 
imagine that you're handicapped, and then tell the members of this House: 
could you live on the allowance that you have set for disabled people in 
this province?  Why don't you be honest and admit that you couldn't? 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- I have no intention of becoming involved in a 
dramatization of the unfortunate situation. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Mr. Minister, that's just not good enough.  Ask yourself 
the question.  Every member on your side of the House should ask yourself 
the question: could you as an individual live on the allowances that you 
set under the social assistance system?  Now specifically here we're 
talking about disabled persons.  Mr. Minister, to cover clothing costs, 
food costs, all personal items, and all household costs other than rent and 
utilities, could you, Mr. Minister, live on that $225 a month, the basic 
allowance?  Could you do it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Chairman, the same answer applies. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Well that's just unacceptable, Mr. Minister.  The record 
shows where you stand.  I suggest to you that you couldn't live on that, 
and therefore I suggest that it is unjust that you expect disabled people 
to live on that $225 a month of basic allowance over and above their rent 
costs, Mr. Minister.  I think the shallowness and unfairness of your policy 
has just been demonstrated by your response. 
 
Now I want to look at another unfair policy, Mr. Minister, as it relates to 
those who are handicapped, and that is with respect to a policy change that 
you implemented, sir.  It used to be that under the former minister of 
Social Services -- who wasn't known for his generosity and kindness -- but 
at least under his policy, sir, someone who was severely disabled, who was 
able to get an independent aide, if they wanted to live in their own home 
or if they wanted to live in their own apartment and they had a severe 
disability, there was an independent living allowance provided for them 
under which they could hire an aide to live with them, if necessary, 
because their disability was very severe, on a 24-hour-a-day basis. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you cancelled that provision.  This independent living 
allowance is no longer available to severely handicapped people.  I've had 
several severely handicapped people approach me asking for help.  You've 
replied to me by simply saying: well these services are now available 
through home care.  I've checked and, in fact, these services are not 
adequately available through home care.  And I, Mr. Minister, I want you to 
give me a commitment tonight that you will reinstate the allowance for 
severely handicapped people to be able to get an aide that will allow them 
to live independently outside of an institution. 
 
Your government talks about how you foster independence, Mr. Minister, but 
this is another classic example of how, in fact, you do the very reverse.  
Now I want a commitment tonight that you are going to reinstate that 
allowance that will permit a handicapped person to hire an aide to live 
independently in their own home or apartment. 
 
(2115) 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- I'm advised by my officials that what we're talking 
about here is an issue that is much, much broader than Social Services can 



 

 

accommodate -- people moving out of institutionalized care into the 
community and so on.  And my officials are right now working together with 
the Department of Health to work out a broader, more all-encompassing kind 
of a program that would accommodate the needs that you've just described. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Well, Mr. Minister, while you were working out that 
broader, more encompassing program, could you explain to the Assembly why 
it is that you cut the allowance, that you eliminated the allowance for a 
severely handicapped person to live independently, Mr. Minister?  That's 
what you did.  And you have to take responsibility for that, sir, because 
you did that after you became Minister of Social Services. 
 
And I want a commitment tonight that you're going to reinstate the funding 
that will allow a severely handicapped person to live independently in the 
community, because if you're not prepared to give me that commitment, then 
all this rhetoric about supporting independent living is just that, sir. 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- Yes, I would . . . And the member probably can 
remember a letter than I sent him when you raised the concern with you 
where I outlined, I guess, some of the concerns and some of the conclusions 
that we came to -- and we're talking about attendant care here, and we're 
talking about the home care program through the health care report -- and I 
think that's were we're going to leave it at this time.  Essentially we 
believe it is a health care and attendant care problem and the health care 
report is the one that we will be looking at to resolve the issue. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Well, Mr. Minister, that is just a shocking response that 
shows the callousness of your government and just how hollow your claim is 
that you support independent living.  And I think anybody watching on 
television will understand what I mean by that. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to turn to another subject that is closely related but 
this time deals with mental health rather than persons suffering from 
physical handicaps.  And I want to specifically look at the plight of those 
suffering from schizophrenia in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister. 
 
You will know, Mr. Minister, that this is a serious disease of the brain 
with terrifying consequences for many of the individuals involved and for 
the families involved, Mr. Minister.  You will also be aware of the fact 
that approximately 1 out of every 100 people in the province of 
Saskatchewan suffers with schizophrenia.  And I think it's fair to say, Mr. 
Minister, that not just here but right across North America a large 
percentage of the people that are homeless are persons who are suffering 
with this disease in a very severe state. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, if you look at my home city of Saskatoon, for example, 
where I think it can safely be said that there are at least 1,500 people 
suffering from schizophrenia in the city, and then you look at the numbers 
of independent, supportive housing situations for those with schizophrenia 
you find a total of 35 in the city of Saskatoon, Mr. Minister. 
 
You also have to consider the urgent need for respite services for these 
families, Mr. Minister.  People who are suffering from schizophrenia are 



 

 

more often than not being cared for by relatives.  Often they are being 
cared for by their parents, Mr. Minister.  And obviously we're talking 
about young people often in their 20's or 30's.  The parents who are caring 
for them then are in their 50's or 60's.  Respite services, Mr. Minister, 
are needed for these family members but they're not available through your 
government. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I suggest that what we need therefore are permanent 
homes for people with schizophrenia who are suffering from the disease with 
a psychiatric nurse available for those people when they require help.  We 
need respite services for families and situations where family members are 
caring for someone suffering from schizophrenia.  We need, Mr. Minister, 
support for those families when they cannot get their loved one who's 
suffering from schizophrenia into a treatment centre, Mr. Minister.  
They're often told right now to phone the police.  You know, that's just 
not acceptable. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, another very serious problem that persons suffering from 
schizophrenia have is that they are often being categorized as employable 
by your government.  Therefore, Mr. Minister, the total allowance that 
they're forced to live on is $375 a month including rent and clothing and 
food costs and everything.  And that's also very unfair. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I want to know what you're going to do to address the 
problem.  Are you prepared to provide respite services for the families who 
are trying to care for schizophrenics?  Are you prepared, Mr. Minister, to 
provide more permanent housing for people who suffer seriously with this 
very disabling disease?  And are you prepared to change your policy so that 
none of these people will be considered to be employables and forced to 
live, if they're living on their own, with only $375 a month.  Are you 
prepared to change those policies? 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- Schizophrenia is a mental disorder, a mental illness, 
and as such falls within the parameters of the Department of Health.  But 
at the same time, if there's an individual suffering from this disease that 
is still looking for assistance and eligible for assistance, certainly it 
involves my department at the same time.  And I know that we have been in 
consultation with the schizophrenic association of Saskatchewan where they 
have made requests to us, and we have been sensitive to their requests. 
 
But essentially what we're talking about here is a mental illness, and the 
Department of Health should be taking the lead role on this. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Mr. Minister, once again you haven't even attempted to 
address my questions.  This is just not adequate.  It's just unacceptable.  
And I'm afraid in opposition there's little we can do about it because 
you're not obliged to answer the questions or to provide adequate answers.  
So, Mr. Minister, I want . . . The record speaks for itself, I think. 
 
And I want to turn to another area . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Indicate why it's not adequate. 
 



 

 

Mr. Prebble: -- Mr. Minister . . . The minister wonders why his answer 
isn't adequate, and I find it difficult to believe that he's asking that 
question. 
 
But I want to turn to another area, and this is, Mr. Minister, with respect 
to the Finlay case and your intervention into it.  And as you know, Mr. 
Finlay was a Manitoba resident suffering from epilepsy. 
 
Mr. Minister, for years now he has been fighting with the Manitoba 
government in the courts and he has been arguing that overpayments were 
being collected from him while he was on social assistance, and his 
position was, not that he shouldn't have to pay overpayments, but that, 
given the very low level of social assistance that he was receiving from 
the Manitoba government -- if my memory serves me right, a basic allowance 
of $213 a month -- that he ought not to have to, with that very low level 
of assistance, he ought not to be having to have overpayments deducted from 
his monthly cheque. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you will know that this case has very significant 
implications for this province and for all provinces in Canada.  Because 
what happened, of course, is that in the federal court, Justice Teitelbaum 
ruled last year that in fact the Department of Social Services in Manitoba 
erred in deducting overpayments from Mr. Finlay's cheque.  And Teitelbaum 
ruled, Mr. Minister, that because the basic level of social assistance 
being paid was just barely adequate to meet Mr. Teitelbaum's basic needs, 
that the deduction of an overpayment off that cheque was unacceptable, and 
was not going to be legally permitted any longer because that meant that 
Mr. Finlay would then have to live below meeting his basic needs; he 
wouldn't have enough income to meet his basic needs any more.  It's an 
important test case. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, the response of your government was very interesting, 
because you joined the Manitoba government in the courts to oppose the 
Teitelbaum ruling.  And we've just had the appeal case under way now in the 
last few weeks, and, of course, you're familiar with the intervention that 
you filed in that case, Mr. Minister, and that the Department of Justice 
filed with you.  But I just want to quote from that intervention, which I 
found really to be quite shocking.  Let me just quote a couple of things, 
Mr. Minister, that you argue in your intervention.  First of all you say: 
 

 The obligation to provide assistance in an amount that takes into account 
the basic requirements does not require Manitoba to provide a particular 
dollar amount of funding. 

 
In other words, what you're saying there, Mr. Minister, is that there is no 
minimal level of social assistance benefit that needs to be paid in order 
to meet basic needs.  Now, Mr. Minister, that is a very, very harsh 
statement on your part, and I think it portrays the policies that your 
government has pursued over the last eight years.  And you go on in the 
intervention, Mr. Minister, to say: 
 

 There is no obligation on the province to provide a specific dollar amount 
of social assistance each month.  It is clear the agreement itself does 



 

 

not contemplate that a particular dollar figure can be calculated to 
represent the cost of purchasing basic requirements. 

 
That's from page 7 of your brief of law.  Mr. Minister, not only are you 
failing to support Mr. Finlay, a man who's fought his case for many years, 
who's suffering with epilepsy, and who's been living on a minimal amount 
for a long time; not only have you chosen, instead, to support the 
Government of Manitoba, but you've gone further than that, Mr. Minister.  
And you're now trying to erode the very foundation of the Canada Assistance 
Plan Act which is based on the fundamental principle of adequacy, i.e., a 
person in need will receive an adequate amount of assistance.  And what 
you're saying in your intervention, Mr. Minister, is that an adequate 
amount of assistance can't be calculated, i.e., there is no minimal amount 
of social assistance that must be paid. 
 
(2130) 
 
But, Mr. Minister, you know, as the government of Manitoba knows, that 
social assistance is cost shared with Ottawa.  And Justice Teitelbaum in 
his ruling ruled that the federal government was to cut off cost sharing of 
social assistance with the government of Manitoba until this problem 
experienced by Mr. Finlay and many other disabled people was rectified, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I am not suggesting to you that overpayments should not 
be collected in this province.  I think they should.  I think, by the way, 
your overpayment collection policy has been very harsh.  You've been 
deducting amounts as much as $70 a month off the cheques of families 
relying on social assistance to collect overpayments when the error for the 
overpayment lies with your own department, Mr. Minister.  And that is a 
very harsh policy indeed. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, surely you are not prepared to argue -- I guess you are 
prepared to argue because you did it in your intervention that you filed in 
the Finlay case.  But surely it's unreasonable to argue that when 
somebody's level of social assistance is so low that it just barely covers 
their basic requirements, that overpayments ought not to be deducted, 
particularly when the error lies with the department.  And we're not, of 
course, here talking about cases of fraud or where there's been any 
wrongdoing, Mr. Minister.  We're just talking about honest mistakes. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I therefore want to ask you: how do you justify this 
intervention before the federal Court of Appeal in which you have taken the 
position, sir, that an adequate level of social assistance cannot be 
calculated, that there therefore is no minimal level of assistance that 
must be paid.  How do you justify that position? 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- I'll try to keep this as straightforward and simple as 
I can because it is rather a complicated issue here.  It should be pointed 
out that it is not only the Government of Saskatchewan that is intervening 
on this case, but there are other provinces like Manitoba for example, 
Quebec, Ontario have all intervened in addition to Saskatchewan.  And I 
might add also that it is also the federal government that is not agreeing 



 

 

with this decision. 
 
What we're dealing here is the issue of provincial jurisdiction and the 
ability of a province to decide whether or not they are going to be 
recovering and to what amount.  I think what we have to also keep in mind 
here is that the federal agreement says that we're not talking about any 
specific amount that must be paid, but rather the fact that it is up to the 
province to decide what that minimum amount or what that amount is going to 
be.  I think that's the issue that we have to keep in mind here. 
 
And the situation on CAP . . . The only thing I was going to add here is 
that its under CAP, it leaves that.  The point that I'm making is that 
under CAP it is left up to the province to decide to make the determination 
as to what that payment should be.  And it doesn't have to be any lower 
amount or higher amount or whatever, it's the question of jurisdiction. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Well, Mr. Minister, that's really not very satisfactory 
because of course if it's left to governments like your own there basically 
doesn't seem to be any minimum amount of social assistance that you're 
willing to pay out.  We've already seen now we've had an eight-year freeze 
with respect to the rates, until finally that freeze was lifted for couples 
with children a few weeks ago, with a $10 increase per child, Mr. Minister, 
and a $10 increase in the housing allowance. 
 
Mr. Minister, your argument in the brief, however, is not just an argument 
that the province ought to be able to decide.  It's an argument that a 
minimum amount of assistance can't be calculated.  And, Mr. Minister, I say 
that this is an attempt to erode the foundation of the Canada Assistance 
Plan Act.  You know it is; your government knows it is, Mr. Minister. 
 
You're going beyond the Finlay case now.  You're trying to actually erode 
the very intention of the Canada Assistance Plan Act.  And if the arguments 
that you have made before the Court of Appeal are accepted, Mr. Minister, 
it has incredibly serious consequences for the future of social assistance 
all across Canada, Mr. Minister.  It's a very, very serious matter indeed.  
And, Mr. Minister, I regret that you've made this intervention, but I think 
it's a hallmark of what your government stands for and it's very 
unacceptable. 
 
Now I want to ask you another question with respect to social assistance, 
this time with respect to the increases that you've just announced, which I 
might say are in the range of about 3 per cent, Mr. Minister.  We've had 
inflation over the last eight years, of about 40 per cent.  We've had 
basically a freeze on the rates for families during that time. And now, 
depending on the number of children a family has, we're looking at an 
increase that is in the range of 3 to 4.5 per cent -- so in other words, 
still at least 35 to 37 per cent short of inflation. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, more notably, as I mentioned earlier, disabled people 
have not received an increase; all single people have not received an 
increase; all married couples without children have not received an 
increase; northern residents, Mr. Minister, have not received any kind of 
an increase in their allowance other than the standard increases I just 



 

 

mentioned.  But no increase in the special northern allowance that takes 
account of their geographic isolation and the higher costs that they incur 
as a result of that. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you explain to me why were all these groups left out?  
Why did they get no increase at all?  And especially answer that question 
for me in light of the fact now that the rates have been frozen for eight 
years for all of those people, and I might add, for individuals who are 
employable, significantly cut back. 
 
 DHon. Mr. Neudorf: -- If I could just react a little bit more to one of 
the previous issues that we were talking about, and that is the right of 
determination by the province to determine the amount of assistance under 
CAP. 
 
And I would just like to point out that not only are we interveners in the 
other provinces, but we are supported in our stand by the federal 
government itself, who is also supporting us when it comes to the fact of 
who's going to determine how much is going to be paid out.  And we feel 
that it is up to the province to make that determination.  That's all 
essentially what we're talking about. 
 
It would not be fair, in my estimation, for someone in Ottawa or somewhere 
in the East to determine what we should or should not pay to the recipients 
in Saskatchewan.  Because it's one amount that's going to be the same 
throughout Canada is not going to be acceptable either because there are 
wide variations in terms of cost of living and whatnot all from Toronto to 
Vancouver to any place in Saskatchewan. 
 
Having said that, the amount of increase that we're talking about that is 
being paid out is no mean amount, I would suggest to you, because we're 
talking about an increase of about in the magnitude of $4 million per year.  
The reason the announcement that I made just a little while ago where 
individual families and so on are going to receive $10 per child per month 
more as far as the children are concerned, and then, of course, there's the 
$10 a month shelter rate and utility rate as well.  So when I say $4 
million, that's what I'm taking into consideration when I say that. 
 
And working with the limited funds that are available for an expansion of a 
program of this magnitude, we have to try to say to ourselves: where are we 
going to be the most effective?  Where's this money, what we put out for 
the people of Saskatchewan, going to have the greatest impact?  And we 
chose cognizantly to target that amount to the members of our society that 
are most vulnerable, which is the children.  The children are dependent 
entirely upon their families for support, and so we decided that the money 
was going to be targeted to the children first and foremost.  And it's not 
just to the children of the South; it's not just to the children of Regina 
or in Saskatoon, but rather whether you live in the southern part of the 
province or in the far North, the impact is going to be all over so that 
the North and South get the same kind of a benefit increase. 
 
You mentioned something about the singles.  My preference is to make the 
singles as much as independent as possible through training opportunities, 



 

 

through job search, and probably somewhere along the line we'll get into 
the long list of opportunities and programs that the government has 
initiated to make the singles that much more oriented toward getting a job 
in the market-place, so where they will no longer be -- and I think you 
appreciate this -- dependent upon the system, but rather become independent 
where they will have this opportunity to be gainfully employed.  And that 
is the trend and that is the emphasis of the government, rather than simply 
saying well here's more money for the singles.  Because it's targeted 
toward the children. 
 
(2145) 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I don't object to you targeting special 
supplements to the children.  That's not my point of objection at all.  My 
point of objection is that you've left out a whole group of other 
individuals who also badly needed help, including as I mentioned earlier, 
those single persons or married couples who are suffering from physical or 
mental disabilities. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I want to point out to you just how inadequate your 
rates are with respect to the North.  I mentioned to you that you'd done 
nothing to increase the northern allowance. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, just consider this for a moment.  I want you to take a 
family who are living in northern Saskatchewan.  Let's take . . . I'm just 
looking for an appropriate community here.  I'm going to take Black Lake.  
The cost of food, Mr. Minister, for a family of four in Black Lake, 
according to a study done by the Prince Albert District Chiefs, is $867.60 
per month because of the very high food costs in that community. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, the Department of Social Services basically allows that 
family, until the change in your policy, $780 a month.  Now we'll want to 
add another $20 a month on there for the two children. That would take it 
to 800, plus I assume some kind of an increase, at least $10 a month, in 
the household allowance, which would take it to 810.  But the figures that 
I'm dealing with here now don't include shelter because if you take a band 
family, that's being looked after usually through Indian Affairs. 
 
So we're now just dealing with the question of the rates for food, 
clothing, personal items, and household items, excluding rent and 
utilities.  Okay?  And what I'm saying to you is that with your increase, 
this family will now be getting $800 a month.  The cost of food for them 
alone in that community is $867.60 a month -- a $67.60 shortfall, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
This is just one example I can find for you. All kinds of other communities 
where the shortfall is much greater than in Black Lake, but let's stay with 
Black Lake for a moment. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you explain to this Assembly please, why there has been 
no increase in the northern allowance to take account of the fact that even 
if this family just spends all their money that they receive in the basic 
allowance on food and doesn't spend a penny on clothing or on household 



 

 

items or on other personal items other than shelter, if they don't spend a 
penny on any of those things and just spend all their money on food, 
they're still $67.60 short a month.  Now the reason for this is that the 
cost of food in northern Saskatchewan is very high, Mr. Minister.  It's 
much higher than it is in the South.  And you have failed to take adequate 
account of that, because the total amount of your special northern 
allowance is only $25 a month, Mr. Minister, and that's just not adequate. 
 
Now I want an explanation of why this northern allowance has not been 
increased. 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- A number of points.  And you recognized that a list of 
the communities -- I had here it somewhere -- that are getting the $25 a 
month in addition to the regular, in acknowledgement of the higher cost in 
the North.  And I think we would be doing an injustice if we did not also 
recognize another special feature of the North which is the traditional 
life-style of the North where the people of the North, a goodly number of 
them at least, would have the ability to supplement some of their food 
intake and so on simply through the traditional methods of fishing and 
hunting. 
 
So to directly relate the amount of moneys given to them to buy their food 
allowances and to meet their food allowance without recognizing the 
supplemental avenues that are available to them, I don't think would be 
fair either. 
 
Another issue that I would like to draw to your attention is that there was 
the study done by the tribal chiefs and this study was given to INAC 
(Indian and Native Affairs Secretariat), and INAC has turned around and 
shared some of those concerns with us.  Currently we are right now 
encouraging and working with the federal government to make some changes 
and some alterations, certainly at their level, and we are looking at, in 
conjunction with the federal government, coming up with a proposal, but 
that has not yet been completed. 
 
And so from our point of view, instead of waiting so that we had a complete 
package to come forward with, we said, well we're not going to wait with 
other initiatives that I announced three or four weeks ago, with the 
targeted funding available to families with children.  Because the need was 
there.  I, at least, ascertained that the need was there for children so we 
said, well let's go along with this as an initial step, and hopefully 
within a short period of time there will be further action taken by the 
federal government in terms of the tribal chiefs' proposal that they had 
come up with. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you know that the federal government's 
policy, long-standing policy, has been to follow the rates that you've set.  
In other words, Mr. Minister, you set the rates for northern Saskatchewan 
and where persons are the responsibility of Indian Affairs they follow.  So 
this is totally within your hands, Mr. Minister, totally within your hands.  
And you have failed the people of northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, you don't have to just take one of the fly-in communities, if 



 

 

you look at other communities, Mr. Minister, that don't get the special 
supplementary allowance, the northern allowance.  Take, for instance, the 
community of Southend.  There, Mr. Minister, the cost of feeding a family 
of four is $831.60.  With your increases, this family would get $700.00 a 
month for a $131.60 a month shortfall.  And that's just with respect to not 
having the money to cover food, Mr. Minister.  That leaves no money for 
clothing, no money for personal items, no money, Mr. Minister, for a 
household allowance. 
 
You don't have to do a study, Mr. Minister, to see that this family is 
living in poverty.  I don't know why . . . You've had eight years now, Mr. 
Minister, to establish . . . Your government has had eight years to 
establish a reasonable policy on this.  You've failed to do so.  You've 
had, Mr. Minister, more than six months.  You've failed to do so. 
 
Mr. Minister, on this side of the House, we want to see action on this, and 
we want to see it within the next few weeks.  And I want an undertaking 
from you that that will be done, Mr. Minister, and that we'll see an 
immediate order in council that increases these rates. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, because our time is coming to an end, I want to raise a 
couple of other important issues before we bring these estimates to a 
close.  And I want to particularly bring to your attention the very high 
numbers of people in the province of Saskatchewan who are relying on food 
banks; you must know this by now as Minister of Social Services.  And you 
must realize, Mr. Minister, that a lot of those are people who are 
depending on social assistance.  But many others, Mr. Minister, are people 
who are working part time or full time at inadequate wages as a result of 
your cheap labour policy, Mr. Minister.  Many others, Mr. Minister, are 
victims of the fact that women in this province are consistently paid less 
than men for work of equivalent value.  Your government has failed to do 
anything about the urgent need for pay equity in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister. 
 
There are a whole series of reasons why we have seen escalating poverty in 
the province of Saskatchewan.  Your government has tried to link all that 
back to a decline in agricultural prices and the farm crisis, and we 
acknowledge that that has some role to play in the problem.  But the larger 
problem, Mr. Minister, has been your government's failure to create 
adequate employment for the people of Saskatchewan, your government's cheap 
labour policy, and a long-time freeze on the minimum wage, although we 
finally seen that lifted in January of this year and I know there will be 
another increase next month. 
 
But even so, someone living on minimum wage, even a single person working 
full time will still be living at least a thousand dollars, more than a 
thousand dollars, below the poverty line, even if they're working full 
time. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I ask you to look at some of these food bank statistics 
because these are a shocking condemnation of the failure of your income 
security programs, Mr. Minister.  And I remind you of the fact that eight 
years ago there were no food banks in the province.  And now, Mr. Minister, 



 

 

the use of food banks is at unprecedented numbers. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I ask you to consider the fact that there are 3,500 
children a month relying on the Regina food bank.  There are 2,700 children 
a month relying on the Saskatoon food bank.  There are, Mr. Minister, 50 
families a month using the food bank at Melfort.  We've seen a rapid rise 
in rural food banks in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister.  Food 
banks now in communities like Lashburn, communities like Carlyle.  Mr. 
Minister, the numbers of people who are using the Prince Albert food bank 
has doubled from 1986: 579 people a month relying on the food bank in 
Prince Albert in January of 1986; 1,267 people relying on that food bank in 
the month of January 1990. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, these figures simply reflect the fact that your income 
security programs have failed the people of Saskatchewan.  We've had an 
eight-year freeze on social assistance rates.  We've had a five-year freeze 
on family income plan rates. 
 
(2200) 
 
And, Mr. Minister, the final question that I want to ask you tonight is 
this: in light of these numbers and in light of the fact, Mr. Minister, 
that your government has frozen the family income plan benefits now for 
five years and in light of the fact, Mr. Minister, that your government is 
the only government in Canada that deducts family allowances off social 
assistance cheques and in light of the fact, Mr. Minister, that your 
government has cancelled travel allowances for those on social assistance 
and has forced families, women, and children to drag their groceries 
through the snow in the winter-time because they have no bus pass, Mr. 
Minister -- in light of these facts which are well established and in light 
of these food bank statistics, I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you could give us 
your commitment tonight that you will do three simple things for families 
with children. 
 
Number one, Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could give families with children 
who are relying on social assistance in the province of Saskatchewan a 
commitment tonight that you, Mr. Minister, will no longer, effective July 
of this year, you will no longer deduct family allowances from the social 
assistance cheque. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder secondly if you could give us a commitment that you 
will reinstate the travel allowance for all social assistance recipients in 
the province of Saskatchewan, and especially, Mr. Minister, families with 
children. 
 
And third, Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could give us your commitment that 
you will lift the freeze on the family income plan and make all families 
living below the poverty line eligible for some family income plan 
benefits. 
 
Will you do those three things for families in Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister?  
Will you finally do something to fight the fact, Mr. Minister, that we have 
in Saskatchewan now, effective as of the Statistics Canada figures I have 



 

 

in front of me for 1988, the highest rate of child and family poverty in 
all of Canada? 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I was debating with myself how 
detailed I wanted to respond to some of those comments that the hon. member 
made. 
 
The first thing I wanted to address is his closing comments on the previous 
topic which dealt with the North.  Somehow through my association with 
hunting and fishing and so on, I've acquired a great affinity for the North 
and I spend as much time up there as possible, not only as Minister of 
Social Services right now, but I have over the years.  And I think I can 
understand and appreciate some of the problems and some of the concerns and 
some of the traditions that the people in the North have.  And since 
becoming minister, I've spent a fair amount of time in the North making 
sojourns up into Garson Lake area --  well, pretty well every community in 
the North I think I have been I have been very impressed with what I have 
seen. 
 
Now I understand that there are conditions in the North that are far, far 
from desirable, and I recognize that.  But when I say I'm impressed with 
the North, I'll give you an example: when I went into La Loche for the 
first time.  Prior to going into La Loche, like you folks do over across 
the way too, you do your research, and so I did some of the research as 
well by finding out what can I expect when I go into La Loche.  In other 
words I preconditioned myself as to what I would find.  And I even went so 
far as to get a copy of a CBC tape that had been aired about a month or two 
before I went up there for the first time to see what it was like. 
 
So I went there properly preconditioned of the horrible conditions that I 
would see.  And let me tell you that I did not do myself justice or the 
people from the North justice by going up there with this preconceived 
notion.  Because being a past teacher, the first thing I did when I got 
into La Loche was to go through the school because I find that a school is 
a good thermometer as to what the community is like.  And I walked into the 
school and I was shocked, because what I expected to see was broken up 
lockers with a lot of graffiti on it and all these other kinds of things. 
 
I went into that school, and in my experience, 22 years as a teacher, I 
have never seen, and I don't say this in a patronizing way, I have never 
seen a school that I was more impressed with -- clean, the studious 
atmosphere.  I can walk into a school, as any administrator could, you can 
walk into a school and you can put your fingers on the hum of activity 
right away. 
 
And you could sense that this was a school where the kids were interested 
in education.  You got the sense immediately that the teachers were on top 
of it.  And during the whole visit that we had, we went away -- I was there 
with the Minister of Northern Affairs at the time -- we left La Loche 
convinced that there was a future, that there was a future in the North if 
we could assist them and if we could help them in whatever way. 
 
Now we have established a lot of programs in the North where we are trying 



 

 

to address that, not by simple hand-outs, not by increasing only the 
minimum wage and increasing the number of payments that are available, 
because the folks up there told me, that's not what we want.  We want jobs.  
We want economic activity.  And that is ultimately going to be the answer. 
 
I don't have the answer right now.  As Minister of Social Services, I'm 
trying.  We've got a Sask works program up there.  They're building road; 
they're developing skills; they're developing techniques in all these kinds 
of things that are going to be beneficial to them. 
 
I don't know if that's the ultimate answer.  I know the Minister of 
Northern Affairs is doing there with the fire suppression program and so 
on.  It's creating jobs.  It's creating skills for the people.  I think 
ultimately that is the answer. 
 
But to what degree that we'll be successful, to what degree we can 
establish long-term, meaningful jobs, it's going to take more than the 
Department of Social Services to do that.  It's going to mean a concerted 
effort on all the government departments and the people up North. 
 
And I would just like to leave you with this idea, that the people up North 
are desirous of earning their way; they're desirous of getting meaningful 
jobs and some kind of economic activity up there that will be on an ongoing 
basis.  So there are problems up North.  We're determined that we're going 
to help solve them as much as possible. 
 
You mentioned food banks.  You mentioned some of these other issues and 
it's a complicated issue.  I don't mean to skirt the issue like you 
indicated in one of your previous announcements there, that when you ask 
questions I'm not answering.  It's a acknowledged strategy on the part of 
this government that we have set one minister aside that is going to be 
dealing with that issue.  We recognize the issue, that it is there.  But we 
also recognize the issue as being a very, very complex one with no one 
cause and certainly no one solution to it.  And so the Minister of the 
Family has been designated as the spokesman and the spearhead to deal with 
this issue.  Not in isolation -- I mean, that's going to have to be done in 
conjunction with my department and other departments as well.  So I'm not 
abrogating responsibility, other than the fact that he is the lead minister 
that is responsible to answering this. 
 
You made some comments about the deduction of family allowance and so on.  
A couple of quick points on that.  The matter of deducting the family 
allowance as part of the basic allowance as such was not started by our 
government.  You were the guys that did that, and so we've continued the 
practice that you have established.  Now I want to say something more about 
it and that is that, even with the deduction of the family allowance, first 
of all the total needs of the people are still being met because the 
allowance that we pay recognizes the fact that the family allowance is not 
going to be a part of that.  So even with the deduction of the family 
allowance.  We are, when it comes to families, still amongst the highest in 
Canada as far as payments to families are concerned, and that's an 
established fact.  So you can argue whether that's enough or not, that is a 
fair argument, but the fact does remain that we are doing those kinds of 



 

 

things. 
 
You acknowledged the fact that some of the other things that we are doing, 
that the minimum wage has been increased, and that it will be increased 
once more.  And so that is something that we are doing. 
 
We have other things like the family income plan, the mortgage protection 
plan for all families, and so we could go down the list.  I don't intend to 
do that at this point.  But I guess what I'm trying to do is offset a 
little bit some of the bleak picture that you were painting, that there are 
some offsetting structures that we're putting in place to address this 
problem. 
 
I guess the commitment that I want to leave with you is that we will 
continue to strive.  I as Minister of Social Services take the job very, 
very seriously.  Sometimes I can't do quite as much as I would like to, 
sometimes I would like to do more, but we will continue to work on an 
ongoing basis.  We're not going to solve all the problems at one time, but 
I think if the two of us in conjunction with our federal counterparts are 
going to continue at it, I think we will see steady progress.  It may be 
slow but there will be steady progress as we forge ahead. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- I just want to conclude on this note, Mr. Minister, and 
then my colleague, the member for Elphinstone, has a couple of questions 
that he wants to ask, but just very briefly because the hour is late. 
 
We have record numbers in terms of users of food banks in the province of 
Saskatchewan: 45,000 people using food banks a year -- 22,000 children, Mr. 
Minister.  And all these figures demonstrate graphically that all your 
claims about adequacy with respect to income security programs ring hollow, 
Mr. Minister.  Your income security programs, your failure, your 
abandonment of a full employment strategy in northern Saskatchewan and in 
all of Saskatchewan have led to this, Mr. Minister, and there can be no 
doubt about that. 
 
And then, Mr. Minister, to top it all off we have the obscenity of you 
coming forward with a mere $740,000 a year under grants for family service 
organizations to fight hunger in the province of Saskatchewan, an amount 
equivalent to the amount that one person working for your government, Mr. 
Chuck Childers, receives. 
 
Mr. Minister, 22,000 people, children, using food banks in Saskatchewan -- 
that is unacceptable.  Bringing forward a budget amount that you brought 
forward, sir, not the Minister of the Family, of only $740,000 to fight 
child hunger in Saskatchewan, that small figure is obscene, Mr. Minister, 
when it's the equivalent of one man's salary.  That is an obscenity.  I 
can't think of any other way to describe it, Mr. Minister. 
 
And so my final question to you relates to two matters.  I want to come 
back to the matter of the family allowance.  Yes, our government 
established the policy of deducting the family allowance from social 
assistance cheques.  But, Mr. Minister, we did it at a time when the amount 
paid to families was 40 per cent higher than it is now.  And you know that.  



 

 

Acknowledge that.  That's the case. 
 
And so my question to you is now, in light of the fact that you won't 
increase the rates, will you at least stop deducting the family allowance 
from social assistance cheques, and will you tell the House whether or not 
the federal government gets back the half of the family allowance that you 
deduct. 
 
(2215) 
 
And secondly and finally, Mr. Minister, will you give us a commitment here 
tonight that you will bring forward a special supplement to your budget 
that increases that $740,000 to fight child hunger to at least $5 million, 
so that you can finally put in place a lunch program and a snack program 
and, where necessary, a breakfast program in those schools where hunger is 
a demonstrated problem in the province of Saskatchewan, so that we can 
finally get a serious program to fight child hunger in this province. 
 
Will you at least, Mr. Minister, do that?  I ask you on behalf of the 
22,000 children that are using food banks in the province of Saskatchewan: 
will you increase that $740,000 allowance?  Will you bring forward a 
special order in council that would do that within the next few weeks? 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to conclude by thanking your staff and thanking you.  
I look forward to the answers to those questions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Chairman, in response to the hon. member's latest 
comments, we recognize that hunger and so on is a problem out there.  And 
like I indicated to you before, it's not a problem that's going to have 
easy solutions or quick-fix solutions. 
 
When we talk about $740,000, let's be clear that we understand that this is 
$740,000 that's earmarked for special incentives and special programs that 
are going to try to solve the problem of hunger, not only on the short-term 
basis, but getting at the root causes of it and finding out what we can do 
to alleviate the reasons for that hunger.  And they are many, manifold. 
 
It's not fair to say that all we're doing is spending $740,000 to combat 
this situation.  Because as I indicated in one of my previous answers, we 
have just allocated $4 million more in this particular budget to help 
families -- targeted to children, targeted to the most vulnerable.  And 
some of our other programs, if you add them all together, I think that even 
in the new initiatives, $740,000 is not the total amount that we're talking 
about.  And it's going to take an effort on many, many groups. 
 
We're in consultation . . . I've had meetings with different groups 
throughout the province.  The Minister of the Family has had meetings with 
different groups of the provinces.  We've met with the mayors of the major 
cities.  We've met with church groups.  We've met with the food banks.  In 
fact, as we speak right now, there are initiatives that my department is 
taking with the food banks to assist them and to work with them in order to 
fight against this problem of hunger.  So it's a many tentacled problem, 
but at the same time we're working from many, many fronts, together with 



 

 

community groups.  I don't think we can ignore that.  Government has a lead 
role, government has a responsibility, but so do communities.  And I think 
working in harmony and working in conjunction with each other, we will find 
that lasting solution that we're all looking for, and hopefully it'll be 
sooner rather than later . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Did you answer the question on family allowance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- The family allowance, and I think there was another 
issue, I can't recall right offhand . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
I'm not going to make a commitment on that at this point. 
 
Under review?  Since I've taken this portfolio almost everything has been 
under review, and we've done a number of things.  Some are going to cost 
the government money and some are not going to cost the government money. 
 
For example, the cheque cashing was one little thing that I couldn't for 
the life of me see why we hadn't done something about that.  And it's 
meaningful to those individuals who were caught up in it.  When you had to 
give up to 20 per cent of the value of your cheque just to get it cashed.  
And this is something that we were able to do. 
 
And I'm working on another project right now is a lot of social assistance 
recipients have the problem of cashing their cheques -- the I.D. problem.  
The normal people who do business and so on, you can't comprehend that 
there would be such a major problem with certain individuals simply because 
they don't have an I.D. that they'll be able to tell the banks or the 
cashing institutions who they are.  But these are some of the kinds of 
things that we can do. 
 
So I'll take your concerns under advisement and we'll continue to work with 
them.  I hope that you will be able to feel free to have the dialogue with 
me, as we've had in the past, so that we can keep discussing on these 
situations. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Minister, I just have a few questions.  I don't 
want to take a lot of time, but they're very important questions because 
they're being brought to us and we're being asked to put to you these 
questions.  And basically it's on the people who work in group homes and 
who are not protected by the labour standards and many of the labour laws 
that apply to other working people in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now this results as you know, Mr. Minister, from the fact that at one point 
in time people who worked in group homes also lived and actually stayed in 
the group home when they were off duty.  They maybe slept overnight and 
worked part time during the evening and used the facilities, maybe took 
their meals at the group home. 
 
In the last number of years that has all changed, as you well know, and the 
people work in the group homes and then they live in another residence.  As 
you also know, the labour laws do not protect those people and when they 
work 15 or 16 hours a day there is no overtime paid.  And many people who 
work in group homes feel abused and used by the system. 



 

 

 
What I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, if you can outline your government's 
policy in dealing with people who work in group homes and whether or not 
you have any plans to make changes that would reflect the needs of these 
people who in many cases, as I say again, are being used by the system in 
terms of working many hours of overtime and not being compensated properly 
through overtime or other privileges that other working people have in the 
province at the present time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- The hon. member is correct in his assessment of how it 
used to be and how it is now in terms of living and staying over in group 
homes, and now you're living elsewhere and you have two domiciles actually 
to take care of.  And so we have switched over to the shift model as such.  
I would like to indicate to the hon. member that we had had a few changes 
made over the last couple of years.  We have actually put in extra staff 
where this is needed.  And I would just suggest to you that if you have any 
individual cases of where this is creating problems, this new shift of 
living in two homes and so on, just let our department know.  We'd 
certainly take a look at it because we are quite willing to address 
situations as such. 
 
Over the last couple of years we have also made some strides into 
standardization of salaries and standardization of benefits as well.  I 
could go into statistics.  I don't know if you're interested in the amounts 
and the percentages and so on, where we have had made an attempt to 
standardize the salaries and the benefits across the piece. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Minister, I guess my question to you is, why is 
there this discrepancy between people who work in a group home, for 
example, and people who work in another area?  Why wouldn't you be 
appealing to the Department of Labour, or in fact suggesting amendments 
that would allow these people to have the same privileges and rights and 
benefits that other working people in the province have? 
 
I understand what you're saying about making changes to shifts and all of 
that.  But that doesn't help if you have an individual who has to work 16 
hours a day, and for the simple reason that they're working in a group 
home, they don't get any overtime.  If they were working anywhere else in 
Saskatchewan, they would have the privilege or the protection of getting 
overtime.  And I guess my argument is that what we need here is a change in 
legislation that would see people who work in group homes have the same 
labour laws applied to them.  And that isn't the case at the present time. 
 
And I think the only way this problem is going to be solved, if you as 
minister take that up with the Minister of Labour and get the legislation 
changed.  I guess that's what I'm asking you here on behalf of the people 
who work in group homes, if in fact you intend over the next month or 
hopefully before the end of this session, bringing in a Bill?  It would be 
a very small Bill to make that kind of amendment, and you could be 
guaranteed that it would pass speedily because the members of the 
opposition, I'm sure, would support the change.  Because it seems to me 
that these people, a very small group of people, are being left out and 
unprotected by the labour laws of the province. 



 

 

 
I guess I'm asking here tonight whether you will consider the kinds of 
amendments that it would take to make these labour laws inclusive of people 
who work in group homes? 
 
(2230) 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- I would say to the hon. member that the issue that he 
raises is an issue that's going to have to take a fair amount of looking 
at.  And I don't think at this time that I'm in a position to make any firm 
commitments one way or the other.  But it will be taken under advisement, 
and we will certainly be looking at it. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Minister, I just want to say, I guess, how 
disappointed I am in that response on behalf of the people who work at the 
centres.  My colleague, the member from Saskatoon Nutana, reminds me, and 
correctly reminds me that many of these people who now work in these group 
homes previously worked in North Park Centre, who were fired or laid off 
and moved to group homes were getting the kind of pay that we're talking 
about and protected by the labour laws, and now find themself in a position 
of having to work very long hours without that kind of protection. 
 
Also, Mr. Minister, you'll know that many of these people are women -- the 
vast majority would be women.  And I can't believe and can't understand why 
you take the position that these people shouldn't have the same benefits as 
other working people in Saskatchewan and it will take a lot of study and a 
lot of time in order to make the proper changes that would protect them.  
But having said that, I guess there's no sense in pushing you further on 
it.  You've made up your mind that you're not going to deal with the issue, 
and I just say to you that we'll be relaying this message to the workers 
who have been corresponding and phoning us on this issue and asked us to 
raise it for them. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, in 
conclusion I just want to read into the record some questions that I'd like 
to get written answers to.  I'd like to receive from you, if I could, at 
your convenience within the next month, the moneys that in the past year 
your department has spent on travel, on polling, on advertising. 
 
I'd also like to know in writing whether or not you have approved any 
private, for-profit, commercial day-care centres in the province.  I'd like 
to know, in the last year, how many new day-care spaces you've created and 
where they're located. 
 
And finally, I would like to get an answer to the question I asked you that 
you didn't answer a few minutes ago with respect to whether or not you 
rebate the federal government half of the family allowance when you deduct 
it off the cheque.  I would like to know that.  If you could get that for 
me in writing, that would be fine. 
 
I also have a number of other outstanding letters.  I'm particularly 
thinking of one that I was hoping to get before estimates, with respect to 
a comparison for the last two years of what each of the non-government 



 

 

organizations have received from your department, a breakdown of benefits 
being paid under the family income plan Act.  This letter is on record, and 
I know you have it and I know you will be getting back to me on it, but I'd 
just like to formally ask for a reply to that. 
 
I want to thank you once again for what I think has been an interesting 
debate.  I also want to thank you for the one commitment you gave me to 
re-examine the wage exemption policy of the department which we appreciate.  
And also to re-examine the deduction of . . . well the policy that you 
pursued with respect to the family income plan and treating non-forgivable 
student loans as income.  I appreciate your willingness to look at those 
policies and look at changes there. 
 
I want to thank your staff very much for their time here in the Assembly.  
We on this side of the House very much appreciate their presence in the 
Assembly.  I want to thank you, Mr. Minister, and wish you good night and 
good luck in the months ahead in terms of improving the lot of families in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- Just a brief response.  I listened very carefully to 
the questions that you were asking and from my perspective I don't see any 
problem in supplying you with the answers for them.  And I'd like to 
indicate to the members opposite, I was very pleased tonight in the kind of 
constructive questions that were being asked.  And I think the objective 
that I set at the beginning that we would keep this on a plane of both of 
us expressing our concerns with the people of Saskatchewan, that we've been 
able to maintain that at a very high decorum, and I certainly appreciate 
that. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 16 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 17 -- Statutory 
 
Items 18 and 19 agreed to. 
 
Vote 36 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1990 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Social Services 
Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 36 

 
Item 1 -- Statutory 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Thank you to the minister and his staff.  That concludes 
the estimates on Social Services, and to all a good night. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:40 p.m. 
 


