





























































Hansard: March 22, 1990


 

 

March 22/90 
 
 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Inquiry into Operation of Saskatchewan Transportation Company 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to address a question to the 
Minister of Justice.  Yesterday I stated, Mr. Minister, that the terms of 
reference in respect to the judicial inquiry that you announced yesterday 
into the Saskatchewan transportation corporation and its operation thereof, 
I indicated that they were narrow, to say the least. 
 
And I want to ask you why Mr. Justice Brownridge, the commissioner which 
you have appointed, was not empowered to look into whether or not the 
officers of the STC (Saskatchewan Transportation Company); whether they 
were engaged in any other questionable expenditures, any other wrongdoings 
during their term of office; whether they were acting on their own; whether 
they had instructions from other persons; whether or not the board of 
directors and/or cabinet ministers were aware of what was happening, or in 
fact were they negligent at not being aware. 
 
Surely those are the questions, if you're going to investigate totally this 
issue, that you have to give the broadest terms of reference at the outset 
to the commissioner. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Well obviously, Mr. Speaker, allegations were made with 
regard to one specific activity. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- No. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Well the hon. members say no, that's not right.  
Certainly some employees, one of your supporters, didn't want the STC 
buying the buses from the United States.  I believe Mr. Orchard made that 
allegation. 
 
Well the allegation about where the buses should be bought is one . . . 
certainly, as I indicated, he did not want the buses bought in the United 
States.  We did set up in terms of the internal operations of the company, 
the accounting firm, one of the major accounting firms to look at those 
internal operations.  And that was announced immediately after the matter 
was raised. 
 
Secondly, with regard to the criminal allegation.  The one that made 
reference to Canada was the question of moneys being paid, and that is the 
allegation that's before us, before the public, and that is the one that we 



 

 

have asked Mr. Justice Brownridge to investigate. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, we made it clear that if during the course of the 
inquiry Mr. Brownridge had reason to have his mandate expanded, that all he 
had to do was apply to cabinet, and as I indicated, the government would 
give that expansion to the mandate. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the NDP say there you are.  I doubt that any government 
could turn that down when the request came. 
 
So having said that, Mr. Speaker, and the allegations that were before us, 
I believe that the mandate given and the individual involved has more than 
enough power and ability to get to the bottom of the matter. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  Before we go to the next questions, I would just 
like to draw to the attention of both members that we had a long question 
followed by a long answer.  I don't think that that's conducive to question 
period, so I'd ask hon. members to co-operate in that regard. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'll certainly attempt to abide by 
that, and I know the minister will too. 
 
Mr. Minister, part of your answer you indicated that Mr. Justice Brownridge 
could come back to cabinet and get expanded terms of reference.  Let me 
give you this example.  Let us suppose that in the investigation Mr. 
Justice Brownridge decides -- this is a new question -- that he would like 
to look at the negligence, the involvement, or the potential involvement of 
a cabinet minister.  It could be any one of you.  Let's take the member 
from Melfort who was the minister in charge of STC.  Do you know what 
you're asking him to do?  You're asking the Justice minister to come back 
to the cabinet table and to ask that minister, can I investigate you?  
That's what you're doing with the narrow terms of reference. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister, do you really think that tying the hands of the 
commission with the restrictive terms of reference is going to satisfy the 
demand of the public for a thorough and complete investigation of this 
mess? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I believe, Mr. Speaker, that when Mr. Justice Brownridge 
makes his report to the people of this province, that the fair-minded 
people in the province will be well satisfied. 
 
I don't believe, and I said this yesterday, that the judicial inquiry will 
ever satisfy the New Democratic Party.  I made that abundantly clear.  The 
New Democratic Party, Mr. Speaker, has had the reputation, the tradition, 
led by the Justice critic opposite, but well supported by others, in terms 
of making allegations, innuendo. 
 
What I challenge the hon. member, because this is important.  The hon. 
member today has stood before this Assembly, said "if," "what if," "what 
about."  Well, Mr. Speaker, I'm going to put the following challenge to the 



 

 

New Democratic Party and the Leader of the New Democratic Party: if they 
have one shred of evidence, appear before the judicial inquiry.  You have a 
legal obligation, you have a moral obligation, and you have a political 
obligation to stand up before a public inquiry and tell what evidence you 
have. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- A new question to the Minister of Justice.  Never, never 
before did I see anyone so sensitive on an issue as this.  Do you know what 
the public, Mr. Minister, is going to say from those answers?  That you are 
afraid of a full investigation.  Not only in your meddling with this affair 
in the narrowness of your terms of reference, you have curtailed the right 
of the full inquiry, unless they come back and ask you whether they can 
investigate you. 
 
But secondly, the Minister of Justice in his righteousness says, I'll 
appoint the counsel to the commission.  Now that sure gives an indication 
of hands off.  I want to ask you: after having appointed the commissioner, 
why didn't you allow the commissioner himself to appoint counsel? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Just so you understand, prior to the appointment of any 
counsel, I did ask the commissioner . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
well certainly we do, but all I indicate to the hon. member is that we did 
ask the . . . (inaudible) . . . names of possible counsel, and this was 
fully acceptable to him. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  We're having difficulty hearing the 
minister.  I'm sure most of us fall into that category.  Let us give him 
the opportunity to reply. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I did indicate to the hon. member that prior to the 
appointment of any counsel, the names of appropriate counsel were submitted 
to the commissioner, and he certainly approved the appointment of the 
counsel.  Let me . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Who are you kidding? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I'm not trying to kid anybody; I'm telling you how it 
happened.  But what I do, Mr. Speaker, because allegations have been made 
by the New Democratic Party, allegations have been made by the New 
Democratic Party, and I challenge the New Democratic Party, I challenge . . 
. (inaudible interjection) . . . No, no.  There's a difference, Mr. Speaker 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Hon. members are engaging in debate, and I 
think that might be said on both sides of the House.  And once more I ask 
members to try to adhere to the rules of question period and keep your 
questions short and to the point and your answers the same way. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Thank you.  I have another question, thank you, Mr. Speaker.  



 

 

Mr. Minister, we are not making allegations.  The people of Saskatchewan do 
not trust this government and the shroud of corruption that lies over this 
government.  And they want a complete investigation.  I'm asking you today 
to justify why you are restricting the terms of reference and why it cannot 
be a complete and total investigation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I think, Mr. Speaker, I have put out the formal public 
challenge to the New Democratic Party and its members to bring any evidence 
that it has before the judicial inquiry and that is made to the public.  
And I ask the New Democratic Party not to play the game of innuendo and 
allegations but to bring the matter before the judicial inquiry.  Mr. 
Speaker, that challenge is there.  I know the press will watch to see 
whether it's honoured.  I know the public will watch, Mr. Speaker, to see 
whether the New Democratic Party has anything, Mr. Speaker, or whether it 
is simply wanting a witch-hunt for partisan political reasons, because 
that's all that's come forward so far today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- A new question to the Minister of Justice.  Mr. Minister, 
the public is demanding  a total and full inquiry with respect to this 
matter.  There's no doubt about it.  I'm going to tell you another reason 
why he didn't want to expand the terms of reference, because you couldn't 
possibly stand the public to see the mention of investigation into a 
minister or boards of directors.  That's why you couldn't put it in there.  
That's why it's confined. 
 
And I'm saying to you, if you've got nothing to hide, put it in there and 
clear the air.  Why won't you do that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Mr. Speaker, the mandate, as I have said on numerous 
occasions, is broad enough to deal with the allegations that are now before 
the U.S. tribunals, and certainly the matters that have been raised here in 
Canada.  Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I've made it abundantly clear that 
I believe that the judicial inquiry will clear the air, ultimately clear 
the air. 
 
What I cannot guarantee, Mr. Speaker, is whether the judicial inquiry will 
clear the political mud.  And I doubt very much that it will, Mr. Speaker, 
knowing what's coming so far today from the opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Further Purchase of Buses by STC 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have a question for the 
Minister of Justice.  Mr. Minister, I understand, and this has been 
confirmed in today's newspaper media reports, that while this process is 
going on Saskatchewan Transportation Company is still actively considering 



 

 

the purchase of yet another 13 Eagle buses.  Given the terms of reference 
that you have set out for the judicial inquiry, as narrow as they are, I 
don't see how you or any member of your government can allow those 
negotiations to go on. 
 
Will you today give us your assurances that all negotiations with Eagle bus 
companies will cease at least until the judicial inquiry reports? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Mr. Speaker, I have some difficulty in that STC has made 
the case, I believe, and I thought that the opposition at one time wanted a 
modernization of the fleet of STC.  And having said that, Mr. Speaker, why, 
if in future bus purchases, the particular bus company, the Eagle bus 
company makes the best proposal for STC and the people of this province, 
why they should be ruled out. 
 
I have some difficulty, Mr. Speaker, with that argument.  Certainly, Mr. 
Speaker, as well, I would expect that given the case that's before the 
public, Eagle, FBI (Federal Bureau of Investigation), and whomever, that 
any sales are going to be pretty well scrutinized by whomever, Mr. Speaker.  
And I would ensure that if they are the successful bidder, and I say "if" 
because this is a matter out for proposals and tender, then, Mr. Speaker, 
the people will get the best deal.  To exclude that is just not a wise 
expenditure of taxpayers' money. 
 

Openness of Inquiry into Operation of STC 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Mr. Minister, you as a lawyer, will be aware of this statement 
that justice must not only be done, it must be seen to be done.  With that 
in mind, will you give this House your commitment that all of this inquiry 
will be conducted in the open, in the daylight, with the press and the 
public invited to attend and examine any and all documents? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I have already made it clear in my remarks yesterday that 
this would be an open judicial inquiry.  The rules, as traditional in the 
matter of such inquiries, are set by the commission. 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Further to that, Mr. Minister, I want you to give this House 
your assurance that when the commission reports -- and this is important -- 
when the judicial commission reports, we want it to do so publicly and not 
first through the sanitization process of your office.  Will you give us 
that commitment, that the report will be made publicly and not sanitized by 
your office? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- The report, when it's completed, will be made public in 
its entirety. 
 

Call for Inquiry into GigaText Affair 



 

 

 
Mr. Anguish: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to start off, Mr. 
Minister, with a quote from the the Star-Phoenix: 
 

 The STC scandal which involves two top executives who have been ordered to 
stand trial in a Dallas court does warrant closer examination to determine 
if allegations of bribery and political pay-offs are true, and to find out 
if anyone else was involved.  But surely GigaText, which involves 100 
times as much public money as the STC affair, deserves similar attention. 

 
Could we have your commitment today that sort of completes the loop that 
would therefore give consensus to have a public investigation into the 
affairs of GigaText now that you are winding that corporation down? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Mr. Speaker, I find a great deal of difficulty in trying 
to answer for the schizophrenics in Saskatoon.  And I say that because on 
the one hand they want an inquiry in the different matters, and at the same 
time we hold public hearings they criticize us for going to the public too 
often, Mr. Speaker.  I can't listen to the Star-Phoenix, accept what the 
Star-Phoenix is saying with any credibility because they've got as many 
different positions on issues, Mr. Speaker, as there are pages in the 
paper. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- New question, same minister, Mr. Speaker.  Well, Mr. 
Minister, even ConSask, I am sure, would agree that GigaText deserves 
further scrutiny.  You wouldn't let us discuss it in Crown Corporations 
Committee, committees that you haven't called back intersessionally like 
you said you would.  You wouldn't let it have the scrutiny of this 
Legislative Chamber. The member from Souris-Cannington said he would take 
full responsibility. 
 
You've wasted over $5 million of taxpayers money and you don't want us to 
know what's happened to it.  The public has the right to know.  And I would 
invite you, Mr. Minister, in your mode of consensus building in 
Saskatchewan, that you ask the Provincial Auditor to take a full, 
comprehensive audit of GigaText and report back to this Legislative 
Assembly and to the Public Accounts Committee so we know where our $5 
million went. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Mr. Speaker, I suppose the more things change, the more 
things stay the same.  I can remember a debate . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- And I remember, Mr. Speaker, when I asked the now Leader 
of the New Democratic Party to table all documents for $400-and-some 
million of expenditure for buying potash mines, and the answer was no.  We 



 

 

asked, Mr. Speaker, for the public documents about Shane Industries, a 
matter of a police investigation, public investigation.  The NDP under the 
then attorney general said no.  I can remember the allegations made against 
Golden Acres motel and the corruption and the pay-off to a former NDP 
member.  The then NDP leader of the opposition . . . now Leader of the 
Opposition said no, it's not in the public interest. 
 
Mr. Speaker, GigaText, Mr. Speaker, had full, full public inquiry before 
the courts of Quebec with all the documentation brought to this Assembly by 
the members opposite, fully available to the public, Mr. Speaker.  I 
suggest to you that GigaText, all the information was brought out in form 
of a judicial hearing.  To say for the hon. members that they didn't have 
the information, is foolish, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Well, my goodness, what a tirade.  Doth I hear a minister 
of the Crown, in the new co-operative government, making politics out of a 
simple question in question period? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- What I ask you, Mr. Minister, is to come clean with people 
in the province of Saskatchewan.  Five million dollars was spent on 
GigaText.  There were distorted figures, distorted claims by your 
government.  All I'm asking you very simply, sir, is will you call on the 
Provincial Auditor's office to do a comprehensive audit of GigaText and 
that audit will be reported back to this Legislative Assembly and to the 
Public Accounts Committee so that we in the opposition can do our job that 
the people of Saskatchewan are asking us to look into. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Mr. Speaker, let me assure the hon. member that my last 
reply, Mr. Speaker, was in the most non-partisan manner and intended fully, 
Mr. Speaker, to balance the public debate that has been before the people 
of this province for a number of years, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the 
commercial activity that, in fairness, should be given to the public and 
that which is not.  Mr. Speaker, again the matter of GigaText, the 
investment, which I know that the the hon. members would want me to clarify 
the record in a non-partisan way, was considerably less than invested in 
Nabu. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we will, I gather, follow the traditional practices of 
the House with the availability of the opposition to take the documentation 
that was before the courts in Montreal, which they have copies of, and to 
question the appropriate minister before both the Public Accounts or Crown 
Corporations (Committee), depending, so you've got a case to be able to 
take to the minister in the appropriate forum. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Suspension of Saskatoon Teacher 



 

 

 
Ms. Atkinson: -- My question is to the Minister of Education.  Mr. 
Minister, Murray Valiaho, a Saskatoon teacher and president of the 
Saskatchewan Educators of the Hearing Impaired, was suspended for three 
days from his job at the school for the deaf because he publicly disagreed 
with your decision to exclude Department of Education employees from the 
Deaf Education Advisory Forum. 
 
Your government makes glowing speeches about freedom and democracy in 
eastern Europe, but it would appear that these same principles don't apply 
to Saskatchewan citizens.  Mr. Valiaho, as president of SEHI, had every 
right to make public comment on how you operate, Mr. Minister, when it 
comes to deaf education in this province.  It is his basic freedom not to 
be penalized because he happens to get a pay cheque from your Department of 
Education.  Can you tell this House where you received the right to rob a 
man of three days' pay simply because he disagreed with you? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Speaker, I think that if the hon. member 
opposite would look at all of the facts involved in this particular case 
and would fully understand what the whole situation is, that this episode 
rose out of the fact that the previous minister of Education had indicated 
in setting up the advisory council on deaf education that employees of the 
Department of Education would not be eligible to sit on that particular 
committee.  And I think that for the most part everyone fully understood 
that. 
 
The fact that Mr. Valiaho was suspended without pay for a few days was, I 
think, clearly understood by the Public Service Commission and the 
Department of Education officials.  I believe that they fully understood 
what the situation was and were within their right in doing what they did. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Okay, Mr. Minister, let's get to the nub of the issue.  
Mr. Valiaho who was upset, because although he was nominated to the task 
force as president of SEHI you rejected him because he was a departmental 
employee, yet Chris Gerrard, a Department of Education employee, is 
nominated by you to the advisory board for independent schools.  Yet Rene 
Archambault, a Saskatchewan Education employee and brother-in-law to the 
Premier of Saskatchewan is nominated by you to the Fransaskois School 
component task force. 
 
Mr. Minister, what hypocrisy.  Mr. Valiaho can't be nominated to the task 
force on deaf education because he is an employee of the department.  Yet 
Mr. Archambault and Mr. Chris Gerrard can be nominated to task forces by 
yourself even though they are members of your Department of Education.  How 
do you explain this double standard and this hypocrisy? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Speaker, we're not talking about hypocrisy or a 
double standard, we are talking about an advisory committee for the 
Minister of Education. 



 

 

 
The fact of the matter is that we had a task force on deaf education that 
spent several months looking into the education of deaf children in this 
province.  After several hearings and after several meetings, the task 
force put forward a report to myself, and I would point out that all of the 
members of that task force, Mr. Speaker, were in fact employees of the 
Department of Education.  I think that there is strong feeling within the 
committee, the membership on the committee, that they feel it would be a 
conflict of interest to have members of the school for the deaf on this 
particular committee. 
 
And I would also point out, Mr. Speaker, that employees at the school for 
the deaf in Saskatoon have ample opportunity for input into the work that 
is being done by the advisory council, or by the advisory committee.  The 
other members on this particular committee, Mr. Speaker, do not have that 
same option. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  I would ask the hon. members to come to order.  
Order. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in reply which was 
moved by Mr. Toth. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Thank you.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's certainly a 
pleasure for me today to enter into this throne speech debate. 
 
I want to congratulate, Mr. Speaker, the member for Moosomin on his moving 
of the throne speech, and as well, the member for Nipawin on his seconding 
of the throne speech.  I feel that those two members in particular, Mr. 
Speaker, did just an excellent job of outlining and confirming the many, 
many points that were made in the throne speech. 
 
I want to add congratulations to the Lieutenant Governor for her address, 
and to the Premier of this province for establishing in that throne speech, 
Mr. Speaker, a number of guiding principles that will take this province 
well into the 1990s, and in fact into the year 2000, which is only 10 years 
away, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that that throne speech that was delivered just the 
other day dealt with a lot of things.  I think some of the words that I 
would use to sum up the content of that throne speech might be words like 
"vision," might be words like "insight," "leadership," "the future." 
 



 

 

Mr. Speaker, that throne speech deals with the province of Saskatchewan at 
a time when we are facing many, many challenges.  It comes, Mr. Speaker, at 
a very interesting time, an interesting time in history, an exciting time 
in history, and an extremely demanding time, Mr. Speaker, for all residents 
of this great province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Speech from the Throne is about the future; it is about 
goal-setting.  Mr. Speaker, it is about looking into the future and seeing 
just where this province might want to be, let's say in the year 2000.  Mr. 
Speaker, this Speech from the Throne is about planning for today, planning 
for today but also planning for the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, most importantly, this Speech from the Throne is about 
something that we hear a great deal about today, and that something I 
believe, Mr. Speaker, is the word "change."  It is about massive change 
around the world.  It is about change that is affecting us here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
There are those that say, well those world-wide events are irrelevant to 
Saskatchewan; we don't care what is happening around the world; let us 
close our eyes to the facts of life in today, the 1990s, and let us hide in 
a little shell and say it doesn't matter what happens around the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to make the case to you today that the change 
that is confronting this whole planet, the change that is confronting North 
America, the change that is confronting Saskatchewan and Canada is very 
relevant to every citizen in this province.  And, Mr. Speaker, our 
residents, our taxpayers, the people of Saskatchewan want to hear more 
about what is happening around the world.  They are hungry for information, 
Mr. Speaker.  They need leadership, Mr. Speaker, and leadership is what 
this Speech from the Throne is all about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, whether we like it or whether we do not like it, the fact is 
we are living in very revolutionary times.  Mr. Speaker, as a young 
politician, it is one of the most exciting things that I can possibly think 
of, to be in this legislature at this juncture, at this crossroads in 
history, in the province of Saskatchewan.  And I hope, Mr. Speaker, that 
today as I stand in my place and speak as I have been elected to do, that I 
am indeed representing the wishes and the desires and the dreams of my 
constituents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I submit to you today that every national economy and regional 
economy is being restructured into something we call a global market-place.  
Mr. Speaker, I remember a few years ago I heard this term "global village" 
by all of the academics.  And I, like most residents of Saskatchewan, did 
not pay a great deal of attention to this thing called the global village.  
But, Mr. Speaker, I should have.  And today I see so very, very clearly 
that that is precisely what is taking place. 
 
I'd like to talk just for a few minutes, Mr. Speaker, about what is 
happening in eastern Europe.  And, Mr. Speaker, once again the members of 
the NDP may want to stick their heads in the sand and say, that has no 
relevance.  Mr. Speaker, I submit to you today, it has a tremendous amount 



 

 

of relevance. 
 
In eastern Europe, Mr. Speaker, people are casting off that yoke of 
socialist dictatorship.  They are opting in favour of freedom, opting in 
favour of freedom of the individual, freedom to make decisions on their 
own, freedom to learn, freedom to share, freedom of information, freedom to 
take risks, freedom to succeed as well as fail, and freedom to try again, 
freedom to vote in open and honest elections. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these people of eastern Europe have learned, as will other 
nations around the world, that to free up their economies to compete in the 
global market-place, to do that they must free their own people. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we have to ask the question, why is all of this happening 
in these eastern European countries?  Why is the wall going down in Berlin?  
Why in the big country of Russia are they turning to privatization?  Why 
has McDonald's restaurant, that great, big symbol of North American free 
enterprise, gone into the country of Russia?  Why has President Gorbachev 
allowed that to happen?  Why has President Gorbachev turned over land that 
used to be collective state farms to individuals?  Why have many of these 
countries turned over the factories to free enterprise?  Why are they 
establishing, if you can imagine, Mr. Speaker, a landmark decision in 
socialist countries, the establishment of stock markets?  Can you imagine 
that, Mr. Speaker -- the establishment of free enterprise stock markets in 
eastern Europe. 
 
These are things, Mr. Speaker, that I or many people could speak on for a 
number of hours.  But I think the point to be made is there's a number of 
these things happening in eastern Europe -- very, very significant; very 
significant, indeed, Mr. Speaker.  And we have to ask the question, why?  
Was it because of political reasons?  Was it because President Gorbachev 
fundamentally believes in McDonald's or believes in stock markets?  No, Mr. 
Speaker.  It was not because of politics; it was because of a practical 
economic solution to the problems that faced his country. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, to that President Gorbachev and to other leaders in those 
socialist countries, I say congratulations to you for taking the effort to 
make change, to make change that is difficult, to make change that is very 
difficult. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the relevant point that I make today, if those leaders 
around the world can make that change, can the members of the NDP Party 
change?  The question is, have they changed, Mr. Speaker?  It's a very 
relevant question, and it is very interesting to note the Leader of the 
Opposition made no mention of these things that are happening around the 
world -- made no mention of whether or not the NDP themselves had changed.  
And I'll get into that just a little bit later, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I make the case to you, major change in eastern Europe.  I make the 
case to you because of economics, not because of political philosophy, but 
because of real economics. 
 
Now what do I mean by the real economics, Mr. Speaker?  I mean, Mr. 



 

 

Speaker, there is a phenomenon going on around the world today called 
trade, called free trade.  And that is why these countries must change to 
adapt to this thing called trade.  And, Mr. Speaker, it is another 
significant point to show you once again that the NDP are hiding their 
heads in the sand, are not recognizing, are not coming clean with the 
people of Saskatchewan about this phenomenon of trade going around the 
world and how we must change and adapt. 
 
And I want to give you a little list here, Mr. Speaker, of some facts -- 
not political rhetoric, not anything that is really open to debate, because 
these are absolute facts, Mr. Speaker, respecting free trade. 
 
Australia and New Zealand today have a free trade agreement.  Brazil and 
Argentina are developing a free trade agreement.  In western Europe the 
year 1992 will see all of the walls come down in western Europe, Mr. 
Speaker.  One country economically. 
 
United States and Japan are negotiating and talking about free trade.  You 
will know, Mr. Speaker, the historic free trade agreement that we passed . 
. . or that we resolved in this legislature and in the Parliament of Canada 
just a few years ago.  Tremendous political debate on it. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it's clear now, it is clear today that there is 
developing world-wide free trade, that there will be in the near future, in 
the very near future, three major trading blocs.  You will see western 
Europe, you will see western Europe as a major trading bloc.  You will see 
the Pacific Rim as a major trading bloc, and you will see North America as 
a major trading bloc. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this is just essential, essential that we not hide our 
heads in the sand and for political reasons, for political reasons, as the 
New Democratic Party had said, oh well, free trade, we're against that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a great deal of respect for the Leader of the 
Opposition.  I believe he is an intelligent man.  I believe he is a 
well-read man, Mr. Speaker.  I believe that the Leader of the Opposition 
today, and many in the NDP ranks across the floor, know full well what is 
happening around the world with respect to free trade, and they are too 
arrogant to admit, Mr. Speaker, to the people of this province that yes 
indeed, free trade is a phenomena that is happening, and the correct 
decision was made.  So that tells me, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP have not 
changed.  They have not changed a bit, Mr. Speaker, and it's extremely 
unfortunate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about something, about where this 
province, about where this province is at with respect to agriculture, and 
it relates to trade.  It relates to one of the last issues that is not 
being dealt with today successfully, is that European-American 
subsidization war, subsidization war, Mr. Speaker, that has absolutely 
wreaked havoc in the international grain markets, Mr. Speaker.  And today 
in Saskatchewan, our farmers, our rural communities are suffering.  
Communities are suffering badly, Mr. Speaker, because of this last bastion 
of protectionism.  And it is a fine, fine example of how we must continue 



 

 

with free trade and we must continue with our GATT (General Agreement on 
Tariffs and Trade) negotiations to reduce and eventually eliminate these 
subsidies, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that today if you were to talk to most residents in 
my constituency and ask them what the issues are, they would say 
agriculture.  If you would talk to them and say, well why agriculture, 
what's happening, they would tell you that it is primarily because . . . 
primarily because of these international grain subsidy wars, primarily 
because of high interest rates, primarily because of droughts that have 
taken place.  And, Mr. Speaker, these have wreaked havoc on our province. 
 
We are at a crossroads today and that is why this Speech from the Throne is 
so very, very important.  I listened intently yesterday, Mr. Speaker, to 
the Leader of the Opposition.  The Leader of the Opposition very 
conveniently, very conveniently made the case, made the case that oh, it's 
all the government's fault, all the government's fault.  Ignored the 
realities, the realities of what international price wars on grain have 
done to us. 
 
And I submit to you, Mr. Speaker, rather than blaming the government, a 
Leader of the Opposition, a true Leader of  
 Dthe Opposition representing fairly the realities that have gone on, would 
have said yes, yes, Mr. Premier, you have tried and you have made a 
considerable difference by your successful negotiations with the federal 
government, something like 600 -- I shouldn't even quote the number, Mr. 
Speaker, I don't have it today. 
 
But I do recall a couple of deficiency payments came to this province of 
Saskatchewan in the neighbourhood of hundreds of millions of dollars.  
Drought payment, drought payments -- hundreds of millions of dollars, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I think this government has made a tremendous effort to counteract 
those international subsidy wars.  I want to commend the Premier of the 
province, Mr. Speaker, for his recognition all across this country on his 
work at the GATT negotiations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we should stand in our place today extremely proud of a 
Premier who is intelligent, who is articulate, who is aggressive, who is 
knowledgeable, and who is experienced in agriculture, and a very successful 
negotiator, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to agriculture, and I would say, Mr. 
Speaker, one of the outstanding men of this country when it comes to 
agriculture and negotiating with the federal government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(1445) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- I say that, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, the NDP, or the 
Leader of the Opposition yesterday made the case that once again it's all 
the government's fault.  Well I'd say, Mr. Speaker, maybe the members of 
the opposition should have given a little bit of credit to, in these times 



 

 

of high interest rates, for the many protective programs that this 
government has made its mark with on the province of Saskatchewan.  Mr. 
Speaker, maybe the NDP should look back and see where they failed in the 
late 1970s and 1980s to address that particular problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'd like to turn, Mr. Speaker, to something that was in the 
throne speech that was of extreme significance, in my view, and that was 
the concept of Consensus Saskatchewan -- 100 people from all walks of life 
across this province going out, consulting with other members of the public 
at large, dealing with some very significant issues. 
 
And I paid particularly close attention to the Leader of the Opposition's 
remarks yesterday, and I won't quote precisely, but something to the effect 
that these people were not capable or able of answering these questions.  
Mr. Speaker, and that was a very, very scary remark for me to hear.  And, 
Mr. Speaker, I sat here and I thought about it a little bit.  What did that 
remark really mean to me?  That remark meant to me, Mr. Speaker, that the 
NDP have not changed, have not changed one iota. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there's a fundamental philosophical difference between 
this side of the House and members of the NDP, and that has to do, Mr. 
Speaker, with a fundamental belief in the individual.  I submit to you, Mr. 
Speaker, that Consensus 100, Consensus Saskatchewan, is based upon a 
fundamental, positive belief in the individual.  I submit to you, Mr. 
Speaker, that members of the NDP don't share that same belief.  They still 
believe today, Mr. Speaker, that big government is all powerful, is all 
knowledgeable, and they don't have the belief in Saskatchewan people that 
Saskatchewan people can be imaginative and creative and look after our own 
destiny as individuals. 
 
No question, Mr. Speaker, we in government have a leadership role to play. 
No question, Mr. Speaker, it is our duty to guide as best we can the people 
of Saskatchewan.  No question, Mr. Speaker, it is our duty to be true 
leaders of society. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there come times, and especially when Saskatchewan is at 
this crossroads we are today, economically and financially, Mr. Speaker, 
that the public must be consulted.  This is a time of massive change, Mr. 
Speaker, that I have talked to you about, world-wide free trade; a time 
when agriculture is in probably the lowest state that it has been for many, 
many years; a time when farm debt is at proportions that are not 
sustainable, not sustainable in this economy; a time when interest rates 
are creating havoc with small businesses and home owners and farmers; a 
time, Mr. Speaker, when the people of Saskatchewan, with all of their 
values, will, I believe, Mr. Speaker, find many solutions. 
 
I believe these people, Mr. Speaker, will quite rightfully look to the 
future.  And they will say, where do we want to be in the year 2000?  How 
do we want to get there, Mr. Speaker?  What obstacles must we overcome? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think that Consensus Saskatchewan will deal with four 
very, very important areas.  I believe the first one that was mentioned was 
economic diversification -- economic diversification.  I submit to you, Mr. 



 

 

Speaker, that there has never been a time, never been a time in the history 
of Saskatchewan where it has become more abundantly clear that we must 
diversify our economy.  We must not have all of our eggs in one basket. 
 
What do I mean by diversification, Mr. Speaker?  I mean something less than 
almost a total reliance on agriculture.  What I mean, Mr. Speaker, is jobs 
and opportunities and the creation of wealth, primarily by the free 
enterprise sector.  Mr. Speaker, there has never been a more pressing 
demand and need for this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I'm talking about is the development of our resources, 
and I firstly talked to you about the development of our natural resources.  
Mr. Speaker, we have been blessed in this province with an abundance of 
potash.  We have developed that well.  I disagree very much with the former 
administration and the method that they chose to -- and I can't even say 
develop; I have to say nationalize it, not creating a single job.  We had 
the mines here, Mr. Speaker; we had the royalty revenue, Mr. Speaker.  
Those moneys by a wise and prudent government could have been spent 
elsewhere. 
 
I use the example of the Alberta Conservative administration in those 
prosperous years of the 1970s.  Did the members of the Legislative Assembly 
in the province of Alberta take their money and buy existing businesses?  
No, Mr. Speaker.  No, Mr. Speaker, they used it to diversify their economy, 
and one of the reasons, Mr. Speaker, why they are sustaining just a little 
bit better than we are today in these terribly difficult economic times. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have been blessed with an abundance of heavy oil in this 
province, an abundance of heavy oil.  Is there anything wrong, Mr. Speaker, 
with taking that oil out of the ground, processing it here in Saskatchewan, 
creating Saskatchewan jobs, creating Saskatchewan investment, creating 
Saskatchewan opportunities, and producing from that heavy oil some good, 
top quality diesel fuel and motor oil products?  Is there anything wrong 
with that, Mr. Speaker?  Is there anything wrong in doing that in 
conjunction with a major, major corporation, major co-operative, Mr. 
Speaker -- Federated Co-op?  Is there anything wrong with that, Mr. 
Speaker?  No.  I submit to you, Mr. Speaker, that has been the right thing 
to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have been blessed as well in this province with a multitude 
of natural gas.  Is there anything wrong, Mr. Speaker, with processing that 
natural resource, creating jobs and opportunities and wealth for the people 
of Saskatchewan?  Is there anything wrong with taking that natural gas, Mr. 
Speaker, and making it into fertilizer?  I submit to you, no, Mr. Speaker.  
In fact that is something that we must do.  We must process those natural 
resources. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, members of the opposition say no to the processing of our 
natural resources when it comes to natural gas.  Members of the opposition 
have said no to the processing of our heavy oil.  Mr. Speaker, and there's 
something terribly wrong; there's something terribly wrong when politics 
will get in the way of straight, good economic sense.  Members of the 
opposition will say, well, you shouldn't be developing those natural 



 

 

resources with people like Cargill or people like Co-op.  Mr. Speaker, I 
think it speaks very well of the Premier of this province.  I think it 
speaks very well of this government and the people of Saskatchewan that we 
will go into a joint venture, into a partnership that will create all of 
these opportunities for Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is time for the opposition, it is time for the opposition 
to stand up today and say, Mr. Speaker, we support some of these 
initiatives.  And I challenge the members of the opposition to throw their 
political rhetoric aside and think of the people in Saskatchewan.  Think of 
all those people that will be employed by these industries.  Think of all 
the people in the Meadow Lake area that will be employed in that pulp mill.  
I challenge members of the opposition to stand up and support some of these 
initiatives. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, must we do that in conjunction with a good, clean 
environment?  Must we protect our environment as we do it, Mr. Speaker?  
Well of course we should, Mr. Speaker.  And I submit to you, Mr. Speaker, 
that during this session you will see more and more talk about the 
environment.  You will see more and more commitments made by this 
government to review existing processes, to change those processes, Mr. 
Speaker, to absolutely ensure that there is absolute protection of our 
environment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the way I look at it, Mr. Speaker, is if you use a 
Saskatchewan person as an example and take a picture of that person and you 
build a frame around that picture, well what does that frame consist of, 
Mr. Speaker?  It consists of protection in health care, protection in 
education, protection in social services, and some diversification of our 
economy to create those jobs.  So, Mr. Speaker, use that as the frame 
around your own picture. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if we don't protect these fundamentals of health care, 
of education, of social services, and of jobs and investment 
diversification, Mr. Speaker, that picture will just float away if you 
don't have a good frame around it.  And, Mr. Speaker, this Speech from the 
Throne, Mr. Speaker, is exactly that.  It is a frame around your picture 
and the people of Saskatchewan's picture, Mr. Speaker, and it is a frame 
that must be protected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members of the opposition have accused this government over 
the last while of cuts to health care, Mr. Speaker, one of those parts of 
that frame.  Mr. Speaker, I submit to you that with the growing cost in 
health care, this entire country is very close to a crisis in health care, 
Mr. Speaker, and I have not seen an alternative presented by the NDP as to 
how to manage the health care industry better. 
 
I submit to you, Mr. Speaker, that investments in health care over the 
administration of the Progressive Conservative government, have 
approximately doubled since 1982.  Now, Mr. Speaker, I don't know how you 
do your figuring back home, but I don't believe that that is anything like 
a cut-back, Mr. Speaker.  It is a massive investment of moneys into the 
health care field, a fundamental part of the picture around people in 



 

 

Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the things that we must do, Mr. Speaker, is, in that 
picture, provide a good education environment for our young people.  And I 
get back to, Mr. Speaker, the very competitive world that we live in today.  
I talk to you, Mr. Speaker, about the world shrinking, about our youngsters 
having to be better educated.  And, Mr. Speaker, it is extremely important 
that we maintain our integrity when it comes to the educational system in 
this province, and I commend, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Education for 
his many initiatives in that respect. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'd like to just get back a little bit to Consensus 
Saskatchewan.  It certainly speaks well of the Premier of this province.  I 
believe it speaks well of the government in humbly admitting that we today 
do not have all of the answers for the people of Saskatchewan.  I believe, 
Mr. Speaker, it does not speak well of an opposition who would immediately 
condemn such an initiative.  I believe it speaks of an opposition that has 
become arrogant in these last years.  I believe it speaks of an opposition 
that does not have a fundamental positive belief in the individual.  I 
believe it speaks of an opposition that has not changed that big brother 
government mentality that only the elected people have that monopoly to 
know what is best for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I submit to you that that is wrong.  I submit to you that 
this government recognizes that in a period of change, in a period when 
people in Saskatchewan are going through these very difficult economic 
times, Mr. Speaker, at a point in history when we must pay attention to the 
future and what we want it to be, that it speaks well of a government that 
would have the vision to adopt Saskatchewan consensus and go out to the 
people and find exactly what those people want their communities to look 
like in the years to come. 
 
I believe it speaks of the very positive belief that this government has in 
the people of Saskatchewan -- the faith and the trust and the confidence in 
those people in Saskatchewan that they can chart their own destiny. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan are made of very good stuff, Mr. Speaker.  Our 
people have been sent all around the world, some of them holding very, very 
major positions in large corporations and governments, industry. And all 
around the world, Mr. Speaker, we have a lot of Saskatchewan talent. 
 
We have a lot of Saskatchewan talent here at home, Mr. Speaker, and I have 
every confidence that when Saskatchewan consensus goes to the people of 
Saskatchewan, deals with many of these pressing issues for which there are 
no easy answers, that the people will come up with very good suggestions 
and recommendations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members of the NDP tend to very much simplify where we are at 
in Saskatchewan today.  They make the case day after day in this 
legislature: oh well, just elect the NDP and we'll fix everything up.  
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think the people of Saskatchewan would maybe believe 
that if members of the NDP would come up in this legislature with some 
concrete suggestions or alternatives. 



 

 

 
But, Mr. Speaker, I don't believe that you can trust an opposition that 
serves only to condemn and criticize, and has offered no reasonable 
solutions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would be very scared of an opposition that has not changed.  
And I don't think they have changed, Mr. Speaker, when you consider that 
they have not stated whether or not they still believe in the land bank, 
whether or not they still believe that, let the free market look after 
interest rates regardless of home owners having houses foreclosed on or 
farmers being foreclosed on.  Have they changed in that respect?  Have they 
changed in the respect of their total indictment of free trade, that it's a 
fact of life?  I don't think they've changed in that either. 
 
Have they changed with respect to their position on developing our natural 
resources?  I don't think they have.  I think they still fundamentally 
believe that a government must develop those natural resources, that a 
government must continue to nationalize as they did the potash mines, or 
nationalize as they did the farm land. 
 
I wonder if they've changed, Mr. Speaker. And I'm making that case to you 
today, Mr. Speaker, because we're in a period of change, a period of 
dramatic change.  Political parties must change.  Governments must change 
the way we do things. 
 
(1500) 
 
I don't believe that government can today provide everything that we have 
in the past.  Conventional wisdom, as they say, is not the answer today, 
Mr. Speaker.  Things must change.  You must have a government that is 
flexible, you must have a government that is compassionate. You must have a 
government that is able to adapt quickly to the changing things in the 
market-place.  Technology is a prime example. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, that this administration has shown that it has 
determination to make changes.  I believe that the message given by the 
Premier of Saskatchewan just two or three weeks ago on television, a very 
difficult message for the Premier of the province to deliver, but I believe 
that it shows, regardless of whether in the short term it is politically 
popular or politically prudent for a government, that our Premier has the 
courage and the determination to make difficult choices. 
 
I speak to you of the gas tax rebate cancelled, Mr. Speaker.  I believe the 
public of Saskatchewan understand why that had to take place.  I talk of 
the other difficult measures that the Premier went on province-wide 
television and spoke about. 
 
I believe that all those measures had to do with change, Mr. Speaker, 
fundamental change.  I believe they had to do with a dedication of those 
saved moneys towards that frame around your picture, the things like health 
care, education, social services, and diversification of our economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I submit to you that any government that is not flexible and 



 

 

ready to change in today's environment will not last.  And, Mr. Speaker, I 
see that rigid inflexibility of members opposite.  And I am frankly very 
troubled by that, Mr. Speaker, because I believe they have had their heads 
in the sand for a long time, and they have not awoke to the realities of 
this changing world we live in today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, once again, these are interesting and exciting and demanding 
times for a person to be in politics.  They are hard times for us too, Mr. 
Speaker, and I have every confidence that through Consensus Saskatchewan, 
through our other consultative processes, that this government will assist 
the people of Saskatchewan in managing that change. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I believe that we will all do that to the best of our 
ability, and I ask today for some co-operation from the members opposite.  
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  As I start, Mr. Speaker, 
I would like to first of all welcome the staff of the legislature, and I 
would like to say welcome them in my own language, which is Cree, and I 
would just like to say "tuwaw" to all of them.  And that means, you're very 
welcome in this House, by the legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in regards to the previous speaker, the Minister of the 
Environment, the member from Melfort, I would like to say that his overall 
view was very similar to the throne speech itself.  I found it very lacking 
in new ideas, and basically what I hear coming through is a lot of the cold 
war rhetoric of past years. 
 
And what I heard the person mention is, in the first 15 minutes of his 
speech, he was talking mainly about Europe.  He was scared to talk about 
Saskatchewan.  He was scared to mention anything about the lives of 
Saskatchewan people, and all he kept talking about was eastern Europe.  He 
forgets that as a minister in this province that the first priority are the 
people of Saskatchewan.  And he did not even have, I guess, the wherewithal 
to be able to recognize that important factor in Saskatchewan history. 
 
One of the other things that I have noticed in regards to his statements is 
the concentration on freedom.  And he mentioned the freedom of information, 
and yet this is one of the governments in the history of Saskatchewan and 
Canada that has one of the worst records in regards to freedom of 
information. 
 
Last year they did not provide half of the information to the auditor 
although it was legally there that they were supposed to produce this 
information.  They refused to do that, basically because they were scared 
that the auditor would find out about possibly what happened in STC, 
probably what happened in regards to the other Crown corporations and the 
privatization processes of it.  They are scared to get the public to find 
out exactly what is going on in this government, and here he thinks he can 
talk about freedom and freedom of information. 
 



 

 

The other aspect that the minister forgets is that the overall context of 
Europe, and the overall context of also Britain and all over the world is a 
question of democracy.  That is the essential question that people are 
raising throughout the world, that they are not getting the freedom and 
access of information and the ability of a government to work with them in 
each of these levels.  This government is well recognized for not working 
with the people of Saskatchewan and spends more time in selling free trade 
and the U.S. economy and the international economy rather than the 
Saskatchewan economy. 
 
I would say very clearly that the minister, when he looks at the 
international context, forgets about the tremendous privatization process 
that took place in England, and the fact that that place is a mess, that 
indeed people are revolting on the streets when he talks about a 
revolution.  When he talks about the poll tax and you see all the strikes 
in Britain and all the people in the streets, even fighting on the streets, 
this government talks about consensus and working with people, but it 
follows exactly the same strategy as Maggie Thatcher's Britain; that indeed 
all they see down there is conflict and more conflict.  And that is 
precisely where this government is leading us into the future. 
 
In regard to the central idea presented, which is Consensus Saskatchewan, I 
have this to say.  I would refer to the three C's, or the three cons, of 
Saskatchewan.  A lot of people have referred to this as ConSask, or 
"Saskcon," basically because there's three aspects to it. 
 
Number one, this government is well-known for concessions, not to the 
people of Saskatchewan, but concessions to international, large-scale 
companies.  Their only concession in the past eight years has been to big 
corporations to tremendous amounts of money, not only outright money given, 
not only outright give-aways, but royalty tax roll backs. 
 
I would like to say also that the other con in regard to the Saskatchewan 
history the other ConSask of Saskatchewan is conflict.  The basis of the 
past eight years has been one of conflict, and I'll be presenting that 
argument as I go along. 
 
The last case is one of consensus.  And I firmly believe that there is a 
very different view of what consensus entails in the province of 
Saskatchewan.  I would like to say at the beginning on this overall concept 
that it is not a very new idea in politics.  The putting together of an 
e pélite of government where you have four ministers with four civil 
servants and four members of the public to chair four areas of where the 
government has had disastrous policies in the economy, in the community of 
the family, and also in the area of management.  We find that this idea of 
an expert panel of 100 people is not a new idea.  The Premier should go 
back and read his political history and he will find that same idea in the 
concept of Plato and his philosopher kings, where he felt that the ordinary 
people of the day should not be able to partake in high levels of decision 
making in government; that you need a group of select expertise -- the 
philosopher kings -- to be able to deal with governing. 
 
And this idea therefore is an ancient idea.  And for the Premier of 



 

 

Saskatchewan to talk about new developments, for him to say this is a new 
direction, he should read the political history of the world.  He talks 
about global strategies, etc., but he doesn't understand world history. 
 
This idea of a 100 panel is: number one, it will become a buffer zone.  It 
will become an area where the government is scared to take flak from the 
people so they provide a buffer zone for the people to the attack.  They 
feel that if they can decoy the people into attacking the l00 people, then 
they will not get the attack directly on them.  It will save the Premier 
and it will save the cabinet members, so they think, in regards to getting 
this buffer zone.  I also feel that by performing a buffer zone between 
themselves and the people what they are doing is that they are scared to 
deal with existing organizations of Saskatchewan people.  They are scared 
to deal directly with the business people.  Right, directly, the minister 
sitting next to them, they need a buffer zone in front of themselves on the 
business sector. 
 
They need a buffer zone between themselves and the workers of this 
province.  They need a buffer zone between themselves and the crisis that 
is happening in the farm gate.  So they need a buffer zone between 
themselves and the farmer.  We well know of the bureaucratic mess this 
province has given us, this government has given us, and we don't need 
another buffer zone. 
 
I think it's very important to state that by establishing this buffer zone, 
what they're doing is that they're afraid to govern.  They're afraid to 
take the responsibility.  They've had eight years to listen to the people 
of Saskatchewan.  They know the many ideas, the creative ideas in the field 
of economics, in the field of social development, in the field of cultural 
development; they know very well the tremendous ideas that have already 
existed and been put forth by many groups in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Yet the government shows that they are not willing to listen.  All they do 
is establish a small buffer zone between themselves and the people.  That 
again, I would state, is one of the oldest ideas in politics.  This 
government is so behind the time that they are using an idea by Plato, 
which existed 400 B.C.  We're talking about an idea that is 2,400 years 
old.  And this government has the audacity to say that they're looking 
forward into the future. 
 
When I look at the idea of consensus . . . I mean, on the idea of 
concessions, one well knows the idea . . . It's not a very hard idea to 
figure out on who had the concessions -- where the give-aways went to, 
where the royalty tax roll-backs were in the province of Saskatchewan.  
It's very simple to know that it was the big corporations in the province 
of Saskatchewan, while everybody had to pay record high taxes from gas tax, 
from bingo tax, which we have never seen in the history of Saskatchewan; 
also to E&H tax (education and health tax) at record high levels.  We have 
seen one of the worst economic situations in Saskatchewan history, but we 
well know that this government will not stand up to the big corporations 
and ask them to pay their fair share in Saskatchewan history. 
 
They also know very well that their policies and their promises are 



 

 

bankrupt. You just have have to look at the free trade agreement.  This is 
a real contradiction for this government because all of a sudden in the one 
hand they blame international economics.  They say, hey, the world is 
attacking Saskatchewan; we are under attack, under siege by the world.  
That's what they say.  The world economy is attacking Saskatchewan. 
 
On the other hand, they want to have an old-fashioned trading bloc to go in 
the back pockets of the Americans in the free trade agreement.  All the 
Americans want to do is utilize Canada in their competition with the 
trading aspect that is going on with Japan and also the European bloc.  So 
all they're having is a "fortress North America" mentality. 
 
(1515) 
 
The actual solution for that is a multilateral trade negotiations in the 
world.  That's the key item, not the back pocket approach with the 
Americans on the free trade agreement.  I would state that in regards to 
the area of the farm gate and with the farmers, I would say, what I have 
seen this government do is this: it gives away and it attempts to give away 
to Cargill $65 million.  It guarantees them $305 million, to the tune of 
$370 million altogether. 
 
At the same time we saw rural communities -- and you see this throne speech 
saying, yes we are going to work with the communities -- but when the rural 
communities asked for a share of the economic development proposal when the 
initial idea of the chemical plant came about, a lot of the rural 
communities said, we want a share of that.  Three communities came out, and 
maybe even more, wanting to have ideas on how to develop with that $300 
million at that time. 
 
But did the province of Saskatchewan, did the PC government make consensus 
with the rural communities?  No.  What they said, the only people in the 
world that count are the big corporations like Cargill, which makes 
billions upon billions every year.  When the farmers who are going broke 
right now are asking for support, they will not get a commitment from this 
government. 
 
When I look at the question of the forestry and I look at the Weyerhaeuser 
agreement, one well knows that when the farmers are being foreclosed with 
10,000 foreclosures, notices of foreclosures in this province, 10,000 
notices of foreclosures in this province, the government can turn around to 
Weyerhaeuser and say, here's 12 million acres of our best forests. 
 
And this is at a time that farmers are losing their land.  This is at a 
time also when you see one of the greatest injustices in regards to land, 
the outstanding land entitlement for Indian people in this province.  When 
we look at that, we well recognize that Weyerhaeuser gets 12 million. 
 
We knew that 100 years ago the Tory government gave CPR (Canadian Pacific 
Railway) 30 million acres of land.  They gave Hudson's Bay Company 7 
million acres of land.  Pardon me, it was 23 million acres of land to the 
CPR and 7 for Hudson's Bay Company, for a total of 30 million.  And the two 
companies got 30 million acres of land.  Another 12 million for 



 

 

Weyerhaeuser.  Over 40 million acres for three companies, and that is Tory 
practice. 
 
But the outstanding land entitlement is 1.3 million acres.  Do you call 
that fair?  This is a Tory plan in regards to conflict.  What the people 
even in Candle Lake are saying and the La Ronge band, they want a solution 
to the issue that the Saskatchewan government can act in accord with the 
federal government so that they can fulfil those outstanding land questions 
in that area.  But they will not do it, basically because they know that . 
. . they really don't have any commitment at all in that issue.  A lot of 
the people are saying it can be done out of court, but they don't want to 
do it at all. 
 
In regards to some of his statements, the minister's statements on Crown 
corporations, I would like to say this much.  In regards to Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan, which he mentioned, I would like to state that 
he said very clearly that the returns on taxes and benefits to the 
provinces were a lot greater during the free enterprise days.  Well it just 
goes to show that he hasn't read Saskatchewan history.  He has to read the 
facts. 
 
During the time of the potash boom in Saskatchewan, when Saskatoon was 
supposedly the potash capital of the world, the then Liberal government was 
only able to collect $16 million for the people of Saskatchewan.  When the 
NDP basically established Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, in a six-year 
period, Mr. Speaker, they were able to get $986 million for the people of 
Saskatchewan -- $986 million which the taxpayers of Saskatchewan then did 
not have to pay.  That 986 million was utilized for roads and the 
construction of airports and for health and education in this province. 
 
When the PCs got in 1982, when you compare the following six-year period, 
Mr. Speaker, what they were able to get in return for the province was 274 
million.  In other words, there was a loss of $712 million in a period of 
six years.  And when you look at that, all it was was a strategy in rolling 
back royalty tax benefits.  They gave away to the companies over $700 
million.  That means that we had to take it out from somewhere.  That's why 
we had the flat tax, the bingo tax.  That's why everybody was pressured at 
school board levels, at municipal levels, basically because they did not 
want to stand up to the big corporations and stand beside the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
When you look at the whole question of taxation, Mr. Speaker, one 
recognizes that in the '50s the corporations paid an equal share with the 
people of Canada in regards to income tax.  The corporate tax was the same 
as income tax in Canada as far as revenue is concerned.  During the '60s 
and the '70s, what happened is that the federal government, basically 
Liberal and Tory governments, moved the taxation question up where it 
benefits the big corporations, and it went from about 34 for ordinary 
people and about 20 per cent for the big corporations. 
 
Now with Tory governments going full blast federally and provincially, we 
now see where the ordinary people of Saskatchewan, the small business, the 
workers of the province, the professionals, have to pay 50 per cent of the 



 

 

revenue, and the big corporations get off with having only to pay 10 per 
cent. 
 
That is the reason why we have this huge deficit.  That is the reason why 
we have to pay $4 billion in debt.  That is the reason why we have to pay 
$300 million in interest payments a year.  That is why we cannot support 
our students to go to university in Saskatchewan.  That is why we cannot 
help settle . . . even to equalize the payments for secretaries in northern 
Saskatchewan under the Northlands Career College.  That is why we cannot 
pay for the seniors and their housing and a lot of the needs that they 
require after basically providing for this province for many years. 
 
So when you look at this, this has been a history of conflict.  This 
government first of all has a history of concessions and give-aways to big 
companies.  Then they have a history of conflict.  I would like to move 
into that area of conflict. 
 
I would like to say in the most general levels that this government has 
played a divide and rule strategy for the many different groups in the 
province.  I would just like to generally name that they played a divide 
and rule strategy, urban against the rural and against the North. 
 
In this throne speech, not even one word, not even one mention of northern 
Saskatchewan.  Not even once did they mention northern Saskatchewan.  All 
they want to do is utilize a divide and rule political strategy which they 
thought got them into the last election.  But they know that the only thing 
that won them the last election was the $1 billion from Brian Mulroney. 
 
I think it's important to recognize that there are many divisions, that we 
also play divisions against even the right for women in regards to day 
care.  We well know the 14 women that were killed in Quebec the past while.  
That indeed, that was a shock to the people of Canada that you would have a 
situation could develop where there was such an intolerant attitude also to 
women. 
 
That type of situation is fostered because of the economic and political 
policy management crisis that's embedded in Tory governments.  That is the 
reason why that happens.  I think one has to recognize that in regards to 
the area, there is also a greater intolerance also for people who are poor.  
And you see a lot of people who have been knocked off the job market by 
this government because of their failure in their economic policies, that a 
lot of people will now start calling down people in the social services 
area. 
 
We see a lot of people at the same time recognizing that there's a lot more 
children going hungry in our province.  There's more suicides.  There's 
more alcohol and drug abuse.  I know in my home town in Cumberland, a 
14-year-old girl had somebody put some drugs into her soft drink and she 
died just a week and a half ago . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The 
member over there from Regina Wascana is talking about the alcohol 
treatment program of three weeks that he put in there.  He doesn't care of 
the person who died last week.  And that's what I was presenting.  He does 
not care that that is indeed the issue that I'm presenting, that he should 



 

 

have some compassion for the people who die in this province because of the 
high unemployment rates and so on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- I think he should also remember that in another place in 
northern Saskatchewan, in Sandy Bay, we know that a baby had died under the 
care of Social Services.  And I understand that will be investigated in the 
future weeks to come. 
 
When I looked at the aspect of intolerance, I also have to look at the 
issue of racism in regards to the overall question of all the nationalities 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I recognize the importance of respecting each other.  I recognize the 
importance of respecting people, whether they come from eastern Europe, 
whether they're from German ancestry or Romanian ancestry or French or 
English.  We also have to remember that there are other people as well from 
Pakistan, from east India, from various areas of the world, from Chile, 
that we have to respect all peoples. 
 
As an aboriginal person, as a Metis person in the province of Saskatchewan, 
I recognize that there is racism in the system.  I cannot turn a blind eye 
like some members from across.  And I've only heard one member, the former 
deputy premier, state that there was racism in Regina.  He recognizes 
racism.  We recognize that there is racism.  We recognize that there is 
intolerance among nationalities. 
 
We have to remember our recent history before the Second World War.  People 
during the rise of Fascism in Germany, they used to make jokes about 
nationalities.  And they started out by only making jokes.  Later on it 
grew to anger, and later on we know what happened in the ovens that they 
baked in as time went on. 
 
Intolerance starts out by just mere jokings or various ways of put-down of 
people, and that is what we are starting to see.  And the reason for the 
intolerance that is growing in Saskatchewan, because we are in such an 
economic and social mess created by the governmental policies and the 
economic situation that we're in. 
 
I think it's very important to recognize that there are many people out 
there that don't want this racism, this intolerance to go on in regards to 
women, in regards to the urban people, in regards to the rural people, in 
regards to people from the North; that we have to respect each other from 
wherever we come.  We have to respect each other on our languages and how 
we dress.  We have to respect each other in many different ways.  And that 
is the basis of the history of this province, and we have to work at that 
level.  That is what we need to do. 
 
(1530) 
 
And when I see policies of this government which basically focuses on 
international and foreign capital, where they put big bucks to their pocket 



 

 

and keeps people poor in Saskatchewan, no wonder the conflict mounts.  The 
conflict also mounts because we have higher taxes to pay for.  We have gas 
and bingo tax.  We have E&H tax. And we have many other different types of 
situations that a lot of people costs them more, and many different 
situations in which people have to pay more. 
 
The last aspect I would like to deal with is the question of consensus.  I 
think it must be recognized we don't need 100 new people to tell us that 
there is already a certain degree of consensus in the province of 
Saskatchewan.  We don't need four new ministers to tell us from an 
e pélitist strategy that there is consensus on certain developments in this 
province. 
 
There is already consensus that this province is in the worst economic and 
mismanaged sense in the whole history of Saskatchewan.  There is consensus 
that this government has to stand up to the big corporations that they pay 
their fair share of the Saskatchewan and federal revenues.  There is 
already consensus that there has to be cut-back on waste, whether it's a 
gigamess, or whether it's something else. 
 
People also recognize that there is consensus on dealing with very strong 
policies in regards to child hunger.  There is consensus as I travel 
through the North that the food transportation subsidy should be 
reinstated; that this government can stand here even today and provide 
subsidies for liquor, for wine, for whisky, for brandy, and all the types 
of liquors in northern Saskatchewan, and yet they will not subsidize food 
in northern Saskatchewan.  They will not subsidize milk; they will not 
subsidize fresh vegetables for the children of northern Saskatchewan, and 
yet they will keep on saying, we want to hear more consensus of the 100 
people.  We don't need 100 other people to provide a buffer zone against 
them. 
 
So we also know that there is consensus, that they want a stable situation 
in the colleges.  In the Northlands college a lot of students met with me, 
saying, look, we want to have continuous learning in the schools.  We are 
in a turmoil situation because the government is unwilling to pay.  A lot 
of the instructors say the government is unwilling to pay even wherein an 
instructor on the west side gets paid the same as on the east side.  They 
can't even pay equal wages for a person doing the same job, and yet they 
can provide a $7 million tax give-away to the uranium mining companies last 
year -- $7 million.  And yet they can't pay a secretary the same amount of 
wages from Creighton to Buffalo Narrows. 
 
There is also consensus that our roads need to be improved in northern 
Saskatchewan.  There's also consensus that Cumberland House needs a bridge.  
There is also consensus that the seniors from northern Saskatchewan want 
more housing and more personal care right in their own communities.  There 
is also consensus that the La Ronge hospital finally needs to be built and 
can no longer be put off.  There has got to be consensus that the people in 
general have suffered too much under this government. 
 
In conclusion I would like to say that this PC government is unwilling to 
change.  It doesn't accept new ideas of the people and instead creates a 



 

 

buffer zone.  The PC government hasn't been listening for eight years, and 
it shows, because they haven't got a vision for the future.  It shows right 
through because all they could have is a 2,400-year-old solution by Plato 
to say that experts can run the government. 
 
They also seem not to care at all.  What people are having a consensus on 
is that this government doesn't care.  All they do prior to every election 
is have promises of consultation and that they will listen, but it only 
lasts prior to the election but never after that. 
 
There is also a consensus, Mr. Speaker, on the fact that the people of 
Saskatchewan no longer trust this government.  The Premier of this province 
can break his very words.  Whether it's with the gas tax, whether it's with 
the E&H tax, the Premier does not live up to his words.  He does not stand 
up to his words.  He does not back up his words.  How can people trust a 
government leader like that? 
 
This government has made many promises and they simply cannot be trusted 
whether they are conned by some somebody from GigaText.  So there is no 
trust as far as people are concerned.  In other words, what we see from 
this PC government is absolutely no direction.  There is no ideas for 
action that are clearly to work directly with the people of Saskatchewan.  
There is really only one strategy that they follow and that's the strategy 
of padding the pockets of foreign, large-scale companies.  And the only 
other aspect is that they provide give-aways for them. 
 
I would say that what we need in the future is this, Mr. Speaker: we need a 
new government, and what we are  
 Dseeing is a general consensus in this province that we need a new 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- We need a new government, Mr. Speaker, that will respect 
people of this province, that will respect the different nationalities, 
that will respect men and women.  They will respect the poor.  They will 
respect people with disabilities.  They will respect the seniors.  They 
will respect the children of this province.  That is the type of government 
that people want in this province. 
 
They want a government, Mr. Speaker, that will not only listen to the 
people on a consultation advisory basis, they want to be able to see a 
government that will act on their concrete reality.  They want a government 
that will work with them in the economic development and job creation in 
this province.  They need a government that says yes to them and give them 
the economic basis to be able to do so. 
 
They want that support whether it's at the farm area, whether it's at the 
business area or whether it's at the worker level or whether it's at the 
unemployed level.  They want to be able to have a government that is 
honest.  They want a government that they can trust. 
 
And I think what we are seeing is a consensus.  We are seeing a consensus 



 

 

that in the end result this government must go.  This government must go 
because there is a greater degree of conflict in this province the likes of 
which we have never seen before.  There is too much give-aways to the big 
corporations. 
 
It's time that we want a government that will stand beside the people of 
Saskatchewan, the people at the rural area, the people at the urban area, 
and the people of the North, and say, yes, we can move forward and not 
having to rely on large-scale corporations from all over the world. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say that people 
from northern Saskatchewan are an important part of Saskatchewan.  I would 
like to remind this government that we have to mention the people of the 
North; that they are willing to work with people of the North in the long 
run; that it has to be stated in throne speeches, in budget speeches, and 
in direct action by this government. 
 
I think that it is very important that as we move into the future, as we 
move into the future, that this is the direction that a new type of 
government will take.  And I predict that there will be change all right; 
there will be change because the people want change.  The people want this 
government to go, and that is the consensus of the people of Saskatchewan.  
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLaren: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  First of all, I would 
like to also congratulate Her Honour, the Lieutenant Governor, for her 
address on the throne speech last Monday night here in this Assembly.  And 
I would also like to really congratulate my colleagues, the member from 
Moosomin and the member from Nipawin, for their moving and seconding 
speeches.  They did an excellent job and I'm real proud of them. 
 
And let me just say, as a member of the Legislative Assembly and as a 
representative of the constituency of Yorkton, that I am really excited and 
optimistic about this session of the legislature and the corner-stones that 
have been set up for us in the throne speech given by Her Honour.  And as 
we begin another session, Mr. Speaker, the fourth session of the 21st 
legislature, I also want to mention that I consider it an honour and a 
privilege to rise and speak on the throne speech today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 1990 marks the 85th birthday of Saskatchewan, a province in 
Saskatchewan . . . or the province of Saskatchewan in Canada.  And this 
throne speech sets the tone for Saskatchewan as we enter a new decade and 
prepare for a new century.  It reflects the many, many challenges and 
hardships that Saskatchewan people have had to face in the past few years, 
but it also recognizes the achievements we have made in light of those 
severe difficulties.  And, Mr. Speaker, this throne speech builds on the 
achievements we have made, emphasizes the areas which we need help, and 
charts a course for our future.  And most importantly, this throne speech 
builds on a Saskatchewan tradition, a tradition of co-operation between 



 

 

individuals, communities, organizations, and government. 
 
Our whole Saskatchewan way of life was founded and has been nurtured by 
this tradition of partnership and consensus building.  It is a tradition of 
optimism, courage, and conviction, and those are the qualities of 
Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker.  And those are the qualities of the 
people in my Yorkton constituency, the people who elected me to this 
Assembly. 
 
And so on behalf of my constituents and the people of this province, I want 
to comment on the outstanding ideas and initiatives outlined in the throne 
speech, ideas which are ground in Saskatchewan's heritage, and initiatives 
which show leadership and vision. 
 
And Mr. Speaker, these are the times that we require leadership.  We are 
witnessing major changes, changes at every level -- social, economic, 
political, national, and global.  We only have to look a the newspapers or 
watch television to see that change is all around us.  But, Mr. Speaker, 
this government is committed to protecting this Saskatchewan way of life, 
to building on our strengths, and to moving this province forward through 
new approaches and through progressive and innovative policies that will 
keep Saskatchewan on the winning edge of change.  And that is what 
leadership is all about. 
 
And I have listened to several speeches in the last couple of days from  
members of the opposition.  And the member from Cumberland and the member 
from Riversdale have both mentioned the drastic thing that free trade has 
caused for Saskatchewan.  Well, what utter nonsense.  What utter nonsense! 
 
(1545) 
 
How many of those gentlemen have manufactured some items and tried to 
export them or sell them?  None.  I bet you, not one.  How many have tried 
to trade and export into other parts of the world?  Not one.  I'm proud to 
say that I was with a company that we exported for 31 years. 
 
And what has free trade done for us?  It has got rid of a number of 
irritants for us.  That's what it's done.  We had almost free trade with 
farm machinery.  We could ship machinery back and forth, whole machines, no 
problem at all at the border on the duty side of things.  We had no 
problems with that.  And we had free trade for years.  The U.S. could ship 
machinery to Canada; we'd ship stuff back to the United States. 
 
What happened to the farmer in Kansas that had a cultivator that we 
manufactured?  He got it duty-free going across the border.  But if he 
broke down with that machine, what happened then?  He paid duty on every 
part that he had to get from us to get that machine going again.  If the 
hydraulic cylinder blew up, we had to ship that cylinder down to that 
farmer; he had to pay duty on it.  It took time. It couldn't get him back 
into the field and operating quickly again. 
 
But what happened with hydraulic cylinders coming into Canada?  The United 
States could ship them up here in the carloads which we used to buy, at one 



 

 

time, duty-free.  So it's just in that small part alone on farm machinery, 
it has removed all that irritant for us. 
 
Then we get to the travel and export and trading in other parts of the 
world.  How do we sell in Australia or Europe or Algeria? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Why not Asia and Latin America?  There's huge markets 
there. 
 
Mr. McLaren: -- Well, we will some day if that's the type of equipment they 
want to buy in Australia.  I'm talking about our equipment that we've 
shipped all over the world.  How do we get it into Australia?  I've heard 
nothing about, except these holiday junkets that we're on around the world 
for the last eight years.  And I want to tell the members opposite that in 
the last two or three years before I left my company, that I went to 
Australia four different times.  We went to Europe twice.  We took 
machinery and put it into trade shows in Algeria.  Do you think we'd have 
been in those countries of the world if we'd have sat on our behinds on the 
desk in Yorkton, Saskatchewan?  No way. 
 
But we've got dealers now in France, a distributor in France.  We're 
shipping material to Algeria.  We've got people in Australia.  And we had 
to go down there to set up dealers.  We had to put on implement 
demonstrations.  We had to set up dealership.  And we ended up finally 
moving a man down there to live down there for five years to get the 
Australians trained in how to handle our equipment.  You don't do it by 
sitting behind your desk here in Saskatchewan.  You've got to go out and do 
it. 
 
The same leadership, Mr. Speaker, which was built on one of the best health 
care systems of the world has been carried on by us and the extra money 
that we have put into that health care system.  Just this last year we 
allocated in excess of 30 per cent of the provincial budget to Saskatchewan 
health care -- 30 per cent, Mr. Speaker, or nearly $1.4 billion.  And how 
that is a cut, that I've been hearing for eight years, is beyond me. 
 
We have spent it on hospitals, long-term care, prescription drugs, special 
care homes, seniors' housing, which was cut out by you people opposite, 
drug and alcohol clinics, research, preventative programs, and the list 
goes on and on and on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And in the Yorkton constituency alone, we have created a chiropody clinic, 
we have given 7 million to the Yorkton Union Hospital for construction and 
renovations, and another 17.3 million the past year for the hospital's 
day-to-day operations.  Yorkton is the home of Whitespruce treatment 
centre, Mr. Speaker, Canada's first free-standing treatment facility for 
addicted youths. 
 
We would encourage the members of the opposition to go and tour that 
facility.  Two brand-new pods which are now handling 30 clients.  I was 
there just a couple of weeks ago, and let me tell you, it makes my heart 
feel good to sit down and hear the clients that are in that facility tell 
their story -- stories that are almost hard to believe -- and to hear what 



 

 

they say and the care and the treatment that they are getting out of that 
facility.  Just excellent.  Drug abuse is a growing problem among our 
youth, and the prevention of drug abuse is a major priority for this 
government. 
 
There's been a 40-bed addition to our nursing home in Yorkton, and the 
government has contributed in excess of 3.3 million to Yorkton's special 
care homes.  These facilities, Mr. Deputy Speaker, make it possible for the 
elderly to remain in Yorkton near their family and friends.  And since 1986 
we have provided over 110 million in assistance to seniors across the 
province through our seniors' heritage program. 
 
This government has done a great deal in health care.  But, Mr. Speaker, 
the price tag attached to quality health care system is very, very high.  
Many people do not fully understand the actual costs of health care.  They 
do not realize that the average daily cost for a hospitalized patient is 
$330 in major hospitals.  They do not realize that the average cost of 
childbirth is $2,600, and that the average cost of heart surgery is 
$16,000.  And they do not realize that they are spending on health some 
$162,000 an hour.  That, Mr. Speaker, is the combined average yearly 
incomes of five families spent every single hour.  And with the appearance 
of new illnesses and the advances made in health care technology, our costs 
are still rising. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has always been committed to providing one of 
the best health cares systems in the world actually.  However we must also 
deal with the tremendous funding pressures associated with our health care 
system, so we have created Consensus Saskatchewan to study the province's 
reaction to the report of the Saskatchewan Commission on Directions in 
Health Care; consensus, Mr. Speaker, which is essential to finding 
solutions to the pressures facing our health care system. 
 
And we are doing the same thing in education.  Through Consensus 
Saskatchewan, through a partnership between home, school, community, and 
the government, we will ensure that Saskatchewan has educational programs 
in place -- programs, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that build on the strengths of 
our educational system; programs that give the people of this province even 
greater access to learning opportunities; programs that prepare us for the 
challenges that the future is sure to bring.  Make no mistake, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that education is a high priority for this government. 
 
Since 1982, funding for education has increased by 80 per cent.  In my own 
constituency, this government has provided well over 64 million in the form 
of educational operating grants.  And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have spent 
over 5 million on educational capital expenditures, grants to construct and 
renovate schools like St. Paul's, St. Mary's, Yorkdale, and the regional 
high school, and St. Alphonsus.  All this since 1982, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and that is just my own constituency. 
 
This government is not just spending money on buildings.  We are also 
developing the innovative programs, programs that will equip our children 
with the knowledge and the skills to deal with our rapidly changing world, 
and the change of technology that is coming into the world and our country 



 

 

and our province and into our local industries. 
 
And I can think of our own facility, Morris, in Yorkton, where we have 
computer lathes now, where we used to have to bring in people from London, 
England to fix them.  Now with our schooling and our chances for people to 
learn, we are able to start using our own work-force to repair machines, to 
operate them, and so on; programs like the new core curriculum which 
provides a solid foundation for lifelong learning; the SCAN (Saskatchewan 
Communications Advanced Network) program and the regional college program 
which offers university and technical education opportunities to people in 
this province and the rural areas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 1990 has been designated international literacy year, and it 
is estimated that one out of every 10 Saskatchewan residents has difficulty 
reading and writing, and that is 10 per cent of our population.  This is 
something that we can't just let sit idle, Mr. Speaker.  This government's 
efforts to fight illiteracy have been significant.  By reducing drop-out 
rates and by providing reading skill programs, we are going to wipe out 
illiteracy in this province. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am very pleased that our government 
has an excellent record in all these areas, particularly in health care and 
education, not to mention our accomplishments in drought assistance, 
community development, diversification, and in the overall trend of our 
government to develop a strong economic base in times when this province 
has been rocked by one economic challenge after another. 
 
It is interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan has had a 600 per 
cent increase in manufacturing.  I think this says something about the 
efforts that we have made in the various sectors of the province.  It says 
that this government has taken our province's future very seriously; that 
this government has prepared Saskatchewan for the 1990s and is preparing us 
for the 20th century. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan is no longer a province that is completely 
dependent on agriculture.  Rather, Saskatchewan is now a province which has 
a partnership between industry and agriculture, a partnership which will 
continue to build on our natural strengths.  So I congratulate my cabinet 
and caucus colleagues for putting together such a forward-looking and 
common sense throne speech, one that I am sure we can all build on and 
ensure a great future for Saskatchewan. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the people of my Yorkton 
constituency for their continued support, and there's no doubt in my mind 
that I will be supporting the motion.  Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to, at the very beginning 
of my remarks, congratulate the member from Moosomin on his speech in 
moving the address.  Considering the subject matter and what he had to work 
with, I thought he did a very good job and I want to commend him for it. 
 



 

 

As well, I want to also congratulate the member from Tisdale on his speech 
in seconding the motion. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Nipawin. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- I'm sorry, Nipawin -- for seconding the motion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the beginning of my remarks I want to say a few words about 
events in eastern Europe which have been mentioned a number of times in 
this House.  But before doing that I'd just like to comment on one aspect 
of the remarks of the member from Yorkton, and that had to do with tariff 
on various articles that the Morris Rod-Weeder Co. was concerned with when 
it was trading into the United States, and the subject of tariffs 
generally. 
 
I want to make certain that the member from Yorkton understands that this 
party, the New Democratic Party, throughout its history has been very much 
in favour of the idea of trade free of tariffs -- trade free of tariffs. 
And we have pressed on a number of fronts for many, many years for the 
reduction and the elimination of tariffs. 
 
And I want to make it clear that if that agreement, that what we used to 
call the Mulroney-Reagan trade deal, had been about the reduction of 
tariffs and if that's what it was, that's all it was, we would have 
supported it.  The problem with that agreement is that while it did take 
off the small number of tariffs left in trade between the United States and 
Canada, it did so over a period of 10 years.  But it dealt with so many 
other things which only peripherally touch on the question of trade, if 
indeed they touch on the question of trade at all. 
 
And I would remind members opposite of what they have heard before in 
debates in this House, that it was the parts of that agreement that dealt 
with energy and with investment and with services that were three 
especially glaring problems with that agreement.  Those were chapters which 
in that agreement were very much to the advantage of the United States and 
not to the advantage of Canada, and will affect our country detrimentally 
for many, many years to come.  And it was those aspects of the agreement 
that roused our party into such strong opposition for that . . . against 
that free trade agreement. 
 
(1600) 
 
There's one other aspect too, and I mention it because it's very much in 
the news in Saskatchewan these days, and that is the problem of 
countervailing duties which the American trade tribunals put on our 
products from time to time, and I think particularly of Saskatchewan hogs.  
And it was my understanding, and I think the understanding of all 
Canadians, that Canada went into those free trade negotiations precisely 
for the purpose of ensuring that the countervailing duty weapon would not 
be used against our traders in the future.  At least, that's what the Prime 
Minister said.  That's what the Prime Minister said. 
 
Now the former minister of trade, the member from Regina South, indicates 



 

 

by motions of his hands that I am wrong.  Maybe that's why he is no longer 
the minister of trade.  The fact of the matter is that the Prime Minister, 
right at the beginning, staked out that point as being the crucial reason 
why we were entering into negotiations that eventually led to that trade 
agreement. 
 
Now I just want to conclude this part of my remarks by saying, Mr. Speaker, 
that we did not come anywhere near addressing that problem in the so-called 
free trade agreement, that in fact Canada is probably in a worse position 
now with respect to the use of countervail than it was before those 
negotiations took place.  And that position, Mr. Speaker, is only going to 
get worse as time goes on.  We see all kinds of evidence of that happening 
in the trade relations between our countries. 
 
Let me just give one example of how much worse it's got.  The Saferco 
plant, the Cargill plant at Belle Plaine that's going to be manufacturing 
the fertilizer.  Are members opposite aware of the fact that United States 
fertilizer producers have already been to the U.S. Department of Commerce 
to complain about the product that's going to be produced in a plant where 
construction of the plant hasn't even commenced.  That's the kind of an 
awkward situation Canada is in with respect to its trade relations with the 
United States, which, in my view, have been in many respects remarkably 
worse as a result of the free trade agreement. 
 
Well I want to say that in response to some of the remarks made by the 
member of Yorkton, and to assure him that as far as tariffs are concerned, 
this party is solidly behind the idea of free trade.  It's the other 
aspects of that agreement that we fear will do damage to Canada this year, 
next year, or the next hundred years, for the rest of our future, indeed. 
 
Now I'd indicated, Mr. Speaker, that I want to say a few words about the 
situation in eastern Europe.  And I want to say how delighted I and my 
friends were with the sequence of events that unfolded there over the last 
year or two.  Who could believe some of the things that have happened 
there. 
 
In Poland, for example, where we saw a totalitarian communist government 
just simply give up, just simply say we can't do this any more, and give up 
the reins of power and hand it over to the Solidarity trade union; a 
government saying, in effect, you do it, we can't do it any more. 
 
And the events swept through Europe.  We just briefly mention some of the 
countries without going into any detail.  Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Romania 
where the Ceausescu regime which would seem to be so solidly rooted in that 
country, having control over practically every aspect of life -- falling 
down, just falling within a matter of days, crumbling and being swept from 
power.  Yugoslavia, East Germany, the Baltic states, and indeed events in 
Russia itself happening that we in this legislature would not have believed 
possible a mere year ago.  And these are exciting events.  And all 
Canadians, indeed all people of the world are excited by them. 
 
The common factors in those countries are interesting to reflect upon.  
They were communist countries.  They were a totalitarian form of communism 



 

 

-- indeed a Stalinist form, a Soviet form of communism.  They were not 
democratic. They were autocratic and they were bureaucratic.  And that's a 
lot of centralization and a lot of power, a government that you would think 
would be impervious to the will of the people, and indeed which we all 
criticized for being impervious to the will of the people. 
 
And they fell.  And not only did they fall, but they fell in such rapid 
order that you literally never knew what you were going to hear when you 
turned on your radio in the morning -- what dramatic event had happened in 
which eastern European country.  One thing you were certain of, Mr. 
Speaker, is that there'd be something on the news that would be dramatic 
coming from eastern Europe. 
 
And I, and I think all of us, asked ourselves over and over again, why?  
What's happening over there?  What is it that's driving these events and 
making them happen one after another in such quick order?  Governments 
falling, governments handing over the reins of power, governments offering 
concession after concession in a dizzying series of events, and yet not 
being able to survive. 
 
And the answer, I think, is clear.  These governments, these governments, 
Mr. Speaker, had lost the political support of the people of those 
countries.  The people had lost their confidence in the ability of their 
government to govern, and they withdrew their support and left those 
governments in a position where they simply didn't have the political 
mandate any longer in order to do the things that a government has to do. 
 
And the remarkable part of that, Mr. Speaker, is that this was in a 
totalitarian government where the governments don't have to go to the 
people and renew their mandate every three or four or five years, as is the 
tradition in this country.  These are countries where governments rule for 
40 years, 50 years, 70 years, without once having anything like a free 
election, a democratic election; where public support for those governments 
was just an assumed fact, a given fact, one that was beyond question. 
 
And yet those governments were feeling this last summer very acutely, the 
fact that they no longer enjoyed the support of the majority of the people 
in their country.  And history will write, Mr. Speaker, history will write 
that those governments crumbled and fell because the political support for 
their regimes crumbled and disappeared.  And that, I think, is the 
essential factor in eastern Europe, and made inevitable the changes that 
have proceeded so rapidly in all of those countries. 
 
What we had in the dying days of those governments is that they were 
scrambling to think of something that they could do, some action they could 
take, some compromise or concession they could offer that would win back 
enough political support for them to survive and continue.  But their 
support had eroded to the point where there just simply was nothing they 
could do.  They couldn't think of any action they could take in order to 
win back the support of the people. 
 
And so in Poland, the general who was running the country prior to handing 
over to Solidarity, just simply couldn't think of one thing that he could 



 

 

do in order to win back the confidence of the people.  And so it was in 
Czechoslovakia and Romania and East Germany.  East Germany's a particularly 
interesting case because the government there really struggled to survive 
-- really struggled to survive -- offered concession after concession after 
concession to the opposition forces, and weren't able to think of what they 
could possibly do in order to win back the support of those people.  And so 
we had totally totalitarian governments, not dependent at all upon the 
support of the people, in our view, falling precisely because they no 
longer had that support.  And I think that's a most interesting aspect of 
the events of the past year, and a lesson that all of us would do very well 
to reflect upon and to consider. 
 
It's not the first time it's happened, of course. There are other examples 
around the world; the European democracies have this crisis of confidence 
that comes up every once in a while.  Some of those countries have had 
worse problems than others.  I think of Italy, for example, where the 
confidence of a government has been a constant issue since the Second World 
War.  And governments rise and fall rapidly, depending upon the degree of 
public support for the program that they put forward. 
 
And in our neighbour to the south, which is a stable republic -- one of the 
most stable republics that the world has known in terms of the way in which 
its government operates and the way in which it is re-elected, having a set 
election date -- there we saw Richard Nixon in 1974 find himself in great 
trouble as a result of a series of criminal acts on the part of people 
around him.  And he found himself, in the summer of 1974, again without 
political support, and realized that, and tendered his resignation in a 
very dramatic series of events that will remain in the memory of that 
country for as long as it exists. 
 
And again the lesson is the same as eastern Europe in the last summer: a 
government cannot govern without the support of the governed.  And my 
colleague says it sounds familiar, and that's precisely the point I'm 
coming to.  The lesson has direct application to this province in 1990 and 
has direct application to my friends opposite because, Mr. Speaker, this is 
a government which has lost the support of the people of Saskatchewan.  We 
know it, they know it, and the people of Saskatchewan know it.  It has lost 
its credibility.  It has, it appears, lost its ability to govern. 
 
The people think, Mr. Speaker, and this is confirmed in poll after poll -- 
little ones that we take, ones that third parties take, and I'm led to 
believe by polls that they themselves take -- that the people think that 
this is a terrible government.  The government doesn't know what it's 
doing, and further, has no idea what it can do -- what its possibilities 
are, what the options are in dealing with the problems that so directly and 
obviously confront them. 
 
What's caused this lack of support?  What's caused this lack of support?  
And let me just briefly touch on what I think are some of the high points, 
the high disaster points that have led this government to the position that 
it's in. 
 
I think that when the history of this era is written, Mr. Speaker, with 



 

 

respect to this province, that the crucial factor is going to be the 
accumulated deficit that has been run up over the past eight years.  I 
sincerely believe that. 
 
I don't have to remind members opposite that the debt of this province has 
risen to the point where it's over $4 billion.  I don't have to remind 
members of this House that every year, this year alone, we're paying 
interest probably in excess of 400 million. 
 
The budget for this year, the year ending at the end of this month, 
allocated something like $380 million to the payment of interest, but I 
think clearly that's going to be exceeded.  But let's use the figure $380 
million.  The people of this province are becoming aware that this 
expenditure is being carried, that before we do anything else in this 
province, we've got to shell out $380 million a year in order to pay the 
interest on a debt that eight years ago didn't exist. 
 
Now we ask, and I've asked some of you opposite and some of you supporters, 
how come this happened?  How in the world did this province, with all of 
its resources and all of its advantages, find itself in debt to the tune of 
$4 billion, so that we each have to . . . this province has to pay 380 
million a year in interest?   That's over a million dollars a day, every 
day of the year, including Saturdays and Sundays.  The first thing that 
happens every morning is, we shell out another million dollars to the 
people who lend us money, the American bankers and the European bankers and 
the Japanese bankers. 
 
(1615) 
 
How did we get in such a state?  And the answer I get when I ask that 
question is that times are tough, times are tough.  Drought, agriculture 
sector's in crisis.  That's what he  
 Dmeans when he says, drought.  Potash prices are in tough shape, uranium 
prices are in tough shape, and so on and on it goes. 
 
Lots of excuses, but let's just face the reality, Mr. House Leader.  The 
reality is that the revenues going into the pockets of this government are 
more than 70 per cent more today than they were when you took office -- 
more than 70 per cent more.  Imagine that. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- What about expenses? 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Now the question from the Minister of Education is, what 
about expenses.  Let me tell you about expenses.  The reason why we've got 
a deficit is your government is spending 88 per cent more than was being 
spent in 1982.  Now sometimes governments have to spend money, there's no 
question about that.  But when you've got in your hands 70 per cent more 
money than you had a mere seven, eight years ago, wouldn't you think you'd 
be able to run the affairs of this government within that reality?  You've 
had an annual increase of about 10 per cent a year and you've managed it so 
badly, you've handled it so incompetently, that here you find yourself in 
1990 with a deficit of $4 billion. 
 



 

 

We go around this province, we go around this province talking to people, 
and the question they ask us is how in the world we are ever going to be 
able to pay that back.  How are you going to do it? 
 
Good question.  You created the problem.  Somebody over there should stand 
up one of these days and tell us how this province is expected to pay back 
the results of their incompetence over the last eight years.  All kinds of 
people are waiting for that to happen. 
 
Now we don't hear a word about that.  That's just a subject that's not 
addressed.  As a matter of fact, it wasn't until just about three weeks ago 
that we heard for about the first time from the Premier that he even knew 
there was a deficit.  In that television broadcast on March 5 he seemed to 
admit, for the first time as far as I am aware, that there actually is a 
deficit in this province. 
 
He didn't seem to have any idea where it came from.  He didn't seem to have 
any idea who had caused it.  He certainly never accepted any responsibility 
for it.  It's just as though he had opened the door and walked into a room 
for the first time and looked over and said, my goodness, where did this 
thing come from?  Where did this terrible problem of a deficit come from?  
I'd better do something about that.  And what did he do about it?  He 
started to cut back some of the very things that he had implemented in 
order to buy power in the first place. 
 
Now what kind of government is that, Mr. Minister?  What kind of government 
is it that gets itself into that kind of a fix?  Pretty bad government.  
Pretty incompetent government.  And the people of this province have some 
time ago come to that conclusion.  So as I say, I believe that when the 
history of this period of Saskatchewan's politics is written, that the 
accumulation of that deficit and this party's handling of the finances of 
this province will be the main reason for that lack of political support 
that we all know exists. 
 
The other point that really, really shocked the people of this province was 
one single event, and that was the day when the then minister of Finance, 
the present Minister of Justice, went before the media of this province and 
admitted that the deficit for that year, 1986, was actually 1.2 billion and 
not the $500 million that he had told them was sort of the outside estimate 
before the last election. 
 
Now you sort of gloss that over, over there, and the member still seems to 
want to play it down as though it were not important.  But walk around this 
province and talk to people, and you'd be amazed at the number of times 
that that situation is recounted, that the deliberateness of the 
manipulation that went into that is recounted, that the credibility of this 
government was scarred, damaged for ever, almost beyond redemption.  Like 
the government of East Germany, you just can't think of anything, you just 
can't think of anything to be able to win back that credibility. 
 
Now the minister makes the motion indicating that I'm sort of off beam on 
the point, and I want to say it again: if I'm off beam, then a huge number 
of people in this province are off the same beam.  They're off the same 



 

 

beam, because they believe that your government has lost credibility.  And 
that situation involving the deficit in 1986 is one that sticks in their 
memory and sticks hard.  And no matter how many times you kick your feet, 
Minister, it's not going to shake loose; it's going to stick right with 
you. 
 
Now the other events that have caused this situation that you're in, from 
my perspective, is the privatization fiasco of last year.  And I don't have 
to heap insult upon injury with respect to that one.  I think you have all 
recognized the horrible mistake that you made in violating the wishes of 
the people of this province with respect to the question of the ownership 
of certain Crown assets.  You went too far.  You damaged their trust in you 
on this issue.  You took them far beyond where anyone is prepared to go, 
and you have paid a huge price for that in terms of your political support. 
 
And I could go on.  The damage to the health care system.  Whether the 
member from Yorkton knows it or not the people of this province are 
terribly resentful, particularly in the rural areas, about having lost the 
school-based dental program. 
 
And as recently as yesterday I had a fresh complaint about the changes to 
the drug plan.  It just never goes away.  Again you can kick your feet as 
much as you like and it's not going to be able to shake loose.  You're 
going to be stuck with those decisions, and stuck with them during the 
dying days of your mandate. 
 
And I won't even mention the aroma in the past months involving things like 
GigaText and the . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . gigabus, as my 
colleague says -- the Eagle bus situation -- and the general perception of 
patronage and odd dealings that surrounds this government. 
 
However I don't have to be standing here reciting these reasons, Mr. 
Speaker, because my friends opposite know perfectly well that they are a 
government that has lost the support of the people of this province.  And 
like the countries of eastern Europe, like President Nixon, like many of 
the democracies in Europe, they are going to have to face the consequences 
of that.  They are going to have to face the consequences of it. 
 
A last factor that I must mention though because it is so important in the 
dilemma in which this government finds itself is the programming and the 
reprogramming of the Premier that we see going on over and over again, over 
and over again. 
 
The big-time pollster comes in, the big Decima crowd, and they do a poll.  
And they work the raw numbers, or they massage the numbers or whatever they 
do, and they come up with certain conclusions.  And they try to figure out 
what are the characteristics of a leader that the people of Saskatchewan 
are wanting at that particular moment. 
 
They make a list of those characteristics and then they call the Premier in 
and they say, now here's what the people want.  They want you to be this; 
they want you to be that; they want you to be folksy; they want you to drop 
your consonants.  You know, they build a profile.  And then the Premier 



 

 

rehearses that, and then he goes out around the province and onto the media 
of this province and he tries it out. 
 
And then Decima goes to work and does another poll to find out whether this 
reprogrammed image is going to work or not.  And if it doesn't work, they 
adjust this and adjust that and call him back in and rehearse him a little 
more and send him back out again.  Now that may work for a little while. 
 
Mr. Swan: -- . . . (inaudible) . . . leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Swan: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  We have this afternoon a group of 26 
Brownies, age six to nine years of age.  They're from the 18th Brownie club 
here in Regina.  And it's my privilege to introduce them to you on behalf 
of the member for Regina Wascana.  The member's away at another meeting 
this afternoon and was not able to be present in the Chamber during the 
time of your visit. 
 
I look forward to an opportunity to meet with the Brownies and with their 
leaders very shortly for pictures and refreshments.  I'd ask all hon. 
members to welcome them here, and I hope you enjoy your time in our 
Chamber. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY (continued) 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- I'd also like to welcome the Brownie group today to the 
House, and I hope you're enjoying what's happening. We're speaking to the . 
. . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The hon. member would like to inform our 
guests. However we have made a decision some time ago that we will not 
involve our guests in the gallery in any way at all. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- No problem, Mr. Speaker.  I felt particularly able to make 
that explanation because of my experience with the Brownies and little 
girls.  I've got six daughters and three granddaughters -- I can never 
remember how many there are.  That's a total of nine.  Even the dog is 
female. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- I was talking about the programming and the reprogramming 
of the Premier.  And the latest conversion, the latest reprogramming, is 
really something to see.  This incredible new person that has now emerged 



 

 

in our midst, who doesn't want to get into politics, doesn't want to have 
any kind of political fights, wants everybody to join in a modified version 
of a big love-in, and we'll all sing along to the same tunes. 
 
I sort of like people like that if indeed they are like that.  A lot of my 
friends are people who exhibit those very characteristics.  The difference 
between them and the Premier is that they've exhibited those 
characteristics all of their lives.  They didn't suddenly emerge, 
reprogrammed, three or four months ago with this brand-new personality.  
It's just a little hard for people on this side of the House to accept this 
newer than new, reprogrammed, brand-new Premier. 
 
It's a little bit difficult for the people of Saskatchewan to admit that 
this conversion on the road to Damascus, or wherever it was, is actually 
real; that this newer than new, reprogrammed Premier is for real and means 
the things that he says.  The people in this province, Mr. Speaker -- and 
you know this -- are very, very intelligent, particularly when it comes to 
political matters, and they simply will not be fooled, will not be fooled 
by these public relations glitzy, gimmicky reprogrammings and conversions, 
and the restructure of the personality of the leadership of this party. 
 
They will remember you for all of the deeds that you have done, and they 
will respond to you in accordance with that. 
 
Let me just sum that up by describing how I see the dilemma for this 
government -- the question of where they're at, Mr. Speaker, what kind of a 
position that they're in. 
 
They lack political support, as I have mentioned.  They just no longer 
enjoy, haven't for some time enjoyed the support of anything like the 
majority of people in this province.  They've been running in second place 
for a long time, and according to some polls -- not ours, but some -- 
they're actually running in third place, at least in significant parts of 
the province. 
 
Now I mention that, not gloating or not wanting to rub it in or anything 
like that, but just to measure or to indicate the depth of the political 
problem for them.  And the result is, from our perspective, that the 
government has lost confidence in its ability to govern this province. 
 
(1630) 
 
They have no sense of purpose.  They have no plan.  They have no ideas, no 
ideas about how to attack the many problems that are facing this province 
now.  Not the foggiest idea of what to do, Mr. Speaker, not the foggiest 
idea. 
 
And that couldn't be established any clearer than by a close reading of the 
Speech from the Throne.  That couldn't be established any clearer.  That 
document is just remarkable in its lack of ideas, in its lack of a sense of 
purpose, in its complete lack of any vision or any plan or any solutions to 
the terrible problems that are facing our people. 
 



 

 

Now the Premier stands in his place debating the agriculture motion the 
other day and he talked and talked and talked in that new way that he has. 
And it's just words, Mr. Speaker.  If you read that speech and analyse it, 
it's just blah, blah, blah.  He could have been saying anything at all.  He 
didn't seem to be caring what he said as long as he was sort of conveying 
that smiling sort of friendly exterior. 
 
The speech, in my submission, Mr. Speaker, just denudes the government.  
They stand, as it were, naked before the people.  Perfectly obvious that 
they have no idea in how to approach the problems of this province -- no 
plan, no ideas. 
 
They just throw up their hands and say, let's find 100 people in this 
province.  Let's find 100 people and let's call it -- what is it?  
Consensus Saskatchewan.  Con Saskatchewan.  ConSask.  Let's find 100 people 
and let's, in some process that we can't describe to you, we are just going 
to pick 100 people.  Maybe we'll draw them by lots.  Some Wednesday night 
on television pick 100 names out of the drum. 
 
But in any event, we will get these 100 people in here and maybe they can 
do what the government can't do.  Maybe they can think of something.  Maybe 
they can find an answer to the problems in education which seem to escape 
the Minister of Education and the government of this province.  Maybe they 
can find an answer to some of the problems in Social Services which have 
escaped the present minister and his predecessors.  Maybe they can solve 
some of the huge problems in economic development which have eluded a 
dizzying array of ministers who have been thrown into that portfolio and 
snatched out and replaced by others for a long, long time. 
 
The bottom line, Mr. Speaker, is that the people are laughing at them.  The 
bottom line is that the people of Saskatchewan when they have been asked to 
respond to this Consensus Saskatchewan idea are laughing at them.  One of 
them even said -- and I am going to conclude on this note -- one of them is 
reported to have said on an open line show, I'm in favour of that idea; I'd 
like 100 people to be appointed to this Consensus Saskatchewan and I'd like 
to be one of them, and the first decision that we'd make is that there 
should be an election in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I share the sentiments of that person and I 
will be supporting the amendment and voting against the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's really an honour for 
me at this time to enter the debate on the throne speech.  I'm doing so 
both as the Minister of Education, but also on behalf of the many citizens 
that live in Saskatoon Mayfair, one of the largest constituencies in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have one of the largest constituencies in Saskatchewan in 
another respect as well, in the fact that we have more than 300,000 



 

 

students, 30 per cent of Saskatchewan's population in this province, that 
were enrolled in some level of our education system over the past year.  We 
add to this the parents, the teachers, the trustees, and various other 
school officials, and the conclusion is obvious -- that virtually everyone 
in this province has a stake in what transpires within our schools. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne is an expression of confidence in 
what has always been two of our key strengths in Saskatchewan, and, Mr. 
Speaker, those are our people and our resources.  It looks to the future 
with new measures to build on these strengths, to help us diversify and to 
grow.  It looks to the future of our local communities, from the smallest 
hamlet to the largest cities with measures that will enhance their 
security.  And it does so in a fiscally responsible framework, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We cannot develop our economic potential until we develop our human 
potential.  The two go hand in hand.  This means we must provide the people 
of Saskatchewan with the knowledge and skills they will need to prosper 
throughout the 1990s and on into the 21st century. 
 
Very few other things touch so many people directly.  And very few other 
things will have so important a bearing on Saskatchewan's future.  Indeed, 
the strength of our social and economic fibre through the 1990s and beyond 
will depend on the willingness and capacity of our students to learn, and 
on the learning opportunities that we make available for them. 
 
Let's consider the following, Mr. Speaker.  Ninety per cent of all our 
scientific knowledge has been discovered during the past 30 years.  It is 
expected that this will double again by the year 2000.  Ninety per cent of 
all of our scientists and engineers who ever lived are still alive today.  
When we consider that as recently as 1975, that only 50,000 computers had 
ever been built anywhere in the world, now that many are sold every year. 
 
Change is certainly not restricted just to areas of science and technology.  
Think of the pivotal events in world history over the past year, and others 
in this Chamber have alluded to that -- the changes that we've seen in 
eastern Europe, South Africa, Central America, and many changes, Mr. 
Speaker, even here in Canada.  Think of how different the history books of 
20 and 30 years from now will be from those that we see in the class-rooms 
today. 
 
We live in a knowledge-intensive world, Mr. Speaker.  The role of our 
school system is therefore more important than ever.  One of the ways 
Saskatchewan education has responded to this challenge is by taking a hard 
look at the course content, the curriculum used in our kindergarten to 
grade 12 schools. 
 
Our objective here is really twofold.  We must keep our courses of study up 
to date so that they reflect the changing world around us.  We must also 
not lose sight of the fundamentals of learning.  The last major overhaul of 
Saskatchewan's curriculum, Mr. Speaker, was conducted in 1963.  This meant 
that we were using learning tools almost three decades old to prepare our 
students for the 21st century. 
 



 

 

In December 1987 my predecessor, the member for Weyburn, released plans for 
the implementation of a new core curriculum in Saskatchewan schools.  
Through core, we expect to see major improvements to the process of 
teaching and learning in our schools.  Core reinforces the teaching of 
basic skills, while also introducing an expanded range of contemporary 
knowledge and skills.  Our overall objective is providing students with 
knowledge that will serve them well in furthering their education in the 
work place, in the home, and in their communities. 
 
To put it another way. We look at core then to provide our young people 
with skills and knowledge that they will need to be lifelong learners.  The 
21st century will belong to those who recognize that learning is a lifelong 
process. 
 
Core has now had its first full year of exposure in our schools, and I am 
extremely pleased with the results.  The reaction from both students and 
teachers has been very, very positive.  Other provinces are commenting 
favourably about the substance of what we're doing and also upon the fact 
that this major undertaking is being effective in such an efficient, 
consultative manner. 
 
Core recently received international acclaim as well.  The February 1990 
edition of the Phi Delta Kappa featured an article on curriculum reform in 
Saskatchewan.  The article suggests that Saskatchewan is leading the way in 
Canadian education, not only in what is being developed but also in how it 
is being developed.  Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, the author cites the 
Saskatchewan model as an excellent example of the collaborative 
decision-making process, calling it the hallmark of Saskatchewan education 
for many years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have heard members on the other side of the House condemn 
the suggestion about Consensus Saskatchewan and the fact that this 
government has not been consulting with the people.  Well, Mr. Speaker, I 
would point out to the members opposite that in the Department of Education 
and the development of the new core curriculum, that we have had more 
extensive consultation in this province than has ever gone on in the 
history of the province. 
 
Let's take a look at the number of years that were involved in having 
hearings and meetings with all of the different stakeholders throughout the 
province, with the parents, with teachers, with trustees. All segments of 
society, Mr. Speaker, have been involved in the hearings that are 
developing this new curriculum.  Six years I believe, Mr. Speaker, were 
involved in the development of it, and now 10 years for implementation. 
 
In addition to course content, we are also actively exploring ways to 
improve the physical settings within which our students learn.  We are 
meeting their day-to-day needs and also actively examining the kinds of 
learning facilities that the future will require. 
 
The average life expectancy of a school facility is 35 to 50 years.  This 
means that schools built today will still be operational well into the 21st 
century. 



 

 

 
What kinds of things do we need to take into account in planning our 21st 
century schools?  To answer this question, Mr. Speaker, last year we 
undertook development of the first integrated high technology teaching 
facility in the province at Viscount School in the town of Viscount.  This 
is a joint project involving Saskatchewan Education, the Lanigan school 
division, the Saskatchewan Future Corporation, and private sector 
interests. 
 
The objective is to evaluate and incorporate the latest technology for 
teaching and learning.  Key features include extensive use of 
computer-based instruction and enhanced distance education capability.  The 
school will also provide greater use of individualized instruction and 
improved capability for interaction with other schools. 
 
Viscount School could serve as a prototype of what Saskatchewan class-rooms 
will look like in the 21st century.  Similar projects are under way at 
Fairview School in Swift Current and Eastend School in the town of Eastend. 
 
Mr. Speaker, projects such as these can play a major role in furthering 
stability in our smaller rural communities.  I say this because the 
learning opportunities available to a rural school can be greatly enhanced 
through technological tools.  We know of the growing concern that there is 
today in the rural areas of our province because of declining enrolments.  
We know that in some cases school boards have to make tough decisions; that 
they have to close schools and children have to be bused from one centre to 
another.  This of course is very tough, tough decisions that have to be 
made, and we have to ensure that our children, wherever they reside in this 
province, have access to quality education.  We must take full advantage of 
all that technology has to offer in planning our schools.  By so doing, we 
can help maintain access to learning resources by all Saskatchewan 
students. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the education development fund continues to provide the 
financial means for quantitative and qualitative improvements to our 
schools.   More that $75 million have been provided to Saskatchewan school 
divisions since EDF (education development fund) was established in 1985.  
More than 2,000 projects have been undertaken during this period of time. 
 
(1645) 
 
The education development fund has provided school divisions with more than 
$12 million for computer technology alone.  As a result, almost every 
school in Saskatchewan now has computers available for instructional 
purposes.  And, Mr. Speaker, you could go into schools found in so many 
different areas of the province, whether you look at some of the Hutterite 
schools where you have a one-room class-room, whether you look at some of 
our northern schools like Cumberland House, whether you look at larger 
schools that you would find in our larger centres, and you'll find young 
people from kindergarten right on up that have access to computers and 
learning all that there is to learn about them. 
 
This fund, Mr. Speaker, has provided some classic examples of technological 



 

 

change and how it can open the doors to new learning opportunities for 
students.  For example, a Braille computer is now available for visually 
impaired students.  New Canadians now have computer programs that teach 
appropriate pronunciation and spelling.  Gifted learners, students 
requiring remedial assistance, and youths facing career choices all benefit 
from computer-based instruction.  All benefit from having state of the art 
learning tools at their disposal thanks to the education development fund 
which was initiated by this government, Mr. Speaker, in 1985. 
 
The education development fund was designed to provide school divisions 
with resources for upgrading their learning resources, improving school 
efficiency and improving the quality of educational programs.  It has 
performed admirably on all fronts.  Bear in mind that the $75 million 
provided through EDF is over and above the regular capital and operating 
grants provided for our kindergarten to grade 12 school system. 
 
The development of our human potential must be done without exception.  By 
this I mean that accessibility must continue to be central to the 
development and delivery of learning opportunities at all levels of the 
school system.  The doors to our schools cannot be closed to those 
disadvantaged by geographic location or socio-economic circumstance.  
Towards this end we will continue to give education in northern 
Saskatchewan the high priority it deserves. 
 
Over the past few years, steps have been taken to resolve problems related 
to governance of education in the North, administrative problems, if you 
like.  Bringing the board of the Northern Lights School Division closer to 
the people it serves, has been one such measure, Mr. Speaker. 
 
More recently, we have focussed our attention on how to improve the quality 
and delivery of educational services to northern residents.  The latter 
part of November, I had the opportunity to visit some of the schools in the 
North, Mr. Speaker, and I was very impressed with the quality of education 
that I saw taking place there. 
 
Early in 1988, a northern education task force was established to examine 
issues on northern education.  Ten public meetings were held throughout the 
North, along with two radio phone-in shows conducted in English and in 
native languages.  Thirty-nine written submissions were also received.  In 
addition, an interim report was provided by the task force to over 200 
stakeholders in northern education, for their reactions and comments. 
 
The final task force report was presented to me in November of last year.  
It provides a summary of concerns and comments by Northerners, along with 
specific recommendations for change at all levels of the school system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it's clear from the report that Northerners recognize that 
education is the key to economic and social progress.  They also recognize 
that steps must be taken to keep students in school, and allow those who do 
leave prior to graduation the opportunity to re-enter.  The report 
highlights the need for increased emphasis on the teaching of native 
languages, along with the need to increase parental and community 
involvement in northern schools. 



 

 

 
The task force also recommends development of training programs for 
teachers in native languages.  Other recommendations call for the 
development of a guidance counselling program, along with measures to 
combat substance abuse, and improve literacy rates in the North. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to report that we have already acted upon some of 
the task force recommendations, and will act on others in the very near 
future.  For example, a pilot project is in place that gives young adults 
in northern Saskatchewan, who've not completed high school, another 
opportunity to do so.  The native counsellor training program, the guidance 
counsellor pilot project, and the just announced northern student awards 
program are all measures developed in direct response to task force 
recommendations. 
 
In the same vein, we will continue to provide a full range of programs to 
meet the special needs of Indian and Metis students.  Towards this end, we 
now have in place a new Indian and Metis education advisory committee to 
provide me with advice on the development and implementation of improved 
programs of instruction.  A new Indian and Metis education policy for 
kindergarten to grade 12 was adopted just this past year.  The policy 
provides a comprehensive framework for the development of Indian and Metis 
education in provincial schools. 
 
The principle of accessibility must be universal.  It must take into 
account that while everyone has the ability to learn, not everyone learns 
at the same pace or in the same environment.  For this reason we will 
continue to provide special education programs for children with various 
disabilities, as well as those with above average learning ability.  Over 
the past year, new policy guide-lines for the education of gifted learners 
were completed and implemented.  A workshop was held for teachers and 
others working with visually impaired children. 
 
 DThe task force on education for the deaf submitted its report, a document 
that will help determine the future direction of education services for the 
deaf and the hearing-impaired.  This January, a new advisory committee on 
deaf education was established, in keeping with the recommendation of the 
task force report.  The committee will provide advice on policies and 
programs for deaf education in Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is an issue that has to be dealt with within the 
next couple of years, in that we have to consider that today over 80 per 
cent of those children who are hearing disabled are now being served in 
regular school systems. 
 
We have to consider then the operation of the school for the deaf.  We have 
to consider the quality of education that these children need and where 
this can best be delivered.  And those are some of the things that the 
advisory committee are going to be dealing with. 
 
Natives, Northerners, the disabled, all of these then have programs that 
are in place to address special needs.  And we will continue to improve 
existing programs and develop new ones with the objective of ensuring that 



 

 

our school doors always remain open to them. 
 
We have to consider that there are other programs that have been developed, 
Mr. Speaker, in the last while, which meet concerns or needs of today, and 
I would refer specifically to the after-care program in Saskatoon at Marion 
M. Graham Collegiate which is now just going into operation, where young 
people who have problems with drug and alcohol and who have received 
treatment at Whitespruce will now have a program that will enable them in 
integrating back to regular class-room settings as time goes on.  This is a 
program that is needed today and it's a joint effort with Health and 
Education. 
 
Another program that meets a concern of today is the program for teen moms 
that was started up a year and a half ago at Mount Royal Collegiate in 
Saskatoon.  We recognize that young people today have many problems that 
they have to deal with and we have to be there to help them deal with these 
problems and ensure that they have an opportunity to continue with their 
education. 
 
In addition, to those with special needs the principle of accessibility 
must also encompass physical distance.  Distance can represent a barrier to 
education for Northerners and those in rural Saskatchewan in particular.  
We have responded to this need in a number of ways. 
 
A regional college network is now an integral part of our post-secondary 
system, relied upon by more than 30,000 adults annually to meet their 
learning needs.  There are now nine regional colleges with 26 sub-offices 
all over Saskatchewan, from Creighton to Shaunavon, from Kindersley to 
Yorkton.  These now form the backbone of our adult education system in 
rural Saskatchewan by providing improved access to post-secondary education 
and other learning opportunities. 
 
Students living outside of major urban centres can pursue their education 
without making a major move to Regina or Saskatoon.  This not only furthers 
the goal of accessibility but it promotes the objective of stable rural 
communities. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when we consider the tremendous costs that young people 
have to undergo today in moving to Saskatoon or Regina to take their 
university or to attend SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 
and Technology), we can see that this will improve the accessibility if 
they can live at or close to the facility, such as the regional colleges, 
where they can have access to more first- and second-year university 
courses as well as courses from SIAST. 
 
We also know that because of some of the quotas that exist at the 
University of Saskatchewan, that there are cases where students have to 
have a fairly high average before they have any opportunity to get into 
some of the colleges.  This of course will mean now that more of these 
students can have access because they will only need to have an average, in 
most cases, of only 65 per cent. 
 
The new field support services division of the Education department 



 

 

achieves a similar purpose.  The division was established in June of last 
year and its purpose is to work directly with local school divisions in 
carrying out department programs.  The division provides a way for my 
department to reach out into local communities and work more closely with 
schools on all matters relating to public education. 
 
Some things do not change, Mr. Speaker.  Successful delivery of educational 
programs will continue to depend upon effective communication between 
Saskatchewan education, parents, school officials, and the community at 
large.  The field support services division furthers this end.  We will 
continue to provide conventional forms of distance education such as 
university extension courses and correspondence school programs.  But we 
are also actively applying today's technological tools to the distance 
barriers that Saskatchewan's demographic and geographic mix can present. 
 
For example, the Saskatchewan Communications Advanced Network, or SCAN, was 
established to co-ordinate access to SaskTel's communication network.  
SCAN's primary objective is creation and operation of a state of the art 
education information network for Saskatchewan.  Within five years I expect 
that more than 75 centres all over Saskatchewan will be linked by the SCAN 
network. 
 
Educational programming will include some university and technical 
institute courses.  There will also be literacy courses, inservice 
education for teachers in outlying areas, professional development courses, 
and vocational classes. 
 
Along with providing improved access to learning opportunities, SCAN will 
also carry information on other topics such as agriculture, health, and 
culture.  It can therefore represent another means of keeping our local 
communities intact.  Instead of local residents leaving the community to 
acquire information, SCAN brings information to the community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, development of our human potential can take many forms in 
addition to academic learning.  We will continue to provide ways for all 
those who want to learn to develop their potential here as well.  For 
example, state of the art skill training is available through campuses of 
the Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology.  Since 1982 
SIAST's training capacity has increased by 28 per cent, or about 1,350 
seats. 
 
The number of courses offered off campus in rural communities has also 
increased dramatically.  Today's technical institutes must be able to 
respond quickly to changing technologies and shifts in employment demand.  
SIAST has the autonomy and the flexibility to do so.  We will continue to 
work with SIAST, Mr. Speaker, to ensure effective delivery of skill 
training programs. 
 
We will also continue to work on innovative ways of providing skill 
training such as the highly successful training to employment programs for 
Northerners.  The provision of training through human resource development 
agreements with the private sector have also borne fruit.  They exemplify 
what can be done when government and the private sector work together 



 

 

towards a common goal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, learning of any kind begins with the ability to communicate.  
Students of any age cannot learn if they cannot read, speak, or listen.  
The year 1990 is the International Literacy Year.  And this is a time when 
we take a look at the programs and the problems that exist here in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And we also have to take a look at the world-wide problem that exists out 
there today, Mr. Speaker, where today that we know that almost one-quarter 
of the world's adult population lack basic literacy skills.  More that 100 
million school-age children have no schools or other facilities within 
which to learn, while others have no reading material available away from 
school to hone their skills. 
 
We in this province are extremely fortunate by comparison.  Nevertheless, 
145,000 Saskatchewan adults, almost 20 per cent of our adult population, 
have less than a grade 9 education.  Many of them have difficulty with 
reading and writing, and some in fact are illiterate.  This represents a 
loss of human potential that we cannot afford.  And it represents a 
travesty of social justice in that so many are disenfranchised from the 
knowledge intensive world that surrounds them, not to mention the pure 
pleasure that reading affords. 
 
We have a major campaign under way in this province to upgrade literacy 
skills for Saskatchewan adults.  In 1988 we entered into a three-year, $2.5 
million  agreement with IBM Canada Ltd. to introduce computer-based 
literacy instruction to Saskatchewan.  This represents the first major 
application of such instruction anywhere in Canada. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


