





























































Hansard: May 03, 1990


 

 

May 3/90 
EVENING SITTING 

 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Education 
Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 5 

 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, I want to return 
for a moment to the questions which I raised yesterday, or the last day, on 
the matter of francophone schools and governance of francophone schools in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I wonder whether the minister would confirm whether or not my understanding 
of the process leading up to the decision of a week ago or so to postpone 
for the time being the francophone governance laws is correct or that my 
understanding is correct. 
 
As I understand it, the background to all of this basically is summarized 
by a June 1989 report signed by Edgar Gallant headlined, "Fransaskois 
component for the Saskatchewan school system," which report in effect had . 
. . at least the making of the report had representation from people in the 
provincial government, Saskatchewan Education, intergovernmental affairs, 
the SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees Association), that's the school 
trustees, francophone delegation, the teachers' federation, the League of 
Educational Administrators, and perhaps others; that a number of experts 
were consulted; and that in this particular document, of which I have a 
copy before me, on June 1989, were the principles and in some instances the 
details of a proposed program for the implementation of French school 
governance in the province of Saskatchewan; that this report was at that 
time hailed by your government and by the various participants to it as 
being a bit of a breakthrough after this very difficult and complicated 
issue.  And it was from this report that the next step was the drafting of 
the legislation which we have not seen but which we discussed the other day 
in the Committee of the Whole. 
 
Is the foregoing summary that I gave an essentially correct summary of the 
background leading up to this document and the draft legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Yes, I think that the member, Mr. Chairman, gave a 
fairly accurate summary of what has transpired to date.  And I would also 
point out that it was out of the Gallant report that the co-ordinating 
committee then began the work to draft the proposed legislation, and that 
in fact was the legislation that was at the drafting stage when the Mahe pé 
decision came down in Alberta. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, that was my next question and you've led 
me to it.  But out of the Gallant report, of which I have a copy here, 
there was established, as you described it, a co-ordinating committee which 
-- again, correct me if I'm wrong in the statements which I make here -- 



 

 

was comprised, among other people, with representatives of the Government 
of Saskatchewan and of course the francophone community. 
 
Is it correct to say that the co-ordinating committee, in addition to 
drafting the legislation . . . are responsible for drafting the 
legislation, also sought to identify schools or target schools, as one may 
describe them, which schools might fall within the ambit of the proposed 
legislation and the overall thrust of the Gallant report. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, I am informed that is correct. They 
had contacted the schools where they thought the possibility did exist for 
francophone governance. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- And is it also correct that, when we talk about francophone 
school governance in general terms, what we mean by that is the empowerment 
of those general powers and authorities of school divisions to the 
francophone schools so identified by this co-ordinating committee.  Said 
empowerment coming about by virtue of the draft legislation which we've not 
seen but apparently you and the committee have been working on.  That's 
roughly what the legislation and the legislative policy aim was directed 
towards. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, the member is correct in what he is 
suggesting, but at the same time the parents had to come forward and give 
an indication that they in fact were also interested in having a governance 
over their own schools.  So it worked both ways.  There was consultation 
with the parents in those areas but they did also have to come forward with 
their requests. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Yes, I thank the minister for that clarification, and I'm 
not making a comment on this for the moment, process one way or another, 
but I'm trying to get a handle on the process. 
 
Could I just to clarify this.  Is it correct that the drafting of the 
legislation, which would legislatively empower the so-called target schools 
-- if I may put it that way, for French governance -- do you say that that 
is the responsibility or was the responsibility of the co-ordinating 
committee or the responsibility of the Department of Education in 
consultation with the appropriate other ministries such as Justice? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- The co-ordinating committee made suggestions with 
regard to what they would like to see in the legislation, but it was still 
up to the Department of Justice to draft the legislation. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order.  Why is the member from Kinistino on his feet? 
 
Mr. Saxinger: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd like to ask leave to introduce some 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 



 

 

Mr. Saxinger: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd like to introduce to you, and through 
you to the members of this Assembly, some guests in the Speaker's gallery.  
It's Stella Waldbillig and her daughter Barbara Scriver.  Stella is down . 
. . she's a health worker in Cudworth and she's down for Consensus 100.  
She's one of the 100 who got chosen.  And I want to ask everybody to please 
welcome them to Regina. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Education 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 5 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Again, Mr. Chairman, as the minister has explained to me, 
the co-ordinating committee was providing input and presumably general 
principles, their comments to the drafting of the proposed legislation 
which was the responsibility of the Government of Saskatchewan.  I believe 
that, roughly stated, is the summary there. 
 
Can the minister tell me whether or not the co-ordinating committee and/or 
the Department of Education officials, who are seen beside you, were aware 
of the issues in Alberta on the question of section 23 of the Charter of 
Rights and Freedoms, and the Alberta legislation and the court litigation 
in that province pertaining thereto, while in the course of drafting and 
preparing and discussing the recommendations on the proposed Saskatchewan 
law. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, in answer to the Leader of the 
Opposition's question, I would point out that the Supreme Court decision 
did not come down until March 15 of this year; however, it was being argued 
back in June of 1989, so there was no way that the officials or the 
Government of Saskatchewan had any way in which they could presume what 
that court decision would be.  So it was heard last June but no decision 
until March. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- I appreciate that, Mr. Minister.  The decision was, as I am 
now informed and advised as a result of the document that you tabled, that 
the Supreme Court decision came as you've described.  But that's not really 
the question that I ask. 
 
I think the answer is self-evident to my question.  I'll put it again.  
Prior to the decision by the Supreme Court of Canada on Mahe pé, is it 
correct to state, can I assume that the co-ordinating committee and/or -- I 
would think it would be and -- the Department of Education were familiar 
with the key issues, of which there are four or five as I read the Mahe pé 
decision?  It's more complicated than that, but four our five major 
decisions and issues.  Were they familiar, the Saskatchewan co-ordinating 
committee and your department officials, of the issues surrounding the 
question of French governance as it was working its way through the Alberta 



 

 

court chain and ultimately the Supreme Court decision?  Clearly the answer 
to that must be, you must have been aware of it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, the officials of Justice and the 
department would have been aware of what was being discussed certainly in 
Alberta back last spring, but at the same time would not have any idea what 
the outcome of the case was going to be.  The legislation as it was drafted 
here was based on the Wimmer decision that came down in 1988, and there was 
no real guide from any higher court decision that could be used in the 
drafting of this particular legislation and thus the need to take another 
look at it. 
 
But in answer to his question, certainly they knew what was being discussed 
in Alberta back last spring, but who was to know what the outcome was going 
to be. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, will the minister tell the House whether or 
not he and the government dispute currently, in the light of Mahe pé, that 
there is an obligation upon the Government of Saskatchewan pursuant to 
section 23 and the various decisions of the courts thereto, is there any 
disputation at all about the constitutional obligation with respect to 
francophone governance in the province of Saskatchewan as a result of this 
decision, in principle terms? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- There's no doubt in the part of the government.  
We're bound by the constitution and we're committed to bringing this 
legislation forward, but we want to ensure that the legislation that is 
going to be brought forward is going to be correct. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- In the light of the Mahe pé decision, will the minister 
advise the House whether or not the co-ordinating committee, the one that 
was advising in general terms that you described for me, will it be 
consulted and advised of the government's analyses of the government's 
perception of the problems, and if so, when and how? 
 
(1915) 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- As I mentioned the other day, Mr. Chairman, we are 
going to be meeting with the other groups that are involved with the 
francophone governance, namely the parents and the task force, and we will 
want to be consulting and discussing this further with them.  I would 
suggest that if there is further need for more consultation with the 
co-ordinating committee and input that this certainly would be the case.  
These people have a very important interest obviously in what the final 
legislation's going to be, the ramifications of the Mahe pé case.  And so 
we're going to have to work together on it to ensure that we do get it 
right. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, it's not my intention to prolong this issue 
tonight because there are other issues that members may wish to raise, but 
I do want to ask the minister a specific question. 
 
If it was thought, previously to the Mahe pé decision -- as I gather it was 



 

 

and in fact practised -- that the co-ordinating committee was part and 
parcel, a natural extension of the consensus that was achieved by Gallant, 
provided the overall directions and input to the drafting of the 
legislation prior to Mahe pé, why is it that the minister seemingly is 
reluctant to indicate that the co-ordinating committee will not be or will 
be used in the period following Mahe pé, in the understanding of the 
so-called complex legal and constitutional questions of which you speak? 
 
Why isn't the co-ordinating committee brought into this early, and quickly, 
and fully, and completely?  And if they are, would you please tell us when 
the next meeting is going to be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, the task force is the main body that 
we would be working with.  Now we're going to be meeting with them very 
shortly.  This, of course, was what came out of the Gallant report, and 
that's the body that we should be working with.  Obviously if there is a 
decision or a concern about the co-ordinating committee having to be 
involved, certainly we would want to pursue that.  But until we meet with 
the task force, which I believe is going to take place the 16th of this 
month, then we will take our direction following that meeting. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Well again, Mr. Chairman, I'm sorry to prolong this, but 
perhaps I don't understand the structure.  It's important for me to 
understand the structure. 
 
You're talking about task force now.  We were previously talking about a 
co-ordinating committee, which I assume by your answer are two different 
bodies.   The task force is chaired -- if I have this correct information 
in front of me -- by one Donald Michaud, director of the Fransaskois adult 
education services, College Mathieu, Gravelbourg. 
 
But I want to come back again for clarification.  Was I in error in hearing 
you say that in the pre-Mahe pé period, the assistance or the guidance -- 
call it what you will -- in the drafting of the legislation was given to 
you by something called a co-ordinating committee.  Is that a different 
body, or is it the same body?  If it's different, how does it relate to the 
task force?   Since it was helping you on the legislation then, my question 
is: since the legislation's apparently run into snag as a result of legal 
decision, why isn't that body helping you now?  Why is it going to the task 
force?  Perhaps you can enlighten me here. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, just to bring the member opposite up 
to date, the co-ordinating committee then was set up to look at the whole 
area of the governance and that committee was headed up by Gallant, Edgar 
Gallant. He then wrote the report, following that. 
 
Now one of the recommendations out of that report was to set up the task 
force.  Some of the members of the co-ordinating committee are also on the 
task force, and since the task force has been set up, that's the main group 
that we have been involved with and would continue to be involved with. 
 
Now the fact of the matter is that Roger Lepage, I believe, was the one who 
was involved in helping with the legislation. I believe he is still helping 



 

 

out with the task force.  So until we meet with them, we will not be doing 
anything further on this until we have some more discussion with them, and 
bring them up to date on the reasons for the delay and where we go from 
there. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Okay, that clarifies it.  I think you used the term 
co-ordinating committee in consultation with the drafters -- I'm not 
holding you to it -- but what you're saying is that the co-ordinating 
committee is in effect Gallant.  What we're really talking about is the 
task force working members, task force -- they're the ones and whether it's 
co-ordinating or task force, that's fine, it clarifies it. 
 
Now I want to return for a minute or two, before I leave this subject for 
the evening, to the Mahe pé decision, and I wonder if the minister would be 
prepared to state again for me, but perhaps with a little more specifics 
tonight, what it is about the Mahe pé decision, in the light of section 23 
in the Charter of Rights and Freedoms that detrimentally affects the draft 
legislation being prepared by the task force and/or co-ordinating 
committee. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, a couple of the issues that I would 
just make mention of with regard to the Mahe pé case, and one of those was 
with regard to the fact that they consider it a sliding scale when they 
determined the student numbers and where it might warrant either complete 
governance, partial governance, or representative participation within 
existing school boards.  Now that was something that had not really been 
considered, I hear, in the province of Saskatchewan.  But that did throw a 
different light on the case.  So whether you have a fairly large number of 
students where it could warrant complete governance down to the situation 
where you might have only a handful of students, and whether or not it 
would warrant having a separate situation there or complete governance 
situation or simply ensuring that those francophone parents had 
representation on the existing school board.  So that's one of the areas.  
Our proposed legislation did not take these considerations into account, 
simply because precedent had not been established when our legislation was 
being drafted. 
 
Now the second one, and I mentioned this as well to you the other night, 
that a problem that was to do with section 29 of our particular Act, in 
that the implications of this section would have in fact meant that some of 
the parents that would qualify under section 23 of the charter would have 
been denied certain rights under our Act.  And I don't think that the 
francophones want that to be the case.  So those are two of the specifics 
that I would suggest to you are a couple of the main reasons for delaying 
our legislation. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- For the minute I want to leave this question, but I'd like 
you to think about it because I'm going to ask you before I take my seat 
this evening.  With respect to the second reason, proposed section 29 of 
the proposed legislation, the question I'll be asking you, and your 
officials perhaps could give some thought to this, is whether or not it is 
correct to say that this was essentially not dependent upon the Mahe pé 
decision and could be relatively easily rectified by drafting changes and 



 

 

amendments. 
 
You can give some thought to that, but this is the question that I want to 
ask with respect to the sliding scale.  And may I preface this by saying 
that in the Mahe pé situation as I understand it, the appeal there dealt 
with the question of section 23 in Edmonton and the management of a 
minority language school in Edmonton.  The facts are that in the Edmonton 
area, according to the judgement, there were approximately 116,800 students 
enrolled in the public and separate systems and 2,900 citizens whose first 
language learned and understood was French.  Of these, 4,130 children aged 
from birth to 19 years, and they were the subject of the particular Act for 
governments in the province of Alberta.  And in that context, as the 
minister says, the Supreme Court talked about section 23, the 
constitutional right to provide these language of instruction provisions in 
the context of the sliding scale. 
 
The question I have for the minister in this regard is, having read the 
Mahe pé decision, as he undoubtedly has and his officials have, does the 
minister view the sliding scale standard set by the Supreme Court of 
Canada, with respect to section 23, as setting out minimum or maximum 
standards? 
 
(1930) 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- The understanding, Mr. Chairman, is that it's 
minimum, it's not maximum. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- I appreciate the minister's answer.  I'm looking at page 
27, 28, and 29 of the judgement of which you have and your officials will 
have.  And at page 27 the court there talks about the measurement of 
management and control, and describes in some detail the sliding scale 
ranging from independent school boards to representation and so forth.  
Funding on page 28 and then goes down to page 29.  And I shall read for the 
minister the following passages of the decision in the middle of page 29, 
and I'm reading from the court judgement: "Second . . ."  The first point 
being the sliding scale, the court says: 
 

 Second, provincial and local authorities may, of course, give minority 
groups a greater degree of management and control than that described 
above.  Section 23 only mandates a minimum level of management and control 
in a given situation; it does not set a ceiling. 

 
And of course the minister says that it's a minimum.  But I want the 
minister's attention focused, if I might, to the first sentence of that 
decision which says that: 
 

 . . . provincial and local authorities may, of course, give minority 
groups a greater degree of management and control . . . 

 
I continue from the quotation, the court says: 
 

 Third, there are a variety of different forms of institutional structures 
which will satisfy the above guidelines. 



 

 

 
Note the words "a variety of different forms of institutional structures."  
So the minister says that the standards are minimum standards.  Is the 
minister telling the House that the proposed legislation, which is drafted 
but which we have not seen, violates the minimum standards? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, it doesn't violate the minimum 
standards but at the same time we recognize that if the numbers were too 
small, that the better route to go would be to provide for francophone 
parents to have representation on a school board as opposed to having the 
full governance and management control over their school.  So it doesn't 
violate the minimum rates. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Well if it does not violate the minimum standards as set 
out by Mahe pé, but yet the minister says that there is a better way to go 
or a better route, based on his words, roughly speaking, does this not 
amount to a denial of the basis of the Gallant report and the work that 
stemmed therefrom? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, the understanding that we have is 
that we would be proceeding in a fashion that would be in line with the 
Gallant report.  But at the same time, I think that there has to be some 
consideration given to those situations, as I indicated earlier, where 
there was a very, very small number of students, as to whether or not they 
would have representation on the school board as opposed to the complete 
and total management and control. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Well, for example, what school boards of the several 
targeted schools, given the numbers that exist within those targeted 
schools -- and you've identified those, as you told me -- which one of 
those would not fall within the minimum standards of the Mahe pé decision? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, there hasn't been a decision on the 
numbers here in Saskatchewan.  But I would point out to the member opposite 
that now, based on the decision out of Alberta, it is necessary that we go 
back, have further discussions with Justice and with the task force to take 
a look at our legislation and ensure that it does not have some of the 
problems that have been pointed out to us that do, in fact, exist. 
 
So we need more time on this.  The Leader of the Opposition is a lawyer.  
He certainly understands a lot of this a lot better than certainly I do.  
But we have to go back now and work with Justice and ensure that the 
legislation that we are going to bring forward is, in fact, right and it is 
going to protect the rights of the francophones, the ones that desire this 
governance of their own schools.  But we need more time on that. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, what I'm trying to inform myself about is the 
government's position.  If Mahe pé has set out a sliding scale, which scale 
is a minimum standard, which standard by your own admission the proposed 
Bills did not violate -- couldn't have; how could you have violated the 
minimum standards?  You told me you didn't violate the minimum standards.  
The question I have, therefore, is what specific reasons justify the 
postponement of the project in the light of Mahe pé.  What specific 



 

 

problems are there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I have indicated to the Leader 
of the Opposition that we're going to be meeting with the task force within 
the next two weeks.  We are also going to be getting more instructions from 
Justice as to some of the detail that needs to be looked at and changed in 
our legislation.  And until that time arrives it's very difficult to give 
him much more than I have. 
 
We have concerns about the Mahe pé decision and how it works on a sliding 
scale.  We keep in mind that here in the province of Saskatchewan that 
there may be some of those situations where in fact it would be more 
appropriate for the group of parents to simply have representation on a 
board as opposed to the francophone governance.  But those are things that 
we're going to have to take a look at with the task force and with Justice 
as we get into more detail in the Bill. 
 
But we want to ensure that when we are finished, that we are going to have 
an Act that is going to meet the wishes of the francophone people.  And I 
think he should understand that to do that we require more time.  The Bill 
could not be put together and put through this House by the end of this 
month in order to allow enough time to have all of the mechanisms in place 
to deliver this service by September 1. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, I think I understand much of what the 
minister is saying.  But what I'm trying to gauge with some specifics is 
the rational arguments upon which the government has made its decisions.  
That's what I'm asking you, to provide some answers here for me.  And I'd 
like to ask another question.  Who made the recommendation to cabinet that 
there should be a postponement of French governance and the legislation as 
a result of the Mahe pé decision?  Was it Justice or Education? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, once the decision came down in 
Alberta this information was made available to the Department of Justice.  
It had been their officials that had been involved in the case in Alberta 
or monitoring the situation there.  So when that report came through, and 
once Justice had had an opportunity to examine it, they were in 
consultation with the Department of Education officials and then that 
decision was taken forward to cabinet that there was no way that we had 
enough time, under the circumstances, to bring in this legislation in this 
session; that we would be just simply unable to have all of the mechanics 
in place for this to go ahead for this fall.  So that is the sequence of 
how this unravelled and how the decision was made. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, I just have a couple more questions in this 
area before I yield to other members.  Did the minister last day promise to 
me and the House that he would provide a copy of the legal and other 
concerns prepared by either Justice or your department, which might be the 
basis of discussion by the task force in the light of Mahe pé, the 
considerations herein?  Am I correct in assuming that that's what you 
indicated you would do? 
 
I understand, if my memory is right, that you will not table the proposed 



 

 

Bill in order for us to look at section 29, and measure your assessment of 
29 with respect to Mahe pé to make sure that we agree with it.  But what 
about the documentation which sets out the constitutional and legal 
concerns which, I must say, with the greatest of respect to you today, you 
have not articulated fully, I don't think, for the clarification of the 
House.  Can we get a copy of the written concerns when you make them 
available to the task force? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- We'll be finalizing those within the next short 
while, Mr. Chairman, and we'll want to meet with the task force and we will 
be able to provide you with a copy at that time. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you. I appreciate that very much.  I also want to ask 
if the minister will indicate to the House what timetable his department 
has with respect to the resolution of these obstacles as set out in 
Mahe pé, as you see them.  What timetable do you have for the resolution of 
these obstacles and your meeting for the task force? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, as I've indicated to the secretariat 
we have met with to date and the other groups that we will be meeting with, 
that it is our plan to get the legislation together and finalized to the 
satisfaction of everyone just as soon as we can, with the idea that it 
could be introduced at the next session of the legislature. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I want to dwell on a 
couple of major issues this evening and leave a number of items for next 
day and next week.  But I have a couple of big issues that I want to dwell 
on tonight because they've had a major impact on education, post-secondary 
education in the last three years. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to take you back to 1987.  I know you weren't the 
minister at that time, but you were a member of the Executive Council and 
consequently you have to take as much responsibility, I suppose, or almost 
as much responsibility for the decision that was made at that time as the 
previous Minister of Education. 
 
I guess I can say without any reservation, Mr. Minister, that the previous 
Minister of Education had very little understanding of education and the 
process of education as such, and it was a relief to the educators out 
there and many other people associated with education when you received 
your appointment, not so long ago.  And there was hope in this province.  
There was hope in this province that we finally have an individual who 
understands education.  But before, Mr. Minister, the buttons pop on your 
shirt, I will tell you that we have been disappointed, and the educators 
out there have been disappointed.  And I think part, it's not your fault -- 
you inherited a bad situation.  We have to see what you will do in your 
term of office to see whether or not you will rectify some of the damage 
that was done by the former minister. 
 
I am referring, Mr. Minister, to the decision that was made in 1987 by your 
government to overhaul the technical schools in this province.  I want to 
take you through some of the disastrous consequences that have occurred 
because of that decision.  We certainly made it very plain to you in the 



 

 

opposition here that that was a wrong decision to go. 
 
(1945) 
 
Our technical schools at that time -- Wascana, STI (Saskatchewan technical 
institute), and Kelsey -- those three campuses could certainly compete 
against any other technical schools, certainly in western Canada.  There 
was no doubt about that at all. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, let me tell you, when I was an active member in 
education and a high school counsellor, we felt very proud, very proud in 
recommending students to anyone of those campuses -- anyone of those 
campuses.  The standards were high, the programs were accepted by the 
industry out there, our graduates were sought after, and the morale of our 
instructors was extremely high.  What compelled you people to make that 
dramatic change, with the disastrous consequences that have come from it, 
is still not understood by very many people out there, certainly not 
understood by the opposition, and some of us have been in education for a 
long time; certainly not understood by many of the people who are in the 
field and at the four campuses now.  Mr. Minister, I guess the decision 
that you people made has been, as I said, an unmitigated disaster. 
 
And what you have done, Mr. Minister, by making that decision, you have 
virtually driven away the chances of many of our young people to receive 
their post-secondary education in the technologies from Saskatchewan.  You 
abolished many good programs, programs that were over-subscribed, and your 
officials who were on the board at that time can certainly confirm that.  
They know that that is true. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, by abolishing many of those programs, you turned them 
over to the private vocational schools, without any standards in those 
private vocational schools that you enforced -- and I will turn to that 
later.  And many of our young people have been ripped off by the greed of 
those private vocational schools. 
 
And I make no apologies for saying that these students were ripped off and 
the province was ripped off, as you indicated in a letter to me last 
January by indicating to me that last year alone we put out, through 
student loans, anywhere between 22 to $25 million depending on which figure 
we use, as we understood last night. 
 
That, Mr. Minister, in itself, as I will later on corroborate for you, has 
been a disaster for many young people.  Their future is shattered.  Their 
future has been shattered; they're deeply in debt, and it's come about 
because of a decision that you people made. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to . . . So that you don't think that it's just my own 
assessment of what people think has happened in the technical school area, 
I want to read to you some lines of a letter that was written to Mr. 
Houghton, and you will know Mr. Houghton is the Chairman of the Board of 
SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology), by a 
staff member. 
 



 

 

Now I will just read some lines to you, and this individual, whom I just 
recently met -- I did not know this individual -- but he wrote the letter 
to Mr. Houghton, and he says the following: 
 

 We stood by, stunned in 1987 when we saw Kelsey Institute, which was a 
quality educational institution, ravaged by a political decision that 
promised better opportunities and better funding for a leaner, amalgamated 
super-institute that would be world class.  "Trust us," said the former 
minister.  "This is done to provide better quality education". 

 
I'm not going to read the whole letter because it's about four or five 
typewritten pages.  He goes on to say in another paragraph: 
 

 The result has been anything but a better quality institution.  Good 
instructors were fired or pushed into early retirement, and success 
appears to be gauged in terms of numbers of clients processed through, 
rather than whether or not we were helping our students to become educated 
people who were prepared to make personal and career decisions which would 
enable them to provide worthwhile livings for themselves. 

 
And then on another page, the writer goes on to say this: 
 

 Quality comes out of commitment.  I, for one, continue to have commitment 
to my students because I am a professional educator; yet if there ever was 
a commitment to the institute by instructors at Kelsey, it has been 
destroyed by your statements, and the ongoing behaviour of the people who 
fund and manage this institution. 

 
He goes on to say to Mr. Houghton: 
 

 I invite you to walk the hallways of Kelsey.  There is terrible morale, 
which obviously affects the students.  Why is it so low?  For each 
instructor there is a different reason, but collectively it is because we 
are tired of hearing what can best be described as lip service to quality. 

 
 No budget for months into the school year, originally no contract 

commitment to instructors beyond the first of December, no public request 
by the board to the government for sufficient funding to keep our 
equipment up to date, and now the final insult of having our board 
chairman say that we have demonstrated frivolous disregard to our students 
by withdrawing our services. 

 
I want to, Mr. Minister, end as he ends.  He says to Mr. Houghton: 
 

 Your cavalier words regarding instructors have only added to the negative 
environment created by years of underfunding and questionable management, 
decisions taken with little, if any consultation with student alumni and 
faculty. 

 
This, Mr. Minister, comes from an individual who has taught at Kelsey for a 
number of years, and he takes his job very seriously.  But I guess they 
were, as he says, stunned on the process of the lack of consultation and 
the treatment that people received when you changed the technical schools 



 

 

to what you called a SIAST or world class institution. 
 
Mr. Minister, it will take years for the technical schools in this province 
to get back to the standards that it had before you ravaged it in 1987.  It 
will takes years.  And I know, Mr. Minister, that you have a hand in this 
because you choose the board.  You chose the chairman.  You chose, through 
your board, the president.  And you chose, through your board, the 
vice-presidents and all the people that are in the administrative 
structure. 
 
And I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, tonight a series of questions on SIAST 
as to what your assessment is today in so far as the decision that was made 
in 1987.  And if you had to do it today as Minister of Education, would you 
proceed in the same process as the former minister of Education did in 
1987? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I would start by answering the 
last question first.  Yes I would definitely proceed.  There might be some 
things that I would do a little bit differently, but there's no doubt about 
it that the fact that we live in changing times, that it was necessary to 
reorganize SIAST and the old community colleges that we had.  I think that 
the member opposite makes a good point.  There were good programs being 
offered prior to the reorganization, and I would suggest that there are 
many more good programs that are still being offered today. 
 
I would also point out that when he talks about quality, that I would 
suggest that we still have quality instruction going on in SIAST.  The 
quality instruction, in my view, Mr. Chairman, comes about by having 
qualified instructors.  I think this is always the way it is in education.  
I think we overdo this whole idea of underfunding. 
 
I know that we need funds and we could always use more money, but at the 
same time the quality of programs is determined more, I think, by the 
quality of the instructor and the type of the instruction that is going on 
within the class-room.  So for the member to suggest that the quality has 
gone down simply because there's a reorganization, I don't buy that. 
 
We've got many of the same instructors that were there prior to the 
reorganization.  And I will readily admit that there have been many 
problems since reorganization.  Part of the problems go down to contract 
decisions and the fact that there has been problems with staff and 
management and people wanting to get contracts settled, and something that 
lasted for a good many months, in fact, over a period of probably three 
years.  And that can be unsettling, but at the same time, Mr. Chairman, 
most people are not undaunted by that.  They go ahead and they provide the 
quality of instruction that they've always provided.  But I know that the 
times have been unsettling for many of the instructors. 
 
And in some cases, courses were shut down because there were courses, Mr. 
Chairman, that were no longer relevant to the needs of today.  There was 
also the need to reorganize and, in some cases, rationalize the programs.  
There may not have been enough students in some of those courses to warrant 
having them on all the campuses.  So the natural thing to do would be to 



 

 

rationalize and specialize in some of the different campuses; in other 
words, setting up more of an idea of centres of excellence.  Amd I think 
that there's a great move in all areas of Canada and probably in North 
America to look at that type of thing today. 
 
So there were some programs cancelled, but very few, but there was more 
amalgamation at some of these courses.  And when you consider that the 
number of spaces has increased substantially since this change or with the 
change, we've got many more students enrolled in SIAST today than ever 
before.  And when you look at the figures back in 1981-82, for example, the 
number of students enrolled was just under 20,000.  Well for this past year 
. . . well 1988-89 it was as high as 46,613.  So many more young people 
that are interested in taking these courses can have that access that they 
didn't have prior to the reorganization or the development of the Woodlands 
Campus in Prince Albert. 
 
So yes, I would do the same thing, but I would probably do a few things a 
little bit differently.  So there have been problems; I recognize that.  
We're talking about a pretty big institution here when we talk about SIAST 
and it has taken a while to get some of the kinks out.  But I would hope 
that now that the negotiations have all been completed and things can get 
back to normal and we can move ahead, it is a world class facility.  It is 
a world class facility. 
 
Well let's take a look at some of the things that are happening.  Let's 
take a good look at some of the things that are happening, Mr. Chairman.  
We have got much more activity going on today, as a result of the 
reorganization, than was ever possible before.  And when we talk about 
world class, I would quote from an article that was in the Star-Phoenix 
just a few days ago that indicates quite clearly that SIAST today is 
involved in no fewer than 19 different countries and that there is an awful 
lot more that can be done in the world through the provision of services 
from the SIAST campuses.  If that isn't world class, Mr. Chairman, I don't 
know what is. 
 
The member opposite has indicated that the private vocational schools have, 
in some cases, not been totally fair to students, and we recognize that 
fact.  That's why we're changing regulations and that's why we're changing 
rules in the student loan fund.  But I would suggest to him that in 
Saskatchewan, where we have -- this was for 1989, the national statistics 
-- 59 schools were registered with 5,766 students enrolled, that compared 
to the other provinces across the country, there are very few provinces 
that would have fewer of these than here in Saskatchewan.  And I would 
point out directly to the maritime provinces where generally they would 
have many fewer schools registered. 
 
(2000) 
 
But when you look at the province of Alberta where they have 97, where 
Manitoba has 45 -- just a little bit behind us -- British Columbia with 
465, and Ontario with 235.  Now, much larger populations?  Well enrolments 
are pretty big in some cases here, but at the same time Ontario has 40,000 
students enrolled in those particular courses. 



 

 

 
Now we know that other provinces are looking at some of the changes that 
we're making in our regulations, and we feel that we've got some really 
good conditions that are going to be put into place that are going to make 
these programs a little bit fairer as far as the students that are taking 
them, but also the fact that the programs are going to be quality and are 
going to meet a need that's out there.  But they are at the same time going 
to lead some place and that the students will be able to get a job upon 
completing their courses. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, I am sorry to hear that you follow in the 
follies of your predecessor in that you, as an educator, can't be 
enlightened to see that what you have done was a mistake.  And to say -- to 
say - 
_ that we've ironed out the kinks, what a joke.  As I will indicate to you 
very shortly, you have spent and wasted more money in administration in the 
corporate body -- not just thousands, millions -- in the corporate body 
itself, as we will come to grips with very shortly. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wish, you know, if you say that you would do the same thing 
as the former minister has done and ripped up the agreements that were 
made, negotiated agreements, you legislated them out of existence.  That 
was, number one, your basic problem.  Finally the Labour Relations Board 
forced you people to accept those agreements. 
 
Time and time again you have been shown that you are wrong in what you are 
doing, and yet you persisted in bulldozing ahead without any regard -- any 
regard -- Mr. Minister.  How you can stand before this legislature and say 
that you would proceed in the same way, with maybe some minor changes, for 
people that have worked and slaved in the education field for 20, 25, 
twenty-nine and a half years, and you summarily dismiss them.  And you say 
you would proceed in the same way.  I am disappointed with you. 
 
I could understand the former minister doing it.  He didn't understand 
education; I've told him that time and time again.  But you are an 
educator.  I would expect that you would have more respect for those people 
who have dedicated their lives, who have spent 20, 25, and twenty-nine and 
a half years.  I don't go to 30 because they would have qualified fully at 
30.  But to dismiss people, summarily dismiss them and replace them with 
people who are not as qualified but who have allegiance to your political 
philosophy is unacceptable, Mr. Minister, simply unacceptable.  And that is 
what has occurred. 
 
That is why the instructors are so low in their morale, because they have 
people heading up the campuses, in some of the campuses, who simply know 
nothing about technical schools, who have had no experience in 
administration, and they are expected to take their advice and their 
leadership from these people.  Those were political appointments, and 
whereby you dismiss people who are fully qualified who had dedicated 
themselves.  And that, Mr. Minister, is where you made one of your most 
serious mistakes.  Not the only ones, but certainly some of them. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you say that activity is the yardstick that you want to 



 

 

use, you say, well look, there's lots of activity going on; it shows that 
we are successful.  Then you say to me that because we have quadrupled the 
private vocational schools that that shows success and excellence of 
quality of work?  Absolutely a non sequitur, absolute nonsense.  That's 
what it is.  Absolute nonsense.  You go and talk to those students who have 
been ripped off by those private vocational schools when they could have 
received office education at Kelsey Institute, and now have to go to one of 
those unregulated private schools. 
 
I will document a little later a number of cases.  And I asked you, Mr. 
Minister, in a letter that I sent to you, whether you would meet with these 
17 students who were attending CompuCollege.  No answer from you, none, no 
answer.  I will document that a little later. 
 
Let me say, Mr. Minister -- You say that when the former minister said that 
it was world class, I didn't think he meant that, oh well, we'll take some 
programs out to third worlds, now we're world class.  That wasn't the 
interpretation that was put on it at all.  When he talked about world 
class, he was talking about quality, excellence. 
 
I want to ask the minister: will you admit that one of the courses that you 
are teaching in another country is a dental program that you did away with 
a few years ago?  Is that true?  Is SIAST teaching a school-based dental 
program in another country? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, it surprises me a bit, I guess, 
the member opposite that he would be so opposed to change -- opposed to 
change.  Because he is suggesting that the reorganization of SIAST and the 
change as far as the community colleges were concerned was not very, very 
progressive.  Because, Mr. Chairman, we fully realize that times are 
changing.  And we had courses going on in the SIAST campuses that were no 
longer going any place.  I mean, why would you want to continue turning out 
widget makers?  Why would you want to continue that?  I mean, it was time 
for change. 
 
And for you to suggest that the principals that we have at the SIAST 
campuses were political appointments, I think that that's really being 
unfair when you consider the background of every one of the people that is 
now on a campus here in Saskatchewan.  Take a look at that.  Because when 
you consider they've got in some cases maybe between 20 and 30 years of 
experience working with community colleges, working with vocational 
programs, or in some cases being involved with vocational programs in other 
parts of Canada -- and I refer there specifically to Moose Jaw -- these are 
decisions that are made by the board of directors of SIAST. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Your appointments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well that doesn't mean that I have any involvement 
with the appointment of . . . the appointment is made by those people.  The 
appointment is made by them.  In fact I could point out to a couple of the 
principals that I did not know until the appointment had been made, who was 
going to get it.  So if you call that a political appointment, I don't know 
where you're coming from. 



 

 

 
I would also indicate to the member opposite that the capacity at SIAST has 
increased by some 21 per cent since the reorganization.  Now that points 
out that there is a lot happening in Saskatchewan.  There's a great need 
for vocational programs, and there are a lot of other things that are 
happening off the campuses where SIAST is involved.  Not all of the 
students are being taught on the campuses.  We've got a lot of other 
programs throughout rural Saskatchewan being provided through the regional 
colleges where SIAST is very, very involved.  So yes, Mr. Chairman, 
reorganization was due and as I indicated to the member earlier, there are 
some things, probably, that I would have done differently.  But at the same 
time it was necessary to meet the needs of the students for the 1990s and 
on into the 21st century. 
 
I would also point out that because of some of the changes, the 
reorganization that took place, that it did create new opportunities for 
some students that possibly hadn't had their needs met in the past.  And I 
refer there to more accessibility that was made available for native 
students in some of the programs that have been developed since that time 
of the reorganization.  So I think that we could have a good debate on 
this.  If you consider the pros and cons of the change, one would see that 
there were many, many reasons for that change taking place, but because of 
the fact that there was a lot of labour strife, I suppose, between 
management and instructors, with not having a contract settled, that 
certainly did not help the situation. 
 
But now, of course, we're past that. We're past that, and I would hope that 
now we can go ahead and move along to develop programs there that will make 
these campuses what all of us want them to be.  And in fact, Mr. Chairman, 
I would welcome support and suggestions from the member opposite because he 
does have a good deal of experience in working with students at the 
secondary level and we need that kind of input as well.  So I would welcome 
that. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, I know you're very adept at not answering my 
question, but I would like you to answer my question: does SIAST offer a 
school-based dental program in another country? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Sorry, Mr. Chairman, they do that; they offer I 
think it's Namibia, one of the African countries I believe, where they are 
doing this.  And I think that to make a comparison to that particular area, 
possibly to Saskatchewan, what their needs are -- yes, they are in fact 
doing that. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, I'm certainly pleased to see that.  At least 
somebody at SIAST recognized that you made a mistake in doing away with the 
school-based dental program and that other countries can benefit from an 
experiment that was so successful in this country and in this province, but 
that you didn't recognize the value of it. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to ask you a question on one particular principal, and 
that's the principal of Kelsey institute, Modest Kowal.  What's Modest 
Kowal's background as far as technical school experience is concerned and 



 

 

also Modest Kowal's administrative experience as far as running a big 
campus like Kelsey is concerned? 
 
Mr. Minister, while you're at it, could you also tell me, when the position 
became vacant, was it tendered?  Was it an open competition?  And could you 
give me the names of those people who applied but did not receive the job? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Kowal has a B.Ed. degree and a 
master's in administration.  With regard to his background, he was acting 
principal at the community college; he also spent eight years with the 
community regional college.  He was also in charge of the Saskatchewan 
skills development program for a number of years.  And it was an open 
competition.  This was a board-sponsored competition, and the board made 
the selection. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, do you mean to tell me that for a position 
like Kelsey we could not attract somebody with post-secondary experience, 
somebody with much more administrative experience?  Mr. Minister, to be 
fair with you, I want to let you know, Mr. Kowal is a very personal friend 
of mine.  I've taught with Mr. Kowal a number of years at Holy Cross High 
School.  I don't want to . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, I didn't 
beat around.  I'm not putting him down.  All I'm saying to you is, Mr. 
Minister, it was political interference, and what I get from Kelsey campus 
is exactly that, that they now have an administration who don't know, who 
don't understand, post-secondary education.  That is the problem that we 
have.  That is why the morale is as low as it is, because they see this as 
political interference.  I also happen to know what the politics of Mr. 
Kowal is, and I think you do too.  I think you know as well as I do. 
 
(2015) 
 
So, Mr. Minister, let's not talk so innocent like that there's no political 
interference.  You know as well as I do.  We know what the policies of Mr. 
Houghton is.  He ran for you people.  I have no objection to Mr. Houghton.  
He's well qualified and has administrative experience.  I don't agree with 
Mr. Houghton not answering my letters, but I'll get to that a little later.  
But, Mr. Minister, don't tell me that you couldn't find . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order, please.  Order.  Order, please!  Order.  Order, 
please.  We're trying to hear the member from Saskatoon South ask his 
question.  There's several other conversations going on, making it 
impossible for everybody.  So if we could allow the member from Saskatoon 
South to continue.  Thank you. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- I don't expect the member from Morse to understand too much 
about post-secondary education, so stick with agriculture, and you know 
very little about that.  You're not having very much success.  If I were 
you, Mr. Associate Minister, I'd go to my office and study a little bit 
more about the problems that we're having in agriculture.  Maybe you'll be 
able to have some success with Ottawa.  Don't get into a field you know 
very little about or next to nothing. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to again ask you: of those people in the open 



 

 

competition, how many people applied for the position of principal of 
Kelsey institute, and could I  
 Dreceive the names and the qualifications of those people who applied? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I think it's unfortunate the 
comments being made by the member opposite because you're talking about the 
fact that he has no experience with post-secondary.  Or what would you call 
the Saskatchewan skills development program?  What would you call the 
community regional college program?  That's post-secondary.  I mean, the 
fact of the matter is that Mr. Kowal is an administrator, and he's got his 
master's degree in administration. 
 
Now for you to ask me how many people applied, we can probably check with 
the board and get that information, but this was a competition that was 
done by the board.  We're talking . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
We've got the loud 
_mouth from Moose Jaw harping over here.  If you wait . . . Do you want to 
allow him to get into this now or carry on? 
 
I would point out to you that the SIAST board is an independent board.  We 
have nothing to do with those competitions.  Well, for you and some of your 
colleagues and some of the people around, everything that's done is 
political.  I mean, let's get off that.  I told you that since I've been 
Minister of Education we've had two principals appointed with SIAST.  I 
didn't know who was going to be the principal until after the appointment 
had been made.  I mean, are you going to accuse me about political 
interference with that?  You're just totally dead wrong. 
 
So the same thing with Mr. Kowal.  If you want us to try and find out from 
the board how many people applied for that job, we will attempt to do that.  
But I assume that from the competition, and that Mr. Kowal was selected, 
that it was all done fair and square and he was obviously the best 
candidate.  So I mean, I don't know where you're getting your information, 
but I mean in some cases everything is political. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, I wonder, would you tell me is Elizabeth 
Crosthwaite here this evening as one of your officials? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- No she isn't, Mr. Chairman.  She isn't one of my 
officials. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Oh, that's right.  We have a lot of movement in 
post-secondary education.  I should have known she's no longer with you.  
Yes, there's lot of movement there. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could find out before the adjournment of the 
estimates, which will not adjourn for at least another three or four days, 
and you will have sufficient time to get the names of those people who 
applied for the position at Kelsey Institute and also their qualifications 
and experience so that we can compare them with Mr. Kowal just to see what 
the open competition for such a job would have brought forward. 
 
I'm surprised that for such a position we could not have received some 



 

 

applicants from across Canada, of people who have had actual administrative 
experience or a number of years of teaching experience plus vice-principal 
experience at the post-secondary level.  Could I be assured, Mr. Minister, 
that those will be made available to me before the estimates are finished 
in post-secondary education? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, we can attempt to get the list 
of the applicants, but would point out to the member opposite that whether 
or not the board wants to give those out, that's their decision.  The same 
thing can be applied at the University of Saskatchewan with their 
competition for a new president, and the same thing here.  We don't know 
who applied for that job from wherever.  Those are independent bodies. If 
they don't want to give us that information, certainly they're not bound to 
it, but we can ask them about it. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, that's just so much nonsense. Come on, don't 
pull that on me.  I know you better than that.  Mr. Minister, you appoint 
all the board members. They're all OC (order in council) appointments.  The 
cabinet appoints every one of those. They then appoint -- and I'm sure 
through consultation with you or your department -- the chairman of the 
board. 
 
Look, I just find it very difficult that you're trying to play those games 
with me this evening. I thought we were going to be straightforward with 
each other.  We can have our differences . . . (inaudible interjection) . . 
. No, I just don't think you are; I don't think you are. 
 
I want a commitment this evening on a number of things when it comes to 
SIAST.  I just don't think it's good enough, Mr. Minister, for you to spend 
millions of dollars, of additional taxpayers' dollars, in SIAST, when, as I 
say, it's been a disaster -- not just by my standards, but by a lot of 
people's standards.  The reorganization of SIAST has been a disaster and 
it's cost us millions of extra dollars, and I need to know some of those 
answers. 
 
This is going to be a long, long session in estimates here, and I mean, 
I've got lots of time and I suppose you have too. I've really nothing 
planned for the summer except a little bit of golf and I'm willing to 
sacrifice that -- I'm willing to sacrifice that.  I'll never break 100 
anyway, so . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, I don't have the time 
that some members opposite have. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, could we have some assurances that you will make an 
effort to get us the names of the people who applied for the job of 
principal of Kelsey and their qualifications?  Could I have that assurance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I can give the member that 
assurance that I will try.  But if the board or the chairman do not want to 
give that information to me, that's their prerogative. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, I will be coming back to this tomorrow; we 
will be on again tomorrow unless they call different estimates.  And I will 
be asking you tomorrow morning as to whether or not you have checked with 



 

 

the chairman of the board, and whether or not the chairman of the board 
will co-operate in making that information available to us.  I think it is 
important. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you had appeared at the February meeting where I 
represented the opposition, Linda Haverstock represented the Liberal Party, 
and we had Arnie Paus-Jenssen from the university, and we all spoke on 
post-secondary education.  But your chair was empty.  You decided not to 
show up. 
 
And there was a lot of anger, there was a lot of hostility towards what was 
happening at the various campuses on SIAST.  And much of it was they were 
saying, was not that they were opposed to change, but they were opposed to 
change when they felt that the quality of education was suffering from 
those changes when they saw that it was political interference.  That 
people were fired and replaced by people who were politically affiliated 
with your party.  And they were very angry with that, and I don't blame 
them, I really don't blame them.  When we have people, as I said before, 
who had put in 25 or 29 and a half years and then were simply told to 
leave, and without any regard at all for their future and what it would do 
to their pension and their retirement, I think is simply unacceptable. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to ask you now turn to another area of SIAST.  When 
you set up SIAST, you decided to set up two headquarters, one in Regina and 
one in Saskatoon.  My understanding, Mr. Minister, is that you presently 
have rented space at Innovation Place, and my understanding also is that 
you have considerable space rented at Sask Place here on Albert Street in 
Regina. 
 
Could you tell me, Mr. Minister, what are the terms of the rent or the 
lease rents in Innovation Place and at Sask Place here in Regina to begin 
with? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, before I comment on that I think it's 
interesting that the member opposite makes mention several times about 
political interference and then he keeps coming back suggesting that the 
Minister of Education should be going to the board of SIAST or to the 
chairman and suggesting that he turn over all of the names of those who 
applied for the principalship of Kelsey Campus in Saskatoon.  What is that, 
if it isn't political interference?  The other point that I want to make, 
Mr. Chairman, to just straighten out the member opposite when he talks of a 
meeting that was held at SIAST, and the minister didn't . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- No, it wasn't at SIAST. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well wherever it was.  And the fact that the 
minister was not there.  It's pretty difficult.  You've been a minister of 
the Crown; you know how busy you are.  You know how your schedule gets 
jammed up, in some cases two months ahead of time.  Well, the fact of the 
matter is, Mr. Chairman, that I heard about the meeting about two days 
before it was going to be held and already had commitments.  Well, that's 
the truth, but the member opposite does not always want to believe the 
truth. 



 

 

 
With regard to the corporate offices, the locations that we have at the 
present time in Regina, as you have indicated, at Saskatchewan Place we 
have 970 square metres, and the length of that lease is till the end of 
March 1991.  In Saskatoon, at the SEDCO Centre at Innovation Place, 233 
square metres, that lease is until 1992, June, no, June 1992 for the SEDCO 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- I want to ask several more questions.  Would you mind 
telling me, since you're moving out, you're moving the headquarters from 
Regina to Saskatoon, and you have a lease there till March 1, 1991.  That 
means almost two years now where you will have to pay the lease on that and 
obviously will not be using it, would you mind telling me what the cost of 
that lease is per year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well I've indicated that the length of the lease is 
until March 1991.  Now there are a couple of options that one could look at 
here.  There is a six-month buy-out option, so that would be the maximum.  
So we're looking at less than a year.  And the move from Regina to 
Saskatoon now is not going to be complete, I wouldn't think, until probably 
this fall.  So there won't be that many months left on that particular 
lease. 
 
At the same time, generally it's the policy that they try and find someone 
else to move into that particular space so that they aren't held to the 
payments until the end of the lease.  So at any rate, the move won't take 
place probably, I would think, September 1, October 1, so there won't be a 
very long period of time left in that particular lease. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, as I said before, you're very adept at not 
answering my question.  I asked for the cost of that lease; you didn't 
answer that for me. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well I think in all fairness, Mr. Chairman, that we 
cannot give the cost of the lease.  I think we have to keep in mind that 
we're living in pretty competitive times.  So I'm not going to be providing 
the cost of that particular lease. 
 
(2030) 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, am I correct in surmising that the cost of 
that lease annually is somewhere around 300,000 per year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the member opposite will have 
to continue to surmise, because I will not be giving those figures. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Let me tell the people of Saskatchewan then that the cost of 
the lease, as far as I know is 300,000 a year, and that if they vacate, as 
they said they would, in June of this year . . . (inaudible interjection) . 
. . The minister now tells me it will not be until probably fall, and I 
will have to take his word for it. Then there is still six months left, and 
of that six months it would mean again that it would cost the taxpayers 
$150,000 per year. 



 

 

 
Mr. Minister, that's not the only cost that has been involved.  Can you 
tell me, Mr. Minister, what has been the cost involved of renovations to 
Sask Place in order to accommodate the corporate body?  What did you spend 
on renovations to accommodate the corporate body? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, the member opposite suggests that 
there could be a considerable loss once the office moves out of 
Saskatchewan Place to Saskatoon, but the general practice is that SPMC 
(Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation) would attempt to rent that 
or lease that space out to someone else so that there would be very minimal 
loss.  I would suggest that with regard to costs of renovations that that's 
a question that you should direct to property management. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, that's very nice of you to say direct it to 
management.  I'll read to you a letter very shortly about what management 
says about questions that I asked and how they react to those questions.  
I'll just read that to you a little bit later. 
 
Mr. Minister, I do want to say to you that this is with the high vacancy 
rate in Regina right now, it'd be very difficult for the government to find 
other people to take that place, and that the high rental that you're 
paying on that, particularly that's, you know, 300,000 per year is a lot of 
money to put out for such an office. 
 
And so, Mr. Minister, I won't get those answers from management because 
management says to me they don't know, they haven't set a policy as to 
whether or not they should answer those questions.  I'll read you the 
letter that Mr. Houghton wrote to me just recently. 
 
Mr. Minister, I also am given to understand that extensive renovations were 
done at Innovation Place.  Can you confirm that that is true?  And 
secondly, can you confirm that there is no more space left in Innovation 
Place and that SIAST is looking for additional space now in downtown 
Saskatoon.  Can you confirm that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Let me correct the member, Mr. Chairman.  I didn't 
suggest management would be a place where he could ask that question.  No, 
I said property management, Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation. 
 
The second thing, with regard to the space that they are presently 
occupying here in Regina, as I understand it there are other tenants that 
could very well be available quite quickly to move into that space, so in 
fact there may not be any loss of money. 
 
With regard to Innovation Place in Saskatoon, there is, as I understand it, 
more space that will be available there before very long.  As you well 
know, the Future Corporation is being wound down and there is a 
considerable amount of space there which is right next door to SIAST.  Now 
that's something that they may well be considering, but I don't think any 
definite decision has been made on that right now. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Are they looking downtown? 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well there's a lot of space available certainly in 
Saskatoon that they could be looking at, but the plan is to have everything 
in one spot.  And they may not be able to do that at Innovation Place, but 
there is an option there that the Future Corporation will be out of that 
before very long.  But they do want to be in one spot. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, I can certainly understand that they want to 
be in one place.  They just moved out of two; certainly they're not going 
to move into two different ones in Saskatoon if they can help it, and I can 
understand that. 
 
But again you did not answer my question.  My question was: can you tell me 
if extensive renovations were made and what the costs were of those 
renovations at Innovation Place.  I am told that extensive renovations have 
been made and I'd like to know what the costs of those were.  One of the 
problems, Mr. Minister, that came up during those extensive negotiations 
was that too much money was being spent by the corporate body.  And one of 
the things that they were saying is that the debt that we have now at SIAST 
of $1.9 million, which now the SIAST is at the board, is asking the 
students to make up in large part, was incurred because of the expenses 
incurred by the corporate body, unnecessary expenses.  That's why I'm 
asking these questions -- because those people have said, look at, that's 
unfair; why should we as students now have to pay for the very expensive 
tastes of certain members of the corporate body?  That is unfair.  I'm 
asking you, Mr. Minister, can you tell me: were extensive renovations done; 
what were the costs of those renovations; and thirdly, can you tell me, did 
they buy fairly expensive and unique furniture that I believe is still 
crated and has not been used at all? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, there were extensive 
renovations done in view of the fact that there were no walls, or any other 
facilities that had been developed in that particular space prior to SIAST 
moving into it. So yes, there were extensive renovations done. 
 
As to the cost, I can't give him those figures.  This was a management 
decision and I'm not one who believes in political interference.  So if you 
can get information from them, that's fine. But there were extensive 
renovations done and for you to be asking me if there's furniture there 
that hasn't been used, I think I've only been in that particular office 
once for a very short meeting, Mr. Chairman, and I couldn't tell you.  I 
certainly did not see any furniture that was still in crates, but maybe you 
should visit up there and see what's going on. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- They won't let me in.  That's not true; that was said 
facetiously.  I don't want anybody to take that seriously. 
 
Mr. Minister, I was going to ask this question before.  Do you, from the 
department, have a representative on the board?  And if you do, who is that 
individual? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- The department does not have a representative on 
the board nor are they required to.  But officials are available to meet 



 

 

with the board at any time when they require consultation, information, 
whatever the case might be. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, did you have a representative on the board? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Yes we did, Mr. Chairman.  The representative was 
Elizabeth Crosthwaite.  And Elizabeth Crosthwaite has moved from the 
department and is now involved with another department. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, can you tell me when Elizabeth Crosthwaite 
went off the board and when she left your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- The last date that Elizabeth Crosthwaite worked 
with the department, Mr. Chairman, was December 6. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, when you had your representative on the board, 
did you regularly meet with that representative in consultations with her 
as to what was going on at SIAST, or did she report to you on decisions 
that were made by the board of directors? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, she didn't meet with me 
directly.  She reported to the deputy minister and any information that 
would have flowed from the board at that time went to the deputy minister. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, do you meet with your deputy minister 
concerning SIAST and discuss the policies and directions and decisions that 
are made by or that come out of the board of directors of SIAST? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I meet with my deputy on many 
occasions and we discuss many issues, many topics.  There are times I'm 
sure that we talked about SIAST.  There are times when we meet with the 
chairman of the board of SIAST, and certainly there are times when we 
discuss SIAST.  But do we meet on specific occasions to do just that?  The 
answer would be no. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, you indicated you meet with the chairman of 
the board, Mr. Houghton.  Would you mind telling me how often you meet with 
Mr. Houghton and do these meetings generally take place after a board 
meeting has occurred? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, I have met with Mr. Houghton on 
probably, I would say, about three occasions.  I have attended parts of two 
board meetings since last October.  There is, I suppose, the odd time if he 
has a question of me that he will give me a call, but as far as any 
meetings, I would suggest about three since last October. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, you say that it's an independent board.  What 
is your function at such a board meeting?  Are you there as a guest?  Are 
you there as a person who influences the board in decision makings?  Are 
you there as someone who gives direction to the board?  Are you there to 
participate in setting policy with the board?  What is your function at 
that board? 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well any time that I have met with the board, it's 
been because they might have had specific concerns that they wanted to 
discuss with me.  I generally consider myself more as a guest when I'm 
there, but at the same time I am involved with some policy and we may 
discuss that when I'm there.  Generally the time that I've spent at the 
board meetings would probably be in the neighbourhood of a half hour to an 
hour.  The first time that I met with them was more of an orientation for 
me to meet the board members, but also to hear some of the concerns that 
they had and ways in which . . . I wanted to know how the department could 
work with them, and so it was a very informal meeting that I had with them, 
but not there to necessarily give them directions, certainly. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, I guess what I am trying to establish here is 
exactly what influence you have on the board of directors in decisions that 
they make.  Certainly, you know, you are no stranger to Mr. Houghton and 
Mr. Houghton is no stranger to you, and I'm reading nothing into that.  I 
want to say that from the outset. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, could you tell me, are you in regular contact with Mr. 
Houghton on the telephone? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- No, I wouldn't call it regular contact. 
 
(2045) 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, I'm not going to pursue it and say well is 
once a week or twice a week or once a month -- I think I'll leave it at 
that. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to go on to another area in SIAST and that is the 
appointment of Eva Lee and of course, her resignation.  Mr. Minister, can 
you tell me when Eva Lee was appointed as president of SIAST?  Again, was 
this an open competition?  And now here, of course, I'd like to also know 
how many people applied for that position and who were these individuals 
and what were their qualifications? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, Ms. Lee was appointed as president 
January 1, 1988.  Yes it was an open competition.  As to the number of 
applications there were at that time or where they were from, I have no 
idea how many there were or where they were from.  This again was a 
decision of the board.  They looked after the receipt of the applications.  
As I understand it, they had a committee that was involved with the 
selection process and made their appointment from that.  And I would assume 
that the common practice would be that she was the best applicant at the 
time and that's how the decision was made. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, one of the problems again, I think we have to 
admit, I think was the inability of Eva Lee to communicate with the board 
and with the staff of SIAST.  And also I think one of the problems that she 
probably experienced was her lack of experience in this area.  It's not an 
area that is common to all people.  I know Ms. Eva Lee was head of home 
economics at the U of S.  I don't know Eva Lee personally; I've met her 
once or twice.  But certainly her stint as president of SIAST was not a 



 

 

very good one, I think, and not a very successful one. 
 
I know that there were many administrative organizations put forward by Eva 
Lee and my understanding, Mr. Minister, is that one of the problems they 
had was that the administrative organizations were changed at least five 
times in the time that she was the president.  One time we would go this 
direction, next time it was best to go in another direction.  And we've had 
vice-presidents change, I guess, about three times in the human resources 
area in the last year itself, and we certainly had some difficulties in 
making that a go. 
 
I want to now turn to the letter that I wrote to Mr. Houghton, and I want 
to read it to you -- and some of the difficulties that I have in you 
saying, well go and ask the board of directors or ask management. 
 
I wrote Mr. Houghton a letter and I asked a number of questions.  Mr. 
Houghton wrote back to me on January 2.  I wrote to him on December 15, and 
a number of questions I asked were these: "Dear Mr. Houghton . . " This is 
my letter to him.  I don't know if I sent you a letter or not, Mr. 
Minister.  But I says: 
 

 As the critic for post-secondary education I am interested in the 
budgetary expenditures of SIAST. 

 
And I felt as the critic I had a right to know some of these answers.  I 
said: 
 

 It would be much appreciated if you could, at your earliest convenience, 
answer a number of questions for me. 

 
 1. Of the total budget allocated for 

SIAST for the 1989-90 fiscal year, do you anticipate a deficit? 
 

I thought it was straight forward. 
 

 If so, what is the amount of the deficit? 
 
 2. How much of the total budget has 

been allocated to each of the four campuses? 
 
 3. What per cent of the total budget is 

expended for professional staff, excluding the Corporate body? 
 
 4. What is the budget allocated to the 

Corporate body? 
 
 5. How many people are employed by the 

Corporate body? 
 
 6. How much money is expended by the 

Corporate body on lease arrangements?  Where are the offices located, 
who are the leases with, and who are the owners of these buildings? 

 



 

 

 7. What is the salary paid to the 
president of SIAST, Eva Lee? 

 
 8. In addition to salary what were the 

additional expenditures incurred by the president so far in 1989-90? 
 
 9. What payments are made to the 

Chairperson of the Board of Directors and to each member? 
 
 10. What criteria are used for the 

appointment of the members of the board? 
 
 11. What criteria are used for the 

selection and appointments of the principal of each of the campuses? 
 
 I thank you in advance for a prompt and accurate reply to the above 

questions.  Sincerely . . . 
 

And I signed it as critic for post-secondary education.  Mr. Houghton wrote 
back on January 2: 
 

 Dear Mr. Rolfes:  Thank you for your letter of December 15, 1989 
expressing your interest in SIAST and requesting information. 

 
 Your request will be put before our Board of Directors at the January 17, 

1990 Board meeting.  We have had a number of inquiries such as yours over 
the past month and it is important for the Board to establish a procedure 
for handling requests. 

 
 In the meantime, I am enclosing two pieces of information which will 

answer a number of your questions.  The first is SIAST's annual report 
which contains a statement of financial position.  The second is the 
Order-in-Council outlining the appointment of Board members, remuneration 
rates, and so on. 

 
 Our Board has a scheduled day long meeting each month except August. 
 
 I will get in touch with you shortly after our January Board meeting. 
 

Well I wrote back to Mr. Houghton, and I said the following: 
 

 Dear Mr. Houghton: ( I wrote back to him on February 22)  On December 15, 
1989, I wrote to you as Chairman of SIAST's board of directors requesting 
answers to a number of questions.  On January 2, 1990, you replied saying 
that my questions would be placed before the board at a meeting on January 
17, 1990.  You indicated that you would be in touch with me shortly after 
that meeting.  It is now February 21, 1990, and I have not received any 
further communication from you concerning my letter of December 15.  I 
would very much appreciate it if you would reply to my letter and write me 
with the information requested as soon as possible. 

 
And I signed the letter.  Well I did not hear from Mr. Meiklejohn and today 
is May 3.  He has not corresponded with me whatsoever.  So, Mr. Minister, I 



 

 

then wrote to Ms. Eva Lee on March 23: 
 

 Dear Ms. Lee:  Further to the letter sent to Mr. Houghton of March 5, 
1990, which is in response to my letter of December 15, 1989, I would 
appreciate an immediate reply to the questions I asked in my letter.  I 
hope that you will respond positively and quickly so that I can adequately 
perform my duties in the legislature as critic for post-secondary 
education. 

 
And then I signed it, "Thank you for what I hope will be a positive 
response".  And I sign it. 
 
I did this, Mr. Minister, because last year I got stonewalled.  The 
minister told me: go to the board of directors, go to the chairman, go to 
the president.  This is exactly what I did.  And I did not, Mr. Minister, 
get any reply, satisfactory reply, from either the chairman of the board or 
the president.  Now I understand now of course why the president didn't 
answer, because in the mean time, Ms. Lee has resigned her position. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, I hope you can put yourself in my position as the critic 
for post-secondary education with a responsibility to try and find out for 
the people of Saskatchewan whether moneys have been expended according to 
the law of the land and according to rules and regulations laid down by 
this legislature.  I can't do that if I cannot get the answers from you as 
the minister responsible.  I cannot get those answers in public accounts, 
and I cannot seem to be able to get them from the chairman of the board or 
the president. 
 
Now I think, Mr. Minister, that that is not an acceptable policy.  
Somewhere along the line, I think, in a democratic government the 
opposition has a right to those answers of the questions that we have 
asked.  And it's not just thousands of dollars; here are millions of 
dollars of public money being expended.  And I think the public has a right 
to know those through the official opposition. 
 
Now I'm asking you again, Mr. Minister, in view of the fact that I cannot 
get these answers from the chairman of the board, I don't seem to be able 
to get them either from Ms. Lee, who I know has resigned but there is a 
replacement, an acting president, a Bryan Dunleavy, who I would expect 
would pick up her duties, and if he had any intentions of answering my 
question or my letter, would have done so. 
 
So I'm asking you, Mr. Minister, would you as the minister responsible for 
post-secondary education, then take it upon yourself to answer these 
questions in the legislature so that we can guarantee the people out there 
that yes, their money is well spent and it is spent according to the rules 
and regulations and the laws laid down by this legislature.  Would you do 
that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I presume that the member 
opposite is interested in all sectors of post-secondary education.  So I 
would assume that he has also contacted the president of the University of 
Saskatchewan and the University of Regina, as well as the chairman of the 



 

 

board of governors in each case, asking them for this same type of 
information.  And he didn't indicate that, but I would assume that he would 
be contacting them in the same way because we are talking about independent 
institutions here. 
 
With regard to his concern about whether the money is being spent properly 
and whether business is being conducted in the proper manner, Mr. Chairman, 
SIAST is subject to an annual audit in the same way that any other 
institution is.  The annual report, if it hasn't already been tabled in the 
House, will be tabled here, and certainly he has an opportunity to take a 
look at what's happening at that time.  But if the chairman of the board or 
the president doesn't see fit to provide that information, that's maybe 
unfortunate, but again the same thing would apply at the universities. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, I must admit I am terribly disappointed.  I 
must admit I had high hopes and was very pleased when you were appointed as 
Minister of Education, as I did not expect that you would follow that 
stonewalling, that secretive kind of policy that the former minister of 
Education ran.  I'm disappointed in you, terribly disappointed, and the 
people have to be. 
 
Yes, Mr. Minister, I met with the four top officials of the University of 
Regina; I asked them a number of questions.  And I will be meeting with the 
president of the University of Saskatchewan.  I've already met with the 
president of the University of Saskatchewan.  He was very, very frank with 
me on every question I asked him. 
 
I met with the top officials of the U of S, at least the four or five top 
officials.  They were very frank in answering all of my questions that I 
asked.  I did not ask for a meeting with Mr. Houghton because I didn't 
think that he would give me a meeting, but I did write to him in all 
sincerity as critic for post-secondary education.  And I do think that he 
has an obligation or you have an obligation to the people of Saskatchewan 
to answer these questions. 
 
You can laugh it off, Mr. Minister, that's fine.  You can laugh it off, but 
I'll tell you, the people out there aren't laughing.  And I'll tell you 
that people, the staff at Kelsey aren't laughing. Neither are the staff at 
Northlands college. They're not laughing. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Why? 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Because you aren't answering the questions for them.  
Because everything you've done in secret, and so much of it is done for 
political reasons. That's why -- that's why. 
 
I asked you a number of questions. All right?  I'll ask you a question 
then, Mr. Minister, see if you will answer it.  You said I should ask you a 
question; I will. 
 
Number one, Mr. Minister, would you please answer for me: of the total 
budget allocated for SIAST for the 1989-90 fiscal year, do you anticipate a 
deficit?  If so, what is that deficit and what caused that deficit? 



 

 

 
(2100) 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, a couple of points.  The report for 
1988-89 did show a deficit of $1.9 million.  That was because of the 
accrual accounting method that is used, an estimate that was made in view 
of the fact that it was thought that the salaries could be settled in that 
particular year, but in fact they weren't.  So there would not have been 
that deficit in '89-89.  Now of course if he's talking about '89-90, we 
haven't reached their year end yet, so we are not going to have an 
accounting of what the deficit is going to be at that point. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, I do want to ask you: am I not correct in 
saying according to the legislation that was passed in this Assembly in 
1987 that SIAST is not allowed to run a deficit?  And if it isn't, how are 
you dealing with SIAST's not abiding by the law of the land? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, they can run a deficit with the 
minister's approval.  So I mean, there is that possibility.  I would point 
out as well, that the budget for SIAST this year has been increased by some 
10.7 per cent, if you consider the increase in the operating grant plus the 
enhancement fund.  So they got a significant amount of new money there.  
And until such time as their year end is reached and their books are 
audited, no one is going to know exactly what type of deficit they might be 
looking at. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Would you mind telling the legislature what your reasons 
were for allowing them to run a deficit? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- We have to keep in mind, Mr. Chairman, that the 
negotiations have now been completed and an agreement reached, and there is 
a substantial amount of money that's required to put into that agreement.  
As a result, you could really only estimate how much money they are 
actually going to need and whether or not the grant is going to be adequate 
enough to cover that -- you never really know for sure. 
 
At the same time, we have to give some comfort to the board that, in fact, 
if a deficit does occur, that it can happen with ministerial approval.  But 
we're not going to know exactly how much the deficit is until their year 
end is concerned.  But I would assume that because of the salary settlement 
that there will, in fact, be a small deficit.  I don't know how much it 
will be at this point. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, you're telling me that the reason you okayed a 
deficit was because of the salary increases -- is that correct?  Okay.  Mr. 
Minister, would you mind telling me what suggestions have you made or did 
your department make any suggestions to SIAST as to how they were going to 
make up this deficit? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, the board of SIAST is going to have 
to determine how they will deal with any deficit that should arise.  They 
are looking at all kinds of different options at the present time.  They're 
looking at a changing mix, if you will, of programs.  There may be some 



 

 

programs that would be deleted if they become redundant. 
 
They're also looking at an expansion, I suppose, if we consider some of the 
contracts that they do get with other agencies.  And we know the expansion 
of programs in foreign countries, and a lot of excellent work being done 
there.  And we do know, as well, Mr. Chairman, that there has been a modest 
increase in tuition fees.  But the students at SIAST, I believe now, that 
their tuition fee is still in the neighbourhood of 5 or 6 per cent of the 
total cost of their year.  The board has to look at all of these options.  
As far as the department is concerned, my officials are involved with them 
in helping to provide data and this sort of thing, and information that 
they need as they take a look at how they can deal with this. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, you had indicated a modest increase in tuition 
fees.  Well maybe I suppose to some people 10 per cent is a modest 
increase.  That's almost double inflation.  It certainly doesn't seem to be 
a very modest increase for the students at SIAST, neither the students at 
the U of R or the students at the U of S.  We'll get into that on another 
day in our estimates on the university student fee increases. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to continue with the questions I asked Mr. Houghton.  
The next question I had asked: how much of the total budget has been 
allocated to each of the four campuses in the year 1989-90? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, the allocation of moneys to the 
different campuses, of course, is a decision of the board.  We can attempt 
to get that information for the member. 
 
Also a comment with regard to tuition fees.  One can suggest that a 10 per 
cent increase does sound like quite a bit of money, but in actual fact a 10 
per cent increase was probably in the neighbourhood of $60, which is not a 
whole heck of a lot of money.  The maximum fee at SIAST now, Mr. Chairman, 
is $720 for a 38-week program.  And just to relate that to the other 
provinces in western Canada: B.C., it's $816; Alberta is $639 -- they had a 
15 per cent increase, so theirs is 150 per cent of ours; Manitoba is $605. 
 
So we are higher than Alberta and Manitoba, Mr. Chairman, but even at that, 
$720 for a 38-week program is not an exorbitant amount of money.  And I 
would hope that a 10 per cent increase is not going to create any hardship 
for the students, considering the fact that they are still paying in the 
neighbourhood of 5 per cent, 5 per cent of the total cost of the program's 
operating costs. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, I do agree with you that it's a much better 
deal than they would get from one of the private schools, private 
vocational schools that we're going to be talking about later on. 
 
Mr. Minister, I could go through all of these.  I do want to ask you: what 
per cent of the total budget is expended for professional staff, excluding 
the corporate body?  You may not have that with you but you can supply that 
to me before the estimates are finished.  But I do want to ask you the next 
question.  What is the budget allocated to the corporate body itself for 
'88-89? 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, in the same way that the Department 
of Education provides an operating grant to the universities, we do not ask 
them for a statement, other than what we get in the annual report, as to 
how that money is allocated.  Now the member opposite is asking for 
something that is provided in the annual report in the same way the reports 
are provided in universities.  So if he can take a look at that. 
 
We provide the operating grant to SIAST and the allocations then are made 
by the board and by the administration.  We know that they are responsible 
people and they know the needs that they have on each particular campus, 
how much it costs to operate the different programs.  So we certainly don't 
have that information here, other than I would point out what's in the 
annual report.  You take a look at the annual report, pages 24 and 25, 
you've got a statement of the SIAST up to the end of June 30, 1989, and you 
can see there some of the areas of expenditure that they've had.  That's 
the information that you should have, in the same way that it's provided 
from the universities. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- That simply isn't good enough.  What I want to know, and 
what the people of Saskatchewan what to know: just how much money was spent 
by the corporate body?  And that is not in here -- can't find that in the 
annual report. I've looked through it. 
 
I also want to ask you: how much was spent on travelling expenses by the 
corporate body?  What were the travelling expenses of the president of the 
corporate body?  How much was expended for suites in the Regina Inn by 
members of the corporate body?  Do we still have a suite rented in the 
Regina Inn, or when did we cease paying for a suite in the Regina Inn? 
 
I think these are all questions, Mr. Minister, that the public have a right 
to know; this is public money. And you are not really at arm's length. You 
appoint the board, and I just don't believe that the public is satisfied 
for you to simply say, well we have no control, we have no say over the 
board of directors.  Why, you appoint them.  You, I'm sure, are consulted 
as to who the chairman of the board is.  I'm sure it wasn't by accident 
that Mr. Houghton was appointed the chairman of the board.  I mean, people 
of Saskatchewan aren't that naive.  They know you had an influence and a 
decision in who the chairman of the board was going to be.  And I think, 
Mr. Minister, you have a responsibility to answer those questions in the 
legislature.  And if you don't, I'll just simply keep on asking and we'll 
be here, as I said, a long time. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to ask you again, and I'll go through these again 
tomorrow if I need to, can you tell me how many people are employed by the 
corporate body? 
 
(2115) 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, let me refer the member again 
to page 24 in the annual report.  The total costs for administration ending 
June 30, 1989, was a little over two and a half million dollars, and travel 
was a little bit over $1.8 million.  Now board expenditures is also there, 



 

 

$168,768.  Mr. Chairman, I can't tell you the breakdown of these particular 
expenditures any more than if I had the annual report here from the 
University of Saskatchewan or the University of Regina as to what the 
expenditures would be for the president or for the vice-presidents or for 
their administrative offices.  That information is not available to us.  
And with regard to board appointments - 
_ he talks about board appointments of SIAST -- yes, Mr. Chairman, we do 
appoint the board, but we also appoint half the board members to both 
universities.  But they don't provide us with a breakdown as to all of this 
information. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, am I to take from what you said . . . I asked 
for corporate expenditures, and you said, well okay, administrative was two 
and a half million dollars.  It was two and a half million dollars to 
administer the corporate body?  And for travel that the corporate body 
spent $1.8 million in expenditures for travel?  How big is the corporate 
body?  You didn't answer the question: how big is the corporate body?  How 
many members are there in the corporate body?  I want to divide that into 
$1.8 million and see what they expended in that year for travel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- The administration, Mr. Chairman, was a little over 
two and a half million dollars, and that would include the administration 
on each and every campus; it also includes the corporate offices, the 
corporate body.  The travel would be the same thing.  It would be travel 
for, I presume, administration, faculty members from the campuses, as well 
as what would have been done by the corporate office. 
 
With regard to the number of people there are in the corporate office, I 
couldn't tell the member opposite how many people in the corporate office 
any more than I can say how many are in the corporate office or 
administration of the University of Regina campus or the University of 
Saskatchewan.  So when we talk administration here, this is for total 
administration: four campuses plus the corporate office and all that's 
involved there. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, what you're saying is that you will not 
divulge what the corporate body expended as far as administration is 
concerned, as far as travelling expenses are concerned.  You simply won't 
tell the people of Saskatchewan what it is . . . (inaudible interjection) . 
. . Well I don't believe you, Mr. Minister.  I just don't believe you that 
you don't have that information. 
 
The Minister of Education says it's a problem of the people of Saskatchewan 
that they don't know what the corporate body expends on travel and 
administrative costs.  I'd tell the Minister of Education that you have an 
obligation to this legislature to tell the people exactly what is expended 
by those people that you have appointed.  You appointed them, and I think 
you have an obligation to tell this legislature what is expended on that 
corporate body. 
 
That is one of the problems that the people had.  They saw these people 
living high off the hog, high off the hog, making these huge expenditures, 
suites rented at the Regina Inn.  And Mr. Minister, they couldn't get a 



 

 

settlement.  They couldn't get a fair settlement and had to go on strike 
for weeks and months at an end.  That was one of the problems, Mr. 
Minister, that you had, and still have.  And I think you owe it to the 
people of Saskatchewan to answer some of these questions. 
 
Mr. Minister, would you mind telling me what kind of contract Eva Lee was 
given by the board of directors or by SIAST?  And I want to be more 
specific.  Was it a contract of personal employment?  Was it a contract for 
personal service contracts?  Or was it an order in council under the terms 
of the Public Service Commission?  Which one of those three was it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well you know, Mr. Chairman, it's unfortunate that 
the member opposite wastes time asking the questions that he does because 
we don't have the knowledge as to the contracts.  That was between the 
president and between the board of governors.  I think it's unfortunate 
that the member opposite isn't talking about some of the excellent programs 
that are going on at SIAST and the excellent work that's being done with 
regard to distance education and the opportunities that they're providing 
for more and more adults and grade 12 graduates from different places in 
the province -- a lot of really good stuff that's going on. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, it's unfortunate that we don't really deal with the good 
things that are happening in SIAST instead of wasting a lot of time on 
questions here that are where the information is between the board of 
governors and in this particular case the president.  So, Mr. Chairman, if 
the member wants information in that regard, I would suggest he'll have to 
ask the chairman of the board for it. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, the chairman of the board, as you well know, I 
read the letter to you, refuses to answer my questions and I believe he 
probably was instructed, either by you or the government, not to answer 
those questions.  And that's why you are stonewalling here.  And that's why 
the chairman of the board, who I do not believe is at arm's-length, he's 
your appointment, the board is your appointment and, Mr. Minister, the 
reason you won't give me these answers is because there has been a huge 
waste of public moneys in the corporate body.  That's why you won't give it 
to us. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, you might not want to tell me what the salary was for 
Ms. Lee.  You know what it is.  Yes you do.  I believe it was somewhere in 
the neighbourhood of $110,000 -- I think I might be out a thousand or two, 
one way or the other -- and her severance pay was six months.  But I wanted 
to know under which of these three she was employed, whether it was under a 
contract for personal employment or personal service contract, because I 
wanted to know exactly whether her severance pay was in line with the 
policy set down by your government. 
 
So Ms. Lee was well paid and she, I am told, did receive severance pay of 
six months.  And so, Mr. Minister, I'm sure that if I have that 
information, you have that information.  So it's nothing secret what those 
. . . As we know the salary of the president of the university is probably 
145 or 150,000.  That is no secret.  That's just a little more than what 
you make as a minister of the Crown.  Oh, well actually it's quite a bit 



 

 

more. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, look.  You know, don't tell me that you don't know this 
information.  I know you know it.  So let's have some of the answers.  Come 
clean with the public.  You have an obligation to let the public know how 
that money is expended. 
 
You, Mr. Minister, made the decision.  Your government made the decision to 
reorganize.  Your government made the decision to hire your political 
people on those boards as the chairman and as the president.  You made that 
decision.  You made the decision to give them millions of dollars.  Now you 
have an obligation, through the opposition, to tell the people how that 
money is expended.  You simply can't sit there and hide behind the people 
that you have appointed.  Those are your appointments; those are your 
people.  And, Mr. Minister, don't tell me -- I don't believe you, the 
public doesn't believe you, when you tell me that you don't know the 
answers to the questions that I'm asking. 
 
You don't want to tell them.  That's the reason, because you are 
embarrassed.  You are embarrassed at how the public money has been 
squandered while programs are suffering, while staff couldn't get an 
increase.  They had to go on strike.  And now you're saying to the student 
body, you will have to pay more because of the mismanagement of some of the 
people that you appointed to these positions.  That's why you don't want to 
tell us.  Mr. Minister, it is simply unfair and it's unacceptable.  It's 
simply unacceptable. 
 
Mr. Minister, I am going to take a break right now and let my colleague 
from Saskatoon Centre ask a particular question, but I'll be back.  Thank 
you very much. 
 
Ms. Smart: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I want to ask you a 
particular question about the student loan program.  I'm sure you've been 
hearing from my colleagues their concerns about student loans, and you'll 
be hearing more about it in the hours to come on the budget estimates for 
Education. 
 
But I have a particular problem that's been raised by a constituent of mine 
that I want to question you about.  I've written you a letter about this 
issue and I have not had a reply from you in writing, but I have had a 
phone call from Don Reimer who is one of your assistants. 
 
Let me try to explain as carefully as I can this particular issue that I 
want to question you about, because it's one that has affected a young 
woman constituent who is trying to go to Robertson Career College for a 
year's training. 
 
Now this particular person has been in and out of the work-force, getting 
employment from time to time, but not been able to get a good paying job 
that would allow her the independence that she needs now that she's an 
adult.  So she's applied to go to Robertson Career College, and she applied 
for a student loan.  And in the assessment that came back regarding this 
particular person, one of the items that she was . . . Now she's applied 



 

 

for Robertson Career College.  Let me be clear, the program that she wants 
to go to runs from this May to next May -- May 1990 to May 1991 -- a full 
year straight through.  And she's expected to contribute some money from 
something called a student work-period income. 
 
Now apparently the way the students are assessed is that your department 
decides that they're going to earn a certain amount of money in the course 
of their time in school, and she's been assessed that she's going to be 
able to get, in her student work-period, $1,135.  Now because she's 
assessed as getting this amount of money from her work-period income, she 
is not then eligible for the full Canada student loan, and once she's not 
eligible for the full Canada student loan, she's then is not allowed to get 
the Saskatchewan student loan. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Chairman, if the 
Minister of Finance would stop yapping from his seat, I . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order, order.  I'd ask members on both sides of the House 
to allow the member for Saskatoon Centre to put her question without a 
debate going across the floor. 
 
Ms. Smart: -- Mr. Chairman, I was having particular difficulty with one 
person on the opposite side of the House. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to ask you about this student work-period income that 
this young woman is supposed to have.  Now when we questioned your 
assistant about this, because of this income that she's supposed to have, 
she's not qualified for the full Canada student loan.  And because she's 
not qualified for the full Canada student loan, she can't get the 
Saskatchewan student loan.  So she's not getting the amount of income that 
she needs in order to go into this program at Robertson Career College. 
 
(2130) 
 
Now my understanding from talking to your assistant is that the definition 
of a student work-period is the months that she was supposedly working 
prior to getting accepted into this program.  Now she's been working on and 
off, part-time work, not been able to get anything very substantial to 
maintain herself.  So she obviously has had great trouble saving up 
anything in order to go to school.  She's also not going to be able to get 
a part-time job during the summer as university students have, because her 
program goes for one year straight through. 
 
So I'm concerned about what you're defining as a student work-period income 
for this particular situation, Mr. Minister.  She has been asked to provide 
your department with evidence that she's been looking for work.  And, Mr. 
Minister, if you know what's happening to the young people of this 
province, you will know that they are going around in the city of Saskatoon 
and in other parts of the province asking people for work.  They've been 
asking at Pizza Hut and submarines, they've been asking at Safeways, 
they've been asking at 7 Eleven stores.  And if they get rejected for work, 
they don't think at that particular time to collect any evidence from the 
employer that they've been there looking for work.  They simply take the 



 

 

rejection and they go off and they go looking for work some place else. 
 
She's been going through this process for a while.  Nothing indicated to 
her that she should save up evidence in order to present it to your 
department once she decided that a good work position was not available to 
her and that she was going to have to go to school. 
 
And now she wants to get into this program and your department is saying 
she has to have income, or evidence of looking for work in the student 
work-period.  Will you please explain that to the House, just exactly how 
you see people being able to meet that demand, these young people.  They're 
having such a terrible time finding work and are trying so hard to get 
through school and who are being cut back in the amount of money they can 
get on student loans, because you assess them as having collected money 
that they don't have. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, one thing that I would suggest 
to the member opposite, that she can probably provide a lot of assistance 
to her constituents if she made sure that she herself is fully aware of the 
programs that we have and the different conditions that must be met.  And 
that can be a help certainly to the Department of Education, but I think an 
even bigger help to your constituents. 
 
So I appreciate your asking the question because there sometimes is a lot 
of concern out there, and some of the students have not either taken time 
to read all of the information, or it hasn't been available to them, or 
there are things that they don't understand and they don't always know 
where to turn for help. 
 
But with regard to what we refer to as a work term, this would be the four 
months prior to the start of a course.  So if you're suggesting that the 
course would be starting this month, it would be the four months prior to 
May of 1990.  And I think that the conditions there are very minimal, and 
it's considered it would be on the basis of the person being paid minimum 
wage. 
 
But you pointed out that in some cases these young people maybe do have a 
difficult time finding a job. Quite a few of them do, but some do have 
difficulty. There are exceptions that can be made so that a student, if 
they can in fact prove that they have been doing a job search and have not 
been successful, that it may in fact be possible for them to get a larger 
loan.  So whether or not your constituent has gone through these different 
steps, I'm not sure, but that would be the process if she hasn't.  If she 
hasn't got the $1,135 because she was not able to find enough work, then I 
would suggest that all that she would have to do is to document in some way 
that she has in fact been looking for work and was not able to raise that 
amount of money, and then it may be possible for her to apply and get a 
larger loan. 
 
Ms. Smart: -- Mr. Minister, your responses show exactly what the problem is 
for the young people of this province.  First of all, you have suggested 
that I have not been giving them the help, and I've been getting all the 
information from your office. So if she isn't getting help, she isn't 



 

 

getting it from your office because that's where I've been in touch for 
information. 
 
Secondly, you have put the onus on the person themselves; you have said 
that she hasn't read the forms properly, that she doesn't know what she's 
dealing with.  She's read very clearly what you've sent to her.  She 
understands very clearly that your expectation is that she will have saved 
documentation from her work searches, which have been sporadic over the 
last few months because there isn't work out there for young people.  And 
she has not saved it because the decision was made recently that she would 
have to go back to school, and the program starts this May.  It's been 
quite a quick decision, Mr. Minister.  Can you understand that? -- in 
people's lives, just what that means to make that kind of decision.  That 
you can't find work elsewhere. 
 
Now you have also said, Mr. Minister, that people can save over four 
months, $1,135 when they're working on minimum wage.  And that again shows 
how little you understand the situations in this province.  If you have a 
40 hour work week and you're getting $4.50 an hour, you only make about 
$640 a month.  If you have to pay your expenses, how in the heck can you 
save over a thousand dollars from that kind of income?  I bet you've never 
had to do that.  I'd like to see you walk around in someone's shoes for 
awhile that has had to do that. 
 
I think you could start to demonstrate some understanding of what's 
happening with the young people here.  And I think that your statements 
that . . . when you stand up and say that within four months she should 
have saved these documentations that she's been looking for work is really 
being very hard on the young people.  She's asking for a student loan.  
She's going to get in debt up to her ears because of the interest rates.  
But she's not being given a Saskatchewan student loan based on this 
decision -- that she has a work-period, that she's going to earn that 
money. 
 
My point is this: it's not usual for young people to save up the evidence, 
but even more, it's so arrogant in a way to say that people on minimum wage 
should be able to save any amount of money towards their education.  
Minimum wage is not even a living wage and lots of young people, like this 
young woman, can't even get 40 hours of work a week.  They're lucky if they 
can get 20 hours or 15 hours.  And they can't save money on that, Mr. 
Minister; they can't. 
 
Now you have got to be more accountable to the students.  Don't blame me; 
I've done what I can do, given your department.  Don't blame her; she's 
trying to get through school.  She's got time to get through career 
college.  Give us a good explanation as to why you think young people 
should be able to save these kinds of money and why you're cutting them out 
of the Saskatchewan student loan program. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- You know, the member opposite, she's more than 
trying at times, Mr. Chairman.  I certainly was not putting her down.  I 
mean, she gets this narrow view and she doesn't take time to listen to the 
answers or she would have heard what in fact that I was saying. 



 

 

 
I think that you can provide a very good service for your constituents.  I 
was just suggesting that you need to make yourself aware of some of these 
programs too, and be helpful in more cases and we're willing to work with 
you on that.  I fully understand the difficult time that many students have 
today. 
 
And for you to stand up and make any kind of statements with regard to . . 
. (inaudible interjection) . . . We seem to have a little interference from 
another channel, Mr. Chairman.  For you to stand up and make any kind of 
statements with regard to my background and how I got my education.  I got 
my education the hard way, and I would certainly be willing to discuss that 
with you at some time, and how I got my education.  And it certainly wasn't 
by having people that handed me a lot on a silver platter either; it was 
all a matter of hard work.  Now you weren't listening to what I was saying 
. . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Well what are you saying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- I was suggesting to you that this particular 
student -- and you haven't given us all the information.  You haven't told 
us whether or not this student is living at home.  You haven't told us that 
at all.  The fact of the matter is that it's a very minimal requirement, I 
think, for students to keep track of job searches or whatever that they're 
doing.  It seems almost today that everybody has to have the government do 
everything for them.  Well where has responsibility gone? 
 
Now for goodness sakes, is it asking too much when a student wants to get a 
student loan -- and we go by the Canada student loan criteria -- is it too 
much then to ask that they should not be able to provide in some way a 
record as to how much they have been looking for work over that period of 
time?  I don't think so. 
 
And let's keep in mind that the student loan programs are there as 
supplementary programs.  It's not the intent that they should be providing 
all of the assistance for students to go on to a college or to university. 
 
Now again, you can stand in your place and you can throw these figures 
around, but you haven't told us whether this young person is living at 
home; you haven't indicated whether or not the parents are providing any 
assistance.  I mean, there's a lot of information here that you're not 
making available. 
 
Now I've indicated to you that if she can indicate that she has been 
looking for work and has not been able to find enough to make a minimum 
amount or save a minimum amount of money, that there is a process by which 
she can apply for a larger loan.  Now you didn't hear me say that. 
 
If you would just listen to what I was indicating to you, if you've got a 
student that is living away from home, they wouldn't really have to save 
all that amount of money per month to meet the minimum requirements to 
qualify for these student loans.  So until I see all of the detail here, I 
couldn't give you any more of an indication on whether this student should 



 

 

be getting more money or not, but it's something that we're willing to look 
at.  If you need more information or the student needs more information, we 
will be very, very happy to provide that for you.  But I'm wanting to work 
with you on this; I'm not working against you. 
 
Ms. Smart: -- Mr. Minister, I realize that I haven't given you the details 
of this particular case, because I want a decision on the principle of this 
concept of student's work-period. 
 
What you are telling me, Mr. Minister, is that students have to find out . 
. . she has to have decided five months ago that she can't make it, and she 
has to come down to a constituency office or by some happenstance get the 
information, because we don't know that the students are trying to do this.  
We are not in touch with people prior to the decisions that they make. 
 
This young woman came to see me because she had decided that she wanted to 
get into Robertson Career College, and she was accepted, and she wanted to 
get in.  And she needed the student loan; she was prepared to take on that 
debt.  Yes, it's not the whole amount of money that she needs to live on.  
It's not enough, the interest rates are high, she's taking on a major debt.  
That's what she chose to do.  And you're denying that to her on the basis 
of some income that she should have been able to earn, and on the basis of 
having saved up some evidence. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, the problems are this: that if you're saying that 
students should know, six months ahead of time or a year ahead of time, 
that they are then going to go on to school, and that they then have to 
find out from your department what's involved in getting a student loan, 
and go through the hoops to meet your requirements, and another year later 
in their lives get into the college of their choice, then be clear with 
that.  Put that out as your policy.  Put that out as your policy.  Tell us 
that people have to know ahead of time, that they have to second-guess what 
your program is, so that they can prepare themselves for it. 
 
I don't see that information getting out to the students, or to the 
potential students.  I don't see you taking the initiative to let people 
know that they have to save up the evidence that they've been looking for 
work, and that they have to come up with a certain amount of money even 
though they're working on minimum wage. 
 
I don't see you making it known to people that even if they get into a 
student program that goes for a full year and doesn't allow them any break 
in the middle where they could maybe earn some income, that they're going 
to have to get work and have a work-period.  So I ask you, Mr. Minister: 
will you be fair with the young students of this province -- if this is 
your policy, how are they going to know about it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well I wish, Mr. Chairman, that when the member was 
up, she would have given an indication as to whether this person was living 
at home or not, because there is different information that I can give in 
each particular case.  But she asks: how are these young people to know?  
Well let me point out to her this: that we send out some 75,000 guides with 
regard to all of the information that applies to student loans for those 



 

 

who want to go on to further education.  And these go out to all of the 
high schools; they're on all the SIAST campuses; they're on the university 
campuses, and I dare say that the private vocational schools, as well, 
would have them.  And you suggest she's going to Robertson's. I would think 
that they would have that information.  So I don't think that there's a 
problem here with the young people getting the information. It is 
available. 
 
(2145) 
 
Now I don't know whether she graduated from grade 12 last year or left high 
school last year, but that information would have been available at her 
high school, if in fact that was the case.  And I would point out that, if 
this person happens to be living away from home, that the amount of money 
that they would have to save would only be about $90 for a four-month 
period. 
 
Now if you're saying $1,135, one would almost think then that maybe this 
young person is still living at home.  So if you've got a person that's 
living at home, even if they were working on minimum wage and not having to 
pay any living costs, I would think in that period of time should be able 
to save a substantial amount of money.  But I don't know what the 
particular situation is. 
 
So there are those opportunities there.  The information is available and I 
think that the young people have to make some plans on their own.  They 
have to make a decision at some point what they're going to take a look at.  
And if the person's coming out of high school, the information should have 
been available there. 
 
We also, I think, are not expecting too much if the young person really 
only has to identify a minimum number of employers that she would have 
talked to in seeking work.  Even over a four-month period of time, anyone 
should be able to keep in mind some of the places that they have gone to 
try and get work.  And we take the student's word for that. We're not 
hard-hearted on this.  There is a lot of flexibility here.  So don't make 
it sound like the person is being unfairly treated by the student loan fund 
and the people that are working there, because that is not the case at all.  
So minimum requirements are needed.  We are there to help out as many 
students as we can.  And of course many of these students as well do have a 
lot of loan forgiveness or remission of loans; they don't pay interest 
while they're going to school.  So lots of opportunity there for them. 
 
Ms. Smart: -- Mr. Minister, just let me be clear.  This is a young person 
whose life story is very similar to many other young people.  She's been 
out of high school for a while, like a lot of people have.  She's not been 
just a graduate from high school whose graduated with a form in her hand 
from your department about how to get student loans.  Yes, she's gone to a 
college to enrol in a program and been accepted and wants to start right 
away.  Obviously, she got the information about the student loans because 
she's applied for one.  But her life has been a hectic search for work.  
She was away from home, now she is back at home because she hasn't got any 
other alternative.  And she wants to get into this program quite quickly.  



 

 

That's the situation; that's the information, and she's been told that she 
has to show that she's looked for work.  Now she has not kept that record, 
like many young people don't keep that record. 
 
And I wanted to question you in a general way in terms of the policies of 
your department, because it struck me that this case was a fairly typical 
one.  I see a lot of young people having to go back home after they've been 
away trying to work and live on their own.  They've graduated from high 
school and they think that they can maybe get some work that would keep 
them in independence, and they're finding that's not possible and they're 
trying to get back to school.  And this particular person had an 
opportunity to go into a program right away and has been denied access to a 
Saskatchewan student loan because of the hoops they have to go through, as 
you've just described, Mr. Minister. 
 
And I just want to express my regret that the young people are being denied 
this financial assistance because it's hard on their families.  These are 
families that don't have large incomes, Mr. Minister.  These are families 
that are having to take their young people back into their homes to try to 
get them through their schooling, and it's tough on all of them, it's tough 
on all the family members.  I wanted to make that point here in the 
legislature and hear what you had to say, rather than take a phone call 
from your assistant. 
 
I appreciate your discussion here tonight.  I understand that you're not 
prepared to help the people in the way that I think they should be helped.  
I think that your description of people having to look after themselves and 
be responsible is just exactly what this young woman is trying to do.  
She's trying to get through a program, she asked for some help, and your 
department couldn't give it to her, and that's too bad. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, let me point out to the member 
that we help students out in whatever way we can.  And my suggestion to her 
would be this: that she has an obligation, I think, to help her constituent 
here, and it sounds to me like these are extenuating circumstances.  And 
what I would suggest to her is that where there are extenuating 
circumstances, that she could help this individual with the appeal process, 
and that is something that is open to situations such as this, where they 
can . . . Maybe as you say, it's going through more hoops, but at the same 
time, we're not always aware of the extenuating circumstances that do 
exist.  But I suggest to you that there is a way that you can do good 
service for your constituent and you can also work with us at the same 
time, and we will see if there are any other ways that we can help this 
person. 
 
I certainly commend anyone who is willing to go back to school and try to 
improve their situation, try to improve their education so that they can in 
fact go out and get into the work force. 
 
So we're willing to work with you on that and provide you whatever 
assistance we can in going through this appeal process, and it sounds like 
you could be very beneficial in this case. 
 



 

 

Ms. Smart: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister, I'll share that information with 
this particular constituent. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, tomorrow in much more detail I will continue 
with what the member from Saskatoon Centre has brought up this evening.  
Now I have a number of cases, and again I don't want you to feel that I'm 
being accusatory of yourself, not on the matter of student loans.  On the 
other matters that we brought up this evening, yes I was. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, I do want to return for just a minute to the change in 
the corporate body office from Regina to Saskatoon.  Can I get some 
assurances, Mr. Minister.  You know when the crop insurance was moved from 
Regina to Melville, there were some assurances given by your government to 
those employees who felt it was impossible for them to move from Regina to 
Meville.  There are also some employees who are very concerned about having 
to leave Regina for Saskatoon.  And parenthetically speaking, Mr. Minister, 
I just can't fathom that as to why they wouldn't want to move to Saskatoon, 
but they do feel that way. 
 
Mr. Minister, can I obtain from you this evening some assurances that these 
people will be given a guarantee of employment elsewhere rather than being 
outrightly dismissed if they do not take the transfer to Saskatoon.  Can 
you give me some assurances on that this evening? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I know that it will possibly 
cause some concern in some cases with regard to the employees that would be 
moving to Saskatoon.  I think that for the most part everyone is very much 
in favour of the office moving, but at the same time, if you've got 
individuals who are deeply rooted in the community here in Regina, it may 
be a little bit more difficult. 
 
I would hope that SIAST will treat all of the employees fairly.  I am sure 
that they will, in the same way as he has indicated that other similar 
situations have been done, but the decision there will be up to the SIAST 
board of governors and I am sure that they will want to treat all of these 
employees in a fair manner. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, I appreciate that concern, but I guess what 
they are looking for is a little more from the minister to, in this 
particular case, discuss it with the chairman of the board and the board of 
directors if need be, to make absolutely certain that these people are 
protected and that alternate employment will be sought for them here in 
Regina if that is the case. 
 
And I would hope that the minister would do more than just say, well it's 
up to the board.  I would hope that you'd use some of your influence and to 
indicate to the board that, yes, these people came to work with us with the 
understanding that they would have their employment here in Regina; now a 
decision is made to move the office and I think they want some assurances.  
And I just want to ask you again, Mr. Minister, will you use your influence 
with the chairman of the board or the board to see whether or not these 
people can have some protection when this move is made. 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm sure that the majority of the 
staff will be moving to Saskatoon.  I agree with the member opposite; I 
couldn't see any reason why they wouldn't want to.  But at the same time, 
if there are some of those who won't be moving, I would hope that they will 
be treated fairly, whether or not it's a move to another position or 
whatever the case might be, but I would hope indeed that would be the case. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- I guess, Mr. Minister, what I wanted from you is: will you 
give them the same assurances, or will you seek to obtain the same 
assurances, from the chairman of the board or the board of directors as the 
employees received from the crop insurance. 
 
I think that's the question that I wanted to ask.  Do you agree with me 
that we should try and seek the same assurances from the board as the 
employees received who were working for the crop insurance and who did not 
move to Melville?  Will you try and seek that assurance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- I would think that the same practice would be 
followed, Mr. Chairman, as has been the case in the past.  And so when we 
can see how many people are not going to be moving, I think that SIAST 
board then will be dealing with that in a fair and just manner. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, I just have a small item in here.  Mr. 
Minister, you may not have the information tomorrow morning, so I want to 
ask you a question on the Kelsey Campus extension calendar, and not so much 
to ask for the materials that are inside, but I want to ask a question 
tomorrow morning -- if we resume our estimates on Education -- on the 
advertising of private vocational schools in the calendar, not only the 
programs, but the actual advertising of the private vocational school.  And 
I'm not opposed to that.  My question is this:  do the private vocational 
schools contribute to the cost of this calendar and if not, then why are we 
advertising the courses that are being offered by some of the private 
vocational schools?  And why are we putting in ads in the calendar of 
private vocational schools? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, as I understand it, this is a 
practice that has been going on for many years.  These would be paid ads, 
and so there's nothing different with this year's calendar, as I understand 
it, than what has been happening in the past.  So if they've got space in 
that catalogue, they must be paying for it. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, just a distinction . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order, order. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Chairman, I appreciate that.  We'll be finished with 
this particular topic in one minute. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to . . . I assume that this will be a paid ad by the 
private vocational school.  But my question is, they're also advertising 
classes in this calendar.  And, Mr. Minister, what my concern is, is simply 
that some of the classes that are being offered are the very ones that I'm 
going to be criticizing tomorrow where the standards are not being met.  



 

 

And they're not recognized out there.  And if they're contained in here, my 
concern is that they're in here, then the people out there will think that 
they're being endorsed by SIAST.  And that is a concern.  I'd like you to 
answer that for me tomorrow, okay? 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10 p.m. 
 


