





























































Hansard: April 26, 1990


 

 

April 26/90 
EVENING SITTING 

 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 46 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, you have just given 
us the list of the RMs, but just for the record can you tell me what the 
percentages are in some of the RMs -- RM 340, RM 310, 280, 281, and 312, 
please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Mr. Chairman, I'll give the highest loss, which was the 
worse case so they would be eligible.  That's the bottom number on the ones 
I gave the member over there.  The RM, I believe you said, of 340 is 21.8; 
339 is 21 . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Three what?  RM 310 is the next one. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Oh okay, I'm sorry.  RM 310 is 22.8; 280 is 22.8; and 
281 is 22.5; and 312 is 22.5. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- That's 22.5 on 312? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Yes.  While I'm on my feet, just so you notice there for 
the RM of 308, which I believe is Big Quill, when we were talking before 
here about 19.45 -- I believe the actual number is -- loss, that was the 
worse possible scenario.  Actually the loss in that RM was 16.8, and as you 
know, one-half of that RM had some rain and that's probably what . . . so 
half had fairly severe conditions; the other half had reasonably decent 
crops.  And so their loss actually, for that RM, was only 16.8, but when 
you took the worst possible scenario it brought it up to 19.4.  So there 
really is an RM about 4 per cent out if it wasn't for -- or 3.2 per cent 
out -- if it wasn't for the averaging effect.  So the averaging effect 
actually made it better than if it was the way it really was -- just as an 
RM by itself. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Mr. Minister, you said that you would send over a copy of 
the regulations setting forth the rules as applied by the federal 
government.  We want to see those. 
 
Okay.  I want to go into a block of constituencies, Mr. Minister.  I want 
to ask you, is it a minimum of four RMs or is it a multiple of four RMs?  
In other words, if you could combine 12 RMs, say, or eight RMs, which their 
average is divisible by four, and the overall is less than the 20 per cent, 
will they qualify? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- It's a block of four, but it's a moving block of four, 
so it always moves forward or whichever direction necessary.  So they don't 



 

 

use eight RMs as a block; they use four RMs as a block, but any combination 
of the four RMs that you can work in, that join each other, can be that 
block.  So it's a moving block, always a moving block, but it has to be a 
combination of four. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Mr. Minister, I read your information here and I just want 
to be clear what figures you're using.  I take the RM of Leroy, 339 -- 
21.8.  Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Yes. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- All right.  I go down to 309 -- 22.8. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Just so you understand, that's not the individual RM; 
that's the highest group of that combination.  So that's not the individual 
RM; it's the highest group of any four you can put together for a loss 
benefit.  You look at the top number is the one, is the actual loss for 
that RM. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Let's start again then.  What is the individual loss in 
respect to the RM of 339? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- 17.1. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Okay.  And what is the loss in 309? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- 27.6. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- 27.6, right.  And what is the loss in 279? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Remember those three will never be in the same four-RM 
block.  It's a column.  It's got to be a rolling block, so a block is a 
block . . . square blocks or a block.  So it has to be a rolling block. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Roll all you want, Mr. Minister, but I got 339, 309, 279.  
It seems to me they're adjoining, right?  Why can't they qualify? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- All the RMs have to be adjoining and it doesn't adjoin 
339. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- You've got to have how many common boundaries?  Can you not 
have four RMs in a strip -- one, two, three, four, on a diagonal strip?  
Well who says you can't?  You said you have to have them adjoining.  Surely 
if you start with 339: 339, 309, 279, and if you join 308, well what is 
this rolling, moving target?  Holy suffering . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- According to the regulations it's a block and a block is 
not a column.  And a column, okay you could run up and down, you could run 
all the way up and down it . . . 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Can a block be a diagonal block or does it have to be a 
square block?  What is a block?  Can you give me the definition of a block?  
I know a block when I see a block, but I'm asking you, can't you have a 



 

 

block: one, two, three, four?  All you have to do is to have joining 
municipalities abutting in some configuration, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- My understanding is that a block, as set out and been 
interpreted through the regulations, is a block of four adjoining, and 
that's what they've defined as a block. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, in the explanation 
in the news release, accompanying the news release of March 13, it says and 
I quote: 
 

 The multi-year disaster benefit is triggered when a group of four RMs are 
paid at least 20 per cent of their liabilities in indemnities in two 
consecutive years. 

 
Now can you define for me if there is a difference between a group or a 
block, and can you define for me how many common boundaries there are in 
your definition of a block or group of RMs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Well I was asking them about that, when it says a group 
or a block, and I don't know, but under the definitions in the regulations, 
under the regulations and interpretations of the regulations as well, in 
1986, that a block was a block of four, adjoining.  You know that's all I 
can say, and I don't have any other thing to go on, other than that. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Then, Mr. Minister, you're saying that a block does not 
mean four common boundaries.  So what my colleague from Quill Lake was 
saying, a block could be a vertical or horizontal block. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Well, what they had informed me, the staff, is that a 
block was defined in regulations as having the four common boundaries and 
that's how they defined a block . . . 
 
(1915) 
 
An Hon. Member: -- What do you mean, four common boundaries? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Well they'd have common boundaries then but four of them 
together as a block. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Minister, I don't want to complicate this, but I have 
to know whether or not the boundaries as you describe as common mean that a 
vertical or horizontal block have common boundaries or a square block has 
common boundaries.  Please explain that for me. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- We're just discussing here the block bit and also how 
you would look at it any other way.  The way it was defined in regulations, 
I'm told, and the way it's been interpreted in regulations is a block is 
with at least all the RMs touching at some point; so that would be a block.  
So if they all don't touch, they wouldn't be a block. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Okay, Mr. Minister, then on the block of RMs that are 
qualifying, being -- if you want to take note of this -- 340, 339, 310, 



 

 

309, 312, 281, 280, and 279, can you describe to me the common boundaries 
of the . . . what I would say will be two blocks there because there's 
eight RMs.  Could you describe to me the common boundaries of those two 
blocks? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Actually under that scenario that you drew up, the four 
top ones all touch the four onto the . . . on the west side are all 
touching with 340 having . . . and the three bottom ones all are square.  
340 would be, or 310 would be in all three of the blocks but there'd be 
four blocks. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- So, Mr. Minister, then you're saying there are, if we use 
that scenario, I'll tell you I'm not sure how you figure this out.  But 
there must be thousands of combinations in order to have certain RMs 
qualify. 
 
Let's take the scenario then, Mr. Minister, just so one can be common to 
all, of RMs 312, 313, 281, and 282.  Could you work out for me the 
percentage of that block? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- When you add those four RMs up that you mentioned, you 
get the average of 17.7 for the four RMs.  If you take the 281 and the 312 
and bring them in with the 310 and the 280, then they all qualified because 
they're all over the amount of loss.  But if you roll them with the other 
four in there, they don't qualify; they only come at 17 per cent, 17.7. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I've been 
listening with interest to this convoluted argument the minister is making 
about how his program works, and it's not surprising to me that the farmers 
of Saskatchewan are protesting against the way this minister has developed 
the criteria for collecting this money.  Even he, with staff sitting around 
him, can't explain the program to the satisfaction of the members of the 
committee.  It's not hard to understand now why farmers are very, very 
upset with this program.  I'm sure the minister has to admit to the 
problem. 
 
Can you tell me, Mr. Minister, what planning and what involvement you had 
in planning this program?  Did you have any input, or how did this come 
about? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- No, I didn't.  I wasn't the minister responsible at the 
time. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Can you tell me who was the minister responsible for 
the crop insurance at the time that this plan was being developed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- I believe that the member for Arm River was the minister 
responsible at the time. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I want to be clear on this.  Was it the member for Arm 
River or was it the Minister of Agriculture -- the member from Estevan, the 
Premier?  Can you tell me for sure that it was the member from Arm River? 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- It was the member from Arm River that was the minister 
responsible for Saskatchewan Crop Insurance at the time. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Give me the time period that the plans and criteria 
for this program were drawn up.  Will you give me the planning period up to 
the date of implementation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- It was developed in 1985 and it went in for 1986, 
brought into place for 1986.  The premiums were loaded in for 1986. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well what I want to say to you is that it's hard to 
believe that any minister of the Crown would approve a program that is this 
convoluted and difficult to explain to the farmers of Saskatchewan.  I say 
again, it's not hard to understand why there's so many people confused and 
upset with the government. 
 
I want to change just for a moment, not to take away from this argument, 
but we will be coming back to it very quickly as my colleagues do some 
figuring on the numbers that you have given them.  But I have had expressed 
to me from former crop insurance adjusters who worked back in the period 
between 1982 and 1986, who worked a number of years for crop insurance, 
that when they were let go by your department, their pensions seemed to 
have disappeared.  That they didn't get any compensation for the pension 
moneys that they had paid into the plan and they are not now receiving any 
pension.  Can you tell me the deal that was made with crop insurance 
adjusters who paid pension into the plan, let's say worked for crop 
insurance for three or four years, paid the pension, and then leave 
employment?  What happens to the money that is deducted off their cheques 
in terms of their pension money? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- In 1987 crop insurance adjusters, was the first time in 
this province, have joined the pension plan.  Previous to that they had not 
belonged to it nor had there been any deductions made for the pension plan 
for them. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The period from '87 on that there is pension 
collected.  What happens to a crop insurance adjuster who works for one or 
two years and then is let go by the department or not called back in the 
spring of the year?  Is that pension money paid back to them?  Can they 
draw that down or what is the formula that applies? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- My understanding is that you could draw it out up to 
three years in the plan.  If you're in there more than three years, you 
can't draw it out, but we're going to verify that to be sure it's 
absolutely correct.  We'll have to get the copy of the pension plan. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I want you to clarify that for me.  You're saying up 
to three years they can draw the money out.  And would that be 100 per cent 
of the moneys that were paid in or would it be a percentage of the money 
paid in?  And what about the moneys that the government matched in the 
pension plan? 
 
The other point that I wanted to ask is whether that would be transferable 



 

 

or portable within other government departments.  I just want you to 
clarify that for us. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- For sure, it's transferable.  We're going to get the 
details so we get the correct figures.  The House will have to go get the 
copy of the pension plan if it's . . . I don't know if we got it with us or 
not.  If we don't have it with us, we'll get a copy and submit it and give 
it to you, if you like, of the entire plan. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The issue I'd like to raise with you, Mr. Minister, 
now is the percentage of farmers who are presently enrolled in crop 
insurance.  Can you tell me, maybe a breakdown by region, what percentage 
of farmers are enrolled in the present crop year and what the anticipation 
is for the coming year in terms of the breakdown on how many farmers, what 
percentage of farmers would be involved in crop insurance, and whether 
there is significant changes in the various regions? 
 
(1930) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- We don't have it by region, although we can get it for 
you and send it to you.  It averages about 78 per cent last year in the 
province.  It looks like it's going to come in about the same this year.  
It averages from 90 per cent in the South to about 60 per cent in the 
North.  It sort of varies that much.  Less take it in the North than they 
do in the South. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, am I right to 
assume or am I correct when I think that you said that RM 310 was common to 
four blocks?  Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- That's correct. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Then, Mr. Minister, the blocks of 312, 310, 281, and 280 
are considered as one block?  Is that right? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Yes. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- I don't want to prolong this but am I also correct that 
340, 339, 310, and 309 are considered one block? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Yes. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- And also that 310, 309, 280, and 279 are one block. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- That's correct. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Well, Mr. Minister, if you add in . . . would it be 
possible then to have another block considering 309, 308, 279, and 278, 
that works out to 21.4 per cent in my calculations?  Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- You're right if you use those four numbers and put them 
together as . . . just use the numbers, but you've got to take . . . 
because the four RMs . . . it says they've got to be a weighted . . . So 



 

 

you take all the total liabilities against the total indemnities in those 
four RMs . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well that's what it says.  
That's why you come out with that at 19.4. 
 
Now I'll read you the . . . I think I sent you a copy, but you'll realize 
that it says that: 
 

 An area block of four municipalities in size will be determined to be an 
eligible area when an indemnity to liability ratio is greater or equal to 
.20 to 1 for the current year and the immediate preceding year. 

 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . An indemnity to liability ratio in the 
four RMs.  So those figures up there, although it's for the one RM, and 
each RM, when you total the total liabilities together against the 
indemnities, you come out . . . it changes it because the one RMs are 
larger -- one small RM changes it all. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- 309, 309, your figures, 27.6, right?  Right?  Okay, RM 279, 
17.4, your figure; 308, 16.8, okay?  278, 19.6.  I'll tell you, you take 
that, you add those up, you take the average and it's over 20 per cent, and 
that's what you should be paying on because you . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Common, too. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- And it's common too.  It's a block of four RMs; exactly what 
you have said it needed to be to qualify.  And you set it out, and that is 
the figures, that's the statistics that you've given to us, and I say that 
308 should be included and I say that 278 should be included, Mr. Minister, 
on your terms, on your definitions, on your figures.  No other conclusion 
can be drawn.  If you start twisting the regulations to make up an excuse 
now . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Playing politics. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- I'll tell you, you're playing politics.  That's the only 
reason it can be.  And I'll tell you what I'm going to do.  On these 
statistics here, unless you admit tonight, that on the basis of your 
statistics, I am going to see the representatives in those RMs and to see 
whether they want to, in fact, take legal action to qualify under the 
criteria that is set out in the regulations that you have brought into this 
House.  I ask you, Mr. Minister, to justify why those two RMs are not 
included. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Well I explained to you that . . . and you know the 
regulations.  You got a copy of them.  And it says, indemnity to liability 
ratio is greater than, or equal to in the four RMs.  And when you take the 
total indemnity against the liability in that four RMs, it comes out to 
19.4 when you average them all together. 
 
You know, that I know, that when you have one large RM, therefore your 
indemnity, percentage-wise, when you've got a large RM and the number of 
farmers, that's figured on the percentage based on per farmers.  When you 
do that, immediately the size of the RM changes the ratio, when you start 



 

 

bringing four together. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Well Mr. Minister, using the figures that you sent across 
to us in . . . Let's go back to four other RMs.  Let's go to 340, 339, 310, 
and 309.  Now you're saying that those are a block of four RMs, and the 
numbers that you have indicated, 340 is 22.3 per cent of liabilities paid 
in indemnities in two consecutive years; 339 is 17.1 per cent; 309 is 27.6 
per cent; and 310 is 25.4 per cent. 
 
Now the average of that of course is above 20 per cent.  When we take 308, 
309, 278, and 279, according to my calculations, that comes out to 21.4 per 
cent or 1.4 per cent above the 20 per cent.  Now I don't see where there's 
a difference between the common block of the first four that I mentioned 
and the common block of the last four that I mentioned.  Now you were 
trying to tell me that there is some factor included there, dealing with 
the number of farmers. 
 
Now Mr. Minister, just for clarification purposes, would you just slowly go 
through that again to explain to this House and explain to those farmers 
and those RMs exactly why they do not qualify? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- I don't know if these are . . . we're using some figures 
of estimates based on the size here, but in the . . . say two RMs, 310 and 
309 . . . 309 and 308, the liability would they be about 6 million.  In the 
one below, in 279 would be about 8 million, and then 278 would only be 
about 3 million.  So when you average them all together, the liability 
against the indemnity, that's when your figures change because you have a 
lot more numbers of contract holders.  So the more you have, the difference 
of figures change because you're ratioing them.  And any time you ratio 
anything, the numbers . . . every time you put one more number in or take 
one out you change those ratios.  This is true for that RM; it's not true 
for the block. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Well, Mr. Minister, the numbers above the RM number on the 
map indicate . . . am I correct to understand that those numbers indicate 
the percentage of liabilities paid in indemnities in those RMs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Well I said a moment ago, when you take those four RMs 
and you take the total dollar liability that's there, against the total 
indemnity in that area -- the total -- then it changes.  Now if you only 
had a million dollars in one and 10 in the other, that's a 10:1 ratio when 
you're dealing with it.  So that's why the ratio of indemnity to liability 
ratio changes when you . . . is different from just being an RM.  If it's 
an RM -- a small RM or a large RM -- each one will be differently.  If this 
had of been a larger number it would have affected a whole bunch around 
there.  Had it been a smaller number it's vice versa. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Well, Mr. Minister, what you're telling me then is the 
numbers on this map that you gave me mean nothing.  We're talking 
percentages here, and the rules say that 20 per cent of the liabilities 
paid in indemnities in two consecutive years, in a block of four RMs, 
qualifies them for the multi-year disaster program.  You told us earlier 
that the numbers above the RM number on the map were the percentages of 



 

 

liabilities paid in indemnities in two consecutive years. 
 
Now, I'm talking about percentages here.  Now don't give me the number of 
the total dollars of liability because that means nothing right now.  We're 
talking about the percentages of liabilities paid.  We're talking about the 
percentage of liabilities paid in indemnities in two consecutive years. 
 
Using that criteria, Mr. Minister, there will be many multiples in other 
RMs that will vary according to your analysis.  And all we're saying and 
all I'm saying is that the block of four RMs: 309, 308, 279, 278, which 
have common boundaries and are common to the block, the numbers you have 
given me work out to higher than 20 per cent of the liabilities paid in 
indemnities in two consecutive years. 
 
Now don't give me the business about the dollar amount in each liability 
because that's irrelevant.  We're talking about percentage because that's 
what your rules say.  That's what your regulations say.  Mr. Minister, do 
you agree with that? 
 
(1945) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Well, for tomorrow we'll bring the total liabilities in 
each one of those areas for all four against the indemnities for those 
four.  And as you know, here's the regulation, indemnity to liability ratio 
for the four RMs, and we will bring you those numbers.  We don't have them 
with us.  So you'll know exactly and you can figure it out for yourself 
then. 
 
Remember that when you use . . . You can't average percentages when you 
have different sizes of anything.  So those percentages only pertain to 
that RM.  When you do the total four-RM, as it says you must do in the 
regulations, then it's called a weighted average and it can change 
somewhat.  If the RMs are all similar then it changes little or nothing, 
but if you get a great big RM like 279 compared to a very small RM like 
278, it's a great deal of change.  Actually 279 probably was two RMs joined 
together; it's a very large RM.  So the percentage then does not 
necessarily reflect the weighted average of the four RMs.  It doesn't in 
this case because of the two difference in sizes. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I'm not understanding something here, 
obviously.  Either that or you're not coming clean with us, because am I 
correct to understand -- let's take this one step at a time -- that in RM 
279 they had a ratio of 17.4 per cent of their liabilities paid in 
indemnities in two consecutive years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Nineteen eighty-nine only. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Then in RM 278, does the 19.6 per cent relate to 1989 only 
as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- That's correct. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Then, Mr. Minister, how does 1988 come into this figure 



 

 

that you have on these two RMs, the percentage figure? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Well in 1988, using exactly the criteria that I 
explained to you now, they qualified because they were over the 20 per cent 
in those RMs.  In 1989, as we've talked about here today, two are in that 
you're talking about and two are not in. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Okay, Mr. Minister, let's just go back.  Can you give me 
the number, the percentage of liabilities paid in indemnities in 1988, for 
RMs 308, 309, 278, and 279. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- In 1988, so that it would trigger, make them eligible to 
trigger the program for 1989, 309 had 0.53, 53 per cent; 308 had 49; 278 
had 52; and 279 had 54. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- We're talking about percentages of liabilities paid in 
indemnities in those years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- That's correct. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Minister, if in 1988, RM 308 had 49 per cent of its 
liabilities paid indemnities.  In 1989, it had 16.8 per cent.  In 309, it 
was 53 per cent in '88 and 27 per cent in '89.  In 278, it was 52 per cent 
in '88 and 19.6 per cent in '89.  279, 54 per cent in '88 and 17.4 per cent 
in '89.  I would conclude that in both years combined it was well over the 
20 per cent average.  Now unless I'm missing something here, that would 
mean that those RMs should qualify.  Could you explain then what other 
reason would make them not qualify, please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Well to qualify for the first year you have to have in 
excess of .20 loss to even qualify for the next year, and if you don't have 
over .20 the second year you don't qualify.  There's no averaging of the 
two years together.  The first year only qualifies you for the second year 
and it's got to be the two consecutive years of an excess of .20 loss per 
RM per year. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Mr. Minister, what you have been saying is if you have four 
adjoining RMs, and if they combined have a total of over 20 per cent 
indemnity paid or liability paid out of the indemnity, that they will 
qualify.  That's what you have said.  And then you gave us the statistics 
here of 309 at 27.6, taking in all the calculations; 17.4 for 279; 16.8 for 
308; and 19.6 for 278.  And when you take those, I'll tell you that joining 
those together you get the average of over the 20 which is set out in your 
regulations.  They don't go into any calculations on the total liabilities 
in your regulations here.  You sent the regulations over, Mr. Minister.  It 
doesn't say that.  It says, four adjoining RMs whose liability of the 
indemnity is over 20 per cent.  That's precisely what it says. 
 
Now I want you to tell me where, in the regulations that you sent over 
here, that it brings in the other criteria that you're talking about, 
because we have looked at it and it's not there.  You're bringing in 
another factor, Mr. Minister.  Would you explain that?  Where is it in the 
regulations? 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, just so we go back, and here's what 
the regulations do say: 
 

 8. An area (a block of four Rural 
Municipalities in size) will be determined to be an eligible area 
when the Indemnity to Liability Ratio is greater than or equal to 
0.20 to 1 for the current year and the immediately preceding year. 

 
 9. The Indemnity to Liability Ratio is 

the combined experience of all insured crops and coverage levels . . 
. 

 
Now it says, all insured crops, the combined experience. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Mr. Minister, how does that get you out of the dilemma that 
you have with respect to the four RMs that we have mentioned -- 309, 279, 
308, and 278 -- having read the regulations?  You explain it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- It says very clearly that it's the combined four RMs' 
indemnity to liability ratio.  I mean it's in point 8 of the regulations.  
It says that, so there is no choice.  We just don't have any choice but to 
follow what the regulations says, and it's the indemnity to liability 
ratio.  And it tells you that: 
 

 8. An area (a block of four Rural 
Municipalities in size) will be determined to be an eligible area 
when the Indemnity to Liability Ratio is greater than or equal to 
0.20 to 1 . . . 

 
Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, can you tell me 
then what the indemnity to liability ratio is for RM 308 in 1989. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Just for that RM, it's 16.8.  That's not the combined 
one; you've got to combine them all four when you go to put them together 
to be sure that they qualify. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Well, Mr. Minister, that's my point.  When you combine them 
for 1989, it comes to 21.4. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Well you're using percentage ratios there, and that's 
figured out on an RM.  And I explained that a moment ago: the difference in 
size; the amount of dollars; the dollars that the liability is . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- But you've taken that, you've calculated that in the 
16.8. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- No, but when you take a small number and calculate it by 
whatever number you got or a large number and calculate it, then when you 
put them all together, you get certainly a different percentage.  I mean, 
it's obvious that you would get a different percentage because it would 
change in particularly the two RMs.  So it's the dollars of liability 
against the dollars of indemnity that's paid in the combined four 



 

 

municipalities any way you want to form them -- that they'd be formed in a 
block. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Well then, Mr. Minister, what does your calculation come 
out to for that block in 1989? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Well I said tomorrow we'll have the total liability 
against the total indemnities available tomorrow so you can look at them 
for those particular four RMs.  And we don't have it with us but we'll get 
it for you. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Well, Mr. Minister, this is key to this debate, and I would 
wonder if it would be possible for you to now provide us with that 
information, because in order to pursue this line of argument, in order to 
make sure everything is clear that we have to have that figure.  I would 
ask the minister if it would be possible in a short period of time to 
provide us with that because it's contingent upon the figure for 1989 
which, in your own calculations of minimum requirement in that four-RM 
block, comes to 21.4 per cent or .24 per cent of liabilities to 
indemnities. 
 
And that is key to this discussion because in 1988, all the numbers are 
very high; there's no problem there.  But in 1989, we're dealing with very 
close numbers to the 20 per cent triggering of the payment.  So, Mr. 
Minister, I'm wondering how long it would take you to get those figures so 
we can continue this discussion. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- As you know, the office is in Melville and most of the 
staff that would be doing that research is here.  Well tomorrow morning 
there would be somebody there.  We could get the information for you.  We 
can have it here for estimates tomorrow morning.  That would be about the 
soonest that we could have those particular estimates here. 
 
There's 299 RMs.  There's 1,160 different blocks that you could be working 
with in the province when you put it together like that.  So we just don't 
have it with us, but we'll get it for you for tomorrow, if you like. 
 
(2000) 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I was wondering if you would be willing 
then to postpone these estimates till tomorrow, and we will allow the 
critic for Highways to go on his estimates for the duration of the evening 
so that we can continue this discussion tomorrow morning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- We can change it around or whatever, but there must be 
some other questions you want to ask other than this particular one here, 
and if you'd like to finish them all off except for this one and then we 
could postpone it and come back tomorrow, I have no problems.  I know you 
want to pursue it and that's fine.  I just don't have them with me, so 
there's no use saying that I have them here because I don't.  We can do 
some calculations but they'd be estimates.  So if you have some others that 
you'd like to pursue, I'm willing to go ahead with them and leave this and 
come back to this tomorrow when I have the figures for you. 



 

 

 
Mr. Upshall: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I don't think we could finish it 
tonight anyway, so if you can oblige us with that, I think the critic for 
Highways is willing to go.  And I believe that he was on stand-by, so I 
assume that the staff would be here for the Highways minister. 
 
And due to the fact, like I say, that we wouldn't finish anyway, and I 
would just like to be able to do a little more work on this tonight in 
order that I fully understand the whole . . . go through the regulations 
and go through the numbers again, then we could continue this tomorrow. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- I have no trouble if the House Leader wants to change, 
that's fine, but you must have some other questions other than this one 
here.  And I'm saying if you'd like to pursue all the rest of them that we 
can clean them up tonight, and then if we get that done, we can go into 
Highways and still come back tomorrow to this.  Because I've got the staff 
here, and I might as well do up as much as possible because they're driving 
from Melville in and you may need tomorrow or whatever.  So that's one less 
day and it costs money to bring staff in and everything. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Minister, the agreement was tonight, and I had no 
intention of going this long on this topic but, as you will know, estimates 
are unpredictable.  The critic for Highways was prepared to go tonight, and 
I believe that in his time frame that it is essential that he go now in 
light of the fact that we could have been done if we hadn't got into this 
confusion that we've got into now.  I think that if it's agreeable to you 
that we will have the evening then to work through.  Because we just got 
the regulations, we'll be able to work through some of the numbers and 
pursue it tomorrow. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- If the member from Humboldt there . . . I just want to 
say that we're going to send somebody out and see if we can send somebody 
down to the office in Melville to get that information for you.  And give 
us 15 minutes or so, and if you want to go on with a few other questions 
and we'll see.  If we can't, then we're prepared to go over to another 
part.  How's that?  Sound fair enough? 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Okay, we will give you a short period of time to do that 
and I will pursue another line of questioning.  I'll just move back to my 
desk so I can get my other notes. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, then we'll go into some routine 
questions for the time being.  I will read off a number of routine 
questions that I'd like you to have answered.  First of all, the name, 
title and salary of all the minister's personal staff; any change in those 
salaries in the past year.  Number two, for 1989-90, the number of 
out-of-province trips taken by the minister, identifying in each case the 
following:  a) destination b) persons accompanying the minister at 
government expense c) cost of the trip, and d) the purpose of the trip. 
 
Number three, for 1990-91, the total amount budgeted for out-of-province 
minister's trips.  Number four, for 1989-90, the total amount spent by the 
agency on advertising, and for 1990-91, the total amount budgeted for 



 

 

advertising.  Number five, for 1989-90, the total amount spent by the 
agency in polling and market research, and for 1990-91, the total amount 
budgeted for these purposes.  And number six, did the agency use any 
charter aircraft during '88-89 and, if so, at what cost and what amount has 
been budgeted for charter aircrafts in 1990-91?  Would you be able to 
provide those for me, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- If the member would like, we'll put it all together -- 
we have no trouble with any of it -- and send it over to you.  We'd have 
that ready tomorrow, probably.  No trouble at all, but whenever, even 
tonight maybe, some time, if we get it all pulled together here. That's 
quite a few questions.  But there's no problem with answering all those 
questions, not at all. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Yes.  There's no rush for those answers, Mr. Minister.  If 
you could have them ready for tomorrow, that would be fine.  Mr. Minister, 
I would like to talk for a minute now about crop insurance and the plans 
for crop insurance in the future.  We have a situation where we have a 
number of agents around the country, and there is one scenario that the 
agent scheme under crop insurance is the first step to privatization.  I 
don't know if that's true or not.  You may wish to respond to that. 
 
But the other question I have for you, Mr. Minister, is the hail insurance 
component and crop insurance.  Are there any plans to reduce, possibly, the 
premium by taking hail insurance out of crop insurance and having hail 
insurance as a rider on crop insurance that could be taken by the farmer if 
he so wished?  Are there any plans along those lines, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- On the last, in regards to the hail component out of 
crop insurance, the federal government have been asking to have us do that 
and put it as a rider.  Alberta already has it that way.  I've met with 
municipal hail, co-operative hail, three or four other hail companies, I 
can't think of their names right off hand here, about three or four 
different meetings. They've been asking to have that done too, and reduce 
the premiums. 
 
The only problems that I have with it -- and I suppose if I was really 
talking about privatization, that's a real way of moving it -- but I have 
some problems with just making it a good working corporation, and I would 
wonder if we would not reduce the amount of those taking crop insurance 
coverages if we take out the hail. 
 
It was brought back in by the former administration, in I believe '74, when 
they brought it in. I think that's the year we brought it in. They brought 
it in for that reason.  As you know, the government of the day then decided 
that if they brought that in and made it part of the package, that they 
could keep more farmers involved and have a broader scale which is less 
risk and better premium rates.  And that was done for that reason.  We have 
some trouble, or at least I do, and the department, if we take that out, 
what it might do to the crop insurance as an insurance company. 
 
Before it came in, there was very few or very low participation in the 
program.  And when it was brought in in them days by the NDP in them days, 



 

 

I believe it really increased the amount of participation in crop 
insurance.  So I'd hate just to take it out because somebody says to take 
it out because it will make it a little better for me.  I want to be sure 
that the crop insurance corporation is here.  We're doing a lot of things 
to it; we're trying to make it an enhanced corporation.  So, you know, I 
would have some problems to do that.  That don't mean to say we won't, but 
I've told municipal hail, I told co-operative hail that, and that we would 
give it some consideration.  And they certainly have been lobbying for it.  
And certainly the federal government would like it taken out and set as a 
rider on the side. 
 
In regards to the agent system, it's a marketing system.  It's a marketing 
and monitoring system.  We've asked the agents to do three things.  One, to 
inform the producer of what is available to them and all the different 
programs -- one on one.  I think it's been fairly well received and in fact 
I think received very good. 
 
A second thing we've asked them to do is pick up the seeded acreage report, 
and talk to make sure the farmer has filled in all his crops, that he's 
satisfied or she's satisfied that they've got it all on there. 
 
Third, we've asked them to do a field estimate, which just says we think 
the field will go whatever, and it's got nothing to do with if you have a 
claim or not.  It's just for our records and tells us if we're going to 
have some of these problems in the area that we've identified over the last 
years -- good management. 
 
And in the fourth they do what they call a report in production, which 
means that he would go out, talk to the farmer, ask the farmer how many 
bushels per acre he thought each field went, for our records and for his, 
how much fertilizer he used, and whatever else that he'd like to put into 
there in the records, and we'd measure the bins so we know how much grain 
there is that he had for production. 
 
Those would just be basically for records so we'd have it.  We would also 
be available to the farmer later on if they, he or she, wanted those 
records for whatever reasons, for selling their farm, or just to prove 
production, or go back and look at what they've been using over the years. 
 
So we think it can benefit two ways.  One, it's good management.  We'll 
know what's going on in the farming industry.  We'll know if we have some 
problems coming up.  We'll know the estimated yields and where we have 
multi-contracts.  In some areas it will certainly manage that a little 
better.  It will also give the farmer a base if they want to come back at a 
later date.  It will be a print out for them; they can have it. 
 
So I think it's a good . . . it's a marketing product that we use in the 
agent system, but it's also a good management tool that will allow both the 
farmer and us as crop insurance to manage it much better I believe, at the 
same time keeping all our 32 claim centres. 
 
There'll be claim centres, dispatch centres.  They'll do everything out 
there instead of doing it in Melville, the head office.  It's all being 



 

 

done out in the field through the computer system.  So it's a different way 
of doing it, but I think it's a good service to the farmer if he had a 
claim.  And it's a good way of managing because the local person certainly 
knows better what goes on out there than maybe head office does. 
 
So it just gives us good management and good for the farmer because, like I 
mentioned two ways: one, he'll get his claim finished and filed there.  Our 
target is seven days after the claim is turned into the office, and if 
there was a need it probably could even be quicker than that because it'll 
be filed directly on the computers and paid out directly.  So some of the 
things we're doing there I believe are really positive steps and looking 
ahead to good management and good for the farmer as well. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Minister, can you tell me what the average percentage 
rate is for hail coverage premium-wise under crop insurance? 
 
(2015) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- I was just checking.  We believe it's about 3 per cent 
--the farmers' share -- but when our research analyst gets back here, Mr. 
Harris, we'll verify that for sure.  But they believe it's 3 per cent, the 
producers' share.  That's an average across the province. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Well I agree with that, Mr. Minister, and I understand 
it'll change from risk area to risk area.  But the point that I make then 
is that crop insurance is the factor that keeps all the other line 
companies in tow, so to speak, when it comes to percentage of premiums.  
And if you were to go to a rider system, that would give the line companies 
free-wheeling when it came to premiums and percentages for hail coverage. 
 
And so I would ask you, Mr. Minister: what's the procedure for changing, 
for taking hail out of crop insurance and putting it on as a rider?  If 
you're going to pay 25 per cent of the crop insurance and the government 
pays 25 and the producer pays 50, what's the procedure for making that 
change, for taking out the hail insurance out of crop insurance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- I think for one of the few times, I think the member and 
I agree that we shouldn't be taking out, so we really never looked at the 
procedure to take it out.  I make it clear that when I talked to both 
municipal hail, to co-operative hail, and hail and rain -- and I can't 
remember the other ones, there was about six total -- I made it clear to 
them that at this time that I had no intentions of even suggesting it be 
taken out. 
 
The federal government has been pressing because we're the only province 
that has it in.  We're saying that may be true, but because of the 
circumstances we have here, because of the spot loss hail feature . . . And 
remember what a spot loss hail does.  It's sort of a double indemnity; it 
allows you to collect on spot loss hail and then if your total loss is not 
greater you can claim again, so there is a double indemnity.  You pay a 
little premium but you get a double one, and that's what's good to the 
farmer.  And so that's one of the reasons I'm not prepared to take it out. 
 



 

 

The other thing, when I talked to municipal hail -- and I use them because 
they're the next big player in the game who run as a co-operative and a 
non-profit, or I shouldn't say non-profit, but non-accumulated profit -- 
they sold last year in excess of $500 million in hail insurance, and you 
know that tells me that they are in there keeping both for crop insurance 
and for the other ones in line as well.  So we've got a double step there 
through municipal hail and through crop insurance. 
 
So I'm not prepared to even suggest that we take it out.  I think it was 
put in for a good reason, I think it should stay in there.  And in fact 
that's one of the areas when we went down to appear before the Senate on 
the crop insurance changes, that we made representation to the Senate, 
saying that's one area that we're not prepared to give an inch on. Also 
when I met with . . . the only other one in is Manitoba and Manitoba's not 
prepared to take it out either, so we both sit on exactly the same 
position. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Minister, you said that Alberta -- if I heard you 
correctly -- Alberta has already, already has hail as a rider on their crop 
insurance, so that would tell me that is a negotiation between the federal 
government and the individual province.  I'm a bit surprised that you do 
not know the process that is involved there, because if you're so concerned 
about the federal government putting pressure on you to remove hail from 
crop insurance, I think that you should really find out the procedure 
there.  But am I right to assume that whether or not hail is taken off crop 
insurance and put on as a rider is a decision, a bargaining decision 
between the federal government and the individual province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- To the best of my knowledge, Alberta's never had it as 
part of crop insurance all risk.  They did put it on -- and I don't know 
how many years ago, a good number of years ago -- as a rider, maybe the 
same time that it was put on here as part of the all risk, I'm not sure.  
But it's a good number of years it's been on there. 
 
But I was saying, under the proposed new legislation, the federal 
government has been fairly reluctant to leave it in, and we have been 
saying adamantly that we're not taking it out.  Before we sign the new 
agreement it must remain in.  So I guess that's the strongest position that 
you can take.  And if you refuse to sign the agreement until it's left in, 
I think that it's fair to say that there'll be no agreement signed until it 
is left in there.  So our concern was that in the legislation it even 
allowed them to discuss that, to make that change, and that's why we made a 
representation to the Senate on that. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I hope you stick to your guns on that 
one because I think it's very important that hail insurance is a component 
of crop insurance.  As you said, it is . . . from my experience it is one 
of the reasons, and one of the major reasons that crop insurance, that 
farmers are carrying crop insurance because it has a reasonable hail 
coverage component in it. 
 
Now just one further question on that.  You say you won't sign the 
agreement unless hail insurance remains under crop insurance.  What tools 



 

 

or levers do the federal government have?  Now you haven't signed the 
agreement on the 25 per cent cost sharing.  Is the agreement of the 25 per 
cent cost sharing . . . let me put it this way, is the hail insurance rider 
clause part of the same agreement that you'll be signing when it comes to 
the 25 per cent cost sharing agreement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- That's right.  It would be part of the agreement when 
and if it's signed, right. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- So then what you're telling me tonight is that you will not 
sign that agreement, you will not sign that agreement unless the hail 
component stays in.  Mr. Minister, I ask you, what are the ramifications, 
or what are the levers the federal government has to force you to sign that 
agreement without the hail rider in?  Are there any? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- I guess, Mr. Chairman, is that they always could refuse 
to fund it and that would be a thing that they could do.  I would be 
reluctant to think they would do that.  We are part of Canada and we do 
have a crop insurance in place.  If they change the legislation . . . I 
believe that it was in there before; I don't think they have or should have 
the right to take it out.  If we are going to be cost sharing on the 
premiums, they do in fact certainly reduce their cost, and if they're 
reducing their cost, I wonder why they wouldn't sign it regardless of 
whether it was in or out. 
 
So I think it's to the benefit of us all.  We're getting some major changes 
to crop insurance.  We want to know what we need in there to make this a 
good, sound insurance plan. 
 
The only alternative they would have is to refuse to fund it, and I suppose 
that's always an alternative any government has, is to refuse to fund 
anything.  But at this, you know, to the best of my knowledge, they would 
certainly come and be part of it.  They'll certainly argue their point, but 
you don't always win every one. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Well until the last comment, Mr. Minister, I was feeling a 
little bit secure in the fact that you would not allow the federal 
government to remove the hail insurance component from crop insurance. 
 
Mr. Minister, let's take the worst case scenario and say the federal 
government refused to fund.  Would you be willing to cover the cost of 
keeping hail insurance under the crop insurance scheme? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- I think I made it quite clear we don't plan to sign it 
unless it's left in.  It's not only our province, it's also Manitoba.  So 
it's not going to be signed unless it's in.  It's to the federal 
government's benefit, regardless of the other 3 per cent which they're only 
paying 1 per cent on, so, I mean, you're talking about -- or 25 per cent -- 
so you're talking about a very small portion.  You're talking about one 
percentage point or something. 
 
It's to their benefit to be in.  They negotiate hard.  They tried to 
off-load, that's for sure.  We believe that it's with all the advantages 



 

 

that's in there, we both break out about even.  The farmer has a better 
coverage and it's a long-term crop insurance plan for the 1990s and beyond. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I will be watching closely because I 
think that's a very important factor.  We must have the hail component 
remain in crop insurance. 
 
Just to go to another topic.  Mr. Minister, under the agent program I was 
led to understand that the farmers dealing with an agent that they chose 
not to deal with, had the option of dealing with another agent.  Is that 
true, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- If the person has a problem with the agent out there -- 
we're running about half the agents there; we've been using crop insurance 
adjusters and staff and offices and everybody's really chipped in to make 
it go -- if you have a problem with the agent out there, you can apply to 
crop insurance. 
 
If you've got a service centre in your town, you can apply to the service 
centre and they will assign one of the other agents to you.  And you can 
sort of pick your agent around, but you can't keep picking a different one 
all the time, but he'll let you pick one.  But you have to work with an 
agent in the area.  But there's other agents; they join together.  And if 
you have a problem we will assign that to another one. 
 
They got somebody in the office; they were working there.  I have the 
information here for you in regards to the RM, the indemnities that was 
paid there . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I was just going to say 
I'll send it across to you so you can look at.  Be all right?  And I'm 
sending along just a little graph that was drawn up to say, you know, how 
it would work -- just a simulated one, as well.  I'll send them both over 
just so you have it.  And then we'll finish this certainly. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Yes, Mr. Minister, so what you're saying then is that 
because of the boundaries, the way they're drawn, geographically it may be 
more advantageous for a farmer to choose another agent.  So are you saying 
that the farmer has . . . I understand that the farmer can't be picking an 
agent as he wishes every so often.  But am I understanding you right that a 
farmer has a choice of choosing an agent, different than the agent that he 
has? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Yes, maybe I didn't make it clear.  Yes, you can pick a 
different agent if you're not happy with the particular agent that's in 
your area, and we would assign that contract to that agent that you pick, 
you know, within a reasonable distance, but there's agents around.  There 
would be a list of agents in the area if you didn't know the rest of them 
that were around that you could deal with. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Well, Mr. Minister, maybe you can clarify for me a letter 
to a farmer from crop insurance corporation in Melville.  I'll just read 
the content of the letter.  This was as a result of a person wishing to 
choose another agent.  It says: 
 



 

 

 Your letter of March 17, 1990 requesting transfer agent has been received.  
We are unable to proceed with your request for transfer at this time.  
Later on this year we will decide on which agent we will transfer you to.  
In the mean time please deal directly with customer services office. 

 
Now, am I to understand by this letter, Mr. Minister . . . It's a little 
different than what you said.  I asked you if a person could choose an 
agent and you said yes, but this letter says that the corporation will 
decide on which agent they will transfer the person to.  Can you clarify 
that for me please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- I guess, to be clear, maybe I was not quite exactly 
right either.  Because we're just setting them up now and in some cases we 
don't have the agent; we don't have the transfer of boundaries in place for 
the agents, we allow that person to go to the customer service office and 
get her or his contract filled out there.  When we have the boundaries 
agreement fixed up so we can change the boundaries, get them all in place 
so we can make those changes, then we can assign a different agent to that 
person that would be relevant to the area that we could assign the contract 
over to. 
 
(2030) 
 
Now there probably is more than one agent in the area.  Some places we're 
short of agents.  I don't know about that particular spot.  The reason we 
didn't do it right now is because we haven't finished all the agency 
system.  They're still only about half done.  Then we have to be able to 
rearrange the boundaries.  We want to finish the agents first, and we allow 
that person to go to the customer service office this year as they have 
done in the past.  But for next year we'll have that so they can be 
assigned to a different agent. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- I understand why they would ask them to go to a customer 
service office this year, but let's assume all the agents are in place.  
Now does this letter mean that the policy is that the corporation will 
determine what agent is available to the person in question. 
 
Now there's a difference between what you said earlier and what you said 
just now.  And what I want to determine is whether or not the corporation 
decides, or the farmer can decide what agent, because if you come to a 
corner of an area where there's four possible agents, does the farmer have 
a choice on which agent he takes or does the corporation dictate what agent 
will be servicing that farmer? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Well I was . . . maybe half didn't give it to you just 
as it should be, and half you didn't quite understand it.  The farmer will 
be able to ask to move into district 150 from 149 or 155, but we have to 
work out an agreement with that agent to take that farmer.  So we would 
have to ask, then we'd have to go back and clarify it with that agent that 
he would accept that farmer.  So therefore it has to be worked out.  So I 
maybe didn't give it to you just exactly how it is, or you didn't quite 
understand how it is, but that's how it is. 
 



 

 

The farmer could pick an agent that he . . . system he'd like to go into, 
one of the agents, and then . . . out of the one he's in.  He'd have to 
have a reason for moving, and the reason's good enough is he can't get 
along with the person -- that's good enough.  And then we'd pick an area; 
then we'd talk to the agent in that area and see if that agent would accept 
that contract.  And if he would, then we could transfer the contract over 
from one to the other and then the farmer would then be covered by a 
different . . . There's going to be quite a few of them, because where they 
split boundaries they maybe have land in two or three different areas, and 
the farmers scatter around quite a bit now.  We know they're going to want 
to move back and forth, but we'd like to get our agents all in place before 
we start that. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- So then what you're saying, Mr. Minister, is there is an 
agreement between the farmer and the corporation as to what agent is 
selected.  But what I want to know is who has final say on determining the 
agent.  Is it the farmer or is it the corporation?  I'm talking within 
reason. I'm not talking the worst case scenario or anything; I'm talking 
within reason. Who has the final say? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- If the farmer doesn't want to deal with that agent 
that's been assigned him -- we assign the first agent to him -- then we 
will work out with the farmer -- with the farmer -- an agent that is 
acceptable to him.  But we also have to work it out with the agent that 
that farmer is acceptable to him, too.  So it takes a bit of massaging to 
be sure that both are happy.  There's no use just assigning somebody if 
you're going to be angry about it afterwards anyway.  And there will be 
some, there will be some that can't get along with any agent and there'll 
be the odd agent, probably, can't get along with any farmer.  And where 
that is the case, the latter is the case, we can do something.  Vice versa, 
we just have to live with it and work the best we can. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- I understand that.  And then there's going to be probably 
cases where that happens.  But what I'm saying is that, if the agent is 
acceptable to the farmer, can the farmer have the final say as to which 
agent he chooses? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- That's right. If the farmer isn't happy with the first 
agent assigned to him, then we'll work with the farmer to find an agent 
that he or she will want to work with.  So we're going to leave it down to 
the working situation.  It'll take a bit to work it out, I understand that, 
for a lot of reasons.  Some of them mightn't be because they don't even 
like . . . Maybe I like the agent well, but because I got some land over 
here, I live over here, and all the other reasons, I haul my grain to here; 
I mean, there's a whole bunch of reasons.  I live in town and I commute out 
to there -- a whole bunch of reasons, we know that.  So we're willing to 
sit down and work it out with the farmer.  It'll take a bit of consultation 
and a bit of time but we also have to work it out with each of the agents 
at the same time. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, talking about the 
agent program, you have a process that you go through in training the 
agents, and there's a cost involved.  Now there was a number of questions 



 

 

that I'd like to ask you.  First of all, let's start with the agents and 
their security in their position.  Are you planning on taking the agents to 
an in-scope position within the union of crop insurance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- No. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Well, Mr. Minister, what security does the agent have with 
regards to the position he's in?  What I'm saying is there may be agents 
that aren't suitable to the corporation and those agents would have to be 
replaced, but there also may be some, the corporation who thinks an agent 
is not suitable but the majority of farmers may think he is suitable.  What 
security does the agent have after putting out a substantial amount of 
money to acquire the agency, what security does he have in his position? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- It's a franchise dealership.  The agent has the option 
of, if he doesn't like the agents that he can sell it back to the 
corporation, and we would get somebody else to be there.  He also will have 
the option -- as we get into it, we'll be looking at allowing him to sell 
it to another agent or dealer provided he meets all or she meets all the 
requirements of Sask crop insurance.  You go through the training and be, 
you know, capable of doing the job, so that would .  But it's a 
transferable or . . . it's a franchise dealership.  It's based a lot like 
your SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) dealerships that many SGI 
agents . . . I've had one for 20 years there in Hudson Bay and, in fact, we 
have two. 
 
Those are franchise dealerships.  They pay for them.  They're bought and 
paid for.  They don't come free.  For sickness or any reason at all, they 
can always sell them back to the corporation for what they paid for them.  
It's sold on a contractual basis at $20 per existing contract.  They can 
build on that, and if they build that up bigger, if they want to sell it 
back or sell it to another agent who qualifies because of the training and 
that, they can do that and they would be worth more. 
 
Our concern was that it would be there; you'd be long-term; that you would 
get to know the people in the area; that you'd be their contact person; 
that you had good public relations, and that you be acceptable in the 
community -- community to be that kind of a person who would work with the 
farmers out there and would understand farming. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Minister, you said the agents can sell back to the 
corporation the files.  Is that exclusive, relating just to the files, or 
does an agent . . . He has the expense of, I understand, buying a computer 
and setting up an office.  Will there be any possible way that he will be 
able to sell the corporation the complete unit or does he exclusively sell 
the files? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Just for his protection, it's only the contract he 
purchased or what he's added to, if he's added more to it.  We would give 
him what he paid for it.  If he wishes to sell it to somebody else who 
would take the training course, as you do to be an SGI agent -- I mean you 
just don't become an agent without taking a real estate course and whatever 
else is necessary and a real estate insurance brokers association 



 

 

certificate or whatever is needed for there.  And I don't understand the 
legal technicalities to it.  But those kinds of . . . it would be the same 
thing. 
 
So we would buy back the franchise only, the contracts only back.  If he 
wanted to sell all the rest of it, he could either sell it to somebody else 
who would have to be trained, and passed the test as necessary, and that 
would be their decision, or we'd take it back. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Minister, what is the anticipated price of buying back 
the files from an agent?  I mean the agents have to pay you, say $20 a 
file.  Now if they work for a year or two years and build up files and 
service the corporation well, but for some reason they have to get out of 
the corporation, what is the anticipated price that the corporation will 
buy back the files from the agent for? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Back to the corporation it would be at $20 a contract as 
he paid for it in the first place.  If he sold it to somebody else as an 
ongoing business, that would be between the buyer and the seller.  The only 
thing is, the buyer has to pass and be a qualified agent for the 
Saskatchewan Crop Insurance.  And there is a test they go through.  We 
bring in 20 at a time or 25.  Two or three usually don't make it each time 
because of the tests, and they have to go through them.  So we're looking 
for quality people; we've got good quality people there and that standard 
would have to be maintained. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Minister, could you describe to the House exactly how 
the agents will be paid.  We hear figures of 200 or $220 a contract.  Now 
can you explain to the House exactly how an agent receives his money from 
the corporation.  Is it an annual reimbursal per contract, or is it a fee 
for service basis, or is it a commission basis? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- It's based on performance, could be monthly or whatever, 
as he sends in his three areas or four areas that he'll get paid on -- well 
really three areas.  On the sale of new contracts or renewal of existing 
contracts he'll get paid, and also part of that is, the field estimate fits 
into that.  He'll get paid 7.5 cents an acre for picking up the seeded 
acreage report, and he'll get paid for picking up the record of production 
in the fall.  So he'll get paid for four different things but based on each 
one. 
 
The average contract, average per agent for the whole year for doing these 
four things.  For selling it to the agent, for picking up the seeded 
acreage report, for doing the field estimates, and for doing the report and 
production in the fall including bin measurements, he'd average about $120 
per contract per year.  Now that's an average.  Some would be less and some 
would be a little bit more, but that'll be close to the average as you go 
through it. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- So what you're saying then, Mr. Minister, it's basically a 
fee-for-service operation whereby if he completes a certain number of steps 
then he will build himself up to an average of $120 an acre . . . a 
contract rather.  Is that correct? 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- I think that's a fair way of saying it, yes. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Minister, the agents have . . . let's say they have 200 
contracts that they buy, purchase from the corporation.  That would be 
$6,000.  I understand there is a cost involved for purchasing a computer.  
Can you explain to me who the computer is going to be purchased from, what 
type it is, and the cost of the computer? 
 
(2045) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- If you had 200 contracts, they're $20 a contract; it's 
not $30 if you purchase it.  So it would be $4,000 just.  What they do, 
they have a . . . And I don't know much about computers, I guess it's fair 
to say, but they use a computer. The agents use a computer. It's available 
through . . . They can either buy it themselves from wherever they want.  
It's a Toshiba that most of them have been picking up, but they can buy 
whatever they want, I guess.  The computer that we have that they can rent 
through crop insurance at $150 a month, and it's a rental purchase -- in 
five years they would own it.  It's available to them under those 
conditions and so they would . . . For the computer it would cost $150 a 
month for five years on a rental purchase plan through crop insurance or 
they can just go buy it outright whatever it's worth.  I don't know what 
it's worth. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Minister, is the computer compatible with the 
corporation's computer in Melville? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Yes, they are. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Minister, have you done an analysis -- or let's ask the 
first question first: what is required of an agent?  Can he run the agency 
out of his home or is he required to have an office separate and apart from 
his home? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- We would like to encourage them to set up an office but 
it's not a requirement to set up an office in the town.  We would encourage 
that.  We know when they first start up, some of these agents don't have a 
great deal of money, and if things work out well for them and they may well 
do it.  They would have to have an office at home or wherever.  Remember, 
it's farm gate service. So they go to the farmer; the farmer doesn't come 
to them.  It's basically an answering service that you have there, an 
answering machine, your computer print-out so you know what is available 
for each farmer, those kinds of things.  The farmer needs some information. 
It can be put back through the mainframe computer and we can put it out to 
them. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Minister, then from that I would assume that there 
would be very few agents who would have offices out of their home because, 
for the amount of money that they're receiving, after they have to purchase 
a computer, purchase the contracts, and service the customer, I don't think 
there's going to be an awful lot of money left over for these agents.  And 
that's what worries me a little bit. 



 

 

 
Mr. Minister, is it possible for an agent to be a broker for another 
insurance company? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- No. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Is it possible that an agent's wife could be a broker for 
another insurance company? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Well we're saying no, if that agent is involved with 
that insurance company in any way.  We have a letter from the insurance 
brokers association, which they sent to all of their insurance agents, 
stating to us and to them they didn't want them selling both their 
insurance and crop insurance.  They wanted them two stand-alone agency 
system.  So the insurance brokers of the province have asked us to do that.  
They have asked their agents to be part of that system. 
 
So we have acknowledged what they've asked us to do, and to the best of our 
knowledge we do not have an agent and a wife or a wife and an agent, 
whichever way that might be, or the combination thereof, selling crop 
insurance. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Does that also include members of the immediate family, if 
they are sellers of general insurance, that the person would not qualify to 
be an agent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- I think it's fair to say, as long as they're not 
involved in another insurance company.  You could be a son or a daughter or 
a son-in-law or a brother-in-law or whatever.  I don't think you can draw 
any lines there.  And we even had some thoughts about whether a wife was 
being an agent and the husband selling the insurance, if that was even a 
conflict.  But the insurance brokers have asked us to be fairly stringent 
with it.  We're abiding as close as we can by what they have asked us to 
do.  But a relative?  I don't know.  Where do you draw a line?  We haven't 
tried to draw that line.  As long as they're not involved with another 
insurance company, we have honoured them as agents if they qualify. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Well, Mr. Minister, the fear, of course, from many of the 
brokers around the province that have contacted me is that if a person got 
a contract to be an agent under crop insurance and any member of their 
immediate family was to be a general insurance sales agent, then there 
would be nothing to stop them from travelling together from farm to farm 
and cutting into someone else's area.  I just have a fear that that's 
possible, and I want to know what the strict rules of the agent that you 
have laid down to the agent are, to ensure that there is no conflict 
between that agent and any member of his immediate family as far as moving 
into other areas that are covered by general insurance people. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- First of all, the agent would have his area and that 
would be defined and he would have to stay in those areas.  He can't go 
into somebody else's area.  We would deal with it appropriately if we knew 
that they were doing that, as you suggested, travelling together and 
selling two different insurance companies or two different lines of 



 

 

insurance at the same time.  We would have to sit down and deal with that 
appropriately, and we would take the steps necessary to see that it 
discontinued. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Minister, I want to pursue this just a little bit in 
terms of the person, the agent being a spouse, suppose, of someone who is 
not an agent but has an insurance agency, a general insurance agency.  I 
own a general insurance agency in the town of Battleford.  Now I don't 
think that you would ever give my wife a contract anyway, because of 
politics that may be involved in it, but setting politics aside, Mr. 
Minister, in a situation like this, I have a general insurance agency in 
the town of Battleford.  Would my wife, for all intents and purposes, then 
qualify if she met the other requirements as a crop insurance agent?  Would 
she qualify to do that, or would she be ineligible to be a crop insurance 
agent because I, as her spouse, have a general insurance agency?  That's 
basically what we're asking here. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- We haven't hired one of those to date.  The only way 
that we would do that -- I'll make it absolutely clear -- is if there were 
separate identities, and they couldn't be run out of the same office.  
They'd have to be run out of separate offices totally, not even adjoining. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- But, Mr. Minister, you said some agents can run out of 
their house.  Now I know that general insurance agents, if they've come 
into the business within the past 10 years or so, can no longer run a 
general insurance business out of their residence.  But because of 
grandfather clausing, there are some insurance agents in the province that 
do in fact run their general insurance agency out of their house, and I'm 
sure you're aware of that.  In that situation, and some of these, quite a 
few of them as a matter of fact, are in rural areas. 
 
In a situation like that, where possibly the man of the household has a 
general insurance agency, could the woman of the household become a crop 
insurance agent and they both run out of the same house?  They might divide 
their basement in half and run it out of the same operation.  Is that 
possible to happen, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- No, if that was the case they would have to have a 
separate office some place else and have to be identified as that too. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I would hope that you would steer away 
from spousal relationships having both a general insurance agency and a 
crop insurance agency appointment, because I think that that just causes 
some very real problems for the insurance industry and I hope that you make 
a very clear distinction that that cannot happen.  I see you shaking your 
head in the affirmative. 
 
I want to go back a little bit to a question that my colleague from 
Humboldt was asking and that's one in terms of the commissions that are 
paid.  Were you saying earlier this evening, if I understood you correctly, 
that an average commission to a crop insurance agent would be about $120 
per contract per year?  Is that correct? 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- That's correct. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Now you also mentioned that if a crop insurance agent 
wanted to get out of the business, that crop insurance agent would be able 
to have the option to sell it back to the crop insurance corporation at $20 
a contract.  Would the crop insurance agent also have the option, rather 
than selling it back to the crop insurance corporation, to sell it someone 
else he'd be selling his business to? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Yes, he or she would.  But they would have to take the 
training course and pass the Saskatchewan crop insurance agents' tests that 
go with it and so they'd have to do that.  If they pass those tests they 
come in.  They'd have to go through the tests as they do with other 
agencies.  Then they would be eligible. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- What's that?  A blood test? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Well you can laugh about it but we're doing it properly. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Properly from the point of view of the Conservative 
party. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Yes, well check all the agents and see.  They're 
available.  You could sell it.  I'll answer the member from Battlefords.  
Yes you could.  You could sell it to whoever you decided but they'd have to 
be, you know, qualified to measure the bins and have to be able to pass the 
tests and do the things that are necessary.  That's exactly what we are 
asking the agents that we're appointing now to do.  So that's the same 
test.  They'd have to go through exactly the same procedure.  Same as if 
you took over any other type of an agency of that concern. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- I can't foresee many people, Mr. Minister -- and I don't 
know whether you'd agree with this or not -- I can't see many people who 
are crop insurance agents at any point selling back their contracts to the 
Crop Insurance Corporation, because it seems to me that this business in 
terms of the commissions and the way it functions would not operate much 
differently than a general insurance agency. 
 
And I don't know whether you're aware or not but I would offer to you, Mr. 
Minister, that in the province of Saskatchewan general insurance agencies 
are sold on the basis of times the annual commission volume of the agency.  
And depending on where an agency would be located and depending on the 
volume and the viability of the general insurance agency, you find 
insurance agencies selling, general insurance agencies selling for one 
times the annual commission volume, 1.5 times the annual commission volume, 
two times, maybe as high as two and a half times in special cases, the 
annual commission volume for that agency. 
 
And I'm wondering if you expect that crop insurance agents will be going 
into similar arrangements, and if they do, you can see why they would never 
end up selling  
 Dback at $20 a contract to the Crop Insurance Corporation because they 
would make multitudes of more money by selling to another crop insurance 



 

 

agent who would be coming into that area, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- There is a bit of difference between what we're asking 
the crop insurance agents to do and what a general insurance agent would 
probably do.  Our estimate is that the average agent will spend 1,100 hours 
on the road and about 100 hours in the office.  Most insurance agents spend 
most of their time in the office.  So there's a great deal of difference, 
if you have to spend your time in a car driving from farm to farm four 
times in a year, from getting your insurance coming to you in your office.  
So there's a bit of difference. 
 
I agree with you.  He may well want to sell them, and that's why we left 
that option there.  If that option is there and they can find a person who 
will do that, it may be to their advantage, and that's fine if they want 
it.  But we believe in many of the cases that they'll probably want to sell 
it back to the corporation.  It hedges against them losing or not being 
able to sell it to somebody else for whatever reasons, whether it's because 
they didn't like it, it's new; whether they felt it was too much work.  In 
some cases we've had agents work one day and quit and said this was a lot 
more than I thought it was going to be.  So there's a combination of 
things.  So we've already had to take a few back because of that.  I think 
it's just a little bit different.  I know what you're saying and I 
appreciate that.  But I think it is a little different.  It's a bit unique. 
 
(2100) 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Well it's not appreciably different.  I suppose you have 
some growing pains in the start-up operation, but certainly if the industry 
does what I would expect it to do, no agent would ever want to end up 
selling their contracts back to the crop insurance corporation.  I mean it 
would make no economic sense for someone who has built up their business 
over a period of 2, 3, 5, 10, 15 years, to sell it back at $20 a contract.  
So you're going to be finding other people buying that business on the 
basis of so many times the annual commission volume of the crop insurance 
agency. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I would ask you about the areas that you have set up and 
the restrictions on the areas.  Is there a possibility, if say years got 
difficult for a crop insurance agent, that they could amalgamate with 
another crop insurance agent in another area to have two areas that might 
not be viable because of economic circumstances, reduced contracts that 
they are able to sell?  Is there provisions made so that more than one area 
can amalgamate so that two agents can in fact work together? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- The staff says yes, there is provisions within our 
policy to do that, but it would have to have approval of Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance before they could do it. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- So they would make application to the crop insurance 
corporation and what would be the factors you would look at to allow two or 
more agents to amalgamate to save costs on the operation of their crop 
insurance agency, Mr. Minister? 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- They'd have to show us that it would be viable to do it; 
that they could manage that themselves; that the number of contracts in 
there, as you mentioned, may be down somewhat, the train, maybe the area.  
It may be because of some of the way . . . we do the boundaries out by 
imaginary lines in the sense of number of contracts, so that could change.  
It could be different things that could change some of those. 
 
So yes, you're right.  If the number of contracts were down, if the 
contracts became larger contracts, maybe some of the areas have larger 
contracts, or they go back to cattle, and in some of the cases where 
they're bigger areas and they've seeded them to grasses, those kinds of 
things may allow us to do it.  But we'd have to feel that the person was 
capable of handling the contracts in that area before we would approve it. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Minister, I suppose . . . I don't want to pursue this 
much longer, but I think that the . . . Was it 230 areas that you have in 
the province? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Two hundred and twelve. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Two hundred and twelve?  Of the 212, I imagine there are 
going to want to be some who want to amalgamate in the not too distant 
future because if the average one would have 200 contracts -- I don't know 
what the average would be, but there are 200 contracts and $120 average per 
contract per year -- they're looking at $24,000 a year.  And with their 
capital input costs to the crop insurance agency and the amount of 
travelling that they are going to have to do, by your admission -- I wasn't 
aware that they had to make that many calls, but I don't know that many of 
these areas are going to be viable. 
 
So if you dispute those figures maybe you could shed more light on it, but 
the figures that I've heard you saying are the average.  The agent would 
get $120 per contract per year, about 200 contracts in an area.  That comes 
to $24,000 gross, and I just don't know how some of these crop insurance 
agents are going to make it, Mr. Minister.  And I think that you should 
maybe be prepared for amalgamation of some of the areas where crop 
insurance agents cannot make a go of it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Well we'll certainly look at it as we get them up and 
running.  It seems that some don't make it anyway; they're quitting for one 
reason or another.  It'll take a while.  We'll give it a year's run.  If 
they come to us and show us that, like I said, that it's viable and what we 
did didn't make sense, we'll move it around. 
 
In some cases where we have a vacant one, we may split it in half, and half 
each way.  Some of those things . . . The boundaries of the rivers will 
change and maybe there across the river there's no bridges -- a whole bunch 
of things.  We're going to have to look at some of them.  We know that; 
we're prepared to do that.  We'd like to get all the agents in place first 
only, and then see where it goes from there. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Mr. Minister, I want to pursue this just a bit further.  And 
first of all you've set up a number of franchisees in respect to the crop 



 

 

insurance.  And I want to ask you first of all what consultation you had in 
respect to the establishment of agents or franchisees. 
 
What is the total cost to the insurance scheme and to the farmers of 
Saskatchewan in respect to the establishment of the 212 areas throughout 
the province, as you have indicated, and as you have indicated that you are 
paying on the average of $120 for the servicing of each farmer, and an 
average franchisee has some 200 clients? 
 
Number one, what consultation and what requests did you have from the 
agricultural community to establish it; and secondly, at what cost to the 
plan and to the farmers in respect to the implementation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- First of all, no cost to the farmers.  It's 
administration, as you know; it's cost shared by . . . And the proposed 
agreement by the federal government and provincial governments, under the 
existing one, it's totally by the provincial government. 
 
In regards to what consultations, we had a great deal of consultations.  We 
invited all the farm organizations in last June to come before the board of 
directors of crop insurance and two -- actually four outside people 
representing different groups: canola growers; stock growers.  I forget the 
other two that were involved into there.  They met with these farm 
organizations. 
 
Everyone was requested -- not requested, asked -- if they'd like to come 
and make a presentation in regards to some of the proposed changes, some of 
the ideas of what we put together for crop insurance for 1990.  I don't 
know how many . . . I forget the number that showed up, but I believe 23 
farm organizations showed up at those meetings.  Every farm organization in 
this province was invited. 
 
Then later this fall -- or last fall, in October -- we had 13 open meetings 
around the province and all over the province.  We held 13 and all this was 
proposed at that time to the farmers that came out.  There was about 4,000 
farmers that came out to the meetings.  The proposals, I think, were well 
accepted.  We had long meetings as you know, and a lot of questions, a lot 
of responses, a lot of direction, and from that we had . . . all these were 
proposed at the time and we got . . . I think basically, it is fair to say 
we got the approval of the farm organizations as well as the farmers out 
there to proceed.  So we had not only the 23 farm organizations that showed 
up but also we had the 13 public meetings were held around this province 
open to just everybody that was interested. 
 
What else was I going to say. I think that covered your questions that you 
asked.  No, you asked me the cost.  That was the other thing, the cost.  
The estimated cost for the agent system, above what we'll save, an 
additional cost will be about 3 to $4 million extra for the agency system, 
above what we will save in through the system in things that we do and 
areas that we would have costs involved in. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Well if you carry on your cost analysis like the provincial 
treasurer does or the Finance Minister, I doubt very much in your figures, 



 

 

Mr. Minister. 
 
But I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, how you chose the individual 
franchisees.  In other words, did you have the districts set up in the 
province, and that you openly asked for applications, and what procedure 
was used in evaluating who was going to be chosen to obtain the franchise? 
 
You indicated here that you had a training course and you had tests and all 
sorts of things.  And I suspect you did have tests because the test that I 
see that you gave was a litmus test, whether or not they were Tories or 
not.  But in any event what I'm asking you, Mr. Minister, what was the 
general procedure that you outlined in so far as getting applicants, and 
secondly, after you had the applicants, how did you go about getting the 
ones that were to qualify to get the franchise in respect to the crop 
insurance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- What we did, we advertised in The Western Producer for 
agents and in the local paper for agents, and it was put in there what was 
required.  It asked you to pick up an application form at your local 
customer service office.  If you were interested, the application forms 
were then forwarded to a company called North West Consultants. 
 
If there was a lot of applications for one particular area they 
short-listed it down.  If there wasn't, and in many cases there was only 
one, two or three, they then interviewed them to see if they were 
interested and if they knew what they were getting, if they knew the work 
that was involved, if they had the education to be able to do the necessary 
work.  Were they physically capable of climbing bins and all the things 
that is necessary to do, because you've got to climb bins and measure 
fields.  Were you prepared to commit the number of hours that were there? 
 
In many cases we ended up with hardly anybody, one or two is all that 
really remained when we got to a district because they just weren't that 
interested when they found out that is was going to be lots of work and 
lots of hours.  By eliminating all the insurance agents in the province it 
eliminated a large number that may have decided not to take it or to take 
it.  Then from there on it went to . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order, please . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well 
pay attention to the question, then.  I think the member from Quill Lakes 
has been asking the questions and he hasn't been interrupted in asking them 
and I think we should allow the minister to answer. 
 
(2115) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- The applicants were then short-listed. If there was a 
bunch they were short-listed down to three, and then picked by North West 
Consultants to try and do the test.  In most cases -- in most cases - 
_ if the agent didn't get the one that he or she applied for, they usually 
applied for two or three alternatives, and then they had the opportunity to 
go to the second or the third choice of theirs. 
 
Quite a few came and did the interview, came even to where they took the 



 

 

course.  It was a two weeks course, and they came and in some cases they 
stayed one or two days, found it was a lot of work going to be involved, 
and left.  And that left some places short without anybody at all applying 
for those particular areas. 
 
So that's the process it went through.  There's been about 100 agents been 
selected so far and there's about 100 to go.  And I believe there's 20 in 
training right now. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- I wonder whether you could indicate who North West 
Consultants' principals are, and whether you could indicate the total cost 
and fee that you paid to North West Consultants for the work that they did 
in choosing the franchisees in respect to the crop insurance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Okay, I'll hurry -- about $36,500 . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- How much? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- About $36,500 for doing the selection and interviewing. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Who are the principals? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- The principal is Walter Basler and I don't know who 
else.  There's another one but I'm not sure who his name is. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Where's Walter Basler from? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- My understanding is he's from Regina. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- What qualifications? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- I understand that North West Consultants does this for a 
lot of people in a lot of different companies in the province.  He's a 
consultant in human resources.  He specializes in interpersonal skills and 
training and he's . . . well that's about all I can say for the gentleman.  
That's his qualification. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Would it be too much trouble to find the other agent that 
operates . . . principal that operates with Walter in this here North West 
Consultants or is that a secret? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- I'm prepared to provide it to you even after the 
estimates is done, or tomorrow, whatever the case is.  Yes, either way I'll 
get it for you. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- What's wrong with tonight?  Well, I'll ask you, Mr. 
Minister, can you indicate what agent was chosen in the Wynyard area, and 
whether you could indicate how many applicants there were in the Wynyard 
area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- My understanding is for the Wynyard area -- I don't know 
what district number that is -- a Bruce Melsted was chosen; there was two 
applicants. 



 

 

 
Mr. Koskie: -- I wonder whether or not you could indicate who the other 
applicant at Wynyard was? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- I don't know.  I'll find out and send it over to you, 
but I don't know who it is.  I don't have no record here of it. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- And I wonder whether or not you could indicate who was the 
appointed agent in the Quill Lake area as the franchisee in respect to the 
crop insurance?  And could you indicate how many applicants in respect to 
Quill Lakes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Merv Sigstad is the one that's appointed there.  There 
was four applicants that were interviewed.  We're not sure how many were . 
. . how many applied?  There was four interviewed. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Would it be possible to provide me with the information of 
the other people that were interviewed in the applications in the Quill 
Lake area?  I know that Merv Sigstad, who was the Tory candidate in Quill 
Lakes in the last election got it.  But could you also indicate the other 
applicants in that area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- We'll get those three for you.  And I know what he says 
and it's true.  Certainly he ran as a Conservative last time.  I just want 
to make mention that there was a variety of people.  If you look up in the 
region 150, you'll see a Gordon McMasters is appointed up there.  I'm sure 
the Leader of the Opposition knows who I'm talking about, and so we have 
been fair. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Who? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Gordon McMasters, a very fine gentleman.  But you know, 
well . . . 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Well I just want to know one more thing in my area.  I 
wonder whether you could advise me who obtained the franchise in Watson?  
Also at the same time, indicate how many applicants there were in Watson? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- A Dwight Mierke, and there was four interviewed. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Would you provide me with the names of the other applicants, 
similarly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Yes. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- I have one other appointee that I want to ask you about, Mr. 
Minister, and that's a Mr. Holmes from Quill Lake, formerly from Quill 
Lakes.  And I wonder whether Mr. Holmes was fortunate enough to get one of 
the franchises over in the Kindersley area.  Could you check with your 
staff and indicate to me whether or not, I believe it's Mr. Bill Holmes, is 
reported to have also obtained an appointment over in Kindersley.  Could 
you confirm that? 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- That's correct. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Well, the point is well made, Mr. Chairman.  I'll tell you 
exactly what you have appointed.  Just exactly, Mr. Chairman, what I have 
been alleging.  The odd NDP or Liberal may have sneaked through.  But let's 
take a look at what is appointed here in the constituency of Quill Lakes.  
Merv Sigstad, Tory, former candidate; Bruce Melsted, Tory, either he or the 
father is the treasurer of the Quill Lakes Tory Party in Quill Lakes; Bill 
Holmes, related intermarriage to Bob Andrew, Tory, left Quill Lakes, went 
to Kindersley, got a job as crop insurance; Dwight Mierke, Tory. 
 
One, two, three, four, out of four.  Not bad, Mr. Minister.  You are 
efficient.  And I'll tell you North West Consultant has done a great job 
for you. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Independent. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- I'll tell you, very independent.  You should be awfully 
proud of yourself, handing out at the cost of farmers, organizers 
essentially for Tories.  That's what you're trying to do.  Melsted, Holmes, 
Sigstad, Mierke -- Tories, every single one of them.  There was no fairness 
in this, there was a blood test.  And that's what happened here, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
I wonder, you said you gave them a test.  I wonder whether there was a 
standard test given.  Could you indicate the nature of the test they had to 
take and whether you could in fact provide to the committee and to our side 
a copy of the test that got them qualified?  Would you have a copy of that 
test that you could provide us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, they go through the interviews as I 
explained it all earlier here, and then they go to Melville -- usually at 
Melville -- and they take two weeks of schooling and they write an exam at 
the end of that time.  And that's the procedure. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- I wonder, Mr. Minister, you have now appointed 108.  I 
wonder whether you could provide us with a complete list of the 108 that 
have been appointed, and send over a map indicating the area and district 
that each of them have been assigned to or have the right to operate 
within. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Yes Mr. Chairman, we will make it available to them. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- When are you going to do this?  After the next election or 
are you prepared to do it . . . like, don't you bring any information in 
here?  Wouldn't you think that we would want to know this information 
tonight?  I wonder whether you could check with your officials and see 
whether or not you have the information. 
 
Because after all, I would have expected that perhaps this new, innovative 
program that you have introduced, where you're setting up the potential of 
250 new businesses out in rural Saskatchewan, that you would want to be 
proud of it and have that information.  When can you provide that 



 

 

information, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- We can get that information available for you.  We'll 
try and have it for you tomorrow here. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Well Mr. Minister, you have the information there because 
when I start going through district by district, what you did is be able to 
confirm to me who was appointed in the individual districts.  Now when I 
stand up and ask you for it -- because you made me very embarrassed -- you 
say tomorrow.  I'm going to ask you again, Mr. Minister, you knew the 
particular ones that I was asking about.  You got it from your officials.  
Why can't you deliver it over?  Take it off the list; send that list over 
here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Mr. Chairman, I was just asking the officials.  They do 
remember.  We don't have it written it out in a list and they . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order, order, please.  Give the minister the chance to 
answer the question. 
 
(2130) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I said we'd make the list available 
tomorrow.  They will have to go back and get a print-out from the office in 
the morning, and we'll make it available to them tomorrow.  And that's what 
I said.  We just don't have it here.  I can keep asking them for names and 
they'll keep giving names, but we don't have it listed out on a sheet of 
paper, that's all, because we're hiring on a continuous basis.  The 20 
that's in training now, who haven't passed the exams yet, and there's a few 
that had passed had gone back -- so we'll have to go and bring the list in.  
I'm prepared to submit the list.  Every time an agent is appointed, a 
letter goes out to that area stating the agent's name, so it's public. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Well, Mr. Minister, this isn't the first time that you've 
dodged a bullet.  Every time you get into a corner and an embarrassment, 
you start ducking and waiting till tomorrow to provide it . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- I mean, this is vital information.  And what surprises me is 
you turn to your officials.  And when I ask you in respect to Quill Lakes, 
you look down; you know who was appointed; you know how many applicants 
there were because you turned around and asked.  I'm asking you -- you said 
that you 108 appointed.  Why do we have to wait till tomorrow morning?  
What is the coincidence that you suddenly had the four that I asked about 
and you can't provide the 108?  What we want to do is pursue it.  And I'm 
asking you, have you checked with your officials to see whether can in fact 
deliver that right now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- As you know, Mr. Hill here has been dealing with the 
agents on a one-to-one basis, so he knows them all by name.  We don't have 



 

 

it written on a sheet of paper, and what I said is we'll get a print-out 
with the names tomorrow available here for them, and I said we'd have it 
available for you and it will be made . . . 
 
The Chairman: -- Order, please.  The minister is answering the question.  
The minister has been asked for some information of which he said he would 
supply to the committee tomorrow, and I would ask the member to move to 
another line of questioning. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Part of the purpose of 
that estimates is to be able to seek information at the time that you're 
dealing with it and to  
 Dbe able to pursue it.  I'm disappointed that the minister is in fact 
dodging this and delaying it until tomorrow. 
 
What surprises me most is that I can go into the area of Quill Lakes and he 
suddenly has it.  That surprises me, Mr. Minister, that you would just 
suddenly come forward with that particular piece of information and 
wouldn't have the others. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, what I want to ask you: you have very flexible 
situations here.  These franchisees, they can operate in their own homes or 
they can have offices or whatever.  What I'm going to ask you, Mr. 
Minister, I want to ask you, number one, this question: are any of the 
franchisees who you appointed, who are supposed to have their own office 
and their own facilities, the computer and phones and so on, are any of the 
agents operating out of provincial government offices, such as rural 
service centres? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- The only one that we're aware of is where they're 
operating in the same building, not out of the rural service centre, make 
that absolutely clear.  The RM is at Wynyard; the RM is in the building; 
they own the entire building.  The RM leases to the rural service centres, 
and they also lease the space, understand, to the agent there.  And the RM 
owns the entire building and make the decision on who can or cannot be in 
that building.  The rural service centre is leased from the RM by the 
property management. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- What I want to ask: is the office that is leased by Mr. 
Melsted in Wynyard, is he paying for the lease rental or is he in fact 
using an office that is an office of rural service centre?  That's the 
question, because I've talked to people in Wynyard and they indicate that 
that's where he moved in, and he's operating out of the rural service 
centre and the office space is being provided. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- He does not.  We do not pay the rent; we pay our own 
rent for our rural service centre.  The agent pays his own rent to the RM, 
as the best I know, because the RM owns the building.  And well that's it.  
The RM owns the building; we pay our own rent.  If he's renting, he pays 
his own rent to the RM.  No way do we pay for any of his rent or is he part 
of our building or part of our structure. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, you obviously have a contract 



 

 

and an agreement with the franchisees.  I would ask you whether you are 
prepared -- and we request at this time a copy of that agreement with your 
individual franchisees -- will you provide us with a copy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- We don't have a copy with us.  We'll give it with the 
list of names tomorrow; you'll have it with all the others. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- When are you going to get some information here?  I mean, 
we're sitting in here going through estimates, and every time we ask you a 
question . . . You'd think you would have a franchise agreement because you 
got 108 operators. 
 
I want to ask you, Mr. Minister: when are you going to provide this 
franchise agreement?  Can you provide that by tomorrow morning?  Do you 
think you're going to be able to cart in all those documents that you 
referred to yesterday?  Can we in fact have that here tomorrow morning? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Mr. Chairman, about 30 seconds ago I said I'd have it 
here tomorrow morning. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, staying on the 
topic of the agents, I'm wondering if you are familiar with the term 
"exempt agent," in terms of a person who is qualified, who has qualified to 
be a crop insurance agent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- No idea.  None of the staff here know. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Minister, a little while ago we were talking about 
agents and whether or not family, immediate family could be involved in -- 
whether the agent himself or immediate family could be involved in being a 
broker for another insurance company.  Now it is my understanding that 
there are agents who sell other general insurance. 
 
Are you telling me, Mr. Minister, that you're not familiar with the term 
exempt agent -- that being an agent who sells crop insurance as an agent 
and sells other general insurance -- that you're not familiar with that 
term, and are you telling me that there are no agents hired by you that 
either are commissioned sales people for other general agents, or their 
family are working for general insurance sales people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Yes, there is.  There's two that are in there.  They've 
been given eight months from the time they signed the contract to be out of 
it or the contract is cancelled. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Could you identify those two please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- One is Don Cody and one is Mark Szyda. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, I was listening closely while the 
minister was trying to explain how people were appointed as to the crop 
insurance to be agents for you and, Mr. Minister, you outlined some of the 
people who had been already appointed.  And during that debate you were 
referring to your staff, and they were referring to a document, and you 



 

 

were looking at a document. 
 
I wonder if you would take the time right now to table the document that 
you were referring to when you got the names of Melsted, Holmes, Sigstad, 
and Mierke?  You referred to a document.  Now I would ask you to give us 
that document right now and so that we could have a look at that to see the 
list of names that you were referring to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- I was referring to names that were written on a sheet of 
paper here by one of the staff here.  And this is what I was referring to, 
which is just our own personal writing; it's not a document. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Minister, first of all I would accept that piece 
of paper that you refer to, the document that you refer to, and if you 
would ship that across.  The other thing -- I wonder if you would turn to 
that same staff person and ask him to continue the list, because obviously 
if he can remember those four that quickly, the only four that were asked, 
even if it's an incomplete list that he could remember, 30 or 40 of the 
names, that would be at least a start.  And I would ask you for that kind 
of a list right now at the present time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- He says he'll write out all he can remember, so we'll 
start.  It will take 15 minutes. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Minister, will you please send across the document 
that you were referring to so that we can read that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- No.  I've written some personal things on here, so I 
see. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Minister, I ask you again.  The rules of the 
Assembly are clear -- and I'm not going to raise as a point of order yet -- 
but the rules of the Assembly are clear that a document referred to by a 
minister has to be tabled.  And I would ask you, Mr. Minister, to table 
that document now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Well that's the way it was used and I'll send it over.  
If it's so important to the member that he reads it, I will send it over to 
him.  And I don't believe that, Mr. Chairman.  I'll send it over just in 
the principle because it don't matter whether he reads it or not, what's on 
there.  But I'll tell you, I don't believe I have to table documents in 
here when I'm doing estimates because we refer to documents all the time 
here in estimates.  I'll send it over in the principle there's nothing to 
hide.  So I'll just send it over. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Minister, you were giving me some names of two agents 
who were given a certain period of time to divest themselves of the 
personal insurance.  Is that a standard rule with the agent program that 
any person who currently has an agency selling general insurance has a 
period of time to divest themselves of that? 
 
(2145) 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- They said their business was very poor but they wanted 
to do something with it, either turn it back or finish the contracts off.  
We said fine, you have eight months to do that or with crop insurance 
you're cancelled.  My understanding is they were very, very small 
businesses and they wanted to either turn them over or sell them to 
somebody else in another area. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- And that is standard procedure for all agents you hire, and 
there are no other agents in that situation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Not that we're aware of. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Minister, we've talked about the cost incurred by 
agents.  At one point in time I was led to believe that the agents would 
have to visit the farmer four times in one particular year.  Is that the 
case for the agents, and will they be paid mileage for doing that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Yes, it's the case, and no, they won't be paid mileage. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Minister, then it is quite clear that it is a 
requirement of the agent to visit each of the possibly 300 contract holders 
four times in one particular year.  Then can you tell me, have you done an 
assessment of the cost to the agent for mileage incurred on those visits?  
It would seem to me that it would be very substantial.  If you had 300 
contracts and one person had to make four or 1,200 trips to each farm in 
one year, 1,200 trips in total to the farms in one year, there would be a 
tremendous cost involved.  Now is that a strict rule or is that just a 
guide-line that you provide? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Yes, that's what's expected of them.  No, they can take 
it or leave it.  That's part of the franchise dealership.  That's what we 
expect of them.  We know that they'll have to do their driving very 
carefully.  They'll have to, in some cases, pick up three or four or five 
or six or ten, or whatever the number is when you go out there.  The 
initial one will be the tough one, and we realize that because you're sort 
of setting new grounds and going to places.  So that'll take some time when 
you're doing the measurements in the fall or picking up the seeded acres 
recorded.  You'll probably pick a lot up in one day. 
 
So those kinds of things you will be able to do.  The amount of miles, 
they'll decide for themselves how they want to travel the area.  They'll 
certainly travel the least miles possible.  And we never said it was a 
sweetheart deal.  We said you're going to earn every dollar you make.  We 
never said you were going to get rich off it.  We said it was a reasonable 
wage.  That's what they will make from it, and that's all that's expected 
from it. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Well I tell you, I don't think the same requirement is made 
by your government to Chuck Childers who is getting pretty much of a 
sweetheart deal.  But I understand there is a discrepancy of how you treat 
farmers and how you treat your corporate friends.  Mr. Minister, can you 
tell me how many, if any, agents that have undertaken to train as agents 
have quit during the process of that training? 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- In the neighbourhood of 20. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Twenty agents who have started taking training have quit.  
Now Mr. Minister, can you explain to me exactly why they quit?  Was it due 
to the fact that they probably have figured out this system that you got?  
Like you said, they're going to earn every penny they make. 
 
By looking at it, I just don't think that it's going to be very lucrative 
unless they can expand the business by way of having a general insurance 
agent or having a spouse or family dealing with general insurance in order 
to supplement their business.  Mr. Minister, can you tell me exactly why 
those people quit? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- I did explain a little earlier that some of them didn't 
realize how much work was involved; some didn't pass the exam; that at the 
end of the training program some went out and started to sell and found 
that it was more than they wanted; some found that dealing with the public 
was just not what they expected.  And so a series of things, and any time 
you set up a new agency you're going to run into those. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Minister, will you have a process of evaluating the 
performance of the agents over a period of time?  And exactly can you 
explain to this House what the procedure is in evaluating the performance 
of an agent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- It will be monitored on an ongoing basis, based on the 
quality of work they do, the reaction of those they sell to, those kinds of 
things.  The public relations that they display will all be important to 
whether they maintain and be part of the agency system. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Minister, can you tell us who does the training of the 
agents and who does the monitoring of their performance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Staff does the training and staff will do the 
monitoring. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I think that what you're saying is that 
you have staff now who know the complete system.  They know the entire 
system of crop insurance, obviously, because they're training your agents.  
And I think that you had an option, when moving into the agent program, of 
using current staff under crop insurance who are very knowledgeable, who 
were already hired, who had the ability to provide the farmers of 
Saskatchewan with information as to what the programs under crop insurance 
would be. 
 
And yet you chose to go out and hire your Tory friends as indicated here --  
we asked four questions and we got four answers and they're all Tories -- 
to come to the agency to provide for you a service that you have already 
had under the current crop insurance system. 
 
What you're doing, Mr. Minister, is disallowing people who are presently 
working under crop insurance to have a decent income.  Many of those 



 

 

adjusters and field staff are making a living or supplementing their 
income, their living, by working for crop insurance, and yet you chose to 
go into an agent program to take the first step to privatizing crop 
insurance, and we've heard a little while ago that you're also . . . the 
federal government is pushing you into the second step of privatizing by 
removing the hail coverage.  But you chose to go to the agents when we have 
a fleet of 200 to 300 people under crop insurance who already could provide 
that service. 
 
There's not very many people, Mr. Minister, that I've talked to who are not 
satisfied with going into the offices to get information on their crop 
insurance program.  I heard absolutely no people complaining about the 
current system, except you chose to start to privatize the corporation and 
to choose your Tory hacks, for the most part, except for those few who 
maybe slipped through, to deliver a program that was already being 
delivered under the current system. 
 
Mr. Minister, or you had another option.  You could have gone through the 
insurance brokers if that's the way you wanted to privatize the industry.  
Mr. Minister, what I'm saying to you is this: there was absolutely no clear 
reason why you're spending 6 to $7 million setting up this program, why you 
are choosing to cut hours off of current staff, in light of the fact that 
the agents will be doing some of that work.  And I would ask you, Mr. 
Minister, how many of the current staff that you have, have acquired agent 
contracts? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- About 20 per cent of agents were former adjusters . . . 
were adjusters that applied for the agency position. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- I'm sorry, Mr. Minister, you said 20 per cent of the 
current 108 were field staff or adjusters that were working for crop 
insurance.  Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- About 21 or 22 people so far that were crop insurance 
adjusters or people within the system that applied for the agent's 
position. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I guess I just would say that I see 
absolutely no reason for going to the agent program.  We will see, and I 
will reserve judgement as to exactly how it works, but I think there's 
going to be many man-hours reduced for those people who are currently 
involved in the crop insurance program.  And unless the motive was to start 
the trend to privatization in the crop insurance, I see no other motive 
than that, because there is an existing system out there that has worked 
and served the people of Saskatchewan well. 
 
And the only other reason, Mr. Minister, is that you have the crop 
insurance program so confused, as witnessed by the debate here on the 
multi-year disaster, as witnessed by yourself saying that there have been 
many changes, that you are attempting -- attempting -- to solve some of 
your problems by going to an agent system. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I want to ask you a couple of questions about the forage 



 

 

feed program.  Can you tell me, Mr. Minister, under your forage program 
this year, whether or not I'm correct by saying there were a number of 
cheques issued, or a majority of cheques that were made out, then 
destroyed, and new cheques reissued? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Not that anybody in the staff here is aware of. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Minister, can you tell me exactly what the procedure 
was to determine the loss under your forage program and the wild hay 
program. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Mr. Chairman, to determine if a producer was eligible 
for a payment under the forage program, they did the actual production of 
tame hay and native grasses that was in the area.  They averaged it by 
townships.  They used the centre township, which was 50 per cent, and the 
eight adjoining townships around which was the other 50 per cent against 
the normal yield.  The producer coverage level was then used against that 
township average, and then the per cent of the compensation or the pay-out 
was based on the loss against the area coverage based on those eight 
townships and the centre one being 50 per cent. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10 p.m. 
 


