





























































Hansard: April 26, 1990


 

 

April 26/90 
 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have two guests that I would 
like to introduce today, through you and to the House and the members of 
the legislature.  First of all, in the Speaker's gallery, the Consul 
General of Belgium, who is in Toronto, Mr. Robert Devriese  The Consul 
General I met this morning, and he will be meeting with Her Honour, the 
Lieutenant Governor. He'll be meeting with the Hon. Grant Schmidt, 
officials from the Department of Health, and officials from 
Intergovernmental Affairs. 
 
I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, and to the members, that the Consul 
General has been very helpful to me personally.  My daughter Michelle just 
had the opportunity to represent Belgium at the United Nations in New York 
and she received her advice on several of the political issues in Europe 
from the Consul General. 
 
As well, he is very interested in the health card technology, and we met 
with the Minister of Social Services in Belgium.  And their officials will 
be here, so he will be continuing to talk about our health card being 
marketed in Europe.  And obviously we had some very good discussions about 
Europe 1992, the multilateral trade negotiations going on at the GATT 
(General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade). 
 
So I would ask all members here to welcome this distinguished European 
visitor. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- As well, Mr. Speaker, I want to introduce to you, and 
through you, a special guest and their organization, Mr. Rodolfo Jerez, 
president of the Saskatchewan Association for Nicaraguan Democracy.  He's 
seated in the Speaker's gallery. 
 
This is a very historic time for Nicaragua.  Mrs. Violeta Chamorro was 
inaugurated yesterday, April 25, as the president of that nation.  The 
government and the province of Saskatchewan look forward to building a 
solid and lasting relationship with people in Latin America, and 
particularly Nicaragua, and wish our very best wishes to the newly 
democratically elected president. 
 
So I would ask all members to please recognize our guests and wish them 
well in Nicaragua. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

Mr. Saxinger: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'd like to 
introduce to you, and through you to the members of this Assembly, a group 
of students, grade 8 students from Cudworth.  They came down together with 
a group from Bruno and they're going to be here today to view this session.  
They are accompanied by their teachers, Jim Bridgeman and Karen Dufort, and 
their bus driver, Ben Lucas.  I look forward to meeting with them at 3 
o'clock for pictures and refreshments and questions.  And I would ask the 
members to please help welcome the students to Regina. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Petersen: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to 
introduce to you, and through you, two visitors to the Assembly today 
seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker.  They're Mel Hegland, the mayor of La 
Ronge, and Mr. Vern Studer, a representative of the chamber of commerce 
from La Ronge.  And I'd ask the gentlemen to rise and be recognized, and 
I'd just ask all members to help me welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I would like to join 
with the member for Kinistino in welcoming to our legislature the groups 
from Bruno and Cudworth.  I have to apologize; I believe I will be in crop 
insurance estimates when it comes time for pictures and drinks, so I've 
asked my colleague from P.A.-Duck Lake to sit in for me, and he will 
certainly do a good job of answering all your questions.  I just hope you 
have a good trip to Regina and a safe trip home, and I'd like all members 
to again welcome them here. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  To you, and through you to all 
members, I would like to introduce seven adult students from the SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) campus, Palliser 
Campus in Moose Jaw who are visiting our legislature today.  They're 
accompanied by their teacher, Mr. Larry Shaak.  I look forward to meeting 
with the friends from Moose Jaw right after question period, and I would 
invite all members to welcome these guests to our Chamber. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, to you, and through you, I would like also to 
welcome two people from La Ronge, the mayor, Mel Hegland, and Mr. Vernon 
Studer who's been, both of them have been very involved in mining 
development and would like to have strong participation in that area, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

STC Inquiry 
 



 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have a question for the minister 
responsible for Saskatchewan Transportation Company.  Mr. Minister, you 
will be aware of the story in today's Star-Phoenix which states: 
 

 After they were arrested in Dallas and disowned by STC, Don Castle and 
Darrell Lowry used Saskatchewan Transportation Company credit cards to 
ring up $1,400 in phone calls between Dallas and Regina. 

 
Since the two men were at that time suspended from their duties at STC, one 
would have assumed that their privileges were also suspended.  That being 
the case, why were they allowed to use STC credit cards to run up $1,400 of 
long distance charges after their suspension? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, the member's quite right in saying that 
the two individuals in question were suspended by STC without pay and other 
benefits.  Other benefits would certainly include the use of credit cards, 
whether they be either credit cards or telephone credit cards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I think the hon. member would know and many people here in 
the House and elsewhere would know, that credit cards and credit card 
numbers, once one has the number, you can go forward and use the credit 
card number.  I believe that was done by both in both cases.  The corporate 
credit card numbers used by STC is a corporate number that's used by 
employees, including the bus drivers out and around the province. 
 
When it came to our attention that this had been done and it was being done 
in Dallas, the credit card number in question was cancelled and new credit 
cards were issued to the employees of STC subsequent to this happening. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: -- New question, Mr. Speaker.  Minister, I'm afraid it's just not 
going to wash; it's not good enough.  It's that kind of a cavalier attitude 
towards the taxpayers' money and towards STC which has taken that 
corporation from a very strong financial surplus position to a $25 million 
deficit during your long, hard, eight Tory years of mismanagement. 
 
Can you tell us, Minister, what perks these two STC executives had in 
addition to a calling card, when they were cut off, and what their monthly 
spending was on such things as expense accounts during the time leading up 
to their arrests? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, as we've said in the House before -- I 
might just make the comment as it relates to credit cards -- the credit 
card numbers, as I've said, once one has the credit card, whether he has it 
physically in their hand or whether they have the number committed to 
memory, they're able to use it.  I know that people that I know, members of 
our caucus who have credit card numbers, memorize their credit card 
numbers.  And so I'm not sure if that's the case with the hon. member or 
some of his colleagues.  That's the fact of life for the way in which 
credit cards work. 



 

 

 
But, Mr. Speaker, more importantly, and as I have said in the House before 
and outside this House, this whole issue as it relates to the two people 
who are charged in the United States -- not convicted, but charged -- who 
are charged in the United States and who have been suspended without pay or 
other benefits by STC, we believe we've acted in a prudent way.  We have 
established a judicial inquiry.  I believe that's seen by people across the 
province as a reasonable response to the unfortunate circumstance that we 
are in. 
 
That is the case.  If the member has other questions, and I know they have 
all kinds of questions, and he takes every opportunity to engage in 
muck-raking or whatever other term you might want to apply to it, but I 
would say to you, Mr. Speaker, I take the responsibility very seriously.  
We have given it -- all of the information -- to the judicial inquiry.  
And, Mr. Speaker, that member, all members, and the people of Saskatchewan, 
I believe, should allow the judicial inquiry to take its course. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: -- A new question, Mr. Speaker, to the same minister.  Minister, 
it's that kind of misspending and your government's lack of controls which 
should be covered in the Ernst and Young report. 
 
Can you tell us if this item was included in the Ernst and Young report?  
And will you do the proper thing and make that report public today so that 
the people of Saskatchewan can see for themselves how this kind of 
mismanagement of taxpayers' money is or was dealt with? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, the issue of the Ernst and Young report 
and the submission of that report by Ernst and Young, the nationally 
recognized firm, to the judicial inquiry is an issue that's been dealt with 
in the past here.  That was turned over to the judicial inquiry on the 
request of Mr. Justice Brownridge, as I've reported to the House before. 
 
At the time that I reported to the House, the members over there did not 
believe it was the case.  They've questioned the answer that I was giving 
at the time.  Subsequently they were shown to be wrong on that case.  Mr. 
Speaker, all I say to you is that the Ernst and Young report has been 
turned over to the judicial inquiry as had been requested. 
 
The Ernst and Young report has dealt with accounting practices and all of 
the management practices within STC.  Mr. Speaker, the judicial inquiry is 
mandated to be a public exercise and will be a public inquiry.  All I can 
say to that hon. member is have patience and you will have all of the 
information that you need. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'd like to direct a 
question to the Minister of Justice.  Mr. Minister, we have some revealing 



 

 

facts.  We have these two officials in Dallas, the two STC officials who 
are facing bribery charges at the present time, making several calls to the 
chief of staff of the former minister responsible for STC and now 
Government House Leader and the member for Melfort.  And we also have 
several calls being made to the former communication director, a very 
senior advisor to the Premier.  I want to ask you, Mr. Minister: are you 
apprised of the fact that these phone calls were in fact made by any of the 
individuals receiving them and whether or not you have determined the 
purpose of those calls. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- No, Mr. Speaker, and we should keep in mind that a lot of 
people, when they receive calls, answer the telephone.  I think the 
question that has to be dealt with is, as the minister responsible for STC 
has answered, what to do about the credit card.  And I think that's the 
question that has to be answered, and the hon. member has answered that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Mr. Speaker, another question to the Minister of Justice.  I 
hope he can do a little better in this one.  Mr. Minister, these are calls 
from the accused from Dallas to a senior chief of staff of one minister and 
also to a former communication officer of the Premier.  I ask you, Mr. 
Minister, will you take it upon yourself to determine the nature of those 
calls?   And will you also, Mr. Minister, undertake to advise the RCMP and 
the commissioner for the judicial inquiry that such calls were made and may 
be of interest in determining whether or not investigation would be 
furthered by such contact with these individuals. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I have little doubt but that the RCM police members that 
I know and that I'm aware of would take a look at the paper, and this 
information, I believe, was in at least both daily newspapers today.  If 
that's a surprise to the hon. member, I'm surprised. 
 
Secondly, from my reading of the paper today, that one of those individuals 
was the sister-in-law of the individual, which I think again what I'm 
simply saying is it's the question of the use of the credit card that's the 
big one.  If someone phoned their sister-in-law, I'm surprised that that 
would surprise the NDP.  And then secondly, my recollection of Mr. Quinlan, 
at the time that the story broke, was doing public relations on behalf of 
STC and the bus system. 
 
So, well again, the only ones.  Every reporter in this province knows full 
well that you haven't brought one new item to the floor of this Assembly.  
You are interpreting it in your own manner but that doesn't deal with the 
facts out there, Mr. Speaker.  The fact is that they use the credit calls.  
And the hon. member responsible has already responded to that question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

Mr. Koskie: -- I want, Mr. Minister, to ask you this.  Will you give the 
House your assurance that if the RCMP or the judicial inquiry wishes to 
investigate whether or not these people -- that is the chief of staff or 
the former communication officers, were in fact acting as conduits for 
higher-ups in government -- will you in fact co-operate fully in the 
investigation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I'm trying to think of what the D could stand for.  I 
know that the N is a misnomer because there is nothing new in the New 
Democratic Party.  But I know the P stands for paranoia, Mr. Speaker, 
because, Mr. Speaker, again nothing new. 
 
We had indicated at the time of the inquiry that there would be full 
co-operation from the government.  We set it up, Mr. Speaker, in the belief 
that it was the right thing to do to get to the bottom of the matter, Mr. 
Speaker.  And there will be full co-operation with the inquiry. 
 
The police have been carrying on their investigation as they normally do, 
as this government quite properly takes a position that they should be able 
to make their inquiries unfettered and independent of government.  We 
believe in that principle, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We do disagree with the principle espoused by the New Democratic Party 
yesterday in Crown corporations that the politicians should oversee the 
police investigations.  That is wrong. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Another question to the minister, and I ask you to listen to 
the question because you seem to stray a little bit, but I can understand 
why you do. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you tell us whether or not the RCMP investigation is 
completed, and if it's not, when do you expect it to be completed? Do you 
have any ideas as to when it's likely to be completed and whether or not 
the investigation is still concentrating solely on Castle and Lowry as the 
member from Meadow Lake has indicated. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Again, Mr. Speaker, the NDP are trying innuendo; we've 
now heard that for the last couple of years.  I can only tell you I'm 
advised that the investigation is continuing and that I would, Mr. Speaker, 
expect that they will report whenever they're finished, and not before. 
 
I will like to restate, Mr. Speaker, that the principle espoused yesterday 
in Crown Corporations by the NDP that there should be political overseeing 
of police investigations is not the policy of this government, it is the 
policy of only the New Democratic Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Executive Compensation at PCS 



 

 

 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have a question for the 
minister responsible for the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, and it 
concerns the contract of William Doyle, the president of PCS (Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan Inc.) sales. 
 
One provision of that contract, Minister, says that the corporation shall 
reimburse the employee for membership dues to the North Shore Country Club 
in Glenview, Illinois, during the five-year term of the agreement.  Now 
we've made inquiries about this North Shore Country Club, and we find that 
it cost 10,000 American dollars just to be put on the waiting list for 
membership, and another $20,000 American immediately upon acceptance as a 
member, and that's over 35,000 Canadian dollars just to get in the door, 
Minister. 
 
Now can you tell Saskatchewan people if this has actually happened; if 
$35,000 of Saskatchewan's money has been spent to get Mr. Doyle into this 
exclusive country club? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Mr. Speaker, I can't answer what clubs or what was paid. 
But let me indicate to the hon. members that I would expect that many 
corporations, and many national and international corporations do in fact, 
Mr. Speaker, encourage their senior managers to join certain clubs and have 
memberships in certain clubs. 
 
For that, Mr. Speaker, to be a surprise to anyone in this province, I would 
be surprised.  And which clubs, which organizations that international 
corporations should have their executive members, is obviously a decision 
of the management of what are in the best interests of the corporation, to 
ultimately get the highest return for shareholders.  That's what business 
expenses are supposed to do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- A new question, Mr. Speaker.  I take it from the 
minister's answer that the answer . . . I take it that the answer is quite 
likely yes, these amounts were paid to get Mr. Doyle into the North Shore 
Country Club. 
 
In addition to this $35,000 to get in the door, we're told that the annual 
membership fee at this club is over $4,000 in Canadian money per year.  Now 
that's what I call high-priced networking or high-priced marketing, but I 
don't think Saskatchewan taxpayers will find it acceptable when there are 
hungry children in this province. 
 
How can you justify this expenditure, Mr. Minister?  Surely Saskatchewan 
people aren't responsible for the golf club dues of company executives.  
Can you tell the House how many other public sector executives have these 
unnecessary and expensive perks in their contracts? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Mr. Speaker, I can't answer that question.  I would 
expect that the corporations that are carrying on business nationally and 
internationally, Mr. Speaker, and corporations where it is in the best 
interests of the company to have their senior employees members of clubs or 
organizations -- that the potash corporation would be no different than 
anyone else. 
 
As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, I can recall when we took office.  We 
took office at . . . and that policy, I'm sure . . . that people, their 
senior members were members of golf clubs in the province, members of 
Assiniboia Club, members of the Saskatoon Club, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So to say, Mr. Speaker, that senior managers are not members of these 
organizations, would be wrong.  And, Mr. Speaker, to say that senior 
executives shouldn't do what they believe in the best interests of their 
corporations, for their employees to get the best interests for their 
shareholders, that's a decision for management, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- A new question to the minister.  Minister, we're talking 
about a contract that was entered into when PCS was a Crown corporation, 
and we're talking about an employee who himself is earning more than 
$300,000 U.S. per year.  Now this North Shore Country Club is ranked in the 
top 100 golf courses in the United States by Golf Digest, and there are 
some 4,500 private golf clubs in the United States. 
 
We're told that this rating is based on three factors: the wealth of the 
membership, the wealth of the club, and the prestige of the club.  Now we 
in Saskatchewan are thrilled to know that the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan is on such an exclusive membership list. 
 
Can you tell this House what possible benefit was expected to accrue or 
will accrue to the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, and thereby to the 
people of this province, by spending a total of over $56,000 Canadian in 
the life of this contract over five years to grant Mr. Doyle membership in 
this exclusive golf course? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Well the difficulty I have is that you can't have it both 
ways.  If it's an exclusive membership, then I would expect in the normal 
course of doing business that their contacts would be that much more 
exclusive, that much more prestigious, that much more important, and that 
much more influential -- Mr. Speaker, that it's those type of people that 
in fact they will want to do business with to influence the decision. 
 
The potash corporation, much to the surprise of the New Democratic Party, 
is dealing with some very large corporations in the United States, major 
buyers, Mr. Speaker, major mining companies in the United States -- major, 
as I say, buyers of potash, major distributors of potash in the 
corporation. 



 

 

 
Agri-food businesses, Mr. Speaker, of hundreds of millions of dollars are 
the type of businesses that the potash corporation quite properly is 
dealing with to try and sell Saskatchewan potash. 
 
I'm surprised that the hon. member would say that they should not be doing 
that.  Mr. Speaker, they should be in contact with the people that are 
going to buy the potash, going to distribute the potash.  And, Mr. Speaker, 
wherever those people are, I hope the potash people is very closely in 
touch with them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Children Living in Poverty 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Speaker, in light of the answer that the minister has 
given, that this government is willing to support $40,000 a year on golf 
fees for top executives, I'd like to direct my question to the minister of 
the families. 
 
Given the fact that we have 64,000 children living in poverty in 
Saskatchewan, 22,000 children using the food banks last year in this 
province, and that 70 per cent of the working parents, primarily women, who 
are working full time, live in poverty, as do their children, do you 
support this policy of $40,000 a year for top corporate executives to golf, 
Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- Mr. Speaker, the 64,000 number that the members of the 
opposition and the critic of the family is throwing around are arbitrary at 
the very best, Mr. Speaker.  Nobody agrees with those figures.  The fact of 
the matter is, Mr. Speaker, that the radio ads that they're running and the 
members of that party are saying that people on low income are not feeding 
their children.  That's what they're saying about the farmers of this 
province, that the farmers of this province are not feeding their children, 
Mr. Speaker.  And we know that's not true. 
 
I'm appalled at the insulting remarks and radio ads that they're running 
against the low income people of this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Agreement with Cargill 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order! 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is addressed to the 
Premier this afternoon.  Mr. Premier, your good friend, Kerry Hawkins, who 
is president of Cargill Canada, said on STV last night that Cargill, and I 
quote: 



 

 

 
 . . . won't bow to political pressure, and details of the plant at Belle 

Plaine will not be given out even it Premier Devine asks for them. 
 

Mr. Premier, who's running things in Saskatchewan -- you or Cargill grain?  
What gives Cargill the right to tell Saskatchewan people they aren't 
entitled to know how their money is being spent? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, they've been all over the map this 
morning, and again they're taking it out of context. 
 
I will say that we are doing a joint venture on fertilizer, the Government 
of Saskatchewan and the Cargill corporation, and indeed you will have 
public information.  But on the commercial arrangements on margins, you 
never make them public. And the commercial basis, and you know that as well 
as I do . . . In fact, we talked about it recently. 
 
So you will have a public document that is there that outlines the nature 
of what the agreement is, but you will not see the release on commercial 
margins.  And nor should anybody expect to in a competitive business. 
 
They might not understand that, Mr. Speaker.  They know very well that they 
couldn't do it.  They couldn't build fertilizer projects, they couldn't 
build paper mills, they couldn't build upgraders.  They don't really 
understand that.  Nor do they understand international marketing. 
 
But maybe they'll come along after a while, Mr. Speaker -- after they 
figure out it's a good idea to diversify the economy here, not have the 
fertilizer plant built in North Dakota and we ship the natural gas and the 
jobs into the States.  Let's have it on this side of the border so we get 
the jobs and we get the opportunities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- A new question to the Premier, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, 
it's a fact that Cargill has put up $65 million, or 15 per cent of the 
equity.  It's a fact that the people of Saskatchewan have put up at risk 
$370 million, or 85 per cent of the equity.  And it would seem that Cargill 
should be a junior partner to the people of this province. 
 
Yet with your full compliance Cargill has decided that it can, on its own 
whim, ignore the wishes of the people of Saskatchewan.  Is it written 
somewhere, Mr. Premier, in those deals which you won't reveal, that Cargill 
has the right to ignore the people of this province and to disregard a 
directive from you -- because that's what Mr. Hawkins did yesterday.  Did 
you put that in your deal? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. members say that we want to give 
Imperial Oil the commission margins as we market all the information to the 



 

 

competitors, from Simplot, or from other places.  I mean, all the 
fertilizer manufacturing is in Alberta, United States, and Manitoba, not in 
Saskatchewan.  So we set up a company here, and the NDP is saying let's 
give all the margin information to Imperial Oil, to Simplot, or to 
Americans or other people when we're building a plant here.  Now nobody in 
their right mind would do that. 
 
We know that you can have an arrangement here where we can build and we can 
be competitive.  There are going to be margins paid for the interest rate 
protection.  There's going to be a commission paid for marketing and 
there's going to be a commission paid for the natural gas. 
 
And in fact, Mr. Speaker, if you go into Moose Jaw right now and you talk 
to people, and I'm sure that you're aware of this, that the people of Moose 
Jaw are awfully glad that the fertilizer plant isn't going to be made and 
put up in Montana or North Dakota.  It's going to be on this side of the 
border, so we can process our natural gas and have the lowest-priced 
fertilizer any place in western Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 
Bill No. 14 -- An Act respecting Certain Payments to the Meewasin Valley 
Authority, the Wakamow Valley Authority and the Wascana Centre Authority 
 
Mr. Kopelchuk: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill respecting 
Certain Payments to the Meewasin Valley Authority, the Wakamow Valley 
Authority and the Wascana Centre Authority. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next 
sitting. 
 

Bill No. 15 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Embalmers Act 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I move first reading of a Bill 
to amend The Saskatchewan Embalmers Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next 
sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Rural Development 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 43 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 



 

 

Mr. Koskie: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I have a series of 
questions which I'd like to perhaps read into the . . . it relates to 
staff, the traditional questions, and travel, and there's a few other ones, 
in-province travel. 
 
I thought perhaps to save time -- because I think we can only wring so much 
water out of a rag, and I think that we should wind this down and get on 
into a new area like crop insurance -- and what I will do if I may, Mr. 
Minister, with your concurrence, is to read in these questions.  And 
perhaps you could provide me with the answer, written reply to these 
questions. 
 
So in respect to staff, the first question I'd like to read in and have the 
minister reply is:  I'd like the name and the title and the salary of all 
personal staff.  This'll all be recorded. 
 
Secondly, I would like to know if there was any change in salary among your 
staff in the past year. 
 
Third, how many vehicles are provided by the provincial government for the 
use of officials and employees who are part of the Department of Rural 
Development? 
 
And four, do ministerial assistants have access to government cars for any 
reason? 
 
And five, do any officials or employees of Rural Development have credit 
cards issued by or paid for by the department? 
 
Mr. Minister, are you prepared then to take those as read in and supply me 
with the answer?  Is that the way you prefer to go? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- No problem.  We'll get them all together and send them 
over to you. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Then I'll proceed, Mr. Chairman.  In respect to travel, I 
want, number one, last year how many out-of-province trips were taken by 
the minister?  What were the destinations?  Who accompanied the minister?  
Four, what was the cost of each trip?  Five, what was the purpose of each 
trip?  Six, in the coming year, how much is budgeted for travel by the 
minister?  And seven, did the department use any charter aircraft during 
'89-90?  If so, what cost? 
 
Also in respect to in-province travel.  Number one, Mr. Minister, can you 
tell me how often you used the executive aircraft in '89-90?  And two, can 
you tell me the cost of these trips?  Three, what was the purpose of each 
of these trips?  And four, did any of your personal staff go along with you 
on the executive aircraft trips in '89-90?  Those I think are the essential 
standard questions which I'd like to have completed. 
 
There's just a couple other areas that I want to touch on and that is in 
respect to WESTBRIDGE, Mr. Minister.  And I'd like you to consider this.  I 
see recently in the Public Accounts for '88-89 that your department paid to 



 

 

WESTBRIDGE Computer Corporation the sum of $373,192.  That was in '88-89.  
Can you tell me if a similar amount was spent last year in '89-90 on 
WESTBRIDGE?  And has a similar amount been budgeted for 1990-91? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Mr. Chairman, the money that's budgeted to WESTBRIDGE is 
for the Crown land management system that we have in place and about 95 per 
cent of that total budget is for that.  It was for the previous . . . it's 
been in all years; it'll be for this year coming up as well, about the 
same. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- In respect to providing this service, Mr. Minister, with 
WESTBRIDGE, you didn't give me the statistics as to how much you spent last 
year or how much is budgeted this year.  I didn't hear it at least.  And I 
want to know whether or not . . . whether you tendered for that service, in 
other words, gave other computer companies an opportunity to tender for 
providing such service, or was it just simply handed out to WESTBRIDGE? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- First of all, I'll go back to your question.  I think 
when I said the dollars I said there was about the same all three years, it 
would be about the same.  Just so I clarify that.  In regards to the 
contract, the contract was with SaskCOMP when it was part of WESTBRIDGE.  
It was just transferred over because it was all in the mainframes and no 
other way . . . If we had to do it again, it would be very costly, even if 
you tendered it out, to get that information and redo it again. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- The contract with WESTBRIDGE Computer Corporation was in 
'88-89.  What is the reason for not having been able to tender it out?  
Because if what you're saying is true, that you were hooked in on SaskCOMP 
and then SaskCOMP was turned over to WESTBRIDGE, then it logically follows 
after that that anything that SaskCOMP had, WESTBRIDGE took over and 
there's no tendering process.  And WESTBRIDGE, as a consequence, gets 
essentially all of government business without any right of any other 
computer company being able to tender. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- When it transferred over, as you said, it was part of 
SaskCOMP.  It went over . . . it's on their mainframe.  We actually 
purchased the use of that information that was on their mainframe from 
them, from WESTBRIDGE now, which was SaskCOMP before. And so we pay for the 
use of that information that's on there and the distribution of that. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Well it's a terrific hand-out to WESTBRIDGE, I'll tell you 
that, Mr. Minister.  That's why their records showed that free enterprise 
was working so well, because what they did is to pick up a very profitable 
company, SaskCOMP, and with it win all of, or a major portion of government 
contracts without any tendering. 
 
What's happening out there, Mr. Minister, is that the other computer 
companies say that there's unfair privileges being granted to WESTBRIDGE, 
the one which you're trying to flog around the province saying such a 
success.  Well you can be a success if you're handed contracts and you 
don't have to compete. 



 

 

 
But you're the big enterpriser, the free enterpriser, you know; the 
individual should get out and compete in the free market.  You don't 
believe in it.  What you have done is handed it out to some of your buddies 
again, that are running WESTBRIDGE.  That's really what has happened and 
it's rigged throughout the whole of the government. And you know it and I 
know it, and so do the competing computer companies in Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to ask a couple other questions here, and you can answer these in 
writing along with the others.  But don't take too long; I want them before 
the election.  In respect to advertising in polling, Mr. Minister, how much 
was spent on advertising by Rural Development in '89-90, the total 
advertising? 
 
I want to know, two, how much is budgeted on advertising in '90-91.  And 
three, did your department spend any money on polling and market research 
in '89-90?  If so, how much?  And is there any amount budgeted for polling 
in 1990-91, and if so, how much?  If you could also supply those answers in 
writing with the others as soon as possible, I'd appreciate it, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
I want to get on because we want to get on to crop insurance.  There are a 
number of people wanting to determine and to find out from you, Mr. 
Minister, some of the unfairness of the application of crop insurance to 
the farmers of the province.  But, Mr. Minister, I want again just to say 
what a disaster your government has been in supporting rural Saskatchewan, 
and it has again been brought to our attention in respect to your buddies 
over in Ottawa. 
 
I mentioned to you the other day that privatization of postal systems was 
the course of action that was going to be taken by the federal Tories and 
that you were a party to that, although you try to deny it.  Just like with 
GST (goods and services tax), you're a party to GST, even though you deny 
you reject it and you're saying you're fighting against it. 
 
And the truth of the matter is, a report came out, a parliamentary 
committee set up by the Tories in Ottawa under the Department of Consumer 
Affairs.  And what did the Tory committee members recommend to the Tory 
government?  They recommend the sale of and the privatization of Canada 
Post.  Other members on that committee . . . there was a New Democrat and a 
Liberal, both of whom opposed and wrote a minority report opposing the 
privatization. 
 
The consumer and corporate affairs committee stated Tuesday: 
 

 . . . that Canada Post would continue with current plans to close rural 
post offices and replace them with mail services offered by retail 
outlets. 

 
That's exactly what is happening, Mr. Minister. And I'm not going to 
belabour it, but the other night over at Cadillac, Saskatchewan, in the 
Shaunavon constituency, again over 200 people came out, fighting to save 
their postal services.  And I'll tell you, there was no Tory MP at that 



 

 

meeting. And the MLA from Shaunavon was at the back of the hall being 
perfectly silent and slipping away quietly. 
 
I'll tell you, Mr. Minister, that the people of Cadillac and other 
communities in this province are angry over your lack of action in helping 
to defend what they believe is their right to defend.  And certainly you 
can take a look at what's happening. 
 
I have a brief report here from the critic of the New Democratic Party that 
sent it to me.  I want just to indicate how rapidly they're moving forward.  
Canada Post and the federal government have chosen to move quickly as a 
strategy to close these post offices throughout Canada.  As of March 20 
this year, 179 have been closed, 457 have been privatized in retail 
outlets, 306 are under review, and 199 communities have their retail post 
offices open, where federal outlets already exist. 
 
In fact, so determined at privatization is your Tory cousins in Ottawa that 
they have admitted, Canada Post actually admitted to putting money into 
retail outlets virtually next door to its own post office.  Canada Post 
told the committee, normally in rural areas where the store is too small, 
where the output will not be able to support the initial payments, we do 
rent or put some money into the investment in order to get a retail store.  
They're actually subsidizing the privatization of postal services. 
 
You know, Mr. Minister, as someone said in the Shaunavon constituency, one 
of the big things the Tories down there provincially are touting is tourism 
on Red Coat Trail, I believe it's called . . . (inaudible interjection) . . 
. Yes.  They're promoting tourism down the Red Coat Trail. 
 
And you know what he said?  He said, you'd think before they advertise 
tourism down there, that they'd build a Red Coat Trail.  But secondly, he 
said after you come down to the communities on this big tourism that the 
Tories are touting, he said you get into towns like Cadillac and you 
wouldn't even be able to send a postcard back, because the post offices in 
the communities will be closed. 
 
So I want to leave it at that.  I think the people of Saskatchewan know 
where the Tories stand on it.  Therefore privatization . . . the provincial 
government is giving only lip-service.  Do you realize that the post office 
in Yorkton, which is making a sizeable amount of money, is due to be 
privatized.  That's how far it has gone. 
 
And the people of Saskatchewan, as the lady that headed up the committee at 
Dubuc, Saskatchewan, she said -- and they closed down the post office in 
Dubuc and now they have it in a retail store, against the wishes of the 
people -- and she said, we will not forget.  An election will come and I'll 
tell you, she said, the people will know how to vote.  They'll vote against 
those Tories that will not stand up for rural Saskatchewan.  And I 
congratulate her for taking that stance. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to basically close these estimates to get on to crop 
insurance.  And I want to say to you that I'm disappointed in the budget in 
respect to rural affairs or Rural Development.  The budget has been cut by 



 

 

over $2.2 million.  You have frozen the grants since '87-88 for the 
operating grants in the conditional and unconditional grants to the RMs.  
That represents over 60 per cent of the budget, and you've maintained the 
amount of money that you'd pay out to the RMs at the same level as in 
'87-88. 
 
As a consequence, what we see in rural Saskatchewan is obviously a 
reduction of services, a reduction in the construction of roads and 
improvements for rural way of life.  And what is even worse, Mr. Minister, 
as a result of the extravagance of your government in wrong priorities, 
costs are being transferred onto the backs of municipal property owners. 
 
Because of the adequate funding of education, the RMs and property owners 
are going to have to pay a considerable more in taxes.  I take a look at 
the Humboldt riding, or Humboldt rural school division.  They lost $106,000 
in funding.  They are going to have to increase from six to seven mills the 
rate of taxation.  They're going to have to get rid of five or six 
teachers.  And the mill rate is going up, and the Minister of Education 
says, does it have anything to do with population? 
 
Well I'll tell you, Mr. Minister, that's another thing that I'm going to 
talk about.  Your economic policy is as bad as your policy in support of 
rural Saskatchewan.  And I say to you, and many of the municipalities 
because of your economic policies, there's a burden of tax arrears in many 
of the municipalities throughout Saskatchewan.  We see you as so-called 
defender of rural services.  And we had to bring you in this House and make 
you announce and change the policy in respect to ferries. 
 
In fact the member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake met and had a press 
conference in Prince Albert, and farmers petitioned and forced you, just 
after the budget came in, to call over the member from Rosthern and say, 
we're in trouble; let's change that policy.  And so he stood in the House 
here and he said, we changed it.  And oh, did they think they had created a 
coup! 
 
Can you feature a minister of the Crown who says he keeps in contact with 
rural Saskatchewan and he's consulting all the time, he says, that he would 
put into a budget a slash of services such as which couldn't be handled by 
the farmers in the area.  He had to change it. 
 
And so what obviously, this budget doesn't mean anything.  Any budget a 
Tory government brings down doesn't mean anything because it has really 
little relationship as to their expenditures.  He has an amount set out 
here, how much it's going to cost for ferry services.  Now during estimates 
review, he changes the policy, so that's not relevant any more. 
 
Yes, Mr. Minister, really fighting for rural Saskatchewan, announced a rat 
program with the Premier a couple years ago.  Oh, they were going to be 
part of the rat-free area of North America, Alberta and Saskatchewan -- 130 
new jobs.  And I'll tell you, I'll tell you the only live body in 
Saskatchewan that supports you and your government, Mr. Minister, are the 
rats .  That's the only ones that support you, are the rats, because they 
have had a stay of execution.  And so the rats are supportive of you.  But 



 

 

I tell you, there's not enough rats to get you elected again.  I'll tell 
you, Mr. Minister, you really fought hard too. 
 
As I said, cut the ferry service; turn it around when you get into a tough 
spot.  Announce a rat program, cut the rat program.  You're fighting hard 
for saving rural Saskatchewan, rural post offices.  Boy, what a fight 
you're putting on there.  Children's dental program, best in North America, 
school-based.  You stood by and watched that be eroded by the Minister of 
Health, your Premier, and the dental college of the province.  Fighting, 
boy; fighting for rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And what else have you done?  You went ahead and did some privatization 
because that's your real strong point, Mr. Minister.  You're the 
privatizer.  And you started out privatizing the community pastures until 
the cattlemen backed you into a corner and said, halt.  You cut 
veterinarian services and grants to provide services of veterinarians to 
the people in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
(1500) 
 
You're starting on the course of privatization of crop insurance -- 250 new 
jobs he said, we're creating.  They called them businesses.  You know what 
I call it?  Pork-barrelling, that's what it is, 250 pork-barrel.  Tory 
organizers they call them.  That's what it is out there in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I'll tell you, I talked to a lot of farmers and they said, we knew pretty 
well what we wanted in our crop insurance and we were able to go into the 
crop insurance office, get what we wanted, pay for it, and away we went.  
We didn't need some Tory coming out to our farm three or four times, 
getting paid 35 or $40,000 a year.  And the worst of it, Mr. Minister, is 
that you haven't even set up a course for them.  What they're doing now is 
going into the rural service centres, and the staff there that provided the 
service are now having to teach these Tory organizers about crop insurance.  
We'll get into that when we get into crop insurance.  But that's what 
you've been privatizing, Mr. Minister. 
 
Another real fight you made, you know, when the privatization of SaskPower 
. . . You really stood tall there, too. 
 
But you do have priorities, Mr. Minister, you and your government.  You 
have priorities for a few and we've alluded to these before.  You have 
Chuck Childers, with his five-year, no-cut contract, and Doyle, and three 
top officials of Crown corporation, potash, get $6 million over five years.  
And you slash over $2 million from the budget supporting rural 
Saskatchewan.  Quite a priority, Mr. Minister. 
 
Farmers of this country: you say it's going to cost you $40 million for 
your seed loan program; federal government says $20 billion.  That's about 
right.  You've cut out anywhere from 5 to 10,000 farmers.  I predict more.  
So that's what you have, about 32 cents an acre for a average farmer.  
That's what it'll cost the government. 
 



 

 

But for Cargill you have $370,000, no problem whatsoever.  You've got 
millions of dollars for Peter Pocklington, who has turned out to be the 
biggest parasite on the provincial treasuries across this country, worse 
than any other Tory that I know.  This is the guy that talked about 
fighting for the individualism.  And he was a leadership candidate, if you 
believe it.  And he just fleeced the provincial government in Alberta for 
some $70 million of the taxpayers. 
 
Yes, you've got priorities all right, priorities for your rich friends who 
dictate the terms of your government. 
 
I say, Mr. Minister, you've failed in agriculture, you've failed to address 
the problems, you've failed to develop a long-term policy.  And as a result 
we see the depopulation of Saskatchewan and the young and the best of our 
brains are leaving this province. 
 
You've deserted small business in the interest of megaprojects.  And 
certainly the working man has not received much under your tenure.  Almost 
one-quarter of the total working force of this province are part time, that 
is they work from one to 19 hours, or from 19 to 30 hours.  Almost a 
quarter are part-time workers.  We once had the highest minimum wage; 
you've had one minimum wage increase in eight years. 
 
Yes.  And you've done more for ordinary citizens of Saskatchewan.  While 
you heaped money onto the Childers and the Cargills and the Pocklingtons of 
this world, what you've done is taxed the people of Saskatchewan.  What we 
have today is the highest personal income tax in all of Canada, Mr. 
Minister, and we have the highest per capita debt in all of Canada. 
 
Mr. Minister, you took a province over that had the lowest per capita debt, 
had the lowest taxation across Canada, and today what you have done is 
destroyed the base of operation for many Saskatchewan people.  And what 
even is worse is you've mortgaged the future of the next and subsequent 
generations. 
 
I want to say, as I've said before, Mr. Speaker, that your government has 
been one of deception, deceit, incompetence, waste, and mismanagement.  You 
try to sell your ideas with millions of dollars of taxpayers' money going 
into advertising.  But the true fact is, Mr. Minister, the substance is 
lacking, and the people of Saskatchewan are aware of it. 
 
And I say to you that what you have done to this province is short of being 
scandalous.  And I say to you, Mr. Minister, you too are part of that 
legacy, a legacy which I wouldn't want to bear, what you have done to this 
province and to the people of this province with the deception, the waste, 
the mismanagement, and indeed corruption. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Minister, that at some point in time a government loses 
its moral right to govern.  I think this government has sunk so low that 
the people of this province, indeed across Canada in respect to Tories, 
have lost all respect for what you stand for or what you have done. 
 
I think what's even worse, Mr. Chairman, is that this government -- and 



 

 

that includes this minister -- have done a terrible disservice even to the 
democratic process.  And I think that the people of Saskatchewan deserve 
much better, Mr. Minister, and I think the people of Saskatchewan are going 
to get much better.  And I think that at the next election the people of 
Saskatchewan will give you a clear message as to what they think of you, 
Mr. Minister, and that government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Mr. Minister, much more could be said of those dreadful 
eight years that you have placed upon the backs of the people of this 
province.  But, as I say, you can only wring so much water out of a cloth 
or a wet rag, and I think we have pretty well wrung everything that needs 
to be wrung out of that department, and we want to get on with the other 
aspects of it because we've got a lot of estimates. 
 
But I say to you, Mr. Minister, in closing, it's time that this government 
stops the deception that they're doing something.  I mean, you're talking 
about rural diversification is the big thing now.  There's nothing wrong 
with diversification, Mr. Minister, but the fact is that you haven't been 
successful in eight years and your priorities have been for megaprojects.  
And I'll tell you, Mr. Minister, you have to meet the present.  People out 
there have concerns.  Their concerns are, right now, how do we survive on 
the farm; how do we survive in it with our business.  And those should be 
the priorities, Mr. Minister. 
 
And the people of Saskatchewan have really one thing in mind as I go across 
rural Saskatchewan.  And time after time I hear it, Mr. Minister, and the 
question they ask me  
 Dis, when will there be an election?  When will there be an election?  
That's what's on the minds of the people of Saskatchewan now. 
 
And so, Mr. Minister, I can say a lot more in respect to your estimates.  
I've said in respect to revenue sharing, you've frozen them since '87-88.  
I've talked about road services branch being cut back, ferry service 
staffing cut back and service -- even though you amended it in the House 
here when we got to you -- RM secretaries grant has been cut.  There's 
other services that have been cut by other departments which affects rural 
Saskatchewan also. 
 
And so I say, Mr. Minister, that we had expected more from you as minister 
of rural affairs, but in view of the fact of the priorities of your 
government you may well be doing the best you can.  But I say to you that 
the time has come that deception will no longer work.  You can't bluff your 
way through or you can't advertise your way into an electoral win any 
longer. 
 
I say to you, you lost the moral right to govern.  And if you have any 
influence, for once work on the Premier and tell him what the people of 
Saskatchewan want.  They want an election and they want it soon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I'll just make a few very 
brief remarks.  The member from Quill Lakes went to a great extent of 
talking how nothing has been done in the Department of Rural Development to 
work with rural Saskatchewan people.  I believe that the people of rural 
Saskatchewan know that that's not true; that we've did a great deal of work 
out there with the rural service centres that we're putting up, with the 
rural development diversification. 
 
I just want to touch on two or three things I touched on earlier, but just 
so the member knows that we are doing a lot of things in rural development 
diversification.  Since the first of this year we've approved grants under 
the rural economic development grant to 30 projects in Saskatchewan, all 
new ones.  That's just since the first of the year.  That's when the grant 
came into place. 
 
I want to touch on a few of the ones that we're involved with.  We're 
working with two dehy plants being established and certainly they know 
where they are.  A flax board plant that's being put into place.  The peola 
chip plant, and I've talked about that.  The Manitou Beach proposals that's 
going to develop tourism in the area.  There's a company going to produce 
sandwiches. 
 
We have the Vis-A-Vis plant that's going into, the Quill Lakes member, into 
Wynyard where we have not only RMs involved and the town involved and a 
local entrepreneur involved, we also have a company from Japan involved.  A 
very major player, also going to put in a Japanese garden there which is 
very, very neat and unique for this area.  And that's part of their own 
expenditure, so that'll probably be the first . . . will be the first in 
this province. 
 
We've got organic flour mills.  We've got about four of them now being set 
up.  We have a couple of eviscerating plants and an expansion to another 
one.  We have NorSask Forest Products up at Meadow Lake that are expanding, 
going to make furniture board.  We have the North American waterfowl plan 
that we're now putting into place in part of the member's area and all 
through the north of Regina here. 
 
And all to the north, where be a very extended amount of opportunities for 
both tourism and for the people of the area, we have been working on 
another inland terminal in the Wadena area, and I don't think there's any 
secret there that they've been asking for some assistance, and we're 
working with them.  And there's a list of other smaller ones that we get 
into, that I could name here today that we've been working on, most of 
those in the last year or so, most of those even in the last year. 
 
I just want touch a couple others.  He said we cut the rural development 
and we froze it.  We have managed where we have administration and staff.  
We've cut down on many areas where we might have travelled and all the 
other stuff.  I can personally say, in advertising too we do the basic 
advertising that's needed.  I can say personally that I don't travel out of 
this province.  I think I went out twice last year, both to Brandon: one to 
speak to Manitoba municipalities, once to speak to the University of 
Brandon, both times on development diversification.  That's the only two 



 

 

trips out and that was on the request of those two groups of people. 
 
(1515) 
 
I want to mention the rural development.  We have done some things, the 
last three or four years, although the amount of moneys that he says in the 
base is frozen for conditional and unconditional, and that's true.  It's 
remained the same.  We've brought in the new rationalization, road 
rationalization program, upgraded most road systems and changed the funding 
dramatically in some of them.  The primary goods system, the heavy haul 
system brought in, which is a special one; it's nothing to do with the 
basic other ones.  We brought in a regravel program that's been available 
now for three years -- this is the fourth year coming up now -- that has 
assisted municipalities to the tune of $7 million, 50-50 cost sharing on 
all designated road systems. 
 
So I just wanted to touch on that because we have done some things, maybe 
not great things -- and you could be right, maybe they're not really great 
-- but they have maintained the basic structure there.  And in fact many 
times have improved our road structures and certainly has rebuilt and 
redesignated so that we do look at where the hauls are and how the major 
service system . . . services there and where it needs to be built into. 
 
He mentioned about the ferries, and it's true, we did cut three hours from 
the ferry service.  We did previous to that.  I've had a few calls previous 
to that, two members I mentioned in the House here, the one from Rosthern 
and the one from Kinistino, went up there on the weekend.  They come back . 
. . met with the groups up there.  They come back and we had discussed 
during the day and then previous to, previous to being . . . as the member 
knows from P.A., previous to even a petition being presented in the House 
here -- and he did have one, I grant you, that is  
 Dfair -- but I had previously announced that we would go back to regular 
hours, those three hours, because the farmers needed it.  They explained to 
us why they needed it, seeding and harvesting. 
 
Yesterday I met with some more groups of farmers up there, so special, 
where they had a special case, and I told them very distinctly that we will 
make sure that they have access where it's needed.  And I think they were 
certainly satisfied with that. 
 
He mentioned the privatization of pastures.  They're to co-ops and 
certainly that's fair if he calls that.  But that's members running it and 
I think that's the right way to go. 
 
I just want to . . . one other thing he mentioned, the post office at 
Cadillac.  I think every one of us have concerns when we lose our post 
office in rural Saskatchewan.  I have written letters to Harvie Andre, the 
minister responsible for Canada Post.  I've written letters to Canada Post.  
I have met with Canada Post about four times over the last three years in 
regards to this. 
 
And in some cases, I would think fair to say, in some cases we have had 
some success.  In regards to Cadillac, the member from Shaunavon was there.  



 

 

I don't know if anybody else was there from the opposition or not.  And I 
don't know.  They may or may not have been; I can't say.  I don't know if 
any MLA was there from the opposition; I'll put that very carefully.  And 
whether they're there or not, I do know that the member was there from 
Shaunavon. 
 
The member and I have put together a letter drafted again to Mr. Harvie 
Andre, the minister responsible.  We are also sending a copy out to the 
people of Cadillac, a copy of our letter.  We're very . . . and the wording 
is put in such a way as we believe that the post office should remain in 
Cadillac; that it's important to the rural structure of our . . . that 
we're putting together out there. 
 
So we've done those kinds of things and . . . Nothing's ever great in tough 
times but you do the best you can, Mr. Chairman.  I believe the Department 
of Rural Development has done the best that's possible out there. 
 
We've worked always with the people; we've always been there to listen to 
them.  I've met with literally thousands and thousands of people over the 
last four years.  I've been into pretty near every community in this 
province meeting with people. 
 
So I want to say to the department folks, they do a great job, each and 
every one of them -- the 400-and-some-odd people that work for the 
Department of Rural Development do a fine job and I'm very, very proud of 
them.  I believe the people of Saskatchewan are proud of them, both through 
our rural service centre network and the way they deliver the service.  
Each and every one of them are people, they're professional people, they do 
a very, very fine job and I hope that the members opposite, as well as the 
members on this side, appreciate the job that's done by those kinds of 
people who certainly are the front-line people who take the flak from the 
individual if there's a problem, and get very, very little credit for when 
something really turns out good.  So to them I want to say thank you, and 
to the member opposite for his questions.  I've done the best I can to 
answer them.  Thank you very much. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Mr. Chairman, in looking through, I note the minister says 
again, I'm fighting and I'm writing to save rural post offices -- oh boy -- 
I mean what hypocrisy.  What you stand for is privatization, and your Tory 
buddies in Ottawa, so get off the horse that you're fighting, because you 
both believe in it.  Don't come in here again and try to deceive the 
public.  I'm sick and tired of hearing it.  Come clean for once and say, I 
believe in it too and I support it, as you do.  Don't give us your 
half-truths. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I'm prepared to proceed with the item-by-item account of the 
expenditures in the department, and although I don't agree with the $2.2 
million cut in the budget, and he alluded to the tough times, and I agree 
with him.  There's an expression that Tory times are tough times.  Boy, 
have we found that out. 
 
But I can agree, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, with one cut in the 
budget, and that's item 19, the member of the Executive Council went down 



 

 

from 44,4 over and above your MLA's salary, to 36,6.  Other than that, Mr. 
Minister, I oppose the freezing since '87-88 of the grants to the rural 
municipalities, because I think that's where the money should be spent.  I 
think that you waste a lot of money in the department in respect to 
high-faluting advertising and all kinds of seminars on how to use the open 
exchange and destroy the wheat board and orderly marketing.  That's a part 
of the old Tory game again. 
 
But in any event, Mr. Chairman, I'm prepared at this time, although 
reluctantly -- because they say when a guy is down you should, if you're a 
good boxer, you keep him down -- but in view of time I have to move on.  
And accordingly, I'm prepared to deal with the individual items. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Did the minister care to respond or not? 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 18 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 19 -- Statutory. 
 
Vote 43 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Rural Development 

Capital Expenditure -- Vote 67 
 
Items 1 and 2 agreed to. 
 
Vote 67 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Economic Diversification and Investment Fund 

-- Vote 66 
Rural Development 

 
Items 9 and 10 agreed to. 
 
 

Saskatchewan Heritage Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Rural Development 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 51 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 51 agreed to. 
 

Saskatchewan Heritage Fund 
Loans, Advances and Investments 

Agricultural Division 
Rural Development 

Vote 61 
 



 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 61 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- That concludes our estimates on Rural Development, and I 
wonder if the minister would like to thank his officials before we close. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Yes I'd like to take this 
opportunity to thank my officials, not only for doing the estimates here, 
but during the season.  As I said earlier, they do a fine job.  I'm very 
proud of the work they do and the work they do for the people of 
Saskatchewan.  I would also like to thank the opposition for their 
questions.  I know that it's always tough to ask questions.  A lot of 
questions are very relevant.  I appreciate those questions.  I know some of 
the comments are always made in whatever form, but certainly the questions 
were very relevant.  The member from Humboldt and the rest, the member from 
Quill Lakes, I want to thank you for the questions. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  On behalf of my colleague from 
Quill Lakes and myself and others who were involved in these estimates, I 
would like to thank the minister for his co-operation and the officials for 
their replies.  Thank you. 
 
(1530) 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 46 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- I'd ask the Minister of Rural Development to introduce his 
officials, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I'd like to introduce the 
vice-president of administration, Jim Walters, over here on our left.  Next 
to me here is Blair Harris, a research analyst.  Directly behind me here is 
Geoff Bartlam, manager of field operations.  And right behind me is George 
Hill, supervisor of agents. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, several items I 
want to cover in the estimates under crop insurance corporation.  I would 
like to begin by talking about the multi-year disaster program over which 
there is some concern, and that is putting it mildly. 
 
The multi-year disaster program, although farmers were paying for that 
benefit, you and I both know that there were some problems with farmers 
collecting after the fact that they paid their premiums. 
 
But just before I get into that detail, Mr. Minister, I want to ask you for 
your opinion or for your analysis of what happened when Manitoba and 
Alberta were paid out three or four weeks or more before Saskatchewan was 
paid out under the multi-year disaster program.  If you could just tell me 



 

 

in your words exactly the process that you went through and why you were 
late in getting your information into Ottawa. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- In regards to why we'd be longer than Manitoba or 
Alberta in sending our estimate of loss to the federal government was a 
couple reasons.  One, we had about 85,000 claims to go through, which we 
have to go through, have to have all the claims in, even to be able to 
determine if that RM was in a claim position. 
 
Second, the way we do our claims.  We had the variable price option which 
made a different way of figuring out the exact amount of coverage, and 
Manitoba didn't have.  And also the way they figure out their percentage of 
claim, they do it at the start of the year.  Ours is loaded in after the 
claim. 
 
So those two reasons would make it a little bit longer.  But mostly 
Manitoba would have about, I don't know, 10 or 12,000 claims, in that 
neighbourhood.  Correct?  And we had about 85,000 claims to go through and 
some of it we went through twice. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Minister, the federal Minister of Agriculture said that 
the reason . . . of course, you'll know that the claims were held up was 
just simply because Saskatchewan did not get their figures in.  And I 
understand that there are a number of claims in Saskatchewan quite 
substantially above the Alberta and Manitoba figures. 
 
But have you, Mr. Minister, explored the possibility or thought about the 
fact that you could possibly improve the length of time between the time 
that all the premiums come into your office, all the results come into your 
office, using maybe the Manitoba formula to speed up the turnaround time 
for the department? 
 
I know since the corporation moved to Melville there has been a couple of 
years where the payments have been very, very late in relationship to what 
they were before.  Have you made any moves, are you making moves to ensure 
that the turnaround time in your office is increased or that farmers can 
get their cash as soon as possible because of the great cash flow shortage 
that they have? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- We've certainly had a few problems, whether we just 
moved to Melville or whether it was the amount of claims.  You know, '85, 
and it started with some pretty tough years, and then '88 was just a 
terrible year.  Every year we've had a substantive amount of claims except 
for 1988.  That was the only year that . . . or 1987, I believe, was the 
only year that we weren't into that position.  So that certainly added to 
the load. 
 
We have made some changes.  We started last year doing the hail claims 
right in the local 32 . . . well actually 52 offices when we get done, but 
the 32 offices now would have right there for their hail claims.  This year 
we're extending that.  Last year we had a few problems.  As we said, we 
didn't know what the premium was; we weren't on line with the computers.  
We didn't know what the premiums was, so we had to deduct the amount of 



 

 

premium from the cheque, and if they'd paid it, it created us a few 
problems.  This year we're all on line.  Not only will we be able to pay 
the hail payment in full, with the premium, whether it's been paid or not, 
we'll know immediately. 
 
But we'll also be able to pay all risk claims right directly from the 32 
customer offices, paid for by the customer service office manager or 
whoever is designated in that office as the payee.  And they will do the 
final cheques, or they'll do all the analysis of the claim, go through crop 
insurance on computers through the head office, get the amount of premiums 
that need to be paid, deduct it from the amount, and issue the cheque.  We 
believe, unless we have a major problem in one area, that most cheques will 
be issued within seven days and that's a pretty decent turnaround time. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Minister, I have in my hands the crop insurance 
brochure, 1990 Program it's called.  And on looking through this program, I 
see no mention of the multi-year disaster coverage.  And I have also looked 
through several other brochures and pamphlets and literature that came out 
from the crop insurance and there is very little mention of the multi-year 
disaster program with regards to explaining the program. 
 
Mr. Minister, you will know from contacts from farmers in rural 
Saskatchewan that there was great confusion as to exactly how the 
multi-year disaster program was going to be put forward.  In fact there was 
confusion after you put out the rules.  Before that, most farmers that I've 
talked to, in fact all farmers that I talked to, understood that the 
multi-year disaster program would be in effect -- because they paid the 
premium, they would be entitled to the benefit.  But they found out that 
that was not true. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you tell me exactly when you decided, or the process that 
you went through to decide what the regulations were for the multi-year 
disaster program, and when the decision was made to have the 80 per cent 
individual coverage holders not qualify for the program?  Let's just start 
with that one. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order.  Order, please.  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Saxinger: -- I would ask leave to introduce some guests, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Saxinger: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I'd like to introduce to you, 
and through you to the members of this Assembly, some 26 students from the 
Pilger School.  They are accompanied by their teachers, Ed Thoms and Gordon 
Doepker.  They're also quite unique.  They have nine parents with them.  I 
think it's quite an honour for them that they can have interest to come 
with their kids and accompany them to Regina. 
 
I look forward of meeting with them for pictures at 4 o'clock or shortly 
after, and for refreshments, and also answer some of the questions they may 



 

 

have.  And I would ask the members to please welcome this group to Regina. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 46 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Mr. Chairman, in answering the member from Humboldt's 
question, the 80 per cent level of coverage has always been in effect 
because the federal regulation states that no producer shall be paid more 
that 80 per cent of his actual yield -- or not actual yield, 80 per cent of 
his amount of insurance that he's insured for.  So that's always been in 
place.  And that's a federal regulation which is now being changed or will 
be, proposed to be changed, under the new regulations or legislation, to 
allow us to go as high as 90 per cent. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Well, Mr. Minister, in talking to some farmers around in 
the country who had actually called into crop insurance offices last fall, 
asking about whether or not they would qualify for the 10 per cent 
increase, they were in fact informed that they would.  Now there seems to 
be some discrepancy in your answer and what the farmers were receiving from 
the offices. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, again can you tell me more specifically, due to the fact 
that there were some people informed that they would be eligible for the 10 
per cent increase over the 80 per cent -- there must have been some 
confusion somewhere -- can you tell me exactly when you put the word out to 
your offices, the 52 offices around the country, that those farmers under 
80 per cent individual coverage would not qualify? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Mr. Chairman, to the best of our knowledge, it was 
always at the offices' level.  They always knew that the regulations which 
were brought in in 1985, I believe, they've always been available.  And to 
the best of my knowledge, the staff would know about those regulations.  
Most of those customer service personnel managers there have been there for 
a long time and they would in most cases, I believe, should have known. 
 
I suppose like anybody else, some way it could have slipped somebody's 
mind, but I would think most of them would have known and should have 
known.  But 1985, that's when it was brought in, and I do have a copy of 
those regulations at that time. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Minister, in one particular case, the office that was 
called had to get back to the particular person involved, and there were 
others.  They called Melville, the head office, and the call came back to 
the farmers involved, saying that they indeed qualified at that particular 
time.  It was not until much later that they were informed that indeed they 
would not qualify. 



 

 

 
Are you telling me, Mr. Minister, that you have no knowledge of some 
misunderstanding put forward out of Melville to some crop insurance 
district offices that would lead farmers to believe that they were actually 
entitled to that program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- The only area that . . . the only way that the staff 
here believe that it could have been misinterpreted, even by the customer 
service manager who would have known these basic rules, that when the phone 
call came in they may have thought that they . . . they just took it for 
granted they were in area coverage, because there wasn't that many 
individual coverage contracts out there.  There's only a total of 1,100 
altogether this year, so there was only 1,100 out there.  They may not have 
thought about it or may have thought they were on area coverage or just 
never really separated the two out when they made that statement. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Well, Mr. Minister, the problem lies in the fact that . . . 
It proves my point that this is one area where there was confusion in the 
multi-year disaster program. 
 
Mr. Minister, there has been a resolution passed by the SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities), and I'll just set the resolution out 
before you and I'll just read into the record: 
 

 Whereas a multi-year disaster benefit has been approved in 95 
municipalities for payments totalling $58 million to some 12,000 eligible 
area producers and designated RMs; and 

 
 Whereas this benefit has added to crop insurance insurance program in 1986 

and is funded by a factor from 1 to 4 per cent, depending on the risk 
area; and 

 
 Whereas there are approximately 700 individual coverage producers in the 

designated RMs who will receive no benefit from the multi-year disaster 
benefit because of federal regulations allowing 80 per cent maximum 
coverage, (which they pay for through their premiums); and 

 
 Whereas producers who changed their policies in 1989 from area average to 

individual coverage should be granted some consideration because of the 
two-year nature of the benefit for which they paid premiums in 1987, 1988, 
and 1986; 

 
 Therefore be it resolved that the SARM press authorities in charge of crop 

insurance to allow for a 5 per cent addition to base coverage for 
individual producers who change their contracts from area average to 
individual coverage for 1989 crop year. 

 
Mr. Minister, are you familiar with this resolution, and if you are, can 
you tell us whether you're considering any changes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Mr. Chairman, we have already dealt with that.  It was 



 

 

already loaded into the computer.  Those who had had any, had paid it all 
into the area based yields in the past and had had the two losses, '88 and 
'89, or had switched from '88 to '89, from area coverage to individual 
coverage in '89.  It was loaded into the computer and about 600 producers 
received payments proportionate to the amount that they had paid into it 
over them previous years.  So it was already loaded in.  They've already 
received their cheques in the last week or so. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- So, Mr. Minister, you're saying that there is now no 
discrepancy for a person who took individual coverage in 1989 and had area 
coverage in 1988; you're saying that over that two years, where the average 
would be 75 per cent, that because you took into account the premiums paid 
in the previous years, that has been added into the actual dollars received 
by those people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- I want to be absolutely sure that I was saying it right.  
For those who switch from '88 area coverage to '89 individual yield 
coverage, it was loaded in to bring the amount of '88 up to 80 per cent . . 
. based on it because they both had two years losses, and of course they 
had paid in previous years.  So it could come up 5 per cent, 3 per cent, 6 
per cent; it depends how much the '88 loss was in comparison.  So it would 
vary a bit.  It would be an average of close to 5 per cent.  Close.  It 
would vary a little bit according to how much crop they had in '88.  So 
it's based on the '88 loss.  Because they had to have two consecutive years 
loss, it went back on that and then brought it up. 
 
So there was about 600 producers have already received a cheque based on 
that, which was proportionate to what their real loss was, because in 1989 
they were on 80 per cent coverage.  If they had a loss, they did receive 
it.  So they got paid for the '88; they already got paid for the '89. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Minister, were those separate cheques or were they 
included in the one cheque that the farmers received? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- If they had received a cheque earlier because of a 
claim, then this would be a separate cheque.  If the claim was still there 
from previous, from their claim, then it was included in the same cheque.  
But it was made . . . notation was on the cheque stub to tell them what it 
was. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- So, Mr. Minister, you're saying that all those people who 
took out individual contracts in 1989 -- about 600 people I think I heard 
you say -- all those people would be eligible for that additional payment 
based on the way you lowered your computer for the 1988 year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Again I want to make sure this is correct.  Those who 
took their 10-year yield in for 1989 did not receive a cheque because they 
had their 10-year yield and they would have got full benefits in.  If they 
took  
 Dan area average in, which is 70 per cent, and carried it forward in, 
because they split the year which 600 of them did, then they would have got 
a cheque proportionate to their loss based on, through the computer -- and 
I'm not just sure how that works exactly -- based on the '88-89 loss year. 



 

 

 
Mr. Upshall: -- And what happened to those people who took their 10-year 
average in?  What was the process that they had to go through? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- The ones that took their 10-year average in would not 
have got a cheque because they already got paid if they had a claim in 
1989.  That's the only way you'd trigger this.  They already got their 80 
per cent total net. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Well, Mr. Minister, are you aware of any producers 
receiving more than the 80 per cent that you said is the maximum in the 
federal-provincial agreement -- more than 80 per cent coverage? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- No. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Well, Mr. Minister, if a producer on the 80 per cent 
coverage had no 10-year history and they were based on the area average 
yield data, even though I'm hearing some reports that even though they were 
at the 80 per cent coverage level, in some instances they were actually 
receiving more than 80 per cent because they didn't have their 10-year 
history in.  So you're saying you're not aware of any producers who may 
have received more than 80 per cent because of the way the criteria was 
handled? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- All those who came in under area average yield at 70 per 
cent, we increased it to 80 per cent.  And that's exactly what we done.  
Now remember, I want to make it clear too that if you took 10 per cent of 
70 it would be 77 per cent.  But we said you can go high as 80 per cent.  
So it's not 10 per cent of 70; it's actually truly an additional 10 per 
cent added to your coverage to take you to 80 per cent. 
 
So there would be some confusion there that somebody might have said, I got 
13 per cent, but really they didn't because they got an additional 10 per 
cent added to the 70.  They went from 70 per cent coverage to 80 per cent 
coverage of the area average yield. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I think that many of the questions that 
I've been asking today are exactly the questions that a lot of farmers have 
been asking.  And these questions simply come up because you didn't explain 
the program to the people. 
 
As I said, in the 1999 program there's no mention -- and you may have the 
regulations and, by the way, I would appreciate you sending them over to me 
-- but the problem is that we were into the second year of drought in many 
areas and the farmers didn't know the program. 
 
Now you can blame the farmers for not knowing the program if you like, or 
whatever reasons you have, but the fact of the matter is that it was your 
department who was responsible for putting out clear guide-lines so that 
individual producers would know exactly where they stood when it come to 
the crop insurance program to avoid the confusion, to avoid the hassles 
that farmers are having to go through in understanding the program, and to 
avoid the fact that many people think that they do not, did not receive the 



 

 

maximum benefit from that program. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, that is just one aspect of the multi-year disaster 
program that you've really botched up.  And I think that, you know, in the 
future I would really encourage you to put forward clear guide-lines for 
your programs. 
 
I want to just go into another aspect of the multi-year disaster program, 
Mr. Minister, and that is the areas that had drought in two consecutive 
years but did not qualify.  Mr. Minister, did you . . . when did you decide 
that the regulations or the formula would include a block of four RMs 
adjoining, and when did you decide that the formula would be 20 per cent of 
the liabilities in those areas, paid in indemnities in two consecutive 
years?  Can you give me the date that that decision was made on? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Mr. Chairman, the regulations were brought in . . . the 
federal regulation was brought in in 1986, and I have a copy.  I only have 
the one; I'll get a copy made up and send it over to him. 
 
They were brought in then.  That was the agreement that was put together, 
federal-provincial.  And certainly provincially it cost us money, because 
usually when there's a reinsurance, and most case is reinsurance, right in 
the last few years it cost money to the provincial government. 
 
And I won't go into the whole details of how that works, but it certainly 
can cost us money.  It may not; there may be money in the fund.  But the 
last few years of drought have certainly drained every penny from that 
fund.  Especially in the last five years, since '85, we've paid out almost 
1.3 billions of dollars through crop insurance payment to the producers of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I just want to make mention, under the multi-year disaster, and I think the 
member raises a good point, that I don't think we advertised it well enough 
or that the farmer knew it well enough, that it was even there.  A lot of 
people . . . We did a lot in 1985 and '86 about advertising and about 
talking about it; in '87 it was in the brochure.  But because it was sort 
of a long-range, long-term disaster fund, it wasn't . . . I don't think we 
carried it saying this might be available to you this year.  We hadn't had 
a major disaster.  It has to be two years in a row before it would ever 
trigger. 
 
But I'm just going to read the letter that was sent to every producer in 
this province on September 14 from the office in Melville, 1989.  The 
content of the letter is: 
 

 The multi-year disaster benefit provides enhanced crop insurance coverage 
to producers in areas that suffer two consecutive disaster years.  An 
additional 10 per cent base coverage, up to a maximum of 80 per cent of an 
area average yield, is provided to producers in eligible areas.  An area 
of at least four rural municipalities in size is eligible for this 
enhanced coverage if more than 20 per cent of liability is paid out in two 
consecutive years. 

 



 

 

 As a result of the 1988 drought, many areas of the province are 
potentially eligible for this additional coverage in 1989.  Land in the 
municipalities listed below will be eligible for the additional 10 per 
cent coverage if they are part of a four-RM block suffering a loss of more 
than 20 per cent of liability in 1989. 

 
 Eligibility for an area will be determined once the 1989 claims have been 

processed.  If you have had land in one of the listed municipalities, you 
are encouraged to register a claim if the additional 10 per cent coverage 
would put you in a claim position. 

 
 You may receive an indemnity payment if your municipality subsequently 

provides eligibility for enhanced coverage under the multi-year disaster 
benefit.  Enhanced coverage is not applicable to spot loss hail, unseeded 
acreage, reseeding establishment, or livestock feed claim. 

 
 For further information, please contact your local customer service 

office. 
 

Now that was sent to every customer in this province, and all the RMs were 
listed on the same sheet that you might be in.  If one of those RMs 
suffered loss in 1988 and you were in that kind of a position, a claim 
position, I would encourage you to file a claim. 
 
And as you know, we announced several times, and a lot of times, and run it 
in the paper . . . I shouldn't say run it in the paper.  We announced 
several times; I believe we did advertise in the paper that there would be 
no charge if you just did it, because we wanted to know if you had a claim 
or not. 
 
There was 229 RMs that had a crop that had the 20 per cent loss in 1988 
that may have been eligible for if it had a loss again in 1989.  I just 
want to bring that out because it did go out to all the producers on 
September 14, 1989.  So I think that covers the two areas that he was 
asking. 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I also have a letter from yourself on 
March 20, 1989, and in that letter you say that a total of 230 
municipalities will be eligible for additional coverage this year if 1989 
is another disaster year. 
 
Well 1989 was another disaster year, Mr. Minister, but the fact remains 
that while you were telling farmers that 230 municipalities would be 
eligible to qualify if they had another drought, the fact of the matter is 
that only 95 qualified at the end of the day.  And only 95 qualified, Mr. 
Minister, because of the four-RM block.  Now you can talk about the program 
as much as you want, but the fact of the matter remains, you advertised 
this as a coverage for loss in two consecutive years.  And if you wanted to 
tell me that the farmers got that and they should have known, well that's 
fine.  But you admit yourself that it wasn't advertised well enough. 
 



 

 

I think it wasn't advertised well enough and you didn't promote it because 
you knew what the result would be.  You knew the result would be many RMs 
and individual farmers left out of this program, and that would save you 
and your government some money.  And I think that's why it wasn't 
advertised, Mr. Minister, and many of the farmers agree with me on that 
one. 
 
The whole problem with you and this department in the crop insurance is the 
fact that even though . . . And I have another little note here from crop 
insurance, and this is interesting.  It says, "The multi-year disaster 
benefit program . . ."  This is March, 1990 as well: 
 

 The multi-year disaster benefit program is part of the ongoing commitment 
of Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation to provide world-class 
programming and service for farm producers. 

 
Well I'll tell you, Mr. Minister, there are hundreds of people out there 
who don't really agree that this is a world-class program, because I have 
had people call me with droughts for more than three years.  Mr. Minister, 
can you tell me why, when a person has had a drought in two consecutive 
years, and in some cases three consecutive years or more, that they did not 
qualify for this program?  I mean, you put the guide-lines in place; you 
knew what the result would be.  Tell me and tell the farmers of 
Saskatchewan why, when they have suffered drought in two consecutive years 
and they were led to believe that this program would kick in some extra 
funds, tell me, tell them why they don't qualify. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, first of all I explained why, how 
the program works, explained the regulations.  That was certainly lots of 
talk about it back in '85 and '86.  It was designed as a disaster 
mechanism, not an individual coverage mechanism which was always available 
to the farmer.  It was designed as a disaster mechanism where you had a 
large block of land that had . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . that you 
had a large block of land that would have a major disaster. 
 
Now the member from Quill Lakes says that it could be on one farm, and 
that's absolutely true.  But we do have individual coverage which would 
allow them to go up to that on a year-over-year basis to cover that.  And 
some of the things that we've changed this year has encouraged greatly the 
individual coverage and it has enhanced the coverage and has enhanced the 
opportunity to do exactly what the multi-year disaster benefit could do if 
you wanted it covered.  And also the multi-year disaster benefit would 
still . . . and could be available in some cases. 
 
He made mention that I said it was eligible in March of 1989 in a letter to 
him.  I think he may have missed the word "may" be eligible.  Because I'm 
sure that I would not have known in March 1989 whether there was going to 
be a disaster or not for 1989.  So what we're referring to was 1988 where 
there was a large number of RMs, I said I think it's 229, actually 
qualified when we got done -- I may have said 230; it was approximate.  But 
certainly that's how it would be. 
 
I want to make one other mention, the premium that was loaded in, the 



 

 

premium that was loaded into the multi-year disaster benefit was based on 
the risk of the area.  And so the higher the risk area, the higher the 
premium was loaded in.  It was not loaded in to the individual coverage.  
Individual coverage was based on one farmer's operation.  It could have 
been on his 10-year average that he was using or it could have been on the 
area average that he took in and then worked from the 10-year average from 
there. 
 
But it was based anywheres from 1 per cent to 4 per cent based on risk 
which was cost shared, which meant it was a half a per cent to 2 per cent.  
And in some cases where the farmer would have had earned a price discount 
or a premium discount, it could have been up to 50 per cent and you can get 
that high in some areas.  He may have only been paying a quarter of one per 
cent to 1 per cent.  So it's those kinds of opportunities were there. 
 
It was a very, very low premium type of a program because the risk was 
based on one in 20 years that felt that it would be any kind of a major 
loss.  That has not happened.  We've continued with the very, very dry 
years and the drought has this year triggered 95 RMs into that. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Minister, I know that the rules were laid down by your 
government and I know that you stand in your place and you say we're doing 
all we can as you said in Rural Development estimates, as the minister, the 
Premier would say: we're doing all we can for rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Do you think it's fair, Mr. Minister, that people who have had years of 
consecutive drought, especially in areas where by your program, you may 
have a block of four RMs where they qualify because they have had 20 per 
cent of their liabilities paid out in indemnities in two consecutive years.  
One of those RMs may have had a very good crop and three maybe had a 
terrible crop.  And then the next block of four RMs, the opposite could be 
true, whereby one RM may have had or two may have had terrible crops but 
the other two brought the average so that the indemnity would not be high 
enough. 
 
Do you think that's fair, Mr. Minister?  When you developed this program 
with your federal counterparts, did you not take into consideration the 
possibility that there would be these inequities?  Especially after the 
payments that have come out from Ottawa; especially the drought payment of 
last year where it was based on production.  And we saw areas like the Red 
River Valley and some other areas, some in Saskatchewan where the 
production had been very high over the last period of years, so they got 
the majority of the payment. 
 
Mr. Minister, I ask you: do you think the method of four RM blocks with the 
formula is a fair one? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Mr. Chairman, it was broke down into the two 
opportunities for the farmers.  One, you could have stayed on your area 
average and you would pay into the disaster program. And if it was a major, 
major loss, like we had this year in many areas, two years in a row -- it 
had to be two years in a row -- then you would receive the additional 10 
per cent benefits. 



 

 

 
Then there was the individual farm benefit -- a farm that you could insure 
under individual coverage.  So you could actually insure it by the farm 
size for an additional 10 per cent, which was available to you and took you 
from 70 to 80, or you could go to a large disaster area, pay a very low 
premium, and then if there was a disaster in that whole area, you would 
then have the opportunity to collect an additional 10 per cent. 
 
It was based on risk.  All insurance is based on the amount of risk.  The 
amount of risk on a farm size is based, and that's how the Premier based, 
the premiums are based on a big, large risk area so they're very, very low.  
Like, it could be as low, with a premium discount, as a quarter of one per 
cent.  They could go as high as 4 per cent if you had no premium discount 
and a very high risk area. 
 
Those were the kinds of . . . the two alternatives that they had back in 
the last years.  This year, for 1990, we brought a much wider, a much more 
enhanced individual coverage program into place.  And I could explain it if 
you like.  About 80 to 90 per cent of all farmers are taking individual 
coverage right now because of the enhanced coverage, because they'd be able 
to select from 50 to 80 per cent, because we've got somebody out there 
explaining the program to them one on one. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Tories. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- And it has worked very, very well. 
 
I heard the member over there say, Tories.  I think they're very, very 
competent people that's doing it, and I'm sure that in his area, I'm sure 
that he would know who's out there. 
 
I would say that, Mr. Chairman, that the people who are the agents out 
there, the hundred that we have selected so far, that they're doing an 
excellent job.  They have for the first time that they've come to the farm 
gate for the farmer to explain the program to him, she or him, and they 
have explained it to him so that they understand what they're buying.  It's 
the first time anybody ever took the time to go to their farm gate and 
explain to them what is available to them, the opportunities that are 
available to them, the different types of enhanced coverage. 
 
In many cases when they explained to the farmer, he said, you know, when I 
had a hail claim last year I could also have made a claim on my area of 
risk, and he didn't realize that, or she didn't realize that.  For the 
first time they understand what they're buying, what it's going to cost 
them, and what the coverage is for. 
 
So although we . . . and I grant you, when we go back to the multi-year 
disaster, we may not have advertised it enough because who knows when it 
would trigger in.  But we did in '85, it did in '86, and we did in '87 
advertise it. 
 
What we're doing now is exactly that.  We're going out and explaining all 
the programs to the farmers so that he or she would know if they want to 



 

 

stay in the area coverage, knowing that disaster is part of the plan. 
They're paying into it.  They know what they're paying into it.  It's the 
first time you really know, as a farmer, exactly what you're buying and how 
much it's going to cost you. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Well thank you for that, Mr. Minister, but my question was, 
do you think it's fair that there's many scenarios around this province 
whereby a large area has had two or more consecutive droughts, but because 
of your formula they do not qualify, and in other instances, areas that had 
decent crops do qualify.  My question, and I would like an answer, Mr. 
Minister, is: do you think that is fair? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, whether I think it's fair or not is 
not the point; it's not the point at all.  The point is that under federal 
regulations, under federal regulations this is how it's set out.  It was 
set out back in 1985 and brought into force in 1986 to do exactly what I 
said.  At the same time, individual coverage is brought in to give you the 
individual farm coverage.  So there was the two alternatives there.  Now if 
you didn't want to pay into the large disaster area of benefits, then you 
could have took the individual coverage and had the 80 per cent too. 
 
Those were two alternatives.  One was more riskier than the other because 
you had to have a bigger loss. But that's the way it was set out.  This 
year, as I mentioned a moment ago, we have brought in a very much enhanced 
individual coverage that I believe will serve the farmer very, very well 
out there for the amount of coverage he or she needs for their farming 
operation.  And whether I think it's fair or not is totally irrelevant 
right now.  What is relevant is that that's the law, and we've got to abide 
by the regulations that are put into place. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I totally disagree with you, because if 
you think it's a fair system, then obviously you're not going to do 
anything about it.  But if you think it's an unfair system -- and the 
legacy of you and your pirates opposite have a long history of unfairness 
when it comes to the people of Saskatchewan, and this is simply another 
example.  So it is very important whether you think it is fair, because if 
you don't think it's fair, then you could undertake to do something about 
it. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I think obviously from your answer that you do think it's 
a fair system and you're not going to do a thing about it.  But I ask you, 
on behalf of those people who have been treated unfairly under the 
multi-year disaster program through crop insurance, are you undertaking or 
will you undertake to put some equity in the system whereby through 
negotiations with the federal government, those people who did not qualify 
because of the regulations will be able to be compensated for moneys that 
they have paid for through their premiums, so they can be compensated in 
the near future to have their level brought up to the 10 per cent extra 
that other people received in the program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I explained, it's the federal 
regulations.  We can lobby all we want.  We can do what we want, but that's 
the agreement that has been signed by the producers, by the federal 



 

 

government.  That's the agreement that's been put into place.  
Provincially, we're not funding that.  We only fund the reinsurance if 
there's a claim on it.  That's all we do -- and only a part of it. 
 
We do the administration, and we've done that.  We went out and we've done 
85,000 claims to see if the farmers would qualify under the federal and 
producer regulations.  The producer and the federal government are the . . 
. who pay the premiums on this.  So all we do is abide by the rules that's 
set out for the farmer by the federal government's regulations and the 
insurance coverage that they bought. 
 
Now I said there was two options at that time. There was individual farm, 
individual coverage which would take you to 80 per cent automatically, or 
you could stay in the area average and the disaster would trigger in only 
under these conditions.  Very tough to trigger in but it was there.  Now 
since then we looked at individual coverage and said, can we enhance that 
to give a much broader base to do that?  We have done that. 
 
(1615) 
 
You can go from 50 per cent all the way up to 80 per cent in two percentage 
increments, all the way up the ladder.  That's available to you.  So if you 
want to take out 60 per cent or 70 per cent or 80 per cent, your premium's 
loaded accordingly.  So you decide on how much you want, based on the 
amount of premium.  The premium is based on the risk.  At 50 per cent the 
risk is low, so the premium is much lower, again cost-shared by the 
governments and by the farmer.  And the administration is all picked up by 
the government, so those are there. 
 
We've done other things, enhanced other ways in crop insurance, but under 
that individual coverage I believe that the option there is much better 
than it was.  I believe it could have been better before, but it's 
certainly a lot better now, and I think it fits the producer's needs very, 
very well. 
 
In regards to whether I would lobby or not, we have made representation to 
the folks in the federal government in regards to that.  They go by and 
abide by two things:  one, the regulations that's in place, that governs 
the insurance that's out in place; and second, that the insurance was 
covered under an insurance plan as it's designed, and the design was done 
under regulations. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Well I'll tell you, Mr. Minister, all your excuses won't 
help the farmers of Saskatchewan pay their bills, and that's the point that 
we have to understand here.  And you now pay 25 per cent of the cost of 
crop insurance, so therefore you must have some say now into what happens.  
So, Mr. Minister, will you be undertaking to correct the inequity in the 
multi-year disaster program, retroactively if necessary.  But will you 
undertake to try on behalf of the farmers? 
 
You have had letters from rural municipalities; in fact I have a copy of a 
letter to you from the Rural Municipality of Humboldt asking that you would 
look into this on behalf of farmers; look into why their RM didn't qualify.  



 

 

And I know that you'll use all these statistics and all the numbers to tell 
them why they didn't qualify.  But the fact remains, Mr. Minister, that you 
have an obligation through crop insurance to ensure that farmers insured 
under the program are covered and get what they deserve. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you undertake to look into it and to possibly change the 
program so that farmers in areas who did not qualify, even though they had 
two years of drought in that area, to make sure that they will qualify? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- In regards to the RM of Humboldt, we have calculated the 
indemnities in the area, we've calculated the liabilities in the area, in 
that four-RM block, and they haven't qualified if that's the way it is.  
The regulations govern that; we don't have any choice.  I mean, we only 
follow the law.  I mean, that's the law and that's the insurance law. 
 
We can go back and attempt to have the federal government go back and 
change their regulations and allow it for different things.  It would 
change the base of insurance.  Certainly it changes the risk.  You'd have 
to go back to everybody in the province for more insurance.  I mean, you 
couldn't just . . . because it would have to . . . because you changed the 
amount of insurance risk. 
 
I don't know if it's even feasible or possible to do it.  I mean, we have 
asked them just to forget the thing and forget the amount of premiums you'd 
have to collect, the insurance risk, and allow us to go back and pay some 
of these producers who had -- not producers, RMs -- who'd had the losses.  
They have said no.  They said that because of all the reasons I give you 
here -- the risk -- the insurance premiums were based on the risk of how 
it's set up here. 
 
Do you want to talk about . . . you're saying that we'd be paying part of 
the insurance premiums for 1990.  It could be true.  We're still in final 
negotiations. 
 
We have brought in a much enhanced crop insurance for 1990, and I could get 
into all the different things we've changed in it -- accessibility to it; 
direct payment from the claim centres; enhanced individual coverage, 
individual forage coverage; enhanced honey coverage. 
 
We brought in such things as organic foods are now insurable.  A whole 
series of those things we have brought in that was never there before, 
enhanced many of the programs greatly.  So we've done some things, I 
believe, that are very, very positive for 1990. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Will the multi-year disaster benefit continue in future 
years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- The multi-year disaster benefit on the area coverage 
will continue as long as we have area coverage.  We have said that we are 
going to encourage individual coverage over the next three years. This year 
going from something like 2 per cent of folks in the individual coverage to 
in excess of 80 per cent in one year is a very major step forward. 
 



 

 

But the multi-year disaster will stay in place for the area coverage 
farmers for 1990 and as long as area coverage is there. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Minister, is there any level of individual coverage 
holders that . . . is there any magic number over a certain number that you 
will delete the area coverage? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Just so we put it in its perspective, the area coverage, 
we would assume, would gradually phase out for a couple reasons.  One, they 
can take 70 per cent coverage under the individual coverage and the price 
is just a little bit lower because the multi-year disaster is not triggered 
into the 70 per cent coverage.  So therefore you would eliminate . . . if 
you take individual coverage and take 70 per cent, it's the same as the 
area coverage less the multi-year disaster, whatever is loaded in from 
that.  And it loads in, like I said, from 1 per cent to 4 cost-shared and 
depends on your premium discounts.  That's taken out of the 70 per cent.  
Now when you go to the 80 per cent, certainly it's more because you've got 
a lot higher coverage. 
 
It would appear that they're better off, really, or at least as well off, 
taking the 70 per cent coverage if they don't feel they're going . . . 
particularly if they don't feel they're going to be in a disaster area.  
And if they haven't been in a disaster area in '89, most of them are then 
going to the individual coverage because they can pick their level from 50 
to 80, whatever they feel comfortable.  And we're going to extend that with 
the new regulations; we hope to extend it as high as 85 or 90 per cent.  
And so they'll have lots of option there. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you say that the multi-year disaster 
will stay in place for the area coverage even though that there are many 
going to individual.  Will you be undertaking to try to rectify some of the 
problems that we have seen this year? 
 
As I said, you are now paying, or possibly will be paying, 25 per cent -- 
it's assumed that you will be.  Will you be making representation and 
negotiations with the federal government that you will be changing the 
program to ensure that these terrible inequities do not happen again for 
those people under area coverage, or are you just going to leave it the 
same and allow the unfairness to continue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Mr. Chairman, because of what we're doing -- talking to 
each farmer individually, explaining the program -- the farmer's now making 
the decision which is best for him.  To stay on the area coverage with the 
disaster mechanism loaded in, which he knows is very difficult to trigger 
-- and he understands it very, very well, particularly after this year, 
particularly after we're explaining it to him. 
 
They're now making the decision; they're making the decision, a financial 
decision based on that.  So if they make that decision, that's the farmer's 
decision, knowing exactly what would trigger in the disaster mechanism -- 
it's very low cost premiums into that -- and they're making that decision. 
 
So now the farmer does understand and he does have it explained to him and 



 

 

he does have the two choices -- distinctly has two choices.  He can go to 
individual coverage at any level he wants from 50 to 80 or he can go to the 
area coverage at 60 or 70 with the area loaded into the additional 10 per 
cent.  He can do that.  He pays his premium accordingly.  He's making a 
financial decision, an individual financial decision based on full 
knowledge of what he's buying.  So no, there probably would be no changes 
to the regulations as it stands today. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Minister, I think that this whole multi-year disaster 
program has been a disaster for you and your government, because despite 
what you say about all the rules and regulations, you know yourself that 
there are some terrible inequities in this system.  You know that many 
farmers were led to believe that they would qualify and that now they don't 
qualify.  You have the opportunity to change that.  You have the 
opportunity to ensure and go back over this program and rectify the 
problems. 
 
You yourself admit that you did not advertise the program properly, and as 
a result of that, farmers are now being penalized.  And you can blame 
farmers for not understanding the program if you wish, but I think it's 
incumbent upon the corporation to clearly explain the details of any 
program and to let them know that ramifications of being involved in 
individual coverage or area coverage. 
 
You did not do that.  What you have done is hung many farmers out to dry 
because of your lack of advertising the program properly. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I just would like to say that all your excuses don't pay 
the bills.  And this is typical of your government's incompetence in 
handling any program that they put forward.  You say that you're going to 
be standing up and working hard and doing all you can.  Well in this case, 
Mr. Minister, I don't think you did.  I think you misled the farmers and I 
think that you're going to pay for it in the end. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Mr. Chairman, since the program has come into place . . 
. Oh, this year only, this year only. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we collect in about $5 million in premiums, cost-shared, 
federal-provincial.  Under MYDB (multi-year disaster benefit) program this 
year, we've collected in somewhere in the neighbourhood of $12 million 
altogether.  We paid out this year alone around 60 millions of dollars.  I 
would say that's a reasonable return to anybody on a program. 
 
The program was based on a large-risk area, and that's . . . Whoever 
anticipated so many farmers in the province would have that kind of 
drought.  It's nice to say in hindsight you could have made it much 
different and loaded the premiums much different and everything else that 
would accommodate for that.  You can't go back.  The premiums were loaded 
very low because it was considered that the area was big enough that the 
risk would be very low and that we had individual coverage for the farm 
size for those who wanted to not go into the disaster area risk or the area 
coverage.  And those two were there so we paid out something . . . we've 
taken in something like 12 millions of dollars since it was brought into 



 

 

place, paid out $60 million this year, in the proximity. 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  You may have explained this, Mr. 
Minister, but I want to get it clear.  You indicated in respect to the 
multi-year disaster that it's four adjoining RMs.  Is it in fact . . . and 
you indicate it has to be the 20 per cent liability paid in indemnity over 
two years in a row. 
 
I guess the question I ask you: is that established over that whole block 
area of four RMs, or does each individual RM has to qualify for the 20 per 
cent indemnity of liability? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Mr. Chairman, it's what we call a weighted average of 
the four RMs.  There should be some below, some above.  But as we put those 
four RMs together, it's the weighted average of the four-RM block. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- That's what I was led to believe.  And so exactly what can 
transpire here then is that you can have three RMs with considerable 
drought having received, you know, and putting in the amount that has to be 
paid out over the two years.  But is it not also true that you could have 
then, another RM which is sizeably over?  In other words, it hasn't taken 
the 20 per cent because it's the weighted average over the whole area.  And 
so what I'm really saying is that you could have one of those RMs 
qualifying, but having significantly better crops and not being required to 
get the full amount of 20 per cent indemnity, liability paid in the 
indemnity.  It seems to me what has happened in this program is just that.  
I know in my area there is one RM that has been brought in, I was advised, 
that on it's own did not qualify but as a result of the other ones were 
brought in. 
 
But on the other hand, I have the RM of Big Quill, and particularly the 
west side of it, as you know, Mr. Minister, because you met with a number 
of farmers when you were down opening up the rural service centre, who came 
up to 19 -- I think they said, I have the figures in my office -- but it 
was 19.84 of the liability paid in indemnity for two years in succession.  
Now that's an instance there, they disqualify.  And if you take the RM of 
Big Quill, on the east side they had a relatively good crop.  On the west 
side they had much the same as Prairie Rose -- same type of land, exactly 
the same; it's in the flats.  And that whole area on the west side, and I 
can't believe that you wouldn't have provided some provision for 
adjustments in extreme cases.  How could a minister not negotiate to allow 
in extreme cases? 
 
Let me give you an example, Mr. Minister.  When you had the drought 
program, the federal-provincial drought program in respect to feed for 
cattle, you had an appeal mechanism. And in circumstances when a portion of 
a municipality qualified, you could go in and indicate that they should 
qualify.  And precisely that happened.  The west side of the municipality 
of Big Quill Lake was allowed, under the appeal, to qualify. 
 
But now, here they are. They advise me, over 19 per cent of liability paid 



 

 

in indemnity, of the indemnity in Big Quill.  And what they have happens to 
them is they sit on the sidelines and get no benefits.  No provision for  
 Dadjustment with a good portion of an RM is excluded.  What a provision. 
 
And on the other hand, I got the situation where I got an RM that doesn't 
qualify, doesn't even reach 19 per cent, and they are included in the 
package.  And this is the anomaly that is been set up. 
 
And I would have thought, Mr. Minister, that some provision would have at 
least been provided whereby a portion Prairie Rose is covered.  Surely to 
heavens, if it's the same based land and two years of drought on the west 
side of Big Quill, there should have been at least a provision to allow 
them to enter in and tag on to Prairie Rose and the four RMs. Whereas in 
another situation, as I said, an RM that wouldn't have qualified except by 
the virtue of the three other adjoining ones, qualified, and basically did 
not need it to the extent of say, the west side of Big Quill. 
 
That's the anomaly and unfairness that the farmers see.  Because I've 
talked to farmers in the Big Quill, and that's their contention.  And 
similarly I've talked to farmers that have qualified, and they said yes, 
they were pulled in as a result of three other municipalities. 
 
And then of course I have the other RM of Lakeside and I know there they . 
. . I don't think the farmers would be wanting to meet with you if they had 
known the basis of the regulations.  I think that they weren't informed as 
well as they might have been by your department. 
 
But don't you see the anomalies that exist here?  Right in my constituency 
I have one RM that is pulled into it, and I got Big Quill, which you said 
to them when you met with them as I'm advised, is oh, I would like to do it 
on an individual basis, but the federal government makes the regulations 
and there's nothing I can do about it. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, there is something you can do about it.  You could act 
on behalf of the farmers and negotiate.  Do you think those birds down in 
Ottawa know what would best be applicable here to the farmers of 
Saskatchewan?  And certainly you could have had an appeal provision for at 
least a portion of a municipality adjacent to one that qualifies, could 
have at least petitioned or appealed to be included into the coverage of 
multi-year disaster.  I just want you to explain that anomaly that exists 
because it's perfectly evident in my riding. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, any time we draw a line, it's always 
a problem.  That's why we moved to individual coverage at that time and 
that's why we're really enhancing individual coverage now. 
 
There's no doubt about it.  A farmer has a loss and he needs to have the 
coverage.  And I think I appreciate that as the member does.  I have met 
with those folks out there and the one RM, we were looking for the maps or 
we didn't have them, but I remember the one RM in particular that they told 
me that one-half of it got a lot of rain and the other half didn't get any 
and it was almost like a magic line. I went through there where the rains 
went and they didn't.  That was on the east side of Wynyard in that area 



 

 

there . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- West side. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- I could be wrong -- west side, whatever.  You could be 
right there. 
 
They explained that to me and I know, what we hoped to do, what the 
regulations . . . or the way they were drawn up was supposed to work and it 
works, I supposed, to some degree, was that when you have a four RM moving 
block, it moves, it shifts around, so any combination of four RMs can 
trigger it.  Normally, they would trigger that in.  If an RM, like you said 
. . . and there was one RM I understand, or maybe two in the province that 
would have got triggered in as you said, even when they were above or less 
than the 20 per cent liability or claims. 
 
But in those RMs you must remember the producer too had to qualify, he had 
to have a loss, he had to have a claim in there.  And then those RMs, I 
don't know, but I would imagine it would be very small claim there in that 
RM. That doesn't say there isn't inequities; there is.  Any time you draw a 
line, and you and I both know it very well, it's just about impossible to 
draw a line however you do it.  The four RM moving block was part of the 
risk insurance that was put in.  The individual coverage was part that was 
encouraged and encouraged a great deal.  Nobody seemed to want to take it 
up.  We've changed it now.  I know you can't . . . you say that after the 
fact, and it's probably true, but it's certainly been enhanced. 
 
I guess that's about all I can say is that basically the regulations are 
here.  And I could read the regulations in.  They're in place.  The 
insurance is based, as you know, all insurance is based on risk.  You can't 
go back on insurance because you've got to go back to all the producers 
that were involved in it. 
 
We've tried; we've been trying for two months.  I don't believe the federal 
government intends to move.  They're bringing in a whole new legislation 
that says that anything in the past has to be re-signed and renegotiated.  
We're trying, but I'm not . . . retroactive, I sincerely don't believe that 
anybody can get them to move, and we've been trying. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- I was wondering if you could indicate what were the four 
adjoining municipalities including Prairie Rose that constituted the four 
municipalities there.  What I really should do is ask you to send over a 
map of it.  I have seen it, I think, in The Western Producer, but just to 
familiarize myself with it. 
 
And the problem is, you see, if you have, say, the municipality of Leroy, 
you have the municipality of Prairie Rose, Usborne, and Wolverine as a 
block of four, but how do you choose competing municipalities?  How do you 
choose? 
 
Let's say we have to choose between the RM of Prairie Rose and Big Quill.  
Could they qualify?  I mean, how do you choose those four municipalities?  
Because I can tell you that in the RM of Big Quill it was almost up to the 



 

 

20 per cent, and when they phoned in to Melville, they said, don't feel bad 
having 19.84, I believe it was, liability, having paid out an indemnity, 
because there's one other RM in Saskatchewan that was higher and didn't 
qualify. 
 
So I guess . . . Do they have to be in a square block?  Can they be the 
municipalities that touch?  How do you choose, say, between those 
municipalities which . . . which composes of the four?  That's what I want 
to know. 
 
And so what I really want to know from you is, you give me the rating for 
each of the municipalities that I mentioned.  Will you give me the block 
that includes Prairie Rose and Leroy and I suspect Usborne and I suspect 
Wolverine were the block of four. 
 
What I want you to do is to give me the individual rating of the liability 
paid in each of those municipalities which made the block of four, I 
suspect, as compared to the rating of Big Quill, which was excluded.  
That's what I want to know.  Or do you pick your areas for a particular 
political reason? 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Mr. Chairman, I may have a copy of the area that when 
they were out there.  I tried to find the map that we had that we gave the 
producers out there and this isn't it.  This is one that was for another 
area. 
 
We're not sure what the RM numbers are -- what Prairie Rose is, and Leroy 
and Usborne and Wolverine.  I'm not sure.  We have the numbers here, if we 
knew how they relate -- what's the RM that relates to the number.  Is it 
308, 309, 310?  We got all the numbers here and all the individual losses 
for each RM. But we can get -- I got a map in my office I'll bring back 
after supper, like this here for you, which shows it all together and then 
I wouldn't have to . . . Would that be all right? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Yes, that would be terrific. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- All right, we'll just do that then. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- So, Mr. Minister, then I want the . . . if you can provide 
not only a map, but I want the individual levels that each of those 
municipalities were calculated as having received.  That's what I have to 
have. 
 
And my colleague indicates that in establishing this that you had some 
moving blocks.  In other words, you shifted around -- is that correct? -- 
in establishing the 20 per cent liability in that block?  And I want to 
know whether or not Big Quill was considered in the formulation of 
qualifying for coverage under the multi-year disaster or whether it was 
excluded, because I can tell you I can think of some reasons why it might 
be, and I hate to suggest it here.  And therefore I need that information 
and I'll continue on with that after supper, Mr. Minister, when I receive 



 

 

that particular information. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- I guess I thought we were going to do it after supper, 
but I can say that . . . how it qualifies.  There is a four-RM moving 
block, and it moves and it takes the four RM . . . it's a four-RM moving 
block and it takes the worst case scenario of any combination of those four 
RMs.  So however it moves, and it's based on an RM loss, based on a four-RM 
average, and then . . . but it's a worst case scenario, so if any way you 
could make them four RMs fit under with the 20 per cent loss or greater, 
then it would trigger them in. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I understand how that works, but you 
must admit that there are, as we have pointed out, several instances where 
RMs who have had droughts don't qualify.  And I just think, and I won't 
prolong this section any further, but I just think that that is a terrible 
injustice to those people.  Even the blocks that came up to 19 or 18 per 
cent, I mean you know, you know that they've had a drought in large areas 
of that block. 
 
Before we quit, Mr. Minister, several of the RMs are saying that the 
percentage came up to nineteen, nineteen and one-half, or nineteen point 
eight four, as the case with Big Quill.  Can you tell me how many of the 
blocks came up to within 1 per cent of your 20 per cent figure? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- There's 10 RMs fell between the 19 and the 20 per cent 
range. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- So 10 RMs have had droughts.  They have had obviously poor 
crops in two consecutive years, but they are not entitled, Mr. Minister, 
because you laid down the rules of 20 per cent in a four RM block.  And I 
can think of no other reason why you would do that except to save money, 
and you can blame the federal government or whatever you want. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, would you name those 10 RMs, please?  Could you send the 
list of the 10 RMs and the percentage of liabilities paid and indemnities 
in two consecutive years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Mr. Chairman, I'll just read it in because I've got some 
other stuff on here with it as well.  I've done some writing on it here.  I 
was talking about the member from Quill Lakes on here.  I didn't want to 
send it over to him. 
 
I want to say first of all that . . . remember that those who had 20 per 
cent or less of loss, that they were in the 80 per cent plus of an average 
crop for that area.  So I'm not saying it's good or bad, but that's the 80 
per cent.  That's why it's there. 
 
Here's the RMs that had between 19 and 20 per cent losses, and I'll read 
them off to you and the amount: RM of 167 had 19.8.  No, 19.8, right?  
That's right, RM of 167; the RM of 313 had 19.8; the RM of 343 had 19.8; 
the RM of 282 had 19.5; the RM of 308 had 19.4; the RM of 278 had 19.4; the 
RM of 225 had 19.2; the RM of 344 had 19; the RM of 157 had 19 and the RM 
of 156 had 19. 



 

 

 
An Hon. Member: -- That's 156? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- That's correct, yes. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Well, Mr. Minister, we see the list of 10 RMs so close to 
qualifying, obviously having a drought, and you're telling us that you're 
not going to do anything to try to increase the amount of moneys that they 
received through crop insurance.  And I say that that program that you have 
in place, you knew that this was going to happen when it was set up. 
 
Why did you not attempt to do something to try to encourage . . . or try to 
rectify the situation whereby RMs that have had droughts, instead of 
misleading them and letting them think that they were going to be 
qualifying, and three of them came within .2 of 1 per cent, obviously 
having severe droughts? 
 
Mr. Minister, how do you justify that in light of the severe crisis we have 
in agriculture when they have come so close, and because you've put down a 
magic number that they won't qualify?  How do you justify that, Mr. 
Minister?  And I ask you again: do you think that is fair? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- I think I said before, Mr. Chairman, whether I believe 
it's fair or not isn't the point.  The point is that this is the way the 
program was set up.  The program was set up as a risk program.  It's an 
insurance program. 
 
We did encourage, as you know, did a lot of encouraging trying to get those 
to go to individual coverage where they would have had a full 80 per cent 
coverage all the way through.  Now they are going to that, and it's good 
because I believe that's the way it should be, and it gives them the 
coverage that they need, whether it's 50, 60, 70, or any range in between 
there. 
 
I just want to make the other comment that some of these areas on the 
average certainly . . . well it figures out to about 85 per cent of your 
crop production or your area coverage is what it is, because it's 81 per 
cent of the area coverage.  So those factors are in there.  So there was 85 
per cent of a crop on the average in those RMs.  That's not good, but it's 
not a total disaster, I guess is what I'm saying.  You've got to draw a 
line some place. 
 
We could go back and say there was some that come within 2 per cent, there 
was some that come within 3 per cent, there was some more come within 4 per 
cent.  Any time you draw a line -- and we talked about it earlier -- it's 
tough to do.  So that's the way the regulations were set up.  They were set 
up back in 1986.  We're bound because that's the federal regulations.  
They, them, and the farmer were the premium payers based on risk. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Mr. Minister, the point that I am making -- and I want this 
clarified -- the point that I am making and I find it almost impossible to 
believe that your . . . in my example of what I gave you of Leroy, Prairie 
Rose, Usborne, and Wolverine, if that's the four, I suspect it is, I find 



 

 

it almost impossible to believe from what the representatives of the RM of 
Big Quill who met with you and who spoke to me as their representative and 
said that you apologized for not being able to change the regulation.  But 
if their figures are right and they dealt with the crop insurance at 
Melville and they indicated that in Big Quill was 19.84, liability paid 
indemnity for two years. 
 
Now what you would have to be saying is that every other municipality, 
every other municipality in that block were under 19.84 -- that's what 
you'd have to conclude -- or you'd have to say that every municipality in 
the block that I'm talking about, none of them were higher than 19.84.  And 
my understanding is that is not correct.  My understanding is that one of 
the municipalities in that block didn't qualify with the 20 per cent 
indemnity paid over two years, in that block that I'm talking about. 
 
And at the same time we have another municipality of Big Quill, which they 
got the statistic from crop insurance, indicating 19.84.  So that's the 
position that you have to justify to me.  And I'll tell you, I'm going to 
be checking that.  Because I'll tell you, you'd better not be politics 
played in this. I'll tell you that. 
 
Because if there is a shifting of boundaries on the basis of politics, I'll 
tell you, you're finished.  And I have a suspicion that there is -- 19.84 
in Big Quill.  And you're saying, therefore, that every other municipality 
was under that. 
 
But at the same time representatives from some of the RMs within the block, 
which I suspect are the four that I indicate, indicate that in fact they 
didn't qualify, that they were under the 20 per cent. 
 
Now they have to have been even higher than 19.84, but I'll tell you that 
better be the facts, mister.  And I want to see the calculations that . . . 
how you arrived at it.  Because I'll tell you one thing, there is going to 
be no politics played with the lives of the farmers just because . . . on a 
political basis. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- So I want you to bring back the statistics of your 
calculations for each of the RMs that I put into that block.  I want you to 
give me how you calculated it and I want you to compare and I'm going to be 
comparing also in respect to the RM of Big Quill.  Because I have a 
suspicion that they were excluded unjustifiably, perhaps on political 
grounds. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- It being 5 o'clock this committee will recess until 7 
o'clock tonight. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


