





























































Hansard: June 05, 1990


 

 

June 5/90 
 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, this 
afternoon I would like to introduce to you, and through you to all members 
of the legislature, a couple of very special guests.  They are seated in 
your gallery, Mr. Speaker, and I am referring to Amy Milne who is 
accompanied by her mother Mary, seated in your gallery. 
 
Amy, I understand, has just turned eight just a short while ago.  She is a 
student at James L. Alexander School in Saskatoon.  And, Mr. Speaker, it is 
not a coincidence that Amy has joined us during Environment Week.  Mr. 
Speaker, Amy is an environmentalist in the truest sense of the word.  Amy 
launched her own recycling program in her neighbourhood, going door to 
door, collected waste paper. 
 
And little Miss Amy has become quite the celebrity since launching her 
project earlier this spring.  Amy gave a toast at the Earth Day 
celebrations at the United Nations in New York on April 22.  She later 
appeared as a guest on Front Page Challenge.  This morning Amy came to 
Regina to join with me and others at the Environment Week kick-off 
ceremony.  At that time she assisted in the official unveiling of a model 
of the planet Earth at the Saskatchewan Science Centre. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I submit to you and to this Assembly that Amy has represented 
Saskatchewan and represented environmental concerns in a very, very 
honourable way, Mr. Speaker, and she deserves special attention here and 
special recognition this afternoon. 
 
Amy and her mother will be meeting with me after question period.  We'll be 
taking a few pictures, and later she will return to Saskatoon.  Mr. 
Speaker, I ask you and all members of this Assembly to join with me in 
welcoming very heartily Amy Milne, a true environmentalist. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I just want to add my welcome formally to the 
minister's welcome and those of all members of the House.  I have the 
honour and indeed the thrill to have Amy and her parents living in my 
constituency.  And when they did what they did, we in our constituency and 
our city and indeed the province were very, very proud of Amy.  And I 
certainly personally welcome her here today. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I will also take 
advantage of welcoming our guests here to the legislature.  I'd like to 



 

 

remind all members of the legislature through you that Amy was the resident 
of Lashburn, Saskatchewan, my community, my home, and where her 
grandparents still reside.  And I just want to congratulate her personally, 
wish her all the best in the future, and on behalf of her grandparents I'd 
just like to say, they are very proud of you, Amy.  Good luck. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- Thank you.  Mr. Speaker, I cannot attest to knowing 
Amy, in coming from Swift Current, but I have to introduce to you 54 grade 
4 students who I think would probably like to follow the role model that 
Amy has laid out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they are seated in the west gallery.  They are accompanied by 
their teacher, Louise Gagniere, Jo-ann Lambert; and four parents, Mrs. 
Thingelstad, Mrs. Steppuhn, Mrs. Krause, and Mrs. Holmes.  Mr. Speaker, 
these children are in from  Oman Elementary School in Swift Current.  They 
come in on an annual basis and this year is no different.  And I would ask 
all members to welcome them, and I will look forward to meeting with them 
after question period. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Petersen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Once again it's my pleasure 
to introduce to you and through you a group of grade 4 students from Wadena 
Elementary School.  They're here today visiting the legislature.  They are 
accompanied by their teachers, Mair MacDonald, Reg Glennie; chaperons, 
Marilyn Cannon, Joan Haskey, Jerry Madarash, and Sharon Rorquist.  Their 
bus driver is Tony Lipinski. 
 
I will be meeting with them for pictures and refreshments later on, and 
some questions and answers, I suppose.  So I would ask all members to join 
with me in welcoming them here once again. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Increase in Cost of Government Borrowing 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- My question is to the Minister of Finance.  Mr. 
Minister, with our credit rating on a toboggan ride, many of the public 
have been asking, what is this going to cost us?  What does it mean to me, 
the taxpayer? 
 
Mr. Minister, two documents brought to my attention yesterday, both bearing 
your signature and signed about 11 months apart, dramatically illustrate 
what it's going to cost us.  Both are orders in council, the formal 
embodiment of a cabinet decision; both are a decision to borrow money both 
for the same amount -- $300 million, both bearing your signature.  There 
are, however, two differences.  One is the date . . . one was dated June 
28, 1989; the other one, 11 months later, May 30, 1990. 
 



 

 

It is the other difference, Mr. Speaker, that dramatically leaps out at a 
person.  The interest rate, Mr. Minister, is 2.4 per cent higher.  That's 
eight-tenths of one per cent higher than the increase in the Bank of Canada 
rate.  Is is not a fact, Mr. Minister, that the difference that 
eight-tenths of one per cent is the negligence factor?  Isn't it true, Mr. 
Minister, that the difference between this increase and the Bank of Canada 
increase, or eight-tenths of one per cent, is what the taxpayer has to pay 
for your negligence and mismanagement, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- The answer is no, Mr. Speaker.  And the reason I say 
that is because the deal that was done on May 10, and which the OC (order 
in council) the hon. member refers to was done before any credit rating 
downgrade, Mr. Speaker, and hence the member is not comparing a deal done 
after the credit rating downgrade . . . he is not comparing one done after 
the credit rating downgrade to one before the credit rating downgrade.  So 
the answer is clearly no, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Before the hon. member puts his next question, I'd like to 
draw to his attention that his first question was very lengthy, very 
lengthy.  We may get into very lengthy answers, and this is something that 
members don't want.  They've brought that to my attention on different 
occasions as I'm sure you're aware.  So let's try to keep the questions 
down and of course the answers as well. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for that ruling.  
It was carefully and slowly put, but I was after all dealing with the 
member from . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- New question.  For the benefit of the member from 
Weyburn who seems to have a problem not just with arithmetic but with the 
English language, the second OC was dated May 30, after the bond ratings 
were available, Mr. Minister.  In fact after both of them were available. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, is that it's a very simple calculation to 
calculate the eight-tenths of one per cent times the $4 billion which 
Dominion Bond (Rating) Service says will be due this year, and the cost of 
your negligence and mismanagement is $32 million -- $32 million is the cost 
of this province's falling credit rating.  My question, Mr. Minister, is 
surely at a price-tag of $32 million it's time to produce an action plan to 
deal with the gross and obscene waste and mismanagement which has been an 
absolute hallmark of this government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well the hon. member is quite correct in terms of the 
date of the OC, Mr. Speaker, but he's unfamiliar with the process.  We went 
to the market on May 10 and I reported to that member in this House in 



 

 

interim supply debate on or about that very same day, with the assistant 
deputy minister who's responsible for debt management sitting right here, 
who advised me that on that very day we went to the market with this $300 
million deal at 12.25 per cent, higher than any of us would like 
particularly, Mr. Speaker, but certainly close to our budget model of 12 
per cent. 
 
The credit rating downgrade, the first one, did not occur until May 23, 24, 
somewhere in there.  The downgrade did not occur before that deal, Mr. 
Speaker.  The hon. member is in error. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- New question.  Mr. Minister, whatever the decision, 
whatever the date of the decision to sell them, the fact is that they were 
sold after May 30, after the downgrade, Mr. Minister.  And if there is, Mr. 
Minister, some other explanation for an increase in our cost of borrowing, 
almost 50 per cent greater than the increase in the Bank of Canada rate, 
you should offer it, Mr. Minister.  I ask you, Mr. Minister, is there any 
other credible explanation for such a rapid increase in our cost of 
borrowing above the general cost of borrowing? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- As I've said before in the legislature, Mr. Speaker, 
and I repeat, the larger factors that are impacting on the province's cost 
of borrowing, albeit that we are concerned with credit rating downgrades, 
that we're disappointed by them, maybe not totally surprised given what's 
been happening in our economy, but having said all of that, the larger 
factors that are impacting 10 and 20 times more so than the credit rating 
downgrade are these two things:  number one, the high interest rate policy 
of the Bank of Canada; and secondly, the uncertainty surrounding Meech 
Lake, the Meech Lake accord, Mr. Speaker.  Every analyst across Canada, I 
think, would acknowledge those points, Mr. Speaker. 
 
If we're to try and put the question of do these downgrades cost the 
province more money, Mr. Speaker, in an incremental sense, the answer is 
yes, they could possibly do that.  The estimates are, the market actuals to 
date, if you like, are on our short-term money about one-one-hundredth of a 
percentage point additional cost; and on our longer-term borrowings, Mr. 
Speaker, around about three-one-hundredths of a percentage point.  Now 
anything over and above what it was before is too much.  Based, if those 
market actuals stay in that range, Mr. Speaker, that could mean for us, on 
the bottom end, about a million dollars in increased costs, and the worst 
case scenario would be somewhere in the order of 2 millions of dollars. 
 
Certainly we're not happy with any increased cost in our borrowing, Mr. 
Speaker, and I have every confidence that the officials in the Department 
of Finance will be able to manage this.  Saskatchewan fortunately enjoys a 
very high reputation in the financial markets across North America. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

The Speaker: -- I'd like to also remind the hon. minister to try not to 
make his answers lengthier than necessary. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you.  New question, Mr. Speaker.  When the 
minister refers to this province's very high reputation in the financial 
community, Mr. Minister, you're living in the past, as you so often do.  In 
fact you have squandered that very high reputation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- My question concerns, Mr. Speaker, the lame excuses 
which you offer for this: a lack of rainfall. 
 
Mr. Minister, both credit rating agencies . . . Moody's referred to your 
industrial development projects, which are as gargantuan as they are 
unsuccessful, and the Dominion Bond (Rating) Service referred to your 
bizarre bookkeeping practice of taking more dividends from the Crown 
corporations than the total profit.  That, Mr. Minister, is waste and 
mismanagement. 
 
Mr. Minister, won't you admit it's time the waste and mismanagement came to 
an end and you began to serve the taxpayers of this province by bringing 
forth an action plan to bring the gross waste and mismanagement to an end?  
Isn't it time, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- I think it's fair to say, Mr. Speaker, that any 
government, this one included, as well all the officials that work for the 
various departments, Crowns, agencies, and commissions, strive for prudent 
management of the taxpayers' dollars.  That doesn't mean to say that they . 
. . any of us are perfect.  Certainly we all try to avoid any mistakes.  
There have been some actions in the past that we wish they would have gone 
better certainly. 
 
But certainly one of the major focuses or major thrusts in this budget was 
to decrease internal government spending so that we wouldn't have to raise 
taxes; and secondly, so that we could find the money to spend in those high 
priorities, namely health, education, and agriculture.  And we stand behind 
that kind of thrust, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Environmental Impact Study on Fertilizer Plant 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- My question, Mr. Speaker, is to the Minister of the 
Environment.  Mr. Minister, last Friday you admitted to this Assembly and 
to the journalists that pressure forced you to require an environmental 
impact study of the Cargill fertilizer plant in this province. 
 
Everyone knows, Mr. Minister, that the responsible thing to do would have 
been to have an environmental impact study before you gave an approval or 
authorization for this project to proceed.  I think even you would agree, 



 

 

Mr. Minister, that the public has a right and the public needs to have an 
explanation for this kind of irresponsibility. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister, if an environmental impact study is necessary -- 
and we have said all along that it is -- why did you not require it to be 
carried out before you gave the approval for the project to be constructed 
and before you committed $370 million of taxpayers' money to the Cargill 
corporation on this project, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Thank you.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 
have stated in this Assembly before, I have stated publicly -- the 
opposition had agreed once, but then they changed their mind.  
Environmentalists across Saskatchewan have agreed that our legislation is 
not perfect.  Our legislation is 10 years old.  Our legislation must be 
updated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, within the confines of the current legislation, departmental 
decisions were made.  Proposals from the proponent were accepted by the 
department, were reviewed by seven departments.  Internal studies were 
made, Mr. Speaker.  Information has been tabled in this House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that decision was taken.  I still believe today that that 
plant is safe.  I believe, Mr. Speaker, that a good internal review has 
been completed.  But I also have come to understand and believe, Mr. 
Speaker, that that is simply not good enough today in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that people across Saskatchewan are saying, we need 
more studies.  We need more proof.  We need more assurances.  Mr. Speaker, 
I believe that the agreement that I signed with the company that allows 
construction to continue but allows my ministerial discretion to make 
changes, to make further reviews, to make studies, will prove beyond a 
shadow of a doubt that this plant is environmentally sound.  And if it 
isn't, changes will occur. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, a new question to the minister.  Mr. 
Minister, you have turned the whole environmental assessment process 
backwards.  After the fact, after the fact you're now asking for an 
environmental impact study, and you do that as part of a deliberate 
strategy.  You do it as if environmental considerations are not important 
enough to be thought of before you approve a project. 
 
I submit to you, Mr. Minister, that this is part of a deal, because the 
deal that you have made is that Cargill can go ahead to proceed with the 
construction with taxpayers' money, and now later on you ask for an 
environmental impact study.  And I say to you that that makes a mockery of 
the whole process, a total mockery. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: -- So I ask you, Mr. Minister, can you at least answer 
this question.  What is the time frame that you have required for this 
study to take place and for the approval to be made?  What is the time 
frame? 
 
And I ask you also, Mr. Minister, why in this contract, an agreement which 
you signed, there is not an obligation on the part of Cargill corporation 
to have this study done before the project is complete, Mr. Minister?  Can 
you explain that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I can inform the hon. member and I can 
inform this legislature that the company, the Saskatchewan Fertilizer 
Company, will go through the environmental impact assessment process.  Mr. 
Speaker, that process should take approximately four to six months. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at that time I stress that if there are any changes that come 
to light, if the hon. critic is indeed sincere in his comments and he has 
information or concerns, as any Saskatchewan resident may, bring these 
forward, Mr. Speaker, and they will be reviewed throughly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there will be public meetings.  There will be an opportunity 
for that member opposite and there will be an opportunity for people all 
across Saskatchewan to address the issues -- to confront the issue itself, 
Mr. Speaker, and see if there are any things that have . . . anything that 
has been neglected with respect to this corporation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think if we cut away from the environmental comments by the 
hon. member, we will really get down to the truth at hand.  And, Mr. 
Speaker, the truth at hand is that hon. member, hiding behind the guise of 
the environment, will not be satisfied until he and some of his American 
counterparts in Oklahoma, Texas, elsewhere, who are raising concerns about 
the environment -- if you can imagine, Mr. Speaker, I don't think this plan 
is going to have one iota impact in the state of Oklahoma -- but, Mr. 
Speaker, that member and that political party will not be satisfied unless 
this project is stopped. 
 
And I ask them to quit.  To stop hiding around the issue of the environment 
and come clean with the public of Saskatchewan and simply say, we are 
opposed to developing our natural resources.  Stand up and say it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, a new question to the minister.  Mr. 
Minister, one of the reasons why you're making a mockery of this whole 
process is because you have already predetermined the result of this 
environmental impact study before it is even done.  That's what you've 
done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- You're saying it's going to take four to six months.  



 

 

Well that's another indication that you're only doing this to try to get 
you by an election, Mr. Minister, and it's got nothing to do with the 
environmental considerations. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister, in view of your continuing argument that the 
reason you couldn't have an environmental impact study done prior to the 
approval of the plant was because the legislation wouldn't let you -- 
that's what you said -- would you care to explain to this House, Mr. 
Minister, where in this legislation it prevents you from having done and 
required an environmental impact study before you gave approval for this 
plant, Mr. Minister?  Would you explain that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I think you would be able to easily, 
easily ascertain from the member's comments that he is more interested in 
the word "politics," which he has stated, more interested in an election, 
whenever that may be held. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my job, my responsibility is to protect the environment in 
Saskatchewan.  My responsibility, Mr. Speaker, is to be the watch-dog of 
the Government of Saskatchewan over such diversification projects and to 
ensure that they are safe for our environment and safe for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, departmental officials, after a thorough review, have given 
their blessing to this project.  Mr. Speaker, if I was to take that firm 
stance and say, that's all that is needed, Mr. Speaker, I don't think that 
is good enough for today in this realm, in this day, and this age. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have gone one step further and I would want to commend the 
Saskatchewan fertilizer company for voluntarily, voluntarily submitting to 
this process and coming out front, Mr. Speaker, and saying, we will show 
that this project is good for the people of Saskatchewan, safe 
environmentally, and if it's not, we will make changes.  And I submit to 
you, Mr. Speaker, those changes will be made if it's found not to be safe. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, a new question to the minister.  Mr. 
Minister, if you are a watch-dog on the environment, then I suggest to you 
you're a watch-dog without neither bark or bite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Because your Premier and your cabinet colleagues have 
taken out your clause on behalf of their political agendas and objectives . 
. . (inaudible interjection) . . . Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
My question is again directed to the minister; it's a new question.  Mr. 
Minister, this environmental assessment which you spoke of was done by 
Saferco first in secret -- in secret and you hid it.  Now you are doing a 
requiring environmental impact study under contract. 



 

 

 
Well, Mr. Minister, the arrangement that you have created here means that 
the government can now avoid and Saferco can now avoid all of the public 
safeguards which are built into The Environmental Assessment Act and 
sections 15, 16, 20, 21, 22, and 23 will not apply.  Mr. Minister, isn't 
that the reason why you have gone the contract route, so that all of the 
safeguards which are in the legislation you will not be able to apply and 
this will give you an out, Mr. Minister.  Isn't that the reason? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I will once again review for you the 
facts of this matter.  Decisions were taken, proposals were accepted and 
the green light was given to this project.  And from all indications, Mr. 
Speaker, after review by seven different government departments -- and from 
what I've seen in government, Mr. Speaker, there's still a lot of red tape 
here that we've haven't gotten rid of yet -- and I'll tell you, Mr. 
Speaker, it's not easy to get something through seven different government 
departments, but that decision was made. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I then had to make another decision.  I had to make the 
decision, Mr. Speaker, is that good enough today?  Is that good enough 
protection of the environment today, Mr. Speaker?  And after some 
consideration, after some consideration, Mr. Speaker, I said, no, that's 
not good enough for today.  We must take one further step. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I submit to you that most fair, reasonable people would say 
we're happy that you're taking an extra precaution.  Mr. Speaker, I am 
somewhat offended by a member opposite who stands up sanctimoniously, Mr. 
Speaker, and talks about whether or not I'm a good enough watch-dog over 
the environment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I remind you and I remind the people of Saskatchewan that that 
particular member was not watching the dogs when he covered up a PCB 
(polychlorinated byphenyl) spill with about two feet of concrete.  Now 
where was the watcher of the dogs back then?  Where was he? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Occupational Health and Safety Report on Shand Accident 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister of Human 
Resources, Labour and Employment, CKRM radio has reported that Myles Morin, 
the former PC MLA who now heads the occupational health and safety branch, 
has stated that his branch's report, an inquiry into the Shand accident, 
may not be made public because he doesn't have the authority to do so, and 
he would have to have approval from either SaskPower or the contractor.  
However, Mr. Minister, there is nothing in the Act which prevents you as 
minister responsible for occupational health and safety to make that report 
public. 
 
There's been a great deal of public concern about this accident, Mr. 
Minister.  As a matter of fact it's the second crane-related fatality on a 



 

 

SaskPower site in just a little over a year.  And obviously hiding the 
results of this report would be in no one's best interest. 
 
And so I ask you, Mr. Minister, I understand that the report has now been 
completed and as minister responsible for occupational health and safety, 
will you order that this Shand occupational health and safety report be 
made public immediately. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Speaker, the members opposite can just never 
resist cheap politicking when it comes to a serious question.  What we have 
here is a report that has not yet been delivered to me.  I have not had an 
opportunity to study the report because it hasn't been delivered by the 
acting director.  There will be no hiding of the results.  I'll have to 
study the legality of publicly issuing a copy of the report.  But certainly 
the results will not be hidden from the workers nor from management, and 
nor will they be hidden from the public. 
 
Once I have had an opportunity to receive the report, study the report, 
we'll be giving out more information. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Speaker, I will direct my question again to the Minister 
of Labour.  And if he prefers not to respond to the question, then I will 
direct it to the minister responsible for SaskPower. 
 
Mr. Minister, I asked you to state very clearly your assurance that that 
report will be made public immediately upon its completion.  And if you do 
not concur with that, Mr. Minister, then the minister responsible for 
SaskPower, who is seated right beside you, I ask then that the minister 
responsible for SaskPower do what Mr. Morin has stated he is authorized to 
do, and that he make sure that that occupational health and safety report 
is made public. 
 
Mr. Minister of Labour, or minister of SaskPower, together, will you ensure 
that that occupational health and safety report will be made public 
immediately upon its completion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Speaker, I've already answered that question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Before we move on, I would just like to make this one 
comment, by and large question period was good, but question period is a 
highly partisan time of the day, and I fully recognize that.  But I think 
that in all fairness both sides by and large, with some exceptions, the 
questions and answers were a little too long.  We had about 25 minutes of 
debate.  I don't think that's really what you want, and I'd just like the 
hon. members to keep that in mind for future question periods. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 



 

 

 
Bill No. 35 -- An Act to amend The Income Tax Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill to amend 
The Income Tax Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next 
sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Resolution No. 8 -- Provincial Debt and Tax Burden 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I put forward this resolution 
today.  I'd like to read it into the record so anyone who would be paying 
attention today out in television land would understand what we're talking 
about.  I have put forward the resolution, Mr. Speaker: 
 

 That this Assembly condemns the Government of Saskatchewan for its 
eight-year record of unprecedented waste and fiscal mismanagement, which 
has caused an alarming provincial deficit and continuous tax increases on 
the people of Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that is the motion that we're dealing with here today.  And I 
took some time a short while ago to in fact look at some of the financial 
information on the government.  We've all heard many times about the 
GigaTexts and the Supercarts and the STC (Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company) bus scandal, and the all the many things that have come to the 
public eye that have been viewed as waste and mismanagement and certainly 
even some of them bordering on corruption.  And one of the members even 
mentions gravel pits, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This government knows no limit to the waste and mismanagement to what level 
they'll go from the very bottom stone of a gravel pit to the very highest 
level of their government.  There is a cloak of concern over the government 
because of their waste and mismanagement and blatant disregard for 
taxpayers' rights and for taxpayers' dollars in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would want to first look at some of the myths that the government would 
wish to put out but they can't do that only in their rhetorical speeches 
that they give in their constituencies and here in this legislature.  I 
would want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that the government puts out a 
publication every year called the Saskatchewan Economic and Financial 
Position.  This current one that I'm holding, Mr. Speaker, is the November 
1989 issue.  And I would say that this has been a requirement of the 
government by law, by statute, to put out the economic and financial 
position of the government for a good number of years now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now one of the things that the government will always say is that there's 
been a drop in revenue, that there's a world crisis upon us, that we've had 



 

 

global war declared on poor little Saskatchewan. 
 
The words of the government in their throne speech on March 19 indicated 
that the rest of the world had declared economic war in Saskatchewan, 
therefore leading people to believe that there's been a reduction in 
revenue to the province of Saskatchewan during the term that they've held 
office, Mr. Speaker.  And this is not true. 
 
I looked at this document that I referred to and it's a document that's put 
out by the government, Mr. Speaker, and I've looked back to 1978 up to the 
year 1989 and the 1989 figures are estimates, Mr. Speaker.  But I would 
point out that the total combined budgetary revenue for the province of 
Saskatchewan in 1978 was $1.6 billion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would then go to the year 1982, Mr. Speaker, where this particular 
government that's in power today formed office.  The total combined 
budgetary revenue in 1982, Mr. Speaker, was $2.7 billion.  So in a period 
of four years we had increased budgetary revenue of about 1 or maybe $.9 
billion -- $900 million increase in revenue. 
 
So now keeping that figure in mind, Mr. Speaker, in 1982 when this 
government took office, $2.7 billion in revenue.  In 1989, Mr. Speaker, 
it's estimated that the government will have revenues of $3.7 billion.  So, 
Mr. Speaker, I point out to you that it's a total myth that revenue has 
decreased dramatically for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I just want to run through some of them quickly, during some of the years 
that this government's been in office.  In 1985, 2.9 billion revenue; 1986, 
3 billion in revenue; 1987, 2.8 billion in revenue; 1988, $3.3 billion in 
revenue, Mr. Speaker.  So I suppose the government can't stand on the fact 
that revenues have been decreasing because the facts show that revenues are 
not decreasing for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So I'm sure anybody that'd be watching would say, well why are we in the 
debt position that we are in, in the province of Saskatchewan?  And 
everybody knows we're in a bad debt situation, Mr. Speaker, because just on 
the operating account of the government, the operating account that runs 
the government departments and agencies not counting Crown corporations, we 
pay interest annually in the current fiscal year, of $493 million just in 
interest on the debt that wasn't there when this government came to office 
in 1982, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I guess what we'd have to look at next, Mr. Speaker, are the 
expenditures of the government.  The expenditures of the government -- as I 
said, I went back as far as 1978, and in 1978 the total combined 
expenditures of government were $1.5 billion, Mr. Speaker, $1.5 billion.  
In 1982 when this government came to office, the last year of Allan 
Blakeney's administration, total combined expenditures were $2.5 billion, 
an increase of that four-year period of about $1 billion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, then let's start looking at some of the Conservative years, 
'85 to '89.  These are the expenditures of the government, Mr. Speaker, the 
Tory government in Saskatchewan: 1985, $3.3 billion in expenditures; 1986, 



 

 

$3.6 billion in expenditures; 1987, $4 billion in expenditures; 1988, $3.8 
billion in expenditures; 1989, again $4 billion in expenditures, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And where is that old myth that they try and perpetuate that the NDP is big 
government, big spenders, want to spend more taxpayers' dollars, increase 
taxes.  Well the record doesn't show that, Mr. Speaker.  The record shows 
that through waste and mismanagement this is the biggest tax-collecting, 
biggest revenue-expending government in the history of the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Speaker, they have driven us into debt so far that 
future generations will be paying the debt created in eight lean years of 
Saskatchewan Tory administration, Mr. Speaker.  We need to know, Mr. 
Speaker, that we have the highest per capita debt of any province in 
Canada, Mr. Speaker.  And we know that debt is deferred tax, Mr. Speaker, 
because at some point some  
 Dfuture generation is going to have to pay the horrendous debt that is 
owed by the province of Saskatchewan to the bond dealers in New York and 
Zu pürich and Japan and other places outside of Saskatchewan, other places 
outside of Canada. 
 
We have debt around the world, Mr. Speaker, created by an incompetent Tory 
management, and that will not be corrected, Mr. Speaker, until they muster 
up the courage to call an election so that people in Saskatchewan can have 
new confidence in a new administration under New Democrats in the province 
of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Speaker, one of my colleagues points out that they 
inherited, the Conservatives when they came into office inherited the 
lowest per capita debt, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you can look at debt in two different areas in the province of 
Saskatchewan: that debt which is held by Crown corporations, and that debt 
that is in the operating account, as I call it, of the government.  When 
the Conservatives came to office in 1982, Mr. Speaker, there was no debt in 
the operating account.  There was a small debt that was self-liquidating in 
the Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker, and that debt has continued to 
increase both on the operating account, which of course increased -- there 
was no debt there; there was actually a surplus -- and it has increased to 
record amounts with the Crown corporations as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'd like to look at some of the debt situation in the province 
of Saskatchewan.  The thing that's been happening is that we've been losing 
our equity, Mr. Speaker.  If you look at the equity in the province of 
Saskatchewan, again by the government's own figures, by 1989 we had a net 
equity situation of $2.9 billion, Mr. Speaker, -- $2.9 billion. 
 
(1445) 



 

 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, no one can remember in recent history of the past two 
administrations in Saskatchewan, going back to the late 60s or early '70s 
of the province of Saskatchewan, having a negative equity position.  We 
have always had an equity position in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, which means in terms of people in the province of Saskatchewan 
that we had something of value.  The taxes were reasonable, expenditures 
were in line with the revenues collected, and people could afford to pay 
the taxes that were levied upon them. 
 
The time of an NDP government in Saskatchewan or Allan Blakeney, Mr. 
Speaker, were prosperous times in the province of Saskatchewan not all 
totally due, but mainly due, Mr. Speaker, to sound fiscal responsible 
management by a government that cared and a government that understood how 
a government has to operate, Mr. Speaker.  Not someone running wild like 
these people do with other people's money, spending it like there was no 
tomorrow, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, the debt in the province of 
Saskatchewan has increased very, very substantially and I want to again 
refer to the government's own document that they put out in November 1989, 
required by law in the province to state the government's position, their 
financial and economic position. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the gross debt in 1989 in the province of Saskatchewan is 
estimated to be $10.7 billion, Mr. Speaker.  This is a debt that includes 
the Crown corporations and the operating account of the provincial 
government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that $10.77 billion is an amount of money that would make most 
people fearful.  I know anybody in the business community that I know would 
be very fearful of carrying a debt like that when you have a $10.77 billion 
debt and a negative equity position. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if there was a banker in the normal private sector or an 
auditor in the private sector that looked at the books of the province of 
Saskatchewan, they'd put you into receivership, Mr. Speaker, because it 
would be bankrupt.  The only reason that doesn't happen is that governments 
are different to the extent that the government can raise more revenue and 
they have the control over resources in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
When I talk about this debt, Mr. Speaker, the gross debt, I want to go back 
to some of the years where the total debt in the province of Saskatchewan 
was under other administrations.  Mr. Speaker, the total debt going back, 
look at 1978, the total combined liabilities and province's debt was $1.6 
billion in long-term debt and 77 million in treasury bills. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the gross debt in 1978 was $1.7 billion.  By 1989 this 
government, these sound, fiscally unresponsible, incompetent managers, Mr. 
Speaker, have brought that $1.7 billion debt to a $10.7 billion debt in the 
province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, that's a position that 
should be shame brought upon this government by the way they've handled the 
affairs of the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I don't want to dwell on those figures too much longer.  I think that 



 

 

I've made my point fairly well using the government's own figures, not 
something that was drawn up by NDP research or by the New Democratic 
Party's provincial office. These are figures, Mr. Speaker, from the 
Government of Saskatchewan under a Tory administration. 
 
If you examine the record, Mr. Speaker, there is no relevance from the 
record of this government that's in print by law, if you compare it to what 
the members opposite say in this legislature and say to people out in the 
province of Saskatchewan in their constituencies.  Mr. Speaker, we are in a 
very dismal economic position in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now what happens by this, Mr. Speaker?  The first thing that happens is 
that we have a large portion of our debt gobbled up . . . or our budget, 
pardon me, gobbled up by interest on the debt.  I mentioned earlier $493 
million this year just in interest on the debt, with no plan to repay it.  
So that's the first thing that happens.  It takes money out of our province 
to pay debt that should be going into programs for hungry children, for 
hospitals, for education, for programs that diversify and develop the 
province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  That's the first thing that 
happens. 
 
The second thing that happens, Mr. Speaker, is it hurts us in the eyes of 
those beyond the province of Saskatchewan.  For example, there are two bond 
rating agencies that are paid particular attention to, Mr. Speaker.  
There's the Dominion Bond Rating Service and there's Moody's bond rating 
service.  Now Moody's say that they have dropped Saskatchewan's credit 
rating eight times since 1985 -- eight times since 1985, Mr. Speaker -- 
four times by Moody's themselves, twice by Standard and Poor's, which is 
another credit rating agency, and twice by Canadian Bond Rating Agency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Moody's is very interesting.  In 1981, Saskatchewan was above 
Quebec, Manitoba, Nova Scotia, and New Brunswick.  Today, after Moody's 
have lowered our credit rating four separate times since the Devine 
administration took office, we are behind Manitoba, New Brunswick, Quebec, 
and we're tied with Nova Scotia.  We are very rapidly falling into paupers 
in the eyes of the economic community beyond our borders, Mr. Speaker.  And 
the bond agencies show this; the credit rating agencies show this by 
lowering the credit rating of the province. 
 
Now it was pointed out in question period today that it cost us, this last 
credit rating drop, something in the area of about $38 million, Mr. 
Speaker, in increased interest rates because the province of Saskatchewan 
is a poorer risk than it has been previous to the drops in the ratings, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government's falling credit rate can be tied to a large 
extent to its privatization policy.  Privatization of course began in a big 
way in 1985 with Saskoil.  The first credit rating drop was in 1985 by 
Moody's.  There have been eight drops since 1985, taking the three agencies 
in total.  Those three agencies would be Moody's, Standard and Poor's, and 
the Canadian Bond Rating Service Ltd. 
 
Now for each of the fiscal years 1981, 1982, through '90-91, the total debt 



 

 

of the province and the cumulative debt has caused us a large part of this 
problem in addition to privatization.  And what some of the rating agencies 
are worried about, Mr. Speaker, is that Saskatchewan continually does not 
have the resources to repay the debt.  They've sold off many of the 
revenue-generating Crowns that we had, Mr. Speaker.  We have no money in 
from those.  It's increased our debt by getting rid of our assets.  And, 
Mr. Speaker, the bond agencies know this. 
 
I'd look to the most recent Dominion Bond Rating Service report on the 
province of Saskatchewan, for the rating here now has been moved from R-1 
middle to R-1 low -- a very poor credit rating for the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, when you consider the excellent credit ratings 
that the province of Saskatchewan had during the 1970s and the early 1980s. 
 
I'd just like to quote from part of this, Mr. Speaker.  The summary says 
that: 
 

 The rating on all short term debt issued by the Province is being reduced 
to R-1 (low) from R-1 (middle).  This reduction reflects the following: 
(1) Cumulative deficits have resulted in a substantial rise in the 
proportion of non-sustainable debt in relation to (the gross domestic 
product) . . . This figure has risen from near zero in the mid 1980's to 
over 30% today, or near 40% if unfunded pension liabilities are included.  
Also, the weighted average maturity of Saskatchewan's gross debt is short 
(now, Mr. Speaker), with 1/3 scheduled to mature within 1 year. 

 
Mr. Speaker, where does that leave the province of Saskatchewan?  What that 
means, that first point as to why they lowered our credit rating, Mr. 
Speaker, is because within one year, if one-third of our debt is scheduled 
to be renewed, we have to go out and . . . rates, interest rates, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We are going to lose millions of dollars more, Mr. Speaker, because of the 
increased interest rates we'll have to pay because of this government, 
their incompetence in allowing our credit rating to drop to such a low 
level. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, and I quote from the article again: 
 

 Future revenue sources from the federal government, which have helped in 
the past, are less certain, given the high deficits which the federal 
government has.  Also, we question the long term ability of Crown 
Corporations to continue to sustain present dividend levels which are 
helping to reduce the deficit. 

 
Now I'd stop there for a minute, Mr. Speaker, and say that, one, the 
federal government is sick and tired of bailing out this provincial 
government.  They bailed out this provincial government in 1986, whereby 
they got their billion dollar deficiency payment and helped them form a 
government.  So that's the past, Mr. Speaker.  That's the way it was. 
 
And the bond rating agencies do not believe that Mr. Mulroney owes any more 
in patronage to the province of Saskatchewan, and the reason -- the bond 



 

 

agency doesn't say it, but the federal government is saying it -- you only 
sent me back four out of 14 members of parliament so I'm not giving you the 
money that you got in the past.  Mr. Speaker, that's the case.  Their 
politics in this example is lowering our credit rating in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the second point made in this point 2 from the Dominion Bond Rating 
Service is that the Crown corporations' ability to sustain present dividend 
levels, which are helping to reduce the deficit.  Last year, or this year I 
believe, Mr. Speaker, they've taken $200 million from Crown Investment 
Corporation, the banker of Crown corporations, to go towards reduction of 
the debt, or in other words, help balance the budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when they sell off all the revenue-generating Crowns in the 
province of Saskatchewan, that revenue is not going to be there in the 
future, Mr. Speaker, and the bonding agencies know that.  And therefore 
they are helping through their privatization moves -- which the people of 
Saskatchewan have loudly said they don't want -- they are helping to sell 
off our Crown corporations, our revenue generators, at our detriment, 
because we get no money from them initially and we in fact have our credit 
rating lowered by the rating services and therefore pay more interest rate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don't want to go on too much longer.  I have a bit of a cold 
and I find myself losing my voice, but I do want to say, Mr. Speaker, that 
it is not the world conditions that have affected the province of 
Saskatchewan to any large extent.  Of course there are world pressures 
around the globe that cause hardship on particular areas from time to time, 
but it is not world conditions, it's not Canadian conditions, to a large 
extent it's not even Saskatchewan conditions, Mr. Speaker, that have caused 
us to have a debt situation like we have in Saskatchewan. 
 
I put forward the motion because the main reason we're in the economic mess 
we're in in the province of Saskatchewan is the waste and mismanagement of 
this government that we have in Saskatchewan today, Mr. Speaker.  We see 
their waste and mismanagement in the GigaText -- over $5 million.  We see 
the waste and mismanagement in the Supercarts that end up in court.  We see 
their total incompetence in dealing with the STC bus scandal, Mr. Speaker.  
We see their incompetence when they pay a head of a potash corporation over 
$700,000 a year as a salary, Mr. Speaker, when they don't even put up any 
more than that to feed hungry people in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Speaker, it's items like that, that there is a long list, many, many 
items that can be pointed to that are waste and mismanagement by this 
government.  They have made the economic mismanagement something in 
Saskatchewan that we have not experienced before.  We have a debt-ridden 
province with long-term implications that have to be cleared up. 
 
And that will be cleared up, Mr. Speaker, on the day that New Democrats 
come into office under the Leader of the Opposition and he is premier.  
With his experience and the enthusiastic members of our caucus, Mr. 
Speaker, we look forward to working with people in the province of 



 

 

Saskatchewan to get the waste and mismanagement out of control and out of 
government so that Saskatchewan people can have the service and the 
government programs that they deserve by a competent and a caring and a 
compassionate government in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with that I would move, seconded by the hon. member from 
Prince Albert-Duck Lake: 
 

 That this Assembly condemns the Government of Saskatchewan for its 
eight-year record of unprecedented waste and fiscal mismanagement which 
has caused an alarming provincial deficit and continuous tax increases on 
the Saskatchewan people. 

 
I so move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to 
enter this debate today on this motion, and I'm pleased to second the 
motion as well. 
 
And I want to read again part of the motion that's put forward by the 
member from The Battlefords, and the intent of this motion of course is to 
indicate to the people of Saskatchewan that this province is in some very 
difficult economic circumstances, and basically it's been precipitated by 
waste and financial mismanagement of this PC government since 1982. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, my colleague from The Battlefords outlined very 
articulately what the result of the economic waste and mismanagement has 
been.  He indicated to this House that we have an unprecedented deficit, 
that we're in a negative equity position, and that we have a massive and 
almost seemingly unmanageable provincial debt somewhere in excess of $13 
billion. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when you analyse the financial statements put forward by 
this government on an annual basis, you can but wonder what they're 
thinking about during the rest of the year, knowing full well that every 
year the problem deepens and becomes worse and worse. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, do we see any changes with respect to how they're 
governing?  Since 1982 I have watched closely, as have the residents of 
Saskatchewan, the way this government is delivering government.  And I've 
sat in this House since 1986, and I see that year by year there are no 
changes.  The direction is constant, and I say to you, Mr. Speaker, and to 
members on that House, on that side of the House, that it's unfortunate 
that these problems persist and continue because clearly the direction of 
this government hasn't changed and I believe will not change.  The only 
thing that will change the direction of government in this province is the 
defeat of this PC government and putting a new government in place whenever 
that election might be called. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the agenda of this government hasn't changed.  It was 
privatization in 1982, and it's privatization in 1990.  The problems were 



 

 

caused by privatization, have been precipitated, and as a matter of fact I 
would say magnified, Mr. Speaker, by the waste and the corruption and the 
incompetence of this PC government.  You can look at every economic 
indicator from housing starts to out-migration to bankruptcies, and the 
record is clear.  There's consistency in those problems, Mr. Speaker.  And 
as I said before, and I'll say again, it's unfortunate that there's 
consistency in the way the government has delivered government to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Last year the number of farm bankruptcies in this province continued to be 
staggering.  The number of total bankruptcies in Saskatchewan continue to 
be of the highest in Canada.  The out-migration of our young people from 
this province continues to be a disgrace.  Housing starts, as I mentioned 
before, continued to stagnate and job creation is in an unparalleled low in 
this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we look at the fact that there were 5,000 fewer people 
employed in '89 than in 1988, it must send a signal to the Premier and to 
the Deputy Premier and the rest of his cabinet, that what they're doing is 
wrong and that there is something amiss.  It must tell them something when 
they see that retail sales have declined and stagnated in Saskatchewan.  
But, Mr. Speaker, what does this government continue to do? 
 
It continues on its course, fulfilling its own political agenda, a course 
of privatization and mismanagement and corruption.  And I want to say, Mr. 
Speaker . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, on a point of order.  I've been listening 
very carefully to the member opposite during the debate, and on a number of 
occasions now has accused me, as a member of this government, of being 
corrupt.  And I suggest to you, as the member of Saskatoon South has just 
substantiated, that this is unparliamentary language, it is not in keeping 
with decorum of this House, and I would ask you, sir, to rule on that.  And 
I would request also that an apology would be in order for that type of 
language. 
 
And I refer you, Mr. Speaker, I refer you to Beauchesne's page 142, rule 
484(3).  Which reads: 
 

 In the House of Commons a Member will not be permitted by the Speaker to 
indulge in any reflections on the House itself as a political institution; 
or to impute to any Member or Members unworthy motives for their actions 
in a particular case. 

 
I submit to you, Mr. Speaker, that that is exactly what the member has been 
doing.  And I request a ruling in favour of my argument. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Mr. Speaker, on a point of order.  I was listening 
very attentively to the remarks of the member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake.  
I did not hear him reflect on the House or members of the House as such.  I 
did hear adjectives pertaining to the government as such, and I think 
that's fair in debate, and therefore the point of order should not be well 
taken. 



 

 

 
The Speaker: -- I listened to the hon. member's point of order, and the 
member's response.  In order to make a definitive ruling, I would quite 
frankly have to have a look at the Hansard verbatim. 
 
However, in this instance I don't think that should be necessary, but let 
me just make this statement.  Unparliamentary language, of course, is 
something we seek to avoid.  I think that, as members, we should seek to 
avoid language which may impute motives to other members which they do not 
deserve. 
 
As I said before, I'd have to look at the verbatim to see if the hon. 
member's point of order is, in fact, in order.  However, I don't think in 
this case it's necessary.  I simply ask hon. members to try to obey that 
rule, and the debate can continue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to continue with my 
remarks. 
 
I was talking and referring to, of course, prior to being interrupted by 
the member from Rosthern, the kind . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I believe that that issue is over with.  The 
member from Rosthern had the right to interrupt on a point of order, and I 
now ask you to simply continue with your remarks and close the issue. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, as I was saying that this government has a 
record unparalleled anywhere in Canada with respect to the way it's been 
handling itself, and I will continue with my remarks with respect to the 
type of government that this Premier and his cabinet and those 
back-benchers have been part of. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker . . . I didn't want to do this but I think I 
will.  And I'm going to put us in the context of how the people of 
Saskatchewan could ask their government to save them some money, how they 
could keep their tax base down, how they could keep their local municipal 
taxes down, how the income tax could be kept down.  And I'd like the member 
from Rosthern to listen very closely as I refer to some of these. 
 
I want to talk about the 1987-88 expenses of $17,423 run up by the 
Premier's office in the Hotel Saskatchewan for a one-year period.  And I'd 
like to talk about the $19,000 in expenses run up by the Premier's office 
in Regina's Ramada Renaissance hotel for one year in 1987-88.  And I'd like 
to talk and I'd like the member from Rosthern to be aware of the $45,000 
paid the former MP Stan Korchinski to advise the Devine government on how 
to lobby the Mulroney government. 
 
Mr. Minister, you can fool yourself, but you don't fool the people of this 
province.  They see through you very clearly in spite of how much this may 
hurt you to hear this. 
 



 

 

And I'm going to continue on, Mr. Speaker, talking about how we could keep 
the taxes down.  They spent $46,000 for rent in the Premier's office in 
Prince Albert, $86,000 to renovate that particular property, $146,440 in 
annual salary cost for the four extra cabinet ministers that were put into 
this cabinet in October of 1989.  And you might be fairly well aware of 
that, Mr. Minister, because you're one of them.  And you might want to be 
aware of the $86,295 in additional salary, on top of the 11 legislative 
secretaries, for the three legislative secretaries of Joan Duncan and 
Graham Taylor and Herb Swan.  Mr. Speaker, I want to make this member aware 
and members on that side of the House, that the people of this province 
have had enough of this kind of government.  They're looking for some 
honesty and some fairness. 
 
And I tell you I want them to be aware, Mr. Minister, of the $15,286 that 
this government spent through GigaText to send Guy Montpetit and his 
friend, Miss Sim, on a little trip from Regina to San Francisco and 
Montreal in August 27 and 28, 1988. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could go on here until 5 o'clock, till adjournment, because 
the list is that long.  And I'm telling you, I'm almost tempted to do that.  
Just simply because this minister tends to want to stick his head in the 
sand and not realize why this province has been brought to its knees 
economically.  I want to say, Mr. Minister, the people of this province are 
pretty clear with respect to where this government is. 
 
And I tell you, Mr. Speaker, I'm going to explain to the member from 
Rosthern that the $212,750 that was paid to Supercart from the Department 
of Science and Technology for the development of a plastic shopping cart 
that never was sold and never was produced commercially in this province is 
not acceptable either. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to spend a couple of minutes talking 
about the $3 and a half million that Chuck Childers, the American who came 
in to run the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, is receiving at a time 
when we've got more hungry children in this province than we had in the 
1930s.  Mr. Speaker, I want him to know about that.  And I'd like him to 
know that when Chuck Childers gets $3 and a half million and a five-year 
no-cut contract, how that minister can condone laying off potash workers 
who've served this province well over the years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I want him to explain how he can condone 
paying Paul Schoenhals, a former cabinet minister of that government, 
$100,000 a year as chairman of the board of that potash corporation.  You 
see because, Mr. Speaker, I don't understand any more how he can condone it 
than his constituents can understand it.  And I tell you they're waiting 
for a chance to explain that to him in very clear and concise terms. 
 
(1515) 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: -- And he might want to explain how he condones paying Bob 
Andrew to sit in Minneapolis in the trade office.  And I'd like him to know 
how he condones Graham Taylor sitting in Hong Kong in the trade office over 
there at a salary of $100,000; sitting in some of the most expensive real 
estate property anywhere in the world, overlooking the bay, spending and 
squandering our money.  I would like to know how he condones that.  And I'd 
like to know how he explains tax increases at the same time this is all 
going on. 
 
If the member wants to get up after I'm done my remarks and explain and 
give some answers to this, I'd really appreciate it because I think the 
people of Saskatchewan have a right to know how he can condone that and how 
he feels that this is the way to run government. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to know as well how he can condone paying $22,572 to 
Remai Investments Ltd. for a feasibility study on a hotel and convention 
complex in Regina that the government then goes in and rents six floors of 
in order to make the project viable.  Can he explain that to me?  Because I 
tell you I have a hard time to understand it, the members on this side of 
the House have a difficult time, and I suggest to you that your voters are 
having a difficult time as well. 
 
I say to the member that there are some other examples he might want to be 
aware of if he isn't.  I want to know how he can condone the cost to 
SaskTel for reprinting all of the telephone books in Regina because the 
government made too many errors on the first one.  How he can condone that 
165,000 when at the same time the hungry kids in this province are allowed 
something like $700,000 annually, or 3 cents a day. 
 
And as Minister of Social Services I'd like him to explain to all the 
families that are trying to live on the pittance that he's providing for 
them, trying to feed their kids when their rents are going up because 
revenue-sharing grants are cut to municipalities and they've got to 
increase their local taxes. 
 
I want to know how he can condone those kind of actions, Mr. Speaker, and I 
want to know how he feels about raising taxes, and I still want to know how 
he feels about the mismanagement and the corruption that's been going on 
under this Premier and this cabinet and this government since 1982.  And if 
he can stand in his place and explain that to me, then I'll happily sit 
down.  But I've got no indication that he's willing to do that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this morning in Crown corporations we found out that Dome 
Advertising, the media corporation of record on behalf of this PC 
government, received in 1987 and 1988 and 1989 $4.6 million, Mr. Speaker -- 
$4.6 million.  One agency.  And that wasn't all that SGI (Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance) spent.  That's one agency that received that money 
from one Crown. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can you imagine how much this corporation received from all of 
them.  Just take that perhaps Dome Advertising would be maybe using a 
profit margin of 20 per cent -- in three years, Mr. Speaker, in three years 



 

 

$920,000 that went into the pockets of those business people, those PC 
business people backed by this government, in three short years.  And I 
want to tell you, I want him to stand up and explain how that corporation 
should be allowed to profit to the tune of over $900,000 in three years at 
a time when farmers in his riding are going bankrupt, at a time when small 
businesses in his riding are going bankrupt, and at a time when this 
government can't afford to fix the roads decently in the constituency that 
he purports to represent. 
 
And I want to know, Mr. Speaker, how he can condone one of the school 
boards that writes letters to opposition MLAs because they're frustrated 
with the lack of funding to deliver education to their students.  I want to 
know how he can condone that school board's letters and how he can condone 
their anger at him for not allowing proper funding to go into that school 
system so that they can deliver education to their kids. 
 
And I want him to stand up when I'm done my remarks, Mr. Speaker, and 
explain that to me. Because I'll tell you what, he's one of the only few 
people in this province that can understand it, if he really in his heart 
believes that that's the case. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has embarked upon mega-advertising to serve 
its own political interests.  You have sold off every piece of . . . or 
most every Crown corporation that used to deliver profits that we could put 
back into health care and into education and into highways, and that we 
used to use to balance our budgets. 
 
And we ask you where the money goes, and none of your ministers will or can 
stand up and explain exactly where the money's gone.  And when you start 
answering those kinds of questions, Mr. Minister, we'll stop asking these 
kinds of questions.  And when you take some of the concerns and the 
legitimate concerns of people of Saskatchewan to heart, then you won't be 
debating motions like this. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, your Premier, your cabinet, and your back-benchers won't 
allow a decent form of government in this province.  And when you stand in 
your place and you're hurt and you're feeling bad because people will call 
you for what you are, you've got a real problem.  And I say to you, Mr. 
Speaker, that this government deserves no less than to be defeated at an 
election and not to win one seat in this province.  That's really what they 
deserve. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people have had enough of GigaText and Joytec and 
Supercart International, and they've had enough of their little travelling 
road shows where they go out and try and convince the people of 
Saskatchewan that they're listening to them now, after they've almost 
destroyed the economy of this province. 
 
Do you think the people don't see through that, the premier and his 
cabinet?  Of course they do.  And I say to you, that's the reason you're 
not going to see an election this fall, because this government hasn't got 
the courage to go back for another mandate because they know the people see 
what they're about.  They understand that the people are not going to take 



 

 

increased taxation and lowered services.  And they understand that they're 
not going to put up with the waste and the mismanagement that this 
government has embarked upon since 1982. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Premier and that cabinet and those back-benchers fool no 
one, unless they fool themselves.  And I'm of the opinion that they don't 
even fool themselves any more, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, six of them -- not one, not two, but six of them -- have left 
the ship.  I tell you, Mr. Speaker, that they know that there's holes in 
the bottom of that ship and it's sinking fast and that this PC Premier and 
his ship are going down in the waves.  Six cabinet ministers, Mr. Speaker, 
six of them, either shamed out of office or ashamed of being in office, led 
by that Premier and by that cabinet. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, they're not going to go back and ask the 
residents of their ridings to pay any more taxes to cover up for the 
mismanagement.  They're not going to do it.  Those six don't have to 
because they've left the ship. 
 
But I want to say, what's awfully disappointing is some of the new four 
young ones that came in, some of the back-benchers that were moved out of 
obscurity to go in and try and cover up for the mismanagement of the six 
that have left, I would suggest, should have a little more common sense and 
should be changing the way this government is running, instead of 
continuing on the same path of the old ones. 
 
And to you new ones I say, shame on you.  I say, shame on you.  If you 
aren't listening to your constituents, then I would think you should take 
the summer off and reassess your position as to whether you should be 
staying with this kind of a government, because I want to say to you, I 
think better of a couple of you, not many but a couple of you. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the waste continues, the mismanagement 
continues, the deficit grows.  And I say to you that the people of 
Saskatchewan are fed up with it and they don't need it any more. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to you that there's going to be another day 
in this province, and I say to you that there's going to be a government 
led by people with integrity and with compassion.  The people deserve that, 
and I say to you that the people are going to have it. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan want to respect their political leaders, they 
want to respect their Premier, and they don't want to feel that every press 
release and every statement made by their government is one to deceive 
them.  They want to know when a new government comes to this province that 
it's not going to deny its agenda to privatize, if that would be the 
agenda, and then turn around the next day and privatize.  What they're 
looking for is some hope, Mr. Speaker.  What they're looking for is some 
compassion, and they're looking for fairness. 
 
And I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, that that's what they're going to 
get under a government led by the member from Riversdale and the newly 



 

 

elected members that are going to replace those on that side that no longer 
deserve to govern. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm waiting anxiously for the minister from Rosthern to come 
in and rebut my remarks.  I would seriously like to hear what he has to say 
with respect to the items, the few items that I've listed.  And I want to 
tell him if he wants confirmation of what I've said, there are places you 
can look.  You can look at internal documents from property management 
corporation or Public Accounts.  You can look in the Legislative Secretary 
salary scale.  That's there. 
 
You can look at court documents that have been brought before the people of 
not only Saskatchewan, but of Canada because they're there.  And it's all 
confirmed.  And I challenge him to rebut one of the number of items that 
I've listed. 
 
And I asked him, and I ask him one more time, to come into this House and 
explain how in light of these things that I've tabled in this House, that 
I've brought before this House, will he have the courage in this fall to go 
back and  Dask his people to yet accept more tax increases which this 
government is going to deliver, or whether they will accept more 
mismanagement and incompetence.  I say to you, Mr. Speaker, he doesn't have 
the courage, and you won't see that election this fall because he's going to 
be one of the members in cabinet voting not to have an election. 
 
And I want to say to you as well, Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to second this 
motion.  And I look forward to hearing his remarks. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I hear my one and only fan in the 
opposition cheering me on again, and I thank him for that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I listened to the motion and I listened to the speakers and, 
Mr. Speaker, I think I would like to make some remarks.  A couple of things 
I'd like to point out to the opposition, Mr. Speaker.  They mentioned some 
patronage.  Mr. Speaker, I have a 30-page document here.  It lists 
patronage, and this is just a part of it.  I understand I haven't got time 
to do the whole thing, Mr. Speaker, but I think that at a future date I will 
read this into the record. 
 
Mr. Speaker, after my remarks, Mr. Speaker, I will be making an amendment to 
the motion and the amendment will read: 
 

 That all the words after the word "Assembly" will be deleted and the 
following substituted therefore: 

 
 Commends the Government for its concentrated effort at managing the 

financial resources of the province in a manner consistent with the 
difficult economy as exemplified by (1) the fact that Saskatchewan people 
continue to pay the third lowest taxes and charges to government of any 
province in Canada; (2) the continued dramatic financial commitments to 
agriculture; (3) a $1.5 billion health budget; (4) an education budget 



 

 

approaching $1 billion; (5) the greatest diversification effort in the 
history of Saskatchewan; (6) major reductions in the size of the public 
service; (7) over $300 million worth of internal spending cut-backs; (8) a 
real decline in the salaries of cabinet ministers and legislative 
secretaries (Mr. Speaker, and by the way, let me also . . . I'll finish 
this first); (9) the transformation of foreign debt into Saskatchewan-held 
bonds and equity; (10) the pay-down of the unfounded liabilities left over 
from the previous administration; and (11) the securing of public sector 
pension funds through Investment Saskatchewan; and many other fiscally 
sound and economically wise initiatives. 

 
Mr. Speaker, mentioning the legislative secretaries, we find the Leader of 
the Opposition in an article in the Yorkton This Week.  He suggested that if 
he was to become premier he would be reducing the deficit by eliminating 
legislative secretaries' salaries in the amount of 60 to $100 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when they talk about mismanagement and hypocrisy, that is the 
most unrealistic figure I've heard for a long time.  I have . . . 
 
(1530) 
 
An Hon. Member: -- You've got it upside down. 
 
Mr. Britton: -- Yes, that's right.  He's got it upside down.  Not only do I 
have a fan, I have a prompter.  Yes, right -- 60 to $100 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, otherwise I would be pleased to address this, but when I listen 
to the members opposite, one of the things they were talking about also was 
cabinet ministers. Well, Mr. Speaker, let's look. In 1980 . . . well, we'll 
back-up. In 1979, there was 19; 1980 there was 20; 1981, 19; in 198 . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . that's right. What have we got now -- 18. 
That's right.  So, Mr. Speaker, they're totally dishonest when they try to 
throw numbers at us.  When you look at their own record, it's worse, much 
worse, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it's a truth, it's a truth, Mr. Speaker, that this province in 
recent years has experienced economic conditions that have produced little 
positive news, and we accept that.  Mostly negative; we know that.  And it's 
true, Mr. Speaker, that the province of Saskatchewan has experienced a 
decade of challenges that have been unmatched since the 1930s.  Unmatched, 
Mr. Speaker.  But it is also true that because of the sound management of 
this government, the province has done better on average than any other 
province and it has survived the decade, Mr. Speaker.  It has built into and 
grown in the critical areas necessary to protect future generations, Mr. 
Speaker, future generations. 
 
Now part of the problem with the NDP's motion today is the lack of veracity, 
Mr. Speaker, and its bold attempt to perpetuate falsehoods. That's why I 
have to speak, Mr. Speaker. 
 
For example, Mr. Speaker, the motion of the members opposite and many of 
their public misrepresentations refer to tax increases.  Well let's see 
first, what the tax situation is today, and secondly, what was the tax 



 

 

situation under the NDP?  We want to get a fair comparison.  Okay? 
 
Today a middle income family in Saskatchewan pays in taxes and charges to 
the province an average of $5,038.  And that's the third lowest in the 
country, Mr. Speaker, third lowest in the country.  This little Saskatchewan 
-- well not number one -- is number three in terms of tax performance for 
middle income families.  Number three. 
 
Compare that to the provinces which are experiencing excellent economic 
conditions.  Compare that.  We're under tough economic conditions and they 
are in good economic conditions.  In Ontario, that same family, a family 
with two children earning $40,000, that family would pay $5,842 -- in 
wealthy Ontario. 
 
In other words, Mr. Speaker, in Ontario a middle income family would pay 
almost $1,000 more than a comparable family in the province of Saskatchewan.  
And they have a boom, and we're in a deep economic depression. 
 
Now the opposition says that's not fair.  They say it's not fair because in 
calculating the comparative positions of the two families, I include the 
medicare charges that Ontario government puts on its people.  But, Mr. 
Speaker, they can't have it both ways.  And I ask the members of the media 
when they are reporting this, when they report these claims that they be as 
rigorous with the opposition as they are with me, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The fact that the medicare premiums other provinces charge their citizens is 
a form of taxation, Mr. Speaker.  That's how they pay for their hospital 
services.  We don't charge so our people don't pay.  In this province the 
government eliminated extra billing and pays for all the medical services 
through general revenues.  Therefore for the comparison to be accurate, 
those extra taxes or charges, as they are called, must be included.  And 
when they are included, the Saskatchewan taxpayer comes out ahead in every 
case -- every case, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you take a case of a single parent earning $25,000 a year, 
you will find that that single-parent family is better off in Saskatchewan 
than almost anywhere else in Canada.  He or she would pay an average of 
$3,500 a year.  In Ontario it would be $4,700; in B.C, $4,600; in the 
Maritimes, between 5,700 and $7,000, Mr. Speaker.  But in Saskatchewan that 
same parent, $3,500, Mr. Speaker.  And that's in a province that has faced 
great economic challenges, Mr. Speaker.  That is a highly favourable record 
and I am proud and honoured to be part of that government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I must address the pure hypocrisy of the Leader of the 
Opposition and his tax-happy caucus.  The NDP has two great charges that 
they make against this government, and they make it time after time.  The 
first is they claim that the gas tax is unfair and unjust. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, when this government eliminated the gas tax, what was the 
position of the NDP?  Great acrimony and bitterness filled the land, Mr. 
Speaker.  The NDP claimed that we got rid of the tax to do favours for our 
friends in the trucking industry, and that the tax should stay put in order 
to make the user of the highways pay for the maintenance of the highways.  



 

 

And so it went on and on for quite a while. 
 
Then in 1984, the NDP at their provincial convention passed the following 
resolution: "There should be a fair and reasonable tax on the consumption of 
gasoline."  That was at their 1984 convention.  Indeed, Mr. Speaker, the 
future former member of Saskatoon Centre held a news conference with her new 
opponent, the member from Saskatoon Fairview and the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana all held news conferences, and I quote from the Star-Phoenix, January 
2, 1985.  Mr. Speaker, I am quoting, so I will use the names: 
 

 Concerning the gasoline tax, Saskatoon candidates Anne Smart, Pat 
Atkinson, and Bob Mitchell, promised the NDP will reinstate the tax. 

 
Yes, and I'm quoting, Mr. Speaker.  They promised, Mr. Speaker, to reinstate 
the tax. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Who said that, John? 
 
Mr. Britton: -- One of the members asked me to repeat who said that.  Mr. 
Speaker, I was asked to repeat that.  Well, Mr. Speaker, it was candidate 
Anne Smart, Pat Atkinson, and Bob Mitchell. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Will you table that at the Table? 
 
Mr. Britton: -- Yes, certainly.  And that was out of the Star-Phoenix, 
January 2, 1985.  No problem. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that's what they said.  This government, Mr. Speaker, we 
modified the tax so that the heavy users in business and industry would pay 
their fair share.  And that was done through the personal rebate program. 
 
And what was the NDP position, Mr. Speaker?  Mr. Speaker, they said it was a 
waste of time.  Mr. Speaker, they said it was unfair because some people 
never claimed.  It was no good because the winter is long and the politics 
hard.  Well, they didn't like it. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, my point is this: the NDP opposed the elimination of the 
gas tax.  They opposed the tax on commercial users and the rebate for 
individuals.  And now they oppose the elimination of the rebate. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the hypocrisy is so obvious that . . . I say to the 
members opposite, if your position now is that the gas tax should be 
eliminated, stand in the House and say so.  Say it in clear terms.  And I 
pose this question on the public record, and let the media watch for an 
answer -- yes or no.  The member from Riversdale -- yes or no?  Will you 
eliminate the gas tax?  That's all we're asking.   That's right.  Yes or no. 
 
Now the second and more important question, Mr. Speaker.  With his position 
so muddled on the gas tax, will the member from Riversdale or one of his 
MLAs promise on the public record, that they will not increase the gas tax? 
 
Now I tell you, Mr. Speaker, and I would ask the media to watch very 
carefully.  Let's watch for the answer.  And I have given the opposition an 



 

 

opportunity to deny their plan to increase the gas tax and they will not 
take that opportunity. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the second great charge the NDP make against this 
government is the so-called unfairness of the flat tax.  Well the flat tax 
is a surcharge on high incomes and provides a balance and protection for low 
income families.  And the opposition NDP oppose that. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there are two documents which show the NDP also have two 
positions on the issue.  They have Stop the GST (goods and services tax) 
ballots that were being distributed by NDP members.  On the reverse side, 
the NDP alternative tax plans -- that's one document.  The second document 
is on Simon de Jong's recent Householder that reinstates that plan of the 
NDP.  What is the plan?  The first part of it is -- surprise, surprise -- a 
flat tax.  A flat tax, Mr. Speaker.  Okay.  That's the first part. 
 
And to whom will the NDP flat tax apply?  To all high income earners?  No, 
no, Mr. Speaker.  The NDP flat tax is targeted at incorporated farmers and 
small-business owners, and the minimum flat tax the NDP propose is 20 per 
cent -- 20 per cent, Mr. Speaker.  This is on the poor people.  This shows 
the terrible misunderstanding they have of small business and farmers.  
Because these people incorporate, Mr. Speaker, the NDP automatically define 
them as the rich -- the bad rich.  If they want to say anything bad about 
people, they call them rich. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Incorporated means rich. 
 
Mr. Britton: -- Yes, big, bad, rich people.  And they want to impose a 
special tax on these. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I'll tell you this.  Most of the small-business people 
and most of the farmers are not rich, Mr. Speaker.  They are working, Mr. 
Speaker, probably harder than most.  They work very long hours, and in many 
cases, Mr. Speaker, are earning less than our own government employees. 
 
Certainly on average, Mr. Speaker, the average small-business owner earns 
less than the average union member.  Now would the NDP propose a special 
minimum flat tax on union members?  You bet not.  But here they have this 
plan, the solution to the deficit, tax small business and farmers.  That is 
the second part of the tax program, Mr. Speaker.  Yes, eliminate the whole 
thing in four years. 
 
Both of these documents -- and I am sure the member for Riversdale, or the 
member from Saskatoon University might display more courage than the member 
from Riversdale and tell the House their open position on this. 
 
The second part is the inheritance tax, the flip side, if you will.  It's 
there, Mr. Speaker.  It's in black and white -- or actually red and white, 
Mr. Speaker.  They proposed this tax, the inheritance tax, Mr. Speaker -- 
this is on working people, small-business people, and farmers that put their 
money away some place in a bank or in some securities for retirement.  
They're going to tax that. 
 



 

 

You know, I find it really amazing that the NDP claims to recognize that one 
of our challenges in this province is to find ways to transfer the farm land 
from one generation to the next, and yet they propose to put a major block 
in the way of . . . by imposing the death tax, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So far the NDP solution is to raise the gas tax, impose a 20 per cent extra 
tax on small business and farmers, and impose a death tax on their 
inheritances, Mr. Speaker.  Sounds like a plan that comes from the 1930s, 
Mr. Speaker -- very typical of our friends across the way. 
 
Now I've been accused of being the Finance minister.  Well, Mr. Speaker, 
let's just take a look.  Yes, let's take a look.  I done a little . . . a 
few things with figures.  We come up with $2 billion . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- No, you've got to come up with $80 billion . . . 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Britton: -- Yes, right.  Two billion dollars that they're going to find 
in four or five years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the funny part of it is, we get answers from over there, but 
nobody challenges the numbers.  Challenge the numbers.  Challenge the 
numbers.  Challenge the numbers, my friend. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I find it amazing.  The NDP claims to recognize that 
one of our challenges in this province is to find ways to transfer land.  
And here's what they do.  From generation to generation, they're going to 
have a death tax, Mr. Speaker.  Sounds like a plan.  Yes. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, let us look deeper.  Specifically the member from 
Riversdale and the kind of fiscal management he would present to the people 
of Saskatchewan.  Yes.  Let's take a look at his.  Let's take a look at his.  
First I remind the House that it was this government, the PC government, 
that did away with the poor tax.  This government on this side.  We took it 
off. 
 
Those taxes made a single mother pay a percentage tax on clothes for her 
baby that was exactly the same, the same tax, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that a 
millionaire paid on a mink coat.  Same level.  Same percentage.  That was 
the NDP's poor tax.  It required a tax to be paid on children's shoes -- 
children's shoes, Mr. Speaker.  The NDP's poor taxes that forced the 
unemployed to pay tax on a new shirt to go to have a job interview. 
 
Well this government did away with the poor tax, Mr. Speaker, and we said, 
you will only pay tax on clothing if the clothing has a value of 300 or 
more, and in no case will the children pay tax to clothing and footwear that 
they need, Mr. Speaker.  That was this government.  This government, this PC 
government fixed that NDP injustice, and I'm proud of that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the NDP says no, no.  They oppose the special treatment for children's 
clothing and inexpensive clothing.  Treat them all alike, is the demand of 
the NDP.  That's what they're saying.  And for a party supposedly 



 

 

representing the poor, it utterly amazes me that people across the floor 
would not recognize that children should be treated differently because they 
are different, Mr. Speaker, and that low income budgets should be judged in 
a different light than high income budgets because they too are different, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the NDP will restore their poor taxes, and it will cost Saskatchewan 
people an additional 40 to $50 million, Mr. Speaker, which was not included 
in my budget report for them, so you can add another 40 to $50 million to 
their grandiose schemes. 
 
This government, Mr. Speaker, does not tax a large number of things that 
were taxed under the other jurisdictions.  We do not tax home electricity or 
natural gas.  And I know the NDP member for Saskatoon Riversdale argues that 
either the price for these essential items should be increased, or they 
should be more heavily taxed in order to promote conservation.  Well great 
idea for getting an excuse to tax.  The fact of it is that  
 Din this province, electricity and natural gas are absolutely essential to 
life, and this government will not tax them under the guise of 
environmental protection, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I challenge the NDP, Mr. Speaker, to stand up and clearly state yes or no.  
Would you impose a tax on home heating fuel, electricity?  Yes or no?  Tell 
us.  And of course, Mr. Speaker, we won't get an answer. 
 
This government does not tax personal services or food or reading material 
or drugs or fertilizer or farm machinery or many other things, Mr. Speaker.  
Yet all of these were taxed in other provinces, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we know that the Leader of the Opposition has announced on three 
separate occasions that if he forms government he will be looking at, and I 
quote again, "ways of raising additional revenues through taxes, two 
billion dollars."  It is absolutely necessary that this man . . . you know, 
Mr. Speaker, this pretender to the throne, this person who would like to be 
premier, I think it's absolutely necessary that he tell the people exactly 
which of these things he intends to tax. 
 
He told us he was going to tax the resource companies for 250 million; we 
know that.  But what about these other things?  Is he going to tax those?  
I think it's imperative that he tells us.  Tell the people of Saskatchewan 
where you're going to get this $2 billion.  It's simply not good enough for 
the opposition leader to say, well, gee, guys, I'm the NDP leader; I 
shouldn't have to tell you anything about anything. 
 
That's not good enough.  It's not, Mr. Speaker, the height of 
irresponsibility in a leader to make expensive pronouncements, vague 
threats against people, promise gifts of great worth, and do it all, but to 
steadfastly claim that with these statement goes no responsibility -- no 
responsibility for making these statements. 
 
And again I ask the members, challenge the numbers; don't challenge my 
credibility.  I'm just a retired small-business man; I'm not supposed to be 
a financial expert.  But I got the numbers there.  Nobody challenges them.  



 

 

Not once have they challenged those numbers.  Mr. Speaker, this is the same 
man who is claiming the public has a total right to know every facet of 
every action in regard to every penny touched or even dreamed about in the 
vicinity of a person who has spoken the word government.  They demand that. 
 
But over here we don't get no information from the member from Riversdale 
of what he's going to do.  This man who pretends so strongly in the favour 
of maintaining an informed electorate, this is the same man who says, gee 
guys, I'm the NDP leader; I don't have to tell the people anything about 
anything.  Well it isn't good enough, Mr. Speaker.  It just isn't good 
enough. 
 
He is the man, Mr. Speaker, who promised to eliminate the total provincial 
debt in 15 years at a cost of 1.2 billion a year.  Now he made that 
promise.  Now I think it's only right and fair that he tells us how he's 
going to do it.  Eliminating 60 to a hundred million dollars in legislative 
secretaries' salaries for one year.  And they question my credibility, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
He is the man who promised to eliminate poverty.  Well, Mr. Speaker, 
hundreds of politicians throughout history have declared war on poverty but 
none has been quite so dishonest as to promise to eliminate it in four 
years. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- . . . said that in Yorkton in some of the papers. 
 
Mr. Britton: -- Read the paper.  I'll send you a copy. 
 
Yet the Leader of the Opposition actually said in public that he will 
eliminate poverty in the first four years he's in power.  He's going to 
eliminate that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, right.  Utter, 
totally irresponsible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the record of the opposition, the terrible record I might say, 
speaks for itself, and so, Mr. Speaker, does the record of this government.  
Mr. Speaker, we have had a 600 per cent increase in manufacturing since we 
became government.  We have provided protection against high interest 
rates, and we have provided massive assistance to agriculture of which, Mr. 
Speaker, I think we all can be proud.  Those on the other side, as well as 
us, should not have to apologize for making assistance available to 
farmers.  And I only raise it to point out that we do help farmers. 
 
The largest health care budget in the history of Saskatchewan, in actual 
dollars. Almost a billion for education, more than ever before.  And yes, 
Mr. Speaker, there is a deficit.  And that is one of the things that I will 
defend because of the massive injection of funds into the agricultural 
sector, Mr. Speaker, and is one of the most pressing challenges facing the 
people of our province. 
 
But the NDP have proven through word and through deed that they are utterly 
incapable of addressing that challenge.  And that is why, Mr. Speaker, I 
oppose this motion and rather move: 
 



 

 

 That all the words after the word "Assembly" be deleted and the following 
be substituted therefor: 

 
 commends the government for its concentrated effort at managing the 

financial resources of the province in a manner consistent with a 
difficult economy as exemplified by (1) the fact that Saskatchewan people 
continue to pay the third lowest taxes and charges to government of any 
province in Canada; (2) the continued dramatic financial commitments to 
agriculture; (3) a $1.5 billion health budget; and (4) an education budget 
approaching $1 billion; and (5) the greatest diversification effort in the 
history of Saskatchewan; (6) major reductions in the size of the public 
service; (7) over $300 million worth of internal spending cut-backs; (8) a 
real decline in the salaries of cabinet ministers and legislative 
secretaries; (9) the transformation of foreign debt into Saskatchewan-held 
bonds and equity; (10) the pay-down of unfunded liabilities left over from 
the previous administration; (11) the securing of the public sector 
pension funds through Investment Saskatchewan; and many other fiscally 
sound and  economically wise initiatives. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I so move, seconded by my colleague from Rosetown. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swan: -- Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Chairman, thank you for the opportunity to 
enter this debate.  I'm very pleased to second the amendment proposed by 
the member for Wilkie-Unity. 
 
I listened with interest as the member for The Battlefords and the member 
for Prince Albert were speaking.  And I could hardly believe my ears, Mr. 
Speaker, as I listened to the method that they described things happening 
within the province of Saskatchewan.  And I think that the public needs to 
be well aware of what's happening in this province and the good things that 
are happening here within the boundaries of Saskatchewan. 
 
You know, the member for The Battlefords predicts doom and gloom and all 
the bad things that this government has done.  He never once mentions the 
good things that this government has done, and some of them right in his 
own constituency. 
 
And I think just as two examples, I would raise the Hunters recreational 
vehicle project that was developed right in the Battlefords constituency -- 
a very, very successful business, has provided employment for a number of 
people in the Battlefords.  Those people are providing opportunities for 
employment, for the spin-off benefits that happen because that company has 
employed a lot of people.  It keeps the grocery store, the clothing store, 
the hardware store, and all of the others in place.  It keeps the schools 
operating and it provides a very nice payroll to that city. 
 
As well, we have Gainers bacon plant.  And the opposition to a man has 
opposed the Gainers project in North Battleford.  Again, a very, very good 
project for that community -- one that has provided something like 150 jobs 
in the community.  And 150 jobs is a very meaningful payroll that has 
impact on the community, not just for one year, but year after year as long 



 

 

as the plant is operating.  I believe that projects of that type are very 
important to the ongoing benefit of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I'm not going to deny, Mr. Chairman, that there have been some difficult 
days within the province of Saskatchewan and that, yes, this government has 
faced a very difficult period of tight monetary management throughout our 
term of government.  We came in, in 1982, at a time when the interest rates 
had soared above 20 per cent.  And that interest rate put many of the 
businesses and the farmers in this province in deep financial difficulty.  
We perhaps could have survived the interest rate problem alone if that were 
the only problem that we faced.  But, Mr. Speaker, as we came into 
government in 1982 and we looked at all of the problems that were facing 
this province, we saw a decline in the value of oil, and indeed most of the 
oil industry had shut down just prior to the time that we became 
government. 
 
We saw the price of yellow cake in the uranium industry drop from a value 
of about $63 a kilogram to where today it's down below $15.  When you look 
at just those two items which are major contributors to government funding, 
they have hurt, and they've hurt the province deeply. 
 
(1600) 
 
Then you take a look at the agriculture industry and the pressures on the 
agricultural prices that we have faced throughout the 1980s.  And, Mr. 
Speaker, the problem today I think is worse than it has ever been at any 
time during that whole period. And today we look at a very major 
agricultural industry that is projected to have something like a minus $9 
million figure as realized net farm income.  Now that industry in itself, 
the agriculture industry is carrying about five and a quarter billion 
dollars worth of debt, and if that industry then faces a minus $9 million 
net farm income for 1990, is it any wonder then that the government faces 
difficult times? 
 
This government cannot expect income tax to be paid by farmers who don't 
have income.  Instead we've had to turn the other method of financing the 
farms and put out farm aid to keep our farmers surviving on the 
agricultural land in the province.  And agriculture is still the major 
industry for Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Chairman, there were a lot of things said today that I would like to 
have the opportunity to review.  I'd like to read many of the negatives 
that were put forward by the member for The Battlefords and the member from 
Prince Albert, and to bring back some statements to this House that will 
set the record straight on many of those issues. 
 
I have much more that I would like to say in this debate and, Mr. Chairman, 
for that reason I am going to move that the debate now be adjourned. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I would seek leave of the Assembly to 
move at this time to government orders. 



 

 

 
Leave granted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 9 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Housing Corporation Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that item no. 1, Bill No. 9, An 
Act to amend The Saskatchewan Housing Corporation Act, be now read the 
third time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Health 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 32 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Would the Minister of Health care to introduce his 
officials, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I'm pleased to 
introduce on my right, Dr. Bill MacDonald who's the deputy minister of 
Health; immediately behind Dr. MacDonald is Dr. Roy West, the associate 
deputy minister of Health; behind myself is Kathy Langlois, the executive 
director of finance and administration; and behind my colleague, the 
Associate Minister, behind Mr. Wolfe is Neil Gardner, associate deputy 
minister of Health.  As you will see, we have various other officials of 
the Health Department here who will be ready to assist with questions that 
may come on various branches of the department -- as we all know, a very, 
very large department. 
 
Mr. Chairman, just prior to -- I had a word with the critic just a few 
moments ago -- prior to or before we get into the specific questioning, I 
thought that I would try to set into perspective some of the things that 
we've been trying to do as a mission in this department that these people 
that are here plus all of the many other -- and I can literally say 
thousands of people who work in the Department of Health and in the health 
delivery field across Saskatchewan throughout the year -- the kind of 
mission that we have and that all the people in that area, in this health 
area share. 
 
Our mission in the Department of Health, Mr. Chairman, is working together 
for health and well-being.  It's a mission for health that I know is shared 
by all of our citizens, and it's a mission that can only be accomplished by 
continuing to work together as we prepare for the challenges of the '90s 
and obviously the first time we've considered a budget of this department 
in this new decade. 
 
We have a vision as well, Mr. Chairman, and it's a vision of a healthy 



 

 

population in a healthy society.  It's a vision that guides this government 
in its policy and priority setting, and it's a vision of protection, of 
consultation, and of prevention. 
 
Our focus on protection has led to the development of a comprehensive 
health system dedicated to providing the quality health services all of our 
people need.  Through consultation we now have a province where 
communities, health care providers, and government work together to 
compassionately and efficiently meet the health needs of our people.  And 
by stressing prevention, we're building a healthier population, better 
equipped to take responsibility for their health and their well-being.  
These are the principles we've relied on in the past and they will serve us 
well as a guide in our future. 
 
In the next 10 years, Mr. Chairman, there will be as much change as we have 
seen in the last 100 years.  And how we together respond to the challenges 
of the '90s and beyond will determine our common future.  Saskatchewan has 
changed profoundly in the years since our health system was first designed.  
A health system designed for the '90s and beyond must reflect those changes 
in order to remain caring, effective, and responsive. 
 
As our population ages, the amount of service we devote to the elderly will 
continue to grow.  Seniors account for about 13 per cent of our population 
and use roughly half of all health services, and their use per person of 
some major services has been increasing very, very quickly in recent years.  
The number of people in our province over 85 years of age is expected to 
double in the next 20 years, and almost two-thirds of those 85 and older 
require home care or special 
_care home services. 
 
Mr. Chairman, this trend will create unprecedented demands for flexibility 
and responsiveness in the health system of the future.  One of the most 
fundamental changes this province has seen in the past 30 years is the 
shift in population from rural Saskatchewan to our cities and our towns.  
Since the early 1960s, our cities have grown steadily.  At the same time, 
our rural population has fallen from more than 50 per cent of our total 
population to about one-third, and that trend is continuing, Mr. Chairman. 
 
The forces of change have touched all of us in countless ways.  The average 
family size has decreased significantly and is expected to drop even 
further.  There has been a dramatic increase in the number of single-parent 
families.  And stress and violence in society are taking a higher toll than 
ever with significant impact on our health system.  In addition, Mr. 
Chairman, the '80s brought with them new developments in technology that 
made it possible for us to help more people with health problems than we'd 
ever be able to do before.  Advances in anesthesia and ultrasound and 
neonatal technology, to name just a few, resulted in numerous new services 
and significant new funding demands. 
 
Technological developments in fields such as genetics, immunology, imaging, 
and treatment will pose new challenges in the 1990s.  We'll have to examine 
the ethical issues surrounding the use of these technologies and decide how 
and where they can be used most effectively. 



 

 

 
The last decade also witnessed a substantial growth in the use of health 
services all across our province.  There were more doctors' visits, more 
surgeries performed, more prescription drugs used per person than ever 
before in our history. 
 
Despite all of these changes -- and there are many others that I haven't 
mentioned -- Saskatchewan's health system has seen only minor structural 
changes in the past 30 years.  The province of Saskatchewan has an 
excellent health care system -- we should make no mistake about that -- one 
that we can all justifiably take pride in, and we all do.  But we can't be 
complacent, Mr. Chairman.  We must be prepared to change as our society 
changes.  The health system is dynamic, not rigid, and we cannot afford to 
become entrenched in a single approach to health care.  Demands for change 
must be faced, discussed, and realistically met in a co-operative way. 
 
As we enter the next century, the 21st century that we so often hear about 
here in this House and all throughout the society, we must constantly be on 
the look-out for ways to improve our system, to ensure continuing high 
quality services, to ensure that it remains accessible to all, to ensure 
that it remains relevant to changing illness and health care patterns, to 
position it to take fullest advantage of improvements in diagnostic and 
treatment technologies, and to ensure its continued affordability for 
future generations. 
 
As we prepare for this challenge, we must remember that the quality of our 
health system in the future will be determined by the quality of our 
thinking today and that we cannot escape the responsibility for tomorrow by 
evading it today. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I'd like to take a few moments now to discuss something we 
don't spend enough time talking or thinking about: health.  You'll note 
that I said health and not health care.  Good health is the single most 
important resource an individual or society can possess.  It gives us the 
freedom and the power to achieve personal goals and to build our economy 
and to shape our future.  Poor health on the other hand weakens our human 
potential and power of self-determination.  We sometimes forget that it is 
better health we're working toward, and better health is only assisted by 
better health care. 
 
We often make the mistaken assumption that health care determines the 
health of the population.  But in reality, health is much more complex than 
that, and many factors play a role in determining it.  Other factors 
include our genetic make-up, the diet and life-style of expectant mothers, 
family housing standards and income levels, education levels and knowledge 
of sound health practices, and an awareness of accident prevention and 
safety practices.  We can't limit our vision, our talent, or our resources 
to providing only one necessary requirement for good health: health care. 
 
Our challenge is to determine which factors affecting the health of our 
population can achieve the greatest results with the resources available.  
How should we as a society respond to this challenge?  That's really the 
question.  How should we respond to this challenge? 



 

 

 
Should we spend a larger portion of our provincial budget on health?  Or 
should we increase our spending on housing and education in order to 
prevent many health problems before they start?  It's a difficult balancing 
act not only between health programs, but between all programs in the 
global sense of the wider budget that we deal with in this House.  And it's 
a balancing act that governments at all levels -- federal, provincial, here 
and other provinces and municipal governments -- are all struggling with 
today. 
 
We don't have unlimited resources; that's obvious to us all.  So some 
difficult choices will have to be made.  In the ongoing debate sparked by 
the commission's report, the recent commission that's reported here in our 
province, the Murray commission, that debate which has been sparked by the 
report will help us to make those choices. 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Chairman, as I've said, we all share a vision for Saskatchewan.  It's a 
vision of a healthy society and a healthy population.  To reach that goal 
we will continue to provide and fund health services that contribute to our 
health, but we must also promote and support those activities that maintain 
wellness and lead to better health. 
 
As a society we must accept our share of the responsibility to help people 
to develop and maintain a sense of well-being through promotional and 
preventive mental health activities.  To successfully combat mental illness 
and disability we must make a greater effort to welcome and empower 
self-help groups, family members, the community, and employers to take an 
active role in prevention and treatment and in rehabilitation.  We must 
begin to do more to promote health and well-being and prevent illness.  
Just as immunization contributes to our physical health, we must develop 
support services that in effect immunize or protect us from the stresses of 
day-to-day life. 
 
Our government is prepared to play a leadership role in the promotion of 
healthy life-styles all across the province, and providing this type of 
information to people will allow them to become partners in a health care 
system whose goal is good health. 
 
Yes, Mr. Chairman, all of our citizens share a vision for Saskatchewan.  
It's a vision of a healthy society and a healthy population.  To reach our 
goal we will continue to provide and fund health care services that 
contribute to our health, but we must also promote and support those 
activities that maintain wellness and lead us there. 
 
We know that we have our work cut out for us but our commitment to meet the 
challenges of the future is as strong as it has ever been.  We know the 
best way to respond to these challenges is through consultation and 
co-operation.  Our government believes in consultation.  We're committed to 
bringing all the players together.  We believe consultation is the best way 
to define needs and efficiently meet them.  I hear some of the members on 
the other side would like to enter this debate. I'll invite them all to 



 

 

enter the debate. 
 
Our government, Mr. Chairman, does not pretend to have all of the answers 
to this.  And I have said that before in public ways and I'll say it here 
in the House to the hon. member from Moose Jaw who sits and smiles over 
there, we don't pretend to have all of the answers to these questions.  
These are important questions for this wide society that we all purport to 
serve here.  So I would just say to the hon. member to allow his critic who 
is paying some attention to these estimates, to carry on in a few moments. 
 
But it is our responsibility, Mr. Chairman, to summon the participation and 
the partnership of health care professionals and users to find those 
answers.  We will accomplish our goals by continuing to work together with 
nursing professions, the physicians, pharmacists, other health 
professionals who play a major role in our health advisory committees. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I am pleased that this year's budget and with the direction 
that this budget is taking.  Despite a difficult fiscal and economic 
environment, our government has continued to ensure access without 
financial impediments to hospital, medical, and other health services.  And 
at the same time we've been able to promote healthier living through a 
variety of community  
 Dprograms. 
 
We in Saskatchewan can be proud of our record, Mr. Chairman, but now is not 
the time to rest on laurels.  The key to our continued success is our 
ability to adapt to changing conditions, and I believe that we can do more 
than simply adapt our present health system to new realities.  I believe 
strongly that we can strengthen this system that is already a good system.  
We can and we will meet those challenges that lie ahead and the result will 
be a stronger and a healthier Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Chairman, this budget that we're considering, these estimates, a budget 
of $1.5 billion, an increase over last year of $135 million, is a good 
budget and it's a budget that pays attention to the health needs of our 
citizens, and we're proud of the budget that's presented here today, Mr. 
Chairman.  Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  We heard the minister talk about a 
vision of medicare, Mr. Chairman, or his vision of health care.  Let me 
tell you, Mr. Chairman, let me just remind this Assembly that the vision 
with respect to medicare was one of Tommy Douglas, Woodrow Lloyd, and Allan 
Blakeney, and it was a vision of certain fundamental principles that should 
be established in Saskatchewan and Canadian society with respect to the 
provision of health care services to all Saskatchewan and Canadian people. 
 
It was a vision that embodied principles such as comprehensiveness, 
universality, accessibility, public administration, and portability, 
meaning that all health care services, quality health care services, should 
be universally accessible to all people in the province of Saskatchewan and 
across Canada and funded by public funds, Mr. Minister, in order to 



 

 

overcome the discrepancies that existed in the health care system where 
rich people had more accessibility to health care than people who were not 
as well off, where the quality of health care depended on how much you had 
in your pocket-book, Mr. Chairman. 
 
That was the vision with respect to medicare.  And what we've witnessed in 
the last seven or eight years is an attack on that vision, Mr. Chair, an 
attack on that vision through a series of underfunding the health care 
system and cut-backs to health care, through the destruction of a 
school-based children's dental plan that brought dental services to the 
children of this province; through an undermining of the prescription drug 
plan by approving the drug patent legislation in Ottawa which this 
government did.  It jumped into bed with Brian Mulroney on that one, Mr. 
Chair, through cut-backs to the prescription drug plan which caused untold 
suffering in the province of Saskatchewan to the sick and the elderly.  
That was how this particular government, the PC government, envisaged the 
health care of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
This minister attacked the vision of medicare.  There was a series of 
attack on medicare, an attempt to move to user fees with respect to 
chiropractors.  And we see this same attempt being tried again, Mr. Chair, 
in an attempt to privatize the dental services, as I indicated before, and 
long hospital waiting lists that were unprecedented in this province, Mr. 
Chair, unprecedented hospital waiting lists, and hospital waiting lists 
today that are still unacceptable to the people of this province. 
 
But the minister talks about his vision of health care.  Well his vision of 
health care, Mr. Chair, is nothing but a deathbed repentance, Mr. Chair, a 
deathbed repentance. 
 
Saskatchewan has played a leading role historically, Mr. Chair, in the 
introduction of innovative programs in the health care sector.  We see, for 
example, that the first union hospital district legislation was in 1916, 
the first municipal doctor legislation in 1919, the first free tuberculosis 
treatment in 1929, the first province-wide hospital plan was introduced by 
Tommy Douglas and the CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) in 1947, 
the first province-wide medicare implemented by Woodrow Lloyd and the New 
Democratic Party in 1962.  And then there were the new and innovative plans 
introduced by Allan Blakeney, such as the prescription drug plan and the 
dental plan, Mr. Chair. 
 
And so Saskatchewan has played a leading role in the introduction of 
innovative plans, of innovative programs, and a leading role in the 
introduction of medicare in the province of Saskatchewan and in Canada. 
 
But there's no question, the system today is not perfect.  There is no 
question it's not perfect.  We see many problems such as inaccessible 
health care services in rural and northern Saskatchewan.  And we'll be 
asking the minister during these estimates, what he is doing to make 
services more accessible to residents living in rural and northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We see problems such as the health status of Saskatchewan residents varying 



 

 

according to their income level.  And we'll be asking the minister what 
he's doing in conjunction with his counterparts to increase the level of 
income of many of our poor people in this province, which will have a 
resultant effect on their health status, Mr. Chair. 
 
We know about government underfunding and cut-backs that have created major 
problems in the health care system, Mr. Chair, which the government is now 
trying to back-pedal on prior to the election in order to garner some 
support and create the image that they are truly interested in universal 
accessible medicare, which I will demonstrate, Mr. Chair, is not the case.  
It wasn't the case in 1987 when they made their heartless cut-backs, and it 
isn't the case in 1990, Mr. Chair. 
 
This government has betrayed medicare.  It's betrayed medicare through its 
destruction of the school-based children's dental plan, and many of the 
items that I have already listed, Mr. Chair.  And why have they betrayed 
medicare?  They've betrayed medicare because ideologically they are opposed 
to socialized medicine.  They are opposed to medicine which is paid for by 
the public, Mr. Chair.  There's absolutely no question that ideologically 
they are opposed to socialized medicine. 
 
They'll say otherwise -- they'll say otherwise.  They have said otherwise 
with respect to SaskEnergy, and then we saw them move, Mr. Chair, to 
privatize SaskEnergy in the province of Saskatchewan in spite of the fact 
that they had said that they were opposed to that.  And now they're saying 
that they stand up for medicare and they're not opposed to the 
privatization of medicare, notwithstanding that they tried to do it in 
'87-88 and then ran into some trouble. 
 
Well I say to you, Mr. Chair, that this government and this Health minister 
has no real commitment to the fundamental principles of health care.  He is 
ideologically not committed to the fundamental principles of medicare. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- So what should be done to solve some of the problems that 
have largely been created, not by elderly people overusing the system, but 
by the policies or the lack of policy by this government, Mr. Minister?  
What are some of the things that we could do? 
 
Well the first thing we could do is establish . . . is reaffirm the very 
fundamental principles of health care -- reaffirm them.  I want to see this 
minister stand up today and say that he affirms the principles of 
comprehensiveness, universality, accessibility, public administration, and 
portability, and that after the next election he will still have the same 
opinion, Mr. Chair.  That's what I want to hear this minister say today in 
these estimates. 
 
What we have to do in the province of Saskatchewan, what we have to do is 
not hand out little plastic cards with a mission statement on it to every 
health care worker in the Department of Health.  Not that, Mr. Chair.  
That's not going to solve the health care problems in this province.  That 
is just a silly gimmick. 



 

 

 
What we've got to do is implement a cogent, rational Saskatchewan health 
strategy.  We've got to implement a cogent, rational Saskatchewan health 
strategy.  We've got to encourage and establish community-based and 
community-managed health services.  And here, Mr. Chair, I mean real 
community-based and community-managed health services, not rhetoric about 
community-based and community-managed health services, which we hear so 
often. 
 
The other thing that has to be done, another goal that this province must 
establish is the goal of putting greater emphasis on health promotion and 
prevention of disease.  Well we heard the minister talk about that today, 
Mr. Chair.  He alluded to the fact that good health was something different 
than health care. 
 
But what I want to see this minister do is take the hundreds of thousands 
of dollars that he's pouring into his corporate strategy program for the 
purpose of boosting the PC government and the Minister of Health in the 
eyes of the people of the province of Saskatchewan, under the guise of 
preventive health care, Mr. Chair, I want to see him take that money and 
hire some public health nurses in rural Saskatchewan and northern 
Saskatchewan.  That would be putting real emphasis on health promotion and 
prevention of disease. 
 
Another goal that is essential in order to attack the problems that do 
exist in our health care system is to reduce the inequities in people's 
health status, Mr. Chair, and in their access to the health care system.  
There are inequities in that regard, and we'll be going to that in more 
detail during these estimates and asking the minister questions about them, 
the obvious one being that of poverty, Mr. Chair. 
 
And the poverty that we see in the province of Saskatchewan today is 
absolutely deplorable.  Never before in our history have we seen so many 
hungry children lining up at food banks.  And I want to know in these 
estimates, Mr. Chair, what the Minister of Health has done to overcome that 
problem in order to improve the health status of these children and of 
their families. 
 
(1630) 
 
Another goal that I believe is crucial for our government to adopt in 
protecting the health care system and improving it is to preserve people's 
human dignity and enhance their self-esteem and ability to cope, and 
encourage more participation by individuals.  This, Mr. Chair, is critical 
to good health and that is a goal that I believe that this department 
should be establishing for the purposes of overcoming many of the problems 
that exist in our health care system, and which have been created by this 
government's policies or simple lack of policy, particularly when it comes 
to a long-term strategic plan for health care. 
 
Well one will say we've had the health care commission meeting for the last 
two years and we're waiting for them, and that's why there hasn't been a 
long-term strategic plan.  And so we wait for the health care system.  And 



 

 

we ask questions and the minister says he's waiting. 
 
And then the report comes out.  Off goes the report to another body of 100 
men and women who have been appointed by this government, Consensus 
Saskatchewan, to do the job that these members in the front benches and in 
the back benches should be doing, Mr. Chair, but because of incompetence or 
lack of leadership, perhaps, are unable to do that job.  They're afraid of 
their own decisions because every decision they make, Mr. Chair, they goof 
on it, and they mess it all up. 
 
So now they're relinquishing the reins of power to 100 men and women in the 
province of Saskatchewan.  And so the Murray commission report that cost us 
some $1.8 million or more is sent off to Consensus Saskatchewan for these 
people to take a look at it and tell the government what they should be 
doing with it. 
 
Well this is absolutely ludicrous.  It's absurd.  I mean this is the height 
of absurdity.  Here is a body that was appointed by this government to 
review health care, spent some 1.8 million -- or at least that amount was 
budgeted; perhaps they spent more, maybe less -- $1.8 million to review 
health care.  How many briefs?  Some 600 briefs or more they received from 
the public of this province. 
 
They analysed the system. And I may not agree with many of the things they 
said in their report, but the fact of the matter is that it's this 
government's report, the taxpayers footed the bill and now the government 
doesn't even have the courage to take a stand on this report, but sends it 
off to other people to further analyse and further study and so on and so 
forth. 
 
And I tell you, Mr. Chair, that that is nothing but a stalling tactic.  
This government is stalling the need to make real decisions with respect to 
the material in the Murray report.  This government does not want to act on 
that report.  This government is not prepared to stand up and take a stand 
on the Murray commission report and that's why it's talking about 
consultation in 100 Consensus Saskatchewan. 
 
Now I notice that when it came to firing some 400 dental workers, most of 
them women, this government didn't even know the word consultation was in 
the dictionary, Mr. Chair.  This government did not consult with the dental 
therapists and the dental workers when it cruelly herded them into a room 
and gave them their notice that they were being fired, Mr. Chair.  There 
was no consultation there.  But all of a sudden leading up to an election 
year, this government is into the consultation mode. 
 
Well I tell you, Mr. Chair, we've heard this before.  We heard this prior 
to 1986 when the Premier of this province said, I'm sorry, I made mistakes, 
I'm going to listen, I will be listening to the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan.  And what did he do as soon as he was re-elected as Premier 
of this province?  He turned around and he destroyed the school-based 
children's dental plan, he decimated the prescription drug plan, he put on 
a lottery tax, he put on a gas tax with a rebate and then he took off the 
rebate.  And this is the Premier who said, Mr. Chair, that he was listening 



 

 

to the people of the province of Saskatchewan.  He was going to listen. 
 
And now we hear it again, Mr. Chair, prior to this election and the 
Minister of Health reiterated it once again in his opening remarks: we 
consult, he says, we're listening.  And the Premier says, we're listening, 
and the Minister of Health says, we're listening.  But I tell you, Mr. 
Chair, the people of the province of Saskatchewan are going to say, not 
this time, Mr. Premier, not this time, Mr. Minister.  We simply can't 
believe you.  You betrayed us last time and we don't trust you.  And that's 
where it's at today in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Chair. 
 
The minister has talked about increases to health care in the amount of 
some 10 per cent, or 9.9 per cent increase I guess is the exact amount.  
Well I want to bring to the minister's attention the fact that there was 
some $30 million, Mr. Chair, in the supplementary estimates. And so if we 
take the $30 million that was spent last year off of the amount budgeted 
this year, we find that it is only a 7.5 per cent increase. 
 
And if we take inflation into effect as well, we find that the increase is 
more in the neighbour of 3.4 per cent as opposed to 7.5 per cent.  And 
that's the real increase in the health care budget this year. And, Mr. 
Chair, that is why people, for example, in the mental health care area tell 
me that their portion of the increase comes to something like $50,000 in 
actual dollars after all these factors are taken into consideration. 
 
So the minister may make a lot about this specific increase, but he doesn't 
tell the public what the real increase in terms of real dollars spent in 
the health care area.  His budget address makes no mention of the shortage 
of doctors in rural Saskatchewan.  I would say that it is in crisis 
proportion in rural Saskatchewan.  We are having difficulty in this 
province attracting doctors to rural Saskatchewan.  But the minister 
doesn't address that problem, Mr. Chair, nor does he mention the shortage 
of nurses or other staffing shortages that we are experiencing in this 
province such as in the therapies. And we've raised questions in this 
particular House with . . . in this House with respect to that particular 
problem. 
 
Instead, what he . . . He makes no mention of the problems in northern 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Chair, no mention of the problems in northern 
Saskatchewan.  In fact, the Murray commission . . . Mr. Bob Murray had 
stated, after he heard the health care budget, about his disappointment of 
the lack of emphasis on mental health and home care and people in northern 
Saskatchewan.  The budget doesn't deal with those problems, Mr. Chair.  It 
doesn't deal with those problems at all. 
 
Instead, the minister once again in the debates with respect to the budget 
has talked about health care costs as spiralling out of control, and that's 
a phrase that we've heard a lot in these last few years.  Yes, we've heard 
it many times, and it's all part of the PC rhetoric to try and get people 
to believe that medicare cannot be properly financed and cannot be publicly 
funded without cut-backs, without cut-backs or some form of rationalization 
or without privatization of health care services.  That's all part of the 
PC rhetoric to attempt to convince people that in the province of 



 

 

Saskatchewan we cannot afford medicare as we know it and we have to make 
changes. 
 
And once again today in his opening remarks the minister has talked about 
the need for structural changes, the need for structural changes.  So we'll 
be asking him questions about what sort of structural changes he wants to 
see done to the health care system, because I think that's very important, 
and that's the major portion of the Murray report, of course.  And I will 
want his opinion on the recommendations of the Murray report with respect 
to structural changes. 
 
The minister talks about the need to make ethical decisions in health care, 
the need to make ethical decisions.  Well yes, there may be need to make 
ethical decisions, but I will want to know what particular decisions he 
feels have to be made in the immediate future and on the long-term basis, 
because I think it is important for the minister to tell us what ethical 
decisions he feels should be made; what structural changes should be made; 
what he thinks about the taxing authority and the Murray commission report, 
because the people of the province of Saskatchewan want to know where he 
stands on these issues before the next election. 
 
There has been no attempt in the budget to deal with the lack of long-term 
planning and co-ordination of services in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Chair, no attempt at all.  And I say that it shows very little . . . no 
vision at all, no vision and no leadership in health care. 
 
And the minister can use the word vision as often as he wants.  The fact of 
the matter is the PC government does not have a vision when it comes to 
health care.  They do not even want to comment on their own commission's 
task force report.  Instead they send it off to Consensus Saskatchewan, and 
that is the extent of their leadership on the issue of health care, Mr. 
Chair. 
 
I want to deal a bit again with the comments by the minister that health 
care costs are rising or spiralling out of control -- I think it was words 
to that effect in the budget, words to the effect that health care costs 
are increasing very quickly. 
 
And I want to make the point that health care in the province of 
Saskatchewan has consistently absorbed somewhere between 25 to 32 per cent 
of the total provincial budgets.  And it's true that costs are rising in 
health care, but they are not rising out of proportion with respect to 
other costs in the country and in this province. 
 
And I think if we examine the American health care system, if we examine 
that closely, a privatized form of health care inasmuch as there are a 
great deal of the services in the United States are not publicly funded but 
are dealt with through private insurance companies, I think it's important 
to examine that because if we do we'll see that health care expenditure in 
Canada is around 8.5 per cent of our GNP (gross national product), whereas 
in the U.S. it's around 11 per cent of their GNP.  And in spite of the fact 
that there's some 36 or 37 million Americans, Mr. Chair, who do not have 
any health care coverage, and many of those people are working people.  



 

 

They are not unemployed people, they are working people, but they can't 
afford health care coverage in the United States, the privatized form of 
health care. 
 
The health care expenditures on a per capita basis is much higher in the 
U.S. than it is here.  And American citizens end up paying more for their 
health care.  And let's look at the average life expectancy.  In Canada 
it's 72.9 years for men and 79.8 for women, as opposed to the United States 
where the average life expectancy is less -- 71 for men, and 78.3 for 
women, Mr. Chair. 
 
Infant mortality rate in Canada is less than it is in the U.S. -- 7.9 
deaths per 100,000 live births as opposed to 10.6 in the U.S. per 100,000 
live births. 
 
And the reason for this, the reason for the difference . . . the point I'm 
attempting to make is that the quality of health care in the U.S. is 
inferior to the quality of health care in Canada.  The stats establish 
that, Mr. Chair. 
 
And yet the costs are higher in the U.S.  And they're higher because what 
we have in the health care sector is competition -- competition amongst 
insurance companies for the purposes of attempting to insure people in the 
United States.  And this competition means higher advertising costs, higher 
promotion costs, and so forth.  And it all adds to the cost of the health 
care bill in the U.S.  The administration costs in the U.S. are higher than 
they are in Canada, and physician fees are higher in the U.S. than they are 
in Canada.  Here in Saskatchewan we negotiate, the government negotiates 
with doctors for a fee schedule.  That's not the case in the U.S.  And this 
negotiation, this socialized medicine, has actually kept the cost of health 
care down. 
 
There is a discrepancy, a clear, marked discrepancy from the time that 
medicare was introduced in Canada to today, in this sense, Mr. Chair. It 
establishes that the costs in the United States with respect to health care 
increased from the date socialized medicine was introduced at a much higher 
rate in the U.S. than it did in Canada.  And socialized medicine in Canada 
and in Saskatchewan stabilized the cost of health care, Mr. Chair.  It 
stabilized the cost of health care, and the increase was much less than 
what it was in the U.S. 
 
But what we have seen with respect to this government, Mr. Chair, is 
misplaced priorities, misplaced priorities.  While money is being spent on 
health . . . 
 
(1645) 
 
An Hon. Member: -- You said you were just going to be a minute or two. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- The minister, Mr. Chair, is complaining about the length of 
my remarks here.  He wants me to quit talking, and I will give him a chance 
to sit down and answer some questions.  There's no doubt about it.  He's 
going to have plenty of time to respond and answer my questions.  He may 



 

 

not be able to answer them, Mr. Chair, to the satisfaction of the people of 
the province of Saskatchewan, but there's no doubt he'll have an 
opportunity to try. 
 
What we see in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Chair, is misplaced 
priorities by this government.  While money is being spent on health, I 
believe that the government is inefficient in where it is spending it.  For 
example, I referred to the advertising and promotion campaign that this 
government is undertaking.  And I believe that although there is some room 
for health promotion, advertising of health promotion, that this government 
has gone overboard on that.  And instead of employing people in the front 
lines -- employing public health nurses in the front lines in northern 
Saskatchewan, in rural Saskatchewan, in urban Saskatchewan -- instead of 
doing that, this government has chose to spend its health dollars in 
self-serving advertising. 
 
We hear from people, we hear from people across this province about health 
care facilities being built and being understaffed.  The emphasis, in other 
words, Mr. Chair, is on the building of facilities as opposed to staffing 
and providing for workers -- staffing and providing for workers.  And an 
example, for example, one of the things that has been brought to our 
attention is the Wascana Rehab Centre, that there are not enough health 
care professionals there with respect to therapies and other areas. 
 
We see this year something like an 80 per cent increase in the capital 
projects budget.  And of course I will want to know -- and I'm putting the 
minister and his officials on notice -- I will want a list of all the 
capital works projects  Dthat are being undertaken in this particular 
budget.  I find it very interesting that in a pre-election year, we have an 
80 per cent increase in that particular area and I think the minister will 
have to justify this to the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
There is no question that it is a fallacy.  It is a fallacy, Mr. Minister, 
to say that costs are out of control, that costs in the province of 
Saskatchewan are out of control.  There's no question that they've increased 
but they're far from being out of control.  And I want to make that point 
clear to the people of the province of Saskatchewan so that they are not 
going to be confused or given the wrong impression that, by the minister's 
comments or the indication that there has to be some cost control that's 
going to result in cut-backs or a move to privatization, because that 
certainly is the impression that we've been left with.  And the minister 
shakes his head, but we just saw government members attending a 
privatization of health care conference in Saskatoon. 
 
We saw government health members in attendance at this privatization 
conference in Saskatoon.  And the fact of the matter is, this is a topic 
that's under consideration by this government.  And they wouldn't . . . When 
we attempt to ask the minister questions about where the Murray commission 
report is going to take us and what his position is on it, he refuses to 
answer.  He refuses to answer.  He's refused to answer what he thinks about 
the structural changes, he's refused to answer about the move to partially 
privatizing, moving to user fees with chiropractors. 
 



 

 

And I'm saying the reason he's refusing to answer these questions, Mr. 
Minister, is because that is his hidden agenda, that is his hidden agenda, 
and that's why we've been hearing so much rhetoric over the last seven or 
eight years about health care costs spiralling out of control. 
 
Now I'm going to wind up these comments by simply asking the minister with 
respect to his opening remarks.  He had talked about that there were only 
minor structural changes that were done to the health care system.  Now I 
would like to know what structural changes the minister has in mind for the 
health care system and the people of the province of Saskatchewan.  And 
health care professionals would be very interested in hearing his comments 
on that.  Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Chairman, there were several remarks in the 
statements made by the critic opposite, beginning with remarks about 
Saskatchewan's leadership role over the years and the things that have been 
innovative in Saskatchewan.  And I think to use the way she characterized it 
-- and I think I'm being fair here -- was that those innovative things that 
have happened in Saskatchewan health care were in another time, all in 
another time, and there are no innovative things in recent years and all 
that sort of thing.  I mean, that's what the member said. 
 
And in my earlier remarks, I made no reference to things that have happened 
just now versus what happened in the '40s and the '50s and the '60s.  
Frankly, Mr. Chairman, all of us in Saskatchewan have a good deal to be 
proud of in the way in which health care has evolved, and the system of 
health care has evolved over a good long number of years in Saskatchewan.  
And it's gone through various governments and all the rest of it.  It's 
because the people of Saskatchewan have a very definite view as it relates 
to these issues. 
 
Some examples, Mr. Chairman, are very recent years.  And I would say 
something that is absolutely . . . can only be described as a success story 
is the opening in Saskatchewan, the only place in Canada that has a youth 
treatment centre for drug and alcohol abuse, Whitespruce. 
 
Now, I'm sure we'll get into more detailed discussion about that in more 
detailed discussion about SADAC (Saskatchewan Alcohol and Drug Abuse 
Commission), but that's an innovation in Saskatchewan.  In every other part 
of this country there is treatment for young people who have difficulty with 
drug and alcohol abuse, but in no other part of the country is it dealt with 
as a specific youth treatment with a different philosophy of treatment 
related strictly to youth as is done at Whitespruce and with some of the 
after-care programs that are being developed in conjunction with 
Whitespruce.  There's an innovation developed in Saskatchewan by 
Saskatchewan people for the service of the 1980s and the 1990s for the needs 
that are here in the here and now, and it's an example. 
 
Another example that I will give, and I know the hon. member never likes to 
hear of this, but it's an innovation that is very important in the delivery 
of health care, in the administration of the delivery of health care 
services, and it's the computerized health care card that was developed here 
in this province by a company in the city of Regina here, as a matter of 



 

 

fact -- a company that's marketing this technology now in other places 
around the world. 
 
And I see the member opposite is waving his health care card, and I'm glad 
that he holds it close to his heart.  He carries it close to his heart, I 
notice. 
 
But in any case, Mr. Chairman, that health care card, that card addresses an 
area in the delivery of health care that has not used advanced technology to 
the extent that many other areas in the health sector have.  We can enter 
any of our institutions and you will find the best, the most advanced 
technology that science is able to come up with in the operating theatres of 
our hospitals and in the equipment that we use, all of that sort of thing. 
 
But when it comes to the administration of a very large sector in our 
economy -- health care -- we have not used the advanced technology that has 
been used in other industries like the financial industries, banking, 
insurance industry, and all of those.  This card can go a long way toward 
that and there are many, many innovations that can come forward as a result 
of it having been introduced here in Saskatchewan, now being looked at by 
other jurisdictions in our own country, by jurisdictions in the United 
States and as well as in the European Economic Community, to name a few. 
 
So those are innovations that have gone on in the here and the now and not 
just those that have related back to some of the pioneers of health care 
politics that the member likes to cite, and she has a very selective memory 
which only stops at the time when Tommy left Saskatchewan, or whatever she 
likes to do there. 
 
Recent innovations.  The breast cancer screening program that's been 
introduced in very recent weeks here, something that's very important to 
women in our province.  It's a new innovation and it's one that we're proud 
of in this department, and the Cancer Foundation is delivering on our behalf 
or on behalf of the citizens of Saskatchewan. 
 
Fetal monitoring equipment that's there and it's now been developed here in 
the province for that kind of monitoring for rural Saskatchewan people so 
that it saves significant travel for them.  And the nature of our province, 
a widespread population over a wide area, that's an important innovation. 
 
The member made several other comments.  I mean she made many other 
suggestions.  I'm going to go to a couple of them. 
 
She talks about the building that has been going on, that we've been 
building facilities and not staffing those facilities, I think is the 
accusation.  And I've heard that accusation before, both here in the House 
and from the member in various parts of the province.  Some people will say 
that that's the case.  And the hon. member mentioned the Wascana hospital 
here in Regina for an example. 
 
The Wascana hospital here in Regina was developed to the stage where it is 
now probably the best of its kind, the best rehabilitation centre of its 
kind in the country.  Now that could not be said just a very few years ago.  



 

 

In fact the facility that was there before, what once was the geriatric 
centre and then became Wascana hospital, was very much deteriorated.  And 
frankly, Mr. Chairman, you've heard me say this before. It was a disgrace to 
this province that does pride itself in its health care delivery and its 
health care facilities. 
 
That facility, for the purpose that it serves our citizens, was a disgrace 
to this province and should have been rehabilitated a lot earlier than the 
time at which our government took over in this province.  There's no 
question that that's true.  So I don't want to get into all of that in a 
very detailed way, but I certainly will, I certainly will if the member 
wants to get into it in a detailed way about the Wascana Hospital and what 
it now serves. 
 
Just one other point on that.  On one hand we have difficulty recruiting, 
and there is no question, I've acknowledged that; and other times, we have 
difficulty recruiting some health care professionals to this province.  And 
on the other hand, the member will say well, you can't recruit these people.  
So basically what she's saying is, why build the facilities that are the 
leading-edge facilities if you can't put the people into them. 
 
I would say that we are making progress in the recruitment of people and of 
professionals working in these facilities.  And it's the old question of 
chicken and egg.  Could we ever recruit scarce human resources in some of 
these professions where they are in great demand, not only here but across 
the country and across North America, if we didn't have the kind of 
facilities that we can use as a lever to attract them?  The answer to that 
is obviously no.  It's obvious to me at least, and that's why we have built 
these facilities and that's why we are having some success, albeit minor 
success in some areas, in recruiting the people that we would like to have. 
 
The whole question of response to the Murray commission, the response to my 
earlier remarks which were not related directly to the Murray commission, 
but were related to the fact that there is significant change going on in 
our demographics.  There's significant change in the society that we serve 
and that this Health department serves, and there's all of those changes . . 
. What the member has really said in her response is that we should not 
acknowledge that change.  We should not speak of change.  And I say to her 
and I say to all the members of the House, we have a responsibility to not 
only recognize that change is about, recognize the changes that are 
happening all around us, but we have a responsibility to respond to that 
change and to prepare our system, the health care delivery system, for the 
changes which we can foresee.  And frankly, for changes which, the way in 
which that happens these days, changes which we are not so able to foresee 
as readily.  So we have to have a flexible system that is able to respond to 
the specific needs of a society at a given time. 
 
And I don't think it's good enough to always say, as the member tends to, is 
that don't address change, don't always be talking to us about change, and 
translating what I say about the fact that there is change taking place into 
some kind of a scare tactic that I'm always talking about change and always 
talking about the extra costs that health care is putting on to the society, 
as though it's some kind of financially driven thing. 



 

 

 
Financially driven is only one aspect of this change.  This change is 
demographically driven and there are many other factors, and I'm sure we'll 
get into that as time goes on here. 
 
(1700) 
 
Mr. Chairman, one other thing.  The budget that we're referring to, and it's 
been presented blue book over blue book, which means for those who don't 
follow the budget discussions around here, this year's budget as presented 
is 9.9 per cent more than what was presented in the blue book last year. 
 
The hon. member has talked about special warrants which took place over the 
year, in the last year.  What special warrants means, expenditures over and 
above those which were budgeted for last year, and in a very large 
department like Health that happens almost every year.  Those things took 
place, she says, then the budget was something like a 7.7 per cent.  I'm not 
sure of the exact number that she used. 
 
But in any case, rather than quibble over the numbers, there is one other 
point that must be made here.  The budget, if you include capital, and those 
numbers that I'm referring to when I speak of the increase in the Health 
budget of $135 million and the 9.9 per cent increase, those numbers do not 
include capital costs, and obviously that's a very big expenditure in a 
department as large as this that has all of the health care facilities to 
build. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, if we include capital costs, capital construction, before 
inflation, the increase in this health care budget that we're discussing 
here today is 10.2 per cent -- over 10 per cent increase in the health care 
expenditures of this province at a time when agriculture's in difficulty, 
all of our commodities in difficulty, all of the kinds of things you've 
heard others speak about as we deal with the economics of this province.  
And for that reason, we're very, very proud of being able to present a 
budget of this magnitude in these times. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Being 5 o'clock, the committee will recess until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


