





























































Hansard: April 30, 1990


 

 

April 30/90 
EVENING SITTING 

 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Education 
Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 5 

 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- I'd ask the minister if he would introduce his officials 
please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  It's a pleasure for me to 
introduce the officials that are here with me this evening.  On my left is 
Dr. Eleanor Rourke, the deputy minister.  Behind me is Mr. Mike Benson, who 
was the past executive director of administration, who is now special 
advisor in Executive Council.  And beside him is Lorne Glauser, associate 
deputy minister of Education.  And there are others of my officials that 
are here that I will be calling on as time goes on. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- I'd really appreciate it if the Minister could introduce 
the other officials that are with him. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- The others that I have with me are John Biss, 
director of policy and client services; Lorne Sparling, director of program 
co-ordination; Robin Johnson, director of financial planning; and Dianne 
Anderson, director of university affairs; Fred Renihan, as well, assistant 
deputy minister of curriculum evaluation. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairperson.  First of all, I 
want to congratulate Dr. Eleanor Rourke on being appointed Deputy Minister 
for Saskatchewan Education.  I believe that this is the first time that we 
have had a woman deputy minister in the province of Saskatchewan handling 
the Department of Education. 
 
We, on this side of the House, view this as a very positive move on the 
part of the government to appoint someone to this position that has had a 
background in education.  And when we were doing estimates last year the 
minister advised us that Lawrie McFarlane was going to be leaving 
Saskatchewan.  We certainly suggested to the government that they find 
someone in the province who was familiar with educational issues, and we 
know that you come with those credentials.  So we wish you good luck and 
congratulate you on your appointment, Dr. Rourke. 
 
Mr. Minister, as you will be aware, education didn't do that well in the 
last budget, particularly education when it comes to K to 12 school system.  
And as you will also be aware, literally tens and tens, probably over 100 
letters were sent to you in March of this year from various school 
divisions across Saskatchewan suggesting to you and your government that we 
really did need to see a massive increase in educational funding if school 
divisions across Saskatchewan were going to meet the expectations of the 



 

 

public and were going to meet educational requirements of Saskatchewan 
youngsters. 
 
Mr. Minister, in these letters that were delivered to yourself and other 
members of the legislature, it was clearly indicated by school divisions 
that they wanted to see your government move toward a 60-40 cost-share 
arrangement in terms of educational funding in the province.  And as you're 
aware, Mr. Minister, school board expenditures have dramatically increased 
over the last several years, but grants to boards have not dramatically 
increased on the part of the provincial government. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you look at educational spending in this province, and if 
we go back to 1980-81, there's only been about a 38 per cent increase in 
grants to school boards on the part of the provincial government.  And this 
is at a time, Mr. Minister, when inflation has increased dramatically.  
Consequently what we've seen is a shift in responsibility. 
 
At one time in the province, and if we go back to 1980, board expenditures 
and grants, grants to boards from the province amounted to about 56.7 per 
cent of total board expenditure.  And if you look at what's happened in 
this fiscal year, 1990-91, grants to school boards have decreased below 49 
per cent.  I'm talking about funding on the part of the provincial 
government.  Consequently we have seen a shift in responsibility, and 
school divisions are having to tax local property taxpayers more and more. 
 
And I've had the opportunity to receive some information in terms of mill 
rate increases in this province.  And as a result of your government's 
decision only to increase operating grants by 3 per cent at a time when 
inflation is running at 4.6 or 4.8 per cent, at a time when school 
divisions, particularly in rural Saskatchewan, are under extreme pressure 
because of rural depopulation, and at the same time implementation of core 
curriculum, at the need to repair buildings, the need to have school buses 
in place to drive further and further distances, we see that the mill rates 
have had to increase dramatically. 
 
For instance, Mr. Minister, in Broadview, their mill rate has gone up by 
8.06 per cent; in Eastend, 6.35 per cent; Cupar, 9.92 per cent; Eston, 
Elrose, 7.81 per cent; Kamsack, 8.77 per cent; Canora, 8.13 per cent.  And 
the list goes on and on and on, Mr. Minister.  There have been dramatic 
increases in the mill rate, which means dramatic increases in property 
taxes on the backs of local property taxpayers because of your government's 
consistent underfunding of educational spending in the province of 
Saskatchewan.  If you look at your record, there's been a 38 per cent 
increase since 1980-81, at a time when inflation has been running at much 
higher levels.  Consequently we've seen a dramatic shift for educational 
spending from the province on to the backs of local school divisions and 
consequently local taxpayers. 
 
Mr. Minister, I'd like you to explain to the people of this province why it 
is that your government seems to have money for the Cargill grains, they 
seem to have money for GigaText fiascos, they have money for Joytec, they 
have money for a number of projects that aren't necessarily in the best 
interests of Saskatchewan taxpayers, but when it comes to educational 



 

 

spending in this province you don't seem to have money for what's really 
important; that's the future of our young people.  Explain that to the 
people of this province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I think what we have to do is 
take a look at the real facts, and not the ones that are being presented by 
the member opposite. 
 
If we consider the fact that during the last 10 years, funding to education 
in this province has grown substantially -- it's grown substantially, Mr. 
Chairman -- and if you consider, for example, that back in 1981-82 some 266 
millions of dollars were being spent at that time, and that has increased 
substantially to this year when we see that the total provincial funding is 
in the neighbourhood of 443.5 millions of dollars.  So there has been a 
substantial increase.  The fact of the matter is that there has been a net 
increase of some, well nearly 10 per cent in real funding to school boards 
during that particular time. 
 
We have to also look at other facts that the member is talking about, Mr. 
Chairman.  And I have given credit to the NDP in the past that they did 
move towards an increase in the amount of funding that the provincial grant 
was covering in the 1970s, and I believe it was up in around the 
neighbourhood of 54, 56 per cent I believe was the highest. 
 
But I would suggest too, Mr. Chairman, that the decline started when the 
NDP were still in power.  That if you take a look at 1981-82, that in fact 
the share of the provincial grant had dropped to 51.6 per cent.  So even 
though she can say that they were starting to move towards this 60 per cent 
of the total operating fund was . . . they were moving towards that.  
Granted they were in good years, but by the time '81-82 rolled around, in 
fact, they had slipped back to 51.6 per cent. 
 
Now I would point out that for the current year it is not below 49 per 
cent, as the member has just indicated.  The fact of the matter is that the 
amount this year is 50.1 per cent.  So we have tried to maintain that 50-50 
share of the educational operating funds -- 50 per cent from the province 
and 50 per cent from the local municipalities. 
 
Now we know that there is quite a variance across the province in that in 
some cases the provincial grant covers 80 per cent of the total operating 
costs.  There are others.  In fact in the city of Saskatoon it is somewhere 
around 31 per cent, but we have to consider the reason for that.  And the 
reason for it is because there has been a tremendous increase in the 
assessment in the city of Saskatoon, tremendous increase in the assessment.  
This last year alone, Mr. Chairman, the assessment increased in Saskatoon 
by $7 million. 
 
Now I think if you look at the average taxpayer's bill in Saskatoon, that 
you will find that per taxpayer that the amount has not increased a great 
amount.  The individual has not increased a great amount.  The fact of the 
matter is that Saskatoon's population has grown substantially over the last 
10 years and the assessment has gone up substantially over the last 10 
years.  So it's a little bit misleading to throw out these figures and say 



 

 

that the local taxpayers are being expected to pay more and more of the 
operating costs, because that's not true. 
 
Mr. Chairman, if you take, for example, the fact that when we calculate the 
provincial grants, that we do not take into consideration the amount of 
money that is paid in teachers' pensions, to the dental program, or to life 
insurance.  That is all paid by the province.  Now if you were to add all 
of that in in fact the provincial grant is about 57 per cent of the total 
operating. 
 
I would point out as well, Mr. Chairman, that for the north-western part of 
this province, with 14 out of the 20 school divisions having reported in 
that area, that the departmental grants there, Mr. Chairman, were 59.9 per 
cent of their total operating grant.  So we can see then the variance that 
occurs across the province. 
 
I would also suggest, Mr. Chairman, that when we consider other funding for 
education in this province that the provincial government pays 80 per cent 
of the capital costs.  The local taxpayers pay 20 per cent, they pay 20 per 
cent. 
 
So I have already indicated that we are willing to look at this, in fact we 
are setting up a committee to examine educational finance in the province.  
And we will be including the trustees and LEADS (League of Educational 
Administrators, Directors and Superintendents) and the STF (Saskatchewan 
Teachers' Federation) with regard to the study that we're going to look at, 
and that information is going to be very, very beneficial.  And it is time 
to take a look at it, but keep in mind, Mr. Chairman, that this is a change 
in direction that the trustees are taking today, because only four short 
years ago they had indicated quite clearly that they wanted to see the 
formula stay as it is because they were afraid of losing local autonomy.  
So that has been respected and now the fact that they are requesting some 
changes, we are willing to look at that and we will be discussing it with 
them, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Chairperson, in response to the minister's remarks, I 
can only say this.  Mr. Minister, I was not talking about the other costs 
that the Government of Saskatchewan obviously incurs as a result of 
education -- pensions, group life insurance, teachers' dental plans, that 
sort of thing.  Those particular items, Mr. Minister, are not part of 
school board operating grants.  They are not part of total school board 
expenditures. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I've got some statistics here from the Saskatchewan 
School Trustees Association.  I've been able to verify those statistics, 
Mr. Minister, and it's quite clear to me that if you look at the record, in 
1980 56.7 per cent of total school board expenditures came from the 
province of Saskatchewan.  In 1981, it was 54.7 per cent; in '82, it was 
54.6 per cent; in '83, under the Deputy Premier's leadership, it was 56 per 
cent.  In 1984, 54.7 per cent; in 1985, 55.2 per cent; in 1986, 50.5 per 
cent; in 1987, 49.9 per cent; in 1988, 49 per cent; and I understand that 
in '89 and '90 it has dropped below 49 per cent. 
 



 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, those are facts.  I mean, you can reel out your list of 
statistics, Mr. Minister, but it's simply not borne out by what school 
trustees are telling us from across this province.  What they are telling 
us, Mr. Minister, is that the Government of Saskatchewan's commitment to 
educational spending in this province has dropped dramatically.  As a 
result of that, Mr. Minister, they are having to rely more and more upon 
local property taxpayers to make up the difference. 
 
(1915) 
 
Now I happen to have reviewed some of the newspapers in this province, 
rural newspapers, in the last couple of weeks in terms of the impact of 
your educational spending on local, rural taxpayers.  For instance, I 
consider Yorkton to be a fairly rural community. "Seven per cent tax 
increase forecast," Mr. Minister, is the headline. 
 
In the Arcola School Division, "Depleted reserves, anticipated salary 
increases result in higher taxes."  That's the headline.  Assiniboia, 3.4 
per cent tax hike for Assiniboia; Shamrock School Division, tax rate 2.75 
per cent mill increase, and they say that staff in the division has been 
reduced. 
 

 Reductions have been made in the maintenance work scheduled for our 
facilities.  The purchase of new buses has been deferred, and our bus 
routes will be re-examined in order to achieve as much efficiency as 
possible while still providing a reasonable service. 

 
Creighton, mill rate increase for Creighton has gone from 43.5 per cent to 
48.75 per cent.  "School division increases mill rate by 2 for 1990."  The 
school division lost $180,000 due to student decreases in the last year.  
We see rural depopulation in the Herbert School Division. 
 
The Meadow Lake school board, Mr. Minister, mill rate taxes increase.  And 
it says: 
 

 While the Meadow Lake board of education appreciates the difficult 
economic circumstances facing the Government of Saskatchewan, the increase 
of 3 per cent in provincial grants to school boards is not enough.  In 
fact, the effect of the recent provincial budget will be an even heavier 
burden for property taxpayers in this school division. 

 
And it goes on, Mr. Minister: 
 

 As a result of down-loading taxation, the Meadow Lake School board of 
education has found it necessary to increase the division mill rate by 
three mills to 57 mills and this increase will serve to maintain a 
standard of education for our children. 

 
"School division told to control spending" -- this is in the Kindersley 
newspaper, Mr. Minister.  Municipal councils across this province are 
concerned about school division spending.  They're concerned about the mill 
rate increases, and it's come about, Mr. Minister, because of your 
government's consistent underfunding of education. 



 

 

 
Now look at the Arcola School Division.  They have advised the town of 11.5 
per cent increase or a 7 mill tax increase for 1990.  That's a tremendous 
increase, Mr. Minister.  That amounts to about $70 for each Carlyle 
resident, according to this newspaper article. 
 
Then we have the Parkland School Division minutes, coming out of the 
Shellbrook newspaper.  And the headline there is: "Hike in school taxes 
probable despite plan to cut 10 teachers."  And they say, Mr. Minister, 
that they've had a special meeting; that the ratio of pupils to teachers 
will have to be increased.  They say that they will see five fewer teachers 
at their school next year. 
 
Canwood has been hard hit.  They say the teacher cut-back is not going to 
affect libraries, critical in resource-base learning, but these are the 
kinds of things that we're seeing in newspapers across the province.  They 
say, in addition, the board has also included plans to reduce the number of 
school bus routes in its various cost-cutting measures, but is also faced 
with only a slight increase in provincial funding. 
 
Then we have one from The Melville Advance, Mr. Minister, "School boards 
ask taxpayers to dig deeper."  And the Melville Public School Board 
increased its mill rate by 5, up to 58 mills from 53 mills, and they say . 
. . The chairman of the school board says, that the increase of 3 per cent 
in grants from the provincial government to school boards is not enough, 
with the effect of the recent provincial budget being that additional 
burden is being placed on local property taxpayers.  And they say again, as 
a result of down-loading taxation, the board found it necessary to raise 
the mill rate. 
 
And then there's an interesting quote: 
 

 The federal government passed the tax burden to the province, which in 
turn has passed it on down to us.  Even with staff and teacher cut-backs 
and increases in class sizes, we'll have to raise our mill rate by 5 mills 
to make up for the provincial government shortfall. 

 
And then we have another article in the Lloydminster Meridian, and the 
headline is, "Eight teaching positions eliminated from the public school 
system."  The mill rate increases 6.7 per cent. 
 
And we have another article.  It says, "No increase in town taxes; school 
division up 5 mills."  This is out of the Rosetown newspaper.  And they've 
had something like a 7 per cent increase, Mr. Minister. 
 
Now obviously we haven't . . . all rural newspapers have not yet reported 
on what's happening in rural school divisions in terms of the property tax 
increases, Mr. Minister, as a result of your government's decision to cut 
funding to education in this province. 
 
And I want you to explain to the people of this province why it is that 
you've only got 3 per cent increases for school divisions at a time when 
you've got hundreds of thousands of dollars and millions of dollars to 



 

 

Cargill Grain.  Please explain the rationale for your government's 
thinking. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, to start with the figures again 
that the member opposite plays fast and loose with in talking about the 
percentages of provincial grant, provincial grant compared to the local 
taxation. 
 
Mr. Chairman, what I have here is a document that was jointly funded by the 
SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees Association) and the Department of 
Education which clearly sets out the figures and I would be very happy to 
table that document. 
 
Also, Mr. Chairman, we have the member opposite talking about cut-backs in 
several areas with regard to the funds, and we know that the grants that 
the school divisions get from the Department of Education depends on 
assessment and it also depends on what's happening with enrolment. 
 
Now she can point out different cases, as she has done, where there have 
been decreases in the grants.  I could also go through and give you many 
examples of where grants have increased substantially.  And in fact I could 
refer to the city of Saskatoon.  I didn't hear her talking about the city 
of Saskatoon.  Well let's see what they said in the city of Saskatoon.  And 
this was a document that was put together and circulated in the city of 
Saskatoon by Dr. Lowell Loewen who says: 
 

 The committee is pleased to report that education was assigned a high 
priority by the provincial government.  Given the state of the provincial 
economy, a 3 per cent average increase in grants to boards of education, 4 
per cent on a per pupil basis, was reasonable. 

 
Now, Mr. Chairman, having said that, I could point out to the member 
opposite, Mr. Chairman, that Tiger Lily School Division -- that's the rural 
school division around Melfort -- had an increase in their grant this year 
of $379,000.  Now that was a 15 per cent increase.  I didn't hear her 
mention that. 
 
Wood River School Division, an increase of $344,000 -- that was almost 15 
per cent increase; Indian Head, an increase of $243,000, an increase of 9 
per cent.  I heard her mention an area, I think, where you come from, Mr. 
Chairman, up in Parkland.  Well there was an item there, I think she 
mentioned.  Parkland, they got an increase of $93,000 this year -- $93,000. 
 
So when she talks about some cases where they are cutting back in teachers, 
Mr. Chairman, I can remember back in the '60s and '70s when other 
governments were in power in this province. I do recall that there were 
also cut-backs in staff at that time, Mr. Chairman, and that was because 
enrolments were dropping, and they've been dropping in this province for a 
good number of years. 
 
We can see the evidence with the number of schools that have closed over 
the years, and there have been cut-backs as far as staff was concerned.  
During the last year I think we've lost some 2,260 pupils, I believe, which 



 

 

is interesting in itself, but also when you consider the fact that 79 more 
teachers were hired.  So the fact that we're losing students doesn't always 
relate to the number of teachers that we have in the province. 
 
so I'm sure that this year there are going to be school boards that will be 
cutting back, in some cases, in staff.  But I would also point out that it 
isn't necessarily due to a cut-back in grant or any change in that regard 
at all.  It's simply because the students have moved.  Their enrolments are 
going down, and it necessitates them making some changes. 
 
The member opposite likes to keep raising Cargill and money that's going 
into Cargill, but there isn't money that's going to Cargill, Mr. Chairman, 
as you well know.  We're into a joint venture here, in a fertilizer plant, 
with Cargill.  We're not giving Cargill anything. 
 
But I would think, Mr. Chairman, that with the development of new 
manufacturing operations and processing plants like Cargill in this 
province, that in years down the road, that we are going to have more and 
more money that we can put into education.  But that group over there, Mr. 
Chairman, are opposed to any kind of diversification and building in this 
province.  They're opposed to Weyerhaeuser paper mills; they're opposed to 
bacon plants; they're opposed to fertilizer plants; they're opposed to 
upgraders. 
 
But, Mr. Chairman, if we don't develop some of our resources in this 
province and build processing and manufacturing plants, we are going to be 
in much worse condition as time goes on because we will not have the 
revenues that are needed to put into education, to put into quality 
education programs for our boys and girls. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, just for your information, I've done a 
little research in the revenue that we've seen in this province since 
1981-82, and there's been a 75 per cent increase in the revenue that your 
government has collected in this province in the last nine years.  But 
there's only been a 38 per cent increase in operating grants to school 
boards. 
 
Now you and I can have a debate on what the real numbers are for ever and a 
day, and we're not going to agree, Mr. Minister.  The one thing we can 
agree on is the fact that we've seen some tremendous property tax 
increases, or school tax increases in this province as a result of your 
government's consistent underfunding to our school divisions in this 
province. 
 
And I just want to name for the record the school boards that have had to 
increase school taxes in excess of 8 per cent:  Big Butte, Wilcox, 
Broadview, Cupar, Outlook, Kamsack, Canora, Humboldt rural, Tisdale, Blaine 
Lake, Arcola, Wilcox again, Creighton, Weyburn, Melville.  Those are all in 
excess of 8 per cent, Mr. Minister.  These are all rural school divisions 
in essence, at a time when Saskatchewan taxpayers, particularly in rural 
Saskatchewan, aren't doing too well economically, Mr. Minister. 



 

 

 
We realize that there has been rural depopulation.  There's been 
depopulation in Saskatchewan because of your government's economic 
policies.  People are leaving this province in droves.  People are leaving 
rural Saskatchewan in droves because of a consistent lack of a long-term 
rural agricultural strategy in this province.  And that's come about 
because of Tory governments in Ottawa and Tory governments in Saskatchewan 
not knowing what to do with the agricultural crisis -- we understand that. 
 
But nevertheless, Mr. Minister, school divisions still have to provide 
education.  There are still people living in rural Saskatchewan, people 
between the ages of 5 and 18 who are in the K to 12 school system.  And 
while there's been rural depopulation, nevertheless core curriculum, core 
subjects, have to be delivered to Saskatchewan school children living in 
rural Saskatchewan.  Underfunding of education isn't going to make the fact 
that education has to be delivered in this province go away.  Education has 
to be delivered. 
 
And so I ask you again, Mr. Minister: what are you going to do to deal with 
the fact that your government only increased educational spending, on 
average, by 3 per cent?  As a result of that, Mr. Minister, school 
divisions across this province have had to increase school taxes 
dramatically.  What you have done, Minister, is what you accused the 
federal government of doing, and that's shifting responsibility from the 
feds to the province.  That's what you accused the federal government of 
doing.  And now what you've simply done is shifted responsibility for 
educational funding from the province onto the backs of local property 
taxpayers, Mr. Minister. 
 
That's not what school trustees in this province want; that's not what the 
teachers' federation wants, and that's not what the league of educational 
administrators and directors want.  They want the highest priority, 
according to this press release, to be in educational funding, and you 
simply didn't come through in your budget. 
 
And I have to ask, Mr. Minister: don't you have any kind of strength in 
that cabinet?  Don't you have any kind of capacity to convince your cabinet 
colleagues that educational funding in this province is important -- that 
education in this province is important? 
 
And I simply have to ask you: what are you doing about it?  Why can't you 
convince your colleagues that a 3 per cent increase is unacceptable and 
that you simply have to have more, in view of some of the problems facing 
this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, we maybe need to remind the 
member opposite at this point, when she starts talking about mill rate 
increases in the province, that if she'll look back at the facts and the 
figures in the 1970s when the NDP were in power, that the increase in the 
mill rate each year was substantially more than what we have seen during 
the tenure of this government, Mr. Chairman.  So maybe the member needs to 
just stop and look back at what the NDP were doing and give us an 
explanation as to why the mill rates were going up so much during some of 



 

 

those years, Mr. Chairman, when the economy was doing fairly well. 
 
(1930) 
 
And the fact that people are leaving the province has nothing to do with 
the policies of this government, it's simply because people are leaving to 
get jobs.  When the agricultural economy is down, we know that in many, 
many other years that people have also left the province, Mr. Chairman.  
Otherwise, how could we explain the fact that back in the 1970s that there 
were some several thousands of people that left the province when the NDP 
were in power.  I mean, how do you explain that, Mr. Chairman?  And I don't 
hear any explanation coming forth from the member opposite, because she 
wouldn't admit that people also left this province back in the '60s or in 
the '70s when the agricultural economy was down.  They left looking for 
jobs. 
 
But I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, that if you combine that with the 
downturn in the economy in the other sectors in this province, it's 
understandable why people have moved to other areas to look for work.  But 
as the economy picks up here and as we get back good crops, hopefully this 
year, and oil prices go up and uranium and potash goes up, that we will 
have more and more people coming back into this province getting jobs, and 
we will see a big difference in that area. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I would also point out to you and like to read into the 
record just what has happened to the increase in our spending in education 
in this province over the last number of years.  In 1982-83 we spent $310 
million -- that's what was going out to operating grants, long-term debt.  
And in 1983-84 it went up to 339.6; in '84-85 it was over $358 million; 
'85-86 was over $400 million; in '86-87 $418.6 million; in '87-88 $414 
million; '88-89 $412.7 million; and '89-90 $431.1 million; and for 1990-91 
$443.5 million. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, since 1982 when this party came into power we have seen 
the grants grow from 310 millions of dollars to 443.5 millions of dollars.  
And I would also point out, Mr. Chairman, that when we talk about operating 
grants, we know that they have continued to increase.  But it was also this 
government that introduced the Education Development Fund some five years 
ago, $150 million that were to be spread out over now a 10-year period of 
time and this money is being used for many, many worthwhile things: the 
development of better library systems, computer systems that have been put 
into schools so that children now from kindergarten to grade 12 have an 
opportunity to learn how to operate computers and the benefit of them, not 
only in schools but also to society.  And increased efficiencies in our 
schools.  So we've got to also include the amount of money that's gone into 
the Education Development Fund and just a lot of good things have been done 
with that money, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Minister, can you explain why the Blaine Lake School 
Division had to increase its property taxes by 12.28 per cent?  What caused 
that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I would point out that in the 



 

 

Blaine Lake School Division that they received an increase in their grant 
of some $35,347.  They had a decrease in the number of students, but in 
spite of that they still went up with their grant.  Now we have to keep in 
mind that it's the local school division board that sets the mill rate.  I 
couldn't say why it went up, whatever number that she has indicated, 
without knowing all the facts involved.  I mean, the board has to be 
responsible for their expenditures.  Maybe there are other things that they 
felt that they had to do in this particular year.  I'm not sure what's been 
happening with their mill rate over the years. 
 
In some cases, I know that school boards have small increases in mill 
rates, and then from time to time they have to have a substantial increase 
because there may be more things that they require.  So whether it was for 
buses or whatever, Mr. Chairman, I could not tell you why they have gone up 
some 12 mills because, in fact, they have fewer students, but their grant 
is up. 
 
And I would also point out, Mr. Chairman, that we talk about the grants 
that the school boards or school divisions have received, that 85 out of 
the 115 school divisions received an increase in their grants this year. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Minister, can you tell me why Tisdale had to increase 
its property taxes by 8.77 per cent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well I could say the same thing about Tisdale, Mr. 
Chairman.  They had a student loss of 59 students and even with that loss 
their grant was up $26,492.  So without knowing all of the different 
factors that were taken into consideration when they were setting their 
mill rate, I could not say why there was an increase.  They probably had 
other expenditures that could not be met through the provincial grant and 
the other funding that they had coming in before that.  But their grant was 
up over $26,000. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Can you tell me what percentage increase that increase 
represents, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- The increase in their grant was a little bit under 
1 per cent, .64 per cent. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, how do you even pay the heating bill 
when your grant increase goes up by less than 1 per cent?  How do you even 
pay teacher salaries, Mr. Minister?  Teachers move through the incremental 
step system, Mr. Minister.  How do you pay the potential, I suspect, 
teacher wage increase that's going to occur once your government negotiates 
the teachers' salary increase?  How do you pay for maintenance?  How do you 
pay for transportation costs, library costs, the costs associated with 
implementing core curriculum with an increase of less than 1 per cent, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, let me point out to the member 
just how much money the Tisdale School Division is receiving.  They may 
have only had an increase of $26,000 but the basic grant for this year in 
Tisdale is $4,165,372.  Now it has never been the intent that the 



 

 

provincial government should be picking up all of the costs related to the 
operations of schools, so when you add to that the amount of money that 
would normally be put in from the local taxation, there is a substantial 
amount of money there. 
 
I've indicated that the enrolment has gone down by some 59 students.  I 
would also imagine that, in some cases, the Tisdale School Division is 
being faced by the closure of some schools.  But the fact of the matter is, 
Mr. Chairman, that they are getting a substantial grant in excess of $4 
million. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, while they're getting a grant of $4 
million, inflation in this province is running at about 4.6 per cent.  Now 
obviously, Mr. Minister, your grant came in at less than 1 per cent.  Your 
grant didn't even meet inflation. 
 
It's no wonder, Mr. Minister, that the Tisdale School Division has 
increased it's property taxes by 8.77 per cent because your grant didn't 
even meet inflation, Mr. Minister.  And, as you know, your grant doesn't 
represent the entire educational spending in the Tisdale School Division.  
Obviously, Tisdale has to raise some of that spending on their own through 
property taxes, Mr. Minister. 
 
So I understand why Tisdale increased its taxes by 8.77 per cent, because 
your grant came in at less than 1 per cent.  I understand why taxpayers in 
this province are feeling particularly overburdened, because your 
government is continuing to shift the responsibility for educational 
financing from the province onto the local property taxpayers. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, can you explain to me why the Humboldt Rural School 
Division increased it's property taxes by 8.89 per cent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, just so we straighten out the 
member opposite, when she says that we're shifting the expenditures from 
the province onto the local taxpayer, in 1981 -- and I believe then the NDP 
were still in power, Mr. Chairman -- the provincial share of the operating 
grant for the Tisdale School Division was 62.1 per cent.  Now in 1988, 
which is the last year that we have the audited statements for, it was 
exactly the same, 62.1 per cent. 
 
Now if the member opposite can see a shift of responsibilities from the 
province to the rural, I fail to see it in that particular example, Mr. 
Chairman.  I'm sure that if you were to look at the year 1990-91, that 
you'll probably see that it's still in the neighbourhood of 62 per cent.  
But for the years that we have at the last audited statement, 62.1 per 
cent, exactly the same as what it was when the NDP were in power. 
 
Now you talk about Humboldt.  Well let's see what's happening at Humboldt.  
They had a loss of 41 students.  They had a loss in the total grant of 
$112,733.  Now what we would see there, Mr. Chairman, is the fact that the 
assessment in Humboldt has increased, will be there to offset the reason 
why they are having a decrease in their grant.   I would also point out, 
and in spite of that, the Humboldt Rural School Division is still receiving 



 

 

in excess of 4 millions of dollars for the current year. 
 
Now when she talks about changes that are taking place, we can see there 
that . . . And this is another interesting one because here is a real good 
example of off-loading, Mr. Chairman.  In fact in 1981 when the NDP were in 
power, the portion of the provincial grant that they provided was 54.7 per 
cent of the operating expenses.  But in 1988, the last year for which we 
have the audited statement, Mr. Chairman, it was 67 per cent.  In fact it 
had gone up over 13 per cent in the share that the province was paying 
towards their total operating costs.  So, Mr. Chairman, again if the member 
would try to mislead the public and the House that we're off-loading, I 
certainly fail to see it. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Minister, you know, you're awfully defensive tonight.  
What I'm trying to do is get a handle . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
No, I'm not being offensive.  He's being awfully defensive.  I'm asking the 
questions but you seem to be fairly argumentative. 
 
What I'm trying to get at, Mr. Minister, is why it is that your government 
continues to underfund education.  You know you have $65 million for 
Cargill Grain.  You can give away thousands of acres of northern 
Saskatchewan to Weyerhaeuser.  You can give away lots of money to the 
GigaTexts of the world.  You can enter into wonderful contracts with Chuck 
Childers, you know, five-year no-cut contracts. 
 
I'm trying to get at your priorities, Mr. Minister.  And I'm simply trying 
to point out to you that while you're busy underfunding educational 
spending in this province, the individual taxpayers are picking up their 
load.  Now if you look at the Outlook School Division, they've just 
increased their taxes by 10.34 per cent.  Can you explain to this House why 
it is that they have to increase their local property taxes by 10.34 per 
cent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Could you repeat the division again, please. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- It's the Outlook school unit: 10.34 per cent increase.  
Their mill rate's gone from 58 to 64 mills. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, again with Outlook -- and I'll try 
not to be so defensive; I'm simply trying to answer the questions. 
 
The Outlook School Division had a loss of 24 students but they have an 
increase in their grant of $75,891, which is 2.68 per cent.  Their total 
grant this year, Mr. Chairman, is $2.9 million and that's for a total of 
1,393 students. 
 
Now I'd like to point out as well what's happened there with regard to the 
portion of the expenditures there, or the provincial grant.  There has been 
a slight decrease there, Mr. Chairman, from 56.1 in '81 to 53.7 for 1988. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Minister, what does your department estimate the 
inflation rate to be?  When your regional people were out meeting with 
school divisions, what number did they fix as the inflation rate? 



 

 

 
(1945) 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, it would be approximately 4 per cent. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, is that what your officials were 
saying out at these meetings that occurred, I think it was the Friday after 
the budget came down Thursday?  They said 4 per cent, or were they telling 
people that the inflation rate, as determined by Saskatchewan Education, 
was about 4.6 per cent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- You could well be right on that.  We get the 
figures, or I understand the officials get the figures, from Finance.  It's 
quite possible. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Okay.  Well, Mr. Minister, given that, as I understand it, 
your officials were saying to school board directors that, according to the 
Department of Education or the Department of Finance, inflation is running 
at about 4.6 per cent in this province, can you tell me how many school 
boards in this province received operating grants in excess of 4.6 per cent 
increases. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, for those that received -- and this 
would include rural as well as the city, separate and public, comprehensive 
and so on -- zero to 5 per cent, there were 44 divisions; from 5 to 10 per 
cent was 24, and over 10 per cent there were 14. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Minister, can you tell me how many school divisions 
received cuts. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Between zero to 5 per cent would have been 21, and 
5 to 10 would have been 6, and more than 10 would have been 3.  And again, 
I would point out that the reasons for decreases would be determined by the 
number of students that had left the school division and also it could be 
an increase in the assessment.  Saskatoon public would be an example of 
where there was an increase in the assessment. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Minister, there were 39 school divisions that received 
cuts or less than a zero per cent increase.  And you say that there are 44 
school divisions that received between a zero to 5 per cent increase.  Of 
those 44, Mr. Minister, how many school divisions received increases in 
excess of the inflation rate of 4.6 per cent, or whatever? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well I can tell you that those that received over 5 
per cent increase would have been 38.  There would also have been a goodly 
number of the next category of 44 that were probably in around that four 
and a half to 5 per cent.  There were a total of 30 that received a 
decrease. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Okay, Mr. Minister, I need a little more . . . I need you 
to be a little more specific.  Of the 44 school divisions that received 
between a zero to 5 per cent increase, how many of those school divisions 
received an increase between zero and 4 per cent, for instance? 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- We don't have it broken down to the 4 per cent.  
All I can give you is to the 5 per cent.  And as I indicated there, the 
increase zero to 5 per cent, there were 44 in that category.  And the next 
category, from 5 to 10 per cent, increase was 24, and over 10 per cent was 
14. 
 
But I would point out, Mr. Chairman, to the member opposite, that the big 
thing that the department looks at with regard to the calculation of all of 
the school grants -- this is all done by the officials within the 
department -- is fairness.  And what they are looking at is equalization.  
And we fully realize that we try to maintain the 50 per cent range right 
across the province.  But again I would point out that it varies all the 
way from about 30 per cent to 80 per cent.  So to try and look at those who 
got more or those who got less, you have to consider the whole province and 
see what is happening, because when you look at some of those divisions 
where they have a very, very low assessment, 80 per cent of their operating 
grants are going to be coming from the province.  So we're looking at 
equalization when we determine whether or not they're going to be getting 
an increase or whether they're going to get a decrease. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Minister, I know that you will have a computer 
print-out of all the school divisions in Saskatchewan and their percentage 
increase.  Can you give me a copy of that.  I received it last year from 
the Minister of Education and I'd appreciate it if I could receive it this 
year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Yes, we'll be happy to provide that. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Minister, can you tell me when you'll provide that for 
me? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- We could provide it in the next session when we're 
into estimates -- tomorrow or Wednesday. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Now, Mr. Minister, it would 
appear from the information that you've just given me that over half of the 
school boards in this province received an increase less than the inflation 
rate in this province.  And that, Mr. Minister, explains why we see school 
boards across this province increasing their school property tax rates by 
rates in excess of the inflation rate.  That's why we see school boards in 
this province dipping into the reserves, as numerous newspaper reports have 
indicated, in order to keep the school taxes at a lower level, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
The point that I'm trying to make is, and it's quite clear from the 
information you've given me, that the reason why school divisions in this 
province have had to increase their mill rates, and in some cases increase 
those mill rates quite dramatically, is because of the cut-backs, or the 
cut-backs in funding to their individual school board, or because the 
funding that your government has forwarded to them is less than the rate of 
inflation. 
 



 

 

And while it's true there has been rural depopulation in this province of, 
say, 39 students in one school division, 59 in another, 24 students in 
another, all of those students don't leave the same school, Mr. Minister.  
Those students come from across the school division and those school 
divisions still have to provide an educational system.  And while your 
formula takes into consideration rural depopulation, or student losses, 
that still doesn't solve the problems that many school divisions are facing 
in this province, and that is having to provide a quality education for the 
students that are left at a time when students are leaving their school 
division. 
 
They still have to provide social studies or English or science or 
chemistry or physics or whatever the subjects may be.  And yet the way that 
education is being funded in this province doesn't seem to take that into 
consideration.  And while I recognize that the formula used to be well 
accepted by school trustees across Saskatchewan, obviously times have 
changed, factors have changed, the situation has changed. 
 
I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, now that you're looking at changes to the 
formula, can you tell me what we are looking at in terms of changes: what 
those changes will take into consideration in order that we can get school 
funding in this province back on track, in order that school divisions 
don't have to increase property taxes at horrendous rates of increases, and 
in order that we can move to the 60-40 formula that's being suggested by 
the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association and which has certainly been 
endorsed by my party colleagues. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, there's no doubt, as I've 
indicated, that we have to look at the financing of education.  But to just 
come out with a figure and say 60-40 and how that might work, there's going 
to be a lot of consultation and discussion with the groups that are 
involved.  Because we know that in fact today, because we try to strive for 
this equalization and fairness across the province, that there is a 
variation all the way from 30 per cent to 80 per cent for the total 
operating costs of schools.  And we also have to take into consideration 
the amount of money that we'd be putting in for capital projects. 
 
But, Mr. Chairman, I think there are other factors that we have to mention 
along with what the member opposite has been raising.  We have to keep in 
mind the fact that there are some 2,264 students that have left the 
province in the last year, or left our systems.  We have to consider the 
fact that there are many school divisions and schools where there have been 
a few students that have dropped out, that they still have to maintain the 
same services, they still have to have the same staff -- they still have to 
maintain the same services.  But we know that because of fewer students 
that the grants are going to be a little bit lower, so the only way that 
they can hope to recover that is by raising the mill rate. 
 
And I would point out, as well, Mr. Chairman, that the same system is being 
used today as it was when the NDP were in power and when the Liberals were 
in power prior to that.  They've always strived for equalization, right 
across the province, the fairness.  And we know that, since times are 
changing, and we have to re-evaluate things and reassess things, it is, as 



 

 

I said, time to take a look at the financing of education. 
 
We intend to do that.  But to say just what changes are going to take 
place, we can't do that until we've had an opportunity to discuss it with 
the trustees, with LEADS, with the STF, with SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association), and with SARM (Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities), because these people are all going to be involved, 
they're all going to be affected by whatever decision comes down. 
 
I think that, Mr. Chairman, as well, that we consider that education is 
paid through taxes, and if it isn't paid through property taxes then it has 
to be paid through other taxes.  The provincial money that goes towards 
education comes -- whether it's through sales tax or gas tax, or whether 
it's through income tax, whatever the case might be -- we're taxing people 
throughout the province.  And when we look at any new way of doing it, what 
we actually are going to probably find out, that we are going to be 
shifting the taxation from some people to other people, but it's still 
going to come, Mr. Chairman, from the taxpayers. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, there are some of us that think that 
the individual taxpayers have paid their fair share in this province for 
far too long.  If you look at what your government has done, individual 
income taxes in this province have gone up by 75 per cent in terms of 
revenue since your government came to power. 
 
If you look at the other kinds of things that individual taxpayers are 
involved in, for instance the sales tax, we've seen a 67 per cent increase 
in the kinds of revenues your government is collecting on that particular 
tax. 
 
But when you look at corporate income tax, and uranium royalties, and land, 
forest, fish, and fur licences, and oil royalties, and potash royalties, 
we've seen dramatic decreases, Mr. Minister, under your government. 
 
And therein lies the problem.  Your government is consistently going to 
individual taxpayers and asking them to shell out more and more money, 
whether that's in the form of individual income taxes or in the form of 
property taxes or school taxes.  And the corporate citizens in this 
province that are doing quite nicely in many instances are not being asked 
to pay their fair share. 
 
And consequently, Mr. Minister, I think that we have the potential for a 
serious tax revolt in this province -- a serious tax revolt.  Because 
people, quite frankly, are sick and tired of paying income taxes and 
property taxes and school taxes when they see the corporate friends of the 
government getting away without paying their fair share of taxes. 
 
(2000) 
 
And my colleague in the House of Commons, John Rodriguez, regularly has the 
corporate welfare bum of the week, and he has an Academy Award kind of 
presentation announcing the corporate citizen in this country that's not 
paying their fair share of taxes.  And those happen to be your cousins in 



 

 

Ottawa that haven't been able to change the tax system in this country so 
that we can get some semblance of fairness. 
 
And in fact what we're not seeing is the goods and services tax, which is 
going to have another increase on school boards in this province because 
they're not going to be exempt, Mr. Minister.  They in fact aren't going to 
have the ability to collect the goods and services tax, but they're 
certainly going to have to pay for the goods and services tax. 
 
And I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, are you prepared to support, should this 
tax go ahead, Bob Nixon's proposal, the treasury minister out of the 
Ontario government, who is suggesting that municipalities, universities, 
schools, and hospitals have some special consideration as a result of the 
government's decision to go ahead with the goods and services tax -- a 
decision which your government has not protested to any great extent in the 
province of Saskatchewan or indeed in the country of Canada. 
 
And I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, what sort of presentations are you making 
to the federal Finance Minister Wilson on the impact the goods and services 
tax is going to have on school divisions in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the member opposite knows full 
well that we have indicated on many occasions that we do not support the 
GST (goods and services tax).  It has also been indicated that school 
boards are not going to be affected by the GST.  So we would certainly want 
to ensure that that is maintained. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the member opposite, you know, likes to talk about the 
corporate sector and the fact they're not paying their fair share but she 
hasn't made any mention of the fact that all of the prices in our four 
major revenue generators have been down substantially in the last number of 
years and this has had an effect on royalties. 
 
It's also interesting too, when they talk about the amount of money and the 
underfunding and all of the rest of this when we have a calculation that's 
been done of some of the things that they're proposing.  It's going to cost 
about $7 billion to bring in some of the things that they've already 
promised, and we're not even into an election campaign yet, Mr. Chairman. 
 
So it's going to be pretty interesting to see what they come out with as 
time goes on with all of these promises that they're making to 
restauranteurs, and they're going to shut down the uranium industry, and 
they're going to do all kinds of things here.  They're going to take back 
all of the companies that have been privatized for a dollar and all the 
rest of the scene, and yet they're going to have money for all of these 
programs. 
 
So $7 billion, it would really be interesting, Mr. Chairman, and we're not 
into a campaign yet, so boy oh boy, it's going to be interesting. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Minister, you really didn't answer my question.  Now 
you say that school divisions aren't going to be impacted upon.  Explain 
that to me.  Explain how school boards are not going to have to pay the 



 

 

goods and services tax. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, the information that we have is that 
it's to be cost-neutral, that the school boards, hospitals, and different 
sectors such as this would probably pay the tax, but then with a rebate 
system it will be, in fact, cost- neutral.  Now that's the information that 
we have and that's the only thing that we've got to go on at this point and 
we would not want to see it any other way. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Minister, has not the school trustees, the 
Saskatchewan School Trustees Association made some sort of representation 
to you, encouraging you and your government to support Bob Nixon's proposal 
for how to deal with the goods and services tax as it will affect 
universities, municipalities, schools, and hospitals?  I think it's called 
the MUSH (municipalities, universities, schools, and hospitals) proposal. 
 
And I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, how you could arrive at the conclusion 
it's not going to affect school divisions when, in fact, school trustees 
across this province, and in particular the SSTA, is very concerned about 
the financial impact the goods and services tax is going to have on local 
school divisions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, we understand that the trustees have 
indeed made a proposal, but not to us; it's gone to the Minister of 
Finance.  And the member may well wish to ask the Minister of Finance some 
questions at a later time. 
 
We too are concerned about administrative costs that may be involved.  If 
school boards are, in fact, going to have to pay the tax and then are going 
to have to look for rebates, there may well be some administrative costs.  
So I think these are things that the ministers of Finance are now 
discussing and negotiating.  We would certainly want to do all we could to 
ensure that there aren't going to be administrative costs for the school 
boards and if there isn't some better way of doing it. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Minister, I know that the SSTA has been talking to the 
Department of Finance, but I also understand that they had also made 
representations to you.  I'm wondering what the Department of Education is 
doing in terms of making representations to the Department of Finance, in 
terms of trying to resolve some of the complicated problems that are going 
to arise for school boards, in particular the rebate mechanism which school 
boards are concerned isn't going to give them full recovery once the goods 
and services tax is implemented.  I'm wondering again: what sort of 
representation are you making to the Minister of Finance or to some of your 
counterparts in Ottawa? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, the officials from the Department of 
Education have been meeting with the officials in Finance, and the 
officials in finance from all across Canada are involved in looking at 
these very issues and trying to work out the fairest possible method of 
handling them.  We certainly do not support any increased costs as far as 
administration is concerned.  That information has been put forward to the 
Finance officials, and they are looking after the negotiations at the 



 

 

federal level. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Since your officials have been in contact with the 
Department of Finance, can you tell me what your official position is with 
regard to the goods and services tax, and what are your officials saying to 
the Department of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- The stand that has been maintained by the officials 
is that we are opposed to the GST, but in view of the fact that the 
legislation is now well along and it would appear that the federal 
government is going to put it through anyway, then we are suggesting to 
Finance that they make sure that they get in there and see that there are 
no additional administrative costs involved. 
 
But at the outset, we're opposed to it.  But we are asking that they ensure 
that there are no additional administrative costs. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Minister, are your officials familiar with Robert 
Nixon's proposal?  And I would be interested in knowing what your 
department's position is on Robert Nixon's proposal. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- The officials are aware of the proposal and find 
that there are some interesting suggestions within it, and discussions are 
ongoing.  Whether or not those are the suggestions that are going to be 
followed in the end analysis, it's hard to say at this time.  But yes, they 
are aware of it. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, it's quite obvious that you've 
developed yourself into quite a politician.  You haven't told me a thing.  
You're aware of it; it's ongoing; but I want to know what your position is, 
Mr. Minister.  Do you support it or don't you?  A simple yes or no.  Do you 
support parts of it or don't you?  Tell us where you're at; we'd be 
interested in knowing. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, as I pointed out, we are aware of the 
Nixon report.  Whether or not we're in support of all of it or part of it 
is really not the point here.  There are other positions, though, that are 
being put forward as well.  What we want to maintain is what's going to be 
best for the educational system here in the province of Saskatchewan.  We 
will continue to work with the Finance officials.  They're meeting all 
across Canada; the negotiations are going on; and it will be dealt with at 
that particular level by Finance. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, that was exactly what the point was.  
The point was, what's your position?  And you haven't told me what your 
position is.  And so the school trustees in the province of Saskatchewan 
will continue to wonder what your position is when it comes to the Robert 
Nixon proposal, because they certainly have found it an interesting 
proposal, and something that might . . . a proposal that might be able to 
accommodate some of the concerns.  Obviously, it has some financial 
implications for the province of Saskatchewan and that's why I was 
interested in hearing what your department's view was on it.  But, 
unfortunately, Mr. Minister, as you've developed into quite a politician, I 



 

 

guess the answer's not going to be forthcoming tonight, so we'll move on. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, it's -- my colleague says is, he's putting politics into 
education, I would suggest he is.  Mr. Minister, it's quite clear in our 
discussion over the last hour or so, that I think I've been able to point 
out to you, and if not you certainly to the people who are listening, that 
your government has not really met it's commitment to the K to 12 system 
this year in terms of funding.  And I'm talking about operating grant 
funding.  I'm not talking about capital expenditures, EDF (Education 
Development Fund), and those other things.  I'm talking about funding for 
the day-to-day operations of schools in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
It is clear, Mr. Minister, that your commitment to school boards in this 
province has dramatically decreased over the last several years and there's 
been a down-sizing, or downgrading of education in the province of 
Saskatchewan on to local property taxpayers.  There's no question that 
while not all mill rates have been set in the province of Saskatchewan 
there have been some dramatic increases across Saskatchewan. 
 
You say that some 38 schools received in excess of a 5 per cent increase.  
Well, there were something like 98 schools that did not receive a 5 per 
cent increase; did not receive the inflation rate in the province of 
Saskatchewan.  And that is why, Mr. Minister, we have seen some pretty 
dramatic increases in school taxes, school tax levies in the province.  And 
not all of the reports are in as you're probably aware. 
 
Mr. Minister, while it's true there has been rural depopulation in the 
province of Saskatchewan, some 2,400 students; students have been leaving 
the province.  Nevertheless, school divisions still have to provide an 
education.  We're witnessing across the province more and more calls from 
parents who are concerned about rural school closure, parents who are 
concerned about cut-backs in teaching staff, parents who are concerned 
about increase in student-teacher ratios, parents who are concerned about 
increases in their property taxes while at the same time recognizing that 
school divisions really, really have a hard time not to increase property 
taxes because of your underfunding of education. 
 
And I guess, Mr. Minister, I find it disappointing that in your budget 
speech that the Minister of Finance read in this legislature in March, 
there were great platitudes given to education, and how education was a 
priority, and how education was going to receive increase in spending, how 
education was the backbone of the government's policy initiatives, one of 
its priorities.  And if you look at what's happened since your budget was 
brought in, many, many school boards did not see increases in funding even 
to meet the rate of inflation and they've consequently had to pass that on 
to the local taxpayers. 
 
(2015) 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I'm going to leave this portion of estimates.  I can say 
very honestly that I am disappointed that you haven't been able to convince 
your colleagues in cabinet that the K to 12 school system deserved more 
spending.  It deserved at least the rate of inflation, Mr. Minister, and 



 

 

you didn't even come close. 
 
Consequently we will see more and more newspaper articles across 
Saskatchewan talking about increased student-teacher ratios, talking about 
cut-backs to school teachers and support services, talking about school 
closures, Mr. Minister.  That in fact is the reality that's occurring in 
the province of Saskatchewan as a result of your underfunding. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I want to turn this portion of our educational estimates 
over to my colleague, the critic for advanced education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Just a couple of things, Mr. Chairman, with regard 
to what the member opposite has just said.  She made mention of the 
pupil-teacher ratio, and I would like to remind her that since this 
government has been in power that the pupil-teacher ratio has, in fact, 
gone down.  We are now sitting at around 16.2:1, which is the third lowest 
in the country.  And I think that certainly the department is to be 
commended for being able to maintain that pupil-teacher ratio. 
 
Now I fully realize that we could go to lots of class-rooms in our larger 
urban centres and you would find that there are probably 30 or 35 students 
in a class-room.  But the pupil-teacher ratio right now is the third lowest 
in Canada.  
 
I would also indicate that we have tried to maintain the same proportion of 
funding of school divisions across this province that has been maintained 
for decades.  And no mention is made, as well, Mr. Chairman, with regard to 
moneys that are going into distance education, moneys that are going into 
the correspondence school, which are also being utilized to assist those 
areas in rural Saskatchewan where, because of declining enrolment, students 
sometimes do not have as much of an opportunity or as wide a subject 
offering.  So there are other things that are going on.  It's not all 
happening just within the operating grant, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, I want to take some 
time this evening to delve into post-secondary education.  And, Mr. 
Minister, I too want to support my colleague from Saskatoon Nutana in 
saying that I wish you had more power in cabinet for . . . in education and 
particularly for post-secondary education. 
 
At one time, Mr. Minister -- and I know you, being a former educator, will 
have to agree with me -- Saskatchewan was recognized all over this country 
and all over this continent as having one of the best education systems 
right from kindergarten to post-secondary education.  We can no longer say 
that, Mr. Minister, and you know that.  You know that. I know you have to 
defend the actions of your cabinet colleagues, but I know also deep down in 
your heart you know that you've got a tough time doing it. 
 
It is difficult, Mr. Minister, when you have to face the universities, and 
you have to face the regional colleges and technical schools . . . 
particularly the universities, Mr. Minister.  I know you've got a tough 
time in defending the money that your government has.  And I know you don't 
like us saying so, but the money that you have for Cargill, the money that 



 

 

you have for Weyerhaeuser . . . Mr. Minister let me just ask you if you 
ever sat down and calculated what the subsidy is to Weyerhaeuser at 8 per 
cent over 30 years.  I sat down the other day and calculated it out.  If 
Weyerhaeuser was to pay the going interest rate, on the price that you sold 
the mill for, Weyerhaeuser would have to pay an additional $432 million.  
$432 million. 
 
Mr. Minister, I met with the university people this afternoon and we 
discussed the possibility of the U of R having a debt -- a long-term debt 
of $6.8 million which may be down to 6.3 million depending on how it's 
going to be calculated.  How advantageous it would be for them, Mr. 
Minister, if they had loans at 8 per cent rather than paying 14 to 15 per 
cent today.  Have you ever thought, Mr. Minister, what that would do for 
the U of R and how helpful and beneficial that would be to the students at 
the U of R, instead of making that money available -- 8 per cent for 30 
years -- to a multinational corporation like Weyerhaeuser.  That is where, 
Mr. Minister, we have a disagreement with you and your government.  That 
you have this money.  You have this money for the Pocklingtons, and the 
Cargills, and the Weyerhaeusers.  But when it comes to our school boards -- 
as my colleague has already pointed out -- and when it comes to 
post-secondary education, the U of R and the U of S, you don't seem to have 
that money available.  That's where we have our argument with you.  It's 
your priorities.  You've got the money but you're simply spending it in the 
wrong places. 
 
Mr. Minister, when we look at the U of R and the U of S, they certainly in 
operating grants -- and let's stay at the operating grants -- in the 
operating grants they have suffered severely under your government since 
1983.  Severely.  I've got the figures here, Mr. Minister, and I showed 
them to the people at the university this afternoon.  They didn't seem to 
argue with those.  It has not kept up with inflation.  The operating grants 
have simply not kept up with inflation, and consequently what the 
university has had to do a number of things.  They've had to cut back on 
programs, number one; they've had to substantially -- substantially -- 
increase the size of the classes, number two.  And we know, Mr. Minister, 
and you didn't argue with my figures the other day so I assume they're 
correct, that we've had since 1982 an increase in student fees of over 82 
per cent -- of over 82 per cent.  That, Mr. Minister, is unacceptable, 
simply unacceptable. 
 
I know today you met with the president of the U of S Student Union.  I 
want to ask you, Mr. Minister: what assurances did you give to the 
president of the U of S Student Union that more moneys would be made 
available in the student loan program, even though recognizing -- 
recognizing -- Mr. Minister, that that will mean that many of the students 
will have to go in debt even further, but at least recognizing that you 
will give them the opportunity to attend post-secondary education. 
 
Have you given assurance to the president of the University of Saskatchewan 
Student Union that more moneys would be available in student loans to 
assist those students who will be adversely affected by the increase of 
tuition fees, due to the fact that you've once again underfunded the 
University of Saskatchewan and the University of Regina in operating 



 

 

grants?  Have you given that assurance?  Mr. Minister, would you just 
comment on the meeting that you had with the president of the university 
student union. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the member opposite goes at 
great lengths into talking about some of the large corporations that are 
providing a lot of revenues to this province and a lot of jobs to this 
province.  I didn't hear him saying anything about the $91,000 a day that 
Weyerhaeuser was losing prior to their being sold -- prior to their being 
sold.  So, Mr. Speaker, we could probably debate that topic for some period 
of time. 
 
I would point out, Mr. Chairman, that operating grants to universities this 
year will increase by 3 per cent, plus they'll receive $8.5 million under 
the Advanced Education Enhancement Fund. 
 
University capital payments, debt retirement will increase by ten and a 
half per cent.  Funding for university capital projects this year, $52.6 
million.  And as well something that's new this year, Mr. Chairman, is the 
fact that federated and affiliated colleges will get in on the enhancement 
fund and also a 3 per cent grant increase there.  SIAST (Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology) is going to be getting a 3 per 
cent grant increase plus $7.1 million from the enhancement fund. 
 
And something significant, Mr. Chairman, is the regional colleges and the 
increases that they're getting, a 3 per cent increase in their grant plus 
$2.3 million from the enhancement fund.  And as well the education outreach 
fund is again going to be at $3.2 million.  So a lot of additional money 
that is going to the post-secondary institutions this year. 
 
Now I know, Mr. Chairman, that all institutions and all school boards, 
everybody could use more money, but we have to keep in mind the ability of 
the taxpayers to pay.  And when tough times are here, such as we've had in 
the last few years, it is difficult to come up with any more money for any 
of the educational institutions.  I would point out that for this year that 
the operating grants for our universities are going to be $153.8 million.  
That's a pretty substantial amount of money, Mr. Chairman.  And as well 
there's going to be eight and a half million dollars for the enhancement 
fund. 
 
Now the University of Saskatchewan this year, their grant is going to be 
$111.7 million with another $6 million from the enhancement fund.  The 
University of Regina will get $42.1 million and another 2.3 from the 
enhancement fund; federated college, $4.77 million plus another $260,000 
from the enhancement fund, and that's new from last year. 
 
As well we're going to see another $23.4 million; it's an increase for debt 
retirement and another $52 million for construction, capital construction 
on our campuses.  So a substantial amount of money, Mr. Chairman, is going 
to our post-secondary institutions. 
 
Now with regard to increases in tuition fees, there is no doubt that there 
have had to be some increases, not only this year, but there have been 



 

 

increases I think for every year as long as I can remember.  The percentage 
increase of course has varied from one year to another.  And, Mr. Chairman, 
I would suggest that even with the increases that we see this year, I am 
pleased that they weren't any higher, and I know that Andrew Thompson was 
pleased that it wasn't any higher than 10 per cent.  That is still a 
significant amount, but it's not certainly as bad as they had thought it 
might be. 
 
But when you make a comparison of the increases in what students have to 
pay in other parts of Canada -- and particularly western Canada -- we find 
that in some cases we are higher, certainly with regard to the Alberta  
 Duniversities.  We're probably about the same as Manitoba; I don't have 
their new tuition fees yet for this year.  I know that we're lower than 
U.B.C. (University of British Columbia) and we're lower than the 
universities in Ontario.  So for western Canada, yes, we're higher than 
Alberta, we're lower than B.C.  When Manitoba's tuition fee increase comes 
in, we'll probably still be about the same.  And again it varies from 
college to college, so we're somewhere in the ballpark. 
 
Now with regard to the student loans, I have indicated to Andrew Thompson 
that it is to be hoped that there will be some additional flexibility 
within the loan program this year.  We know of some of the concerns that 
have been raised in the past and we're trying to address those.  We have to 
keep in mind that the Saskatchewan student loan fund has only been in place 
for a very short period of time and there were a lot of growing pains to go 
through. 
 
One of the problems that we have with the Saskatchewan student loan fund is 
that we use the same criteria as is used for the Canada student loan fund.  
We all I think would admit that some of the criteria there are a little bit 
outdated for today, but we haven't had any success to this point in making 
some changes.  What I would hope is that in our own operation here that we 
can have a little bit more flexibility so that we can meet some of the 
needs that we haven't been able to meet in the past. 
 
I think we've been doing a very good job with student loans in this 
province.  And some of the new programs that have been introduced, it has 
enabled more students to participate in them when you look at the number of 
students that are getting loans today.  That's up from 5,400 recipients 
back in '81-82 to now over 19,000 for this current year.  So it's a pretty 
substantial amount. 
 
The amount of money that's gone into that is around a hundred millions of 
dollars, 105, I think to be exact -- 60 from the feds and 45 from us.  And 
there is a lot of loan forgiveness.  There's free interest of course while 
students are still attending classes.  We know that as well we did have 6 
per cent interest loans which I think was a pretty good deal.  And we 
recognize today that students can't always find employment that they want, 
maybe as easy as when you and I were going to university, although I think 
that we generally found it sometimes tough then.  There weren't always the 
jobs that we wanted. 
 
But I would point out as well that the student loan fund is really there 



 

 

only to supplement the income or other sources of money that students would 
have to go to university.  It's not the intent that student loans should be 
covering all of the costs.  And that's where I would differ a little bit 
with Mr. Thompson and some of the points that he has been making.  But 
we'll be discussing those as time goes on because we want to try and meet 
on a regular basis. 
 
One other thing that I discussed with him today was the fact that we 
recognize that a lot of the problems with student loans occur in Saskatoon, 
and because of the large number of students there at SIAST and at the 
campus.  And what we want to see there is some changes that we can provide 
the service on campus during the peak period of time. 
 
(2030) 
 
We're looking now and talking to the students.  They're going to make some 
space available so that we can maybe have one or two people up there, one 
or two days a week, depending on the demand.  We're going to have to 
monitor that closely, but enable students then to have some of their 
concerns dealt with right there on the campus.  And we're getting full 
support from the students' union on that.  And I think that that is going 
to be very beneficial and we'll probably head off some of the problems in 
fact before they become problems. 
 
But we do have to continue to look at the student loan fund and address 
concerns as they are raised.  I would hope that this year we have fewer 
concerns raised than last because of changes that we have made, some 
streamlining that has been done.  But for the most part there is a lot of 
money that's going out as loans, and we have to ensure that those who need 
it are in fact getting it. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I'm not going to get into 
operating and capital grants to the university this evening.  I want to do 
that much more extensively on Wednesday.  But I was a little bit surprised 
by your statement that you said in your meeting with Mr. Thompson today 
that he was satisfied or happy with a 10 per cent increase in student . . . 
Did I hear that correctly? 
 
Would you mind telling me exactly what Mr. Thompson's view was on a 10 per 
cent increase in student tuition fees? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- As Mr. Thompson indicated to me, and I think he was 
quoted in the newspaper the other day, that he was pleased that it wasn't 
higher.  Certainly 10 per cent as far as he is concerned, probably is not 
acceptable, but at the same time there were a lot of rumours that they 
might be looking at a 15 per cent increase.  And that was the indication 
that he had given to me, that certainly he was pleased that it wasn't 
higher.  I'm not saying he was happy with it. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, I'm sure glad you corrected that because 
that's not what I understood Mr. Thompson's position was either.  But, Mr. 
Minister, would you tell me if the -- and then I'm going to get off of this 
particular area -- if the U of S had taken care, my understanding is that 



 

 

even with a 10 per cent increase in student funds, student fees, the 
university will still be short $1 million. 
 
How do you expect the U of S -- they're not allowed to run a deficit -- how 
do you expect the U of S to take care of the additional million dollars, or 
are discussions going on with your department so additional funds would be 
made available? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- I know that when we talk about a million dollars 
that it's still a fair amount of money, but when you consider the size of 
the University of Saskatchewan's budget, that that's just a little over 
half of 1 per cent that they're looking at, that they're going to have to 
try and address. 
 
But again, it's up to the board of governors in the university 
administration to see what, in fact, they can do to address the problem 
that they have. 
 
Now we recognize that through the enhancement fund that they are getting 
some additional money.  We have to continue to work together with them to 
see if there are other things that can be done throughout the course of the 
year.  We're not sure exactly, for example now, what effect that the 
increased expenditures to regional colleges is going to have, how many more 
students may be involved with programming out there, but we have to 
certainly continue to work with them. 
 
I plan on discussing this again with Dr. Ivany later this week, but we do 
work in very close co-operation with him.  Right now, they just had their 
board meeting, as you know, last Friday, and that's when the tuition fees 
were set.  And they're obviously looking at their expenditures and seeing 
if there are, in fact, other ways in which they can do away with that 
deficit.  So that's something that's going to take a little bit of time for 
them to try and work out, but we will be in discussion with them. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, as I indicated, I'm not going to pursue this 
any further this evening.  I will go in much more detail on Wednesday or 
Thursday or Friday, whenever we get back to it, however long it will take.  
I will just remind you today that that's what I intend to do, and exactly 
what your lack of funding has done to the two universities and what will 
happen. 
 
Now you talk very much about the enhancement fund, and I will go into much 
more detail of that a little later, how detrimental that is to the 
universities when you don't include that into the base funding, as you 
didn't do last year and you probably won't do this year. 
 
What I want to do, Mr. Minister, is get back, I want to get back to the 
student loan fund.  Mr. Minister, are negotiations going on at the present 
time between the provincial governments and the federal government to 
change the criteria, which you have already admitted tonight and I think we 
both agree are outdated? 
 
They should have been changed and we were looking at some changes in the 



 

 

late '70s and the early '80s which didn't come about.  And I just want to 
ask you this evening, Mr. Minister, how far advanced are those 
negotiations?  And if you can't, if you can't convince the federal 
government that they should change the criteria under which students are 
eligible for student loans, will you give us a guarantee tonight that you 
will undertake to change the criteria that you use in the Saskatchewan 
student loan program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- The concerns about the Canada student loan plan . . 
. or program are not just unique to Saskatchewan.  All of the provinces 
have concerns about it, and in fact negotiations are going on with the 
officials and working through the Council of Ministers of Education.  We 
had a chance to discuss it briefly when I was at the last meeting, but in 
the interim, the officials are looking at it.  It doesn't appear likely of 
course that there are going to be any changes now in place for August 1 of 
this year, but we have to ensure that we continue working to have some of 
those changes brought in for next year. 
 
With regard to what we can do with our own program here, we will still, for 
the most part, be following that same criteria.  But what I suggested 
earlier, that we are going to be looking at all the flexibility that we can 
within our particular program to see that those students who require the 
loans will in fact be able to get them. 
 
And as I understand it in talking with some of our officials, we do have 
some more flexibility that we can work on.  But we'll still have the same 
general framework.  But there are some situations we have to always 
consider on an individual basis.  But there is some flexibility as I'm told 
by the officials in the student loan program. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, my question to you is, again, what are you 
recommending . . . what is it the Government of Saskatchewan recommending 
to the federal government in changes to the student loan program?  What are 
your recommendations and could I have a copy of those recommendations that 
you have made?  I know that those negotiations have been going on for some 
years now.  Surely they are not secretive.  Could I have a copy of your 
recommendations that you . . . the Government of Saskatchewan has made to 
the other provincial ministers and also to the federal government. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, I would point out one of the main 
issues that we have and that's to do with the parental contribution table.  
They're really outdated.  And I've been assured by my officials that we can 
provide you, for the most part I think, all of the recommendations that we 
have made to the feds and we'll have that for you on Wednesday. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, I appreciate that very much.  My next question 
I guess is, if you feel, as you've indicated already, that the federal 
criteria are outmoded and outdated and it takes a long time -- I know, I 
mean, I've been there and I know it takes a long time to negotiate those 
through all the provinces and then to get agreement with the federal 
government -- if you feel that those are outdated and unfair, why don't you 
make the changes and show some leadership in this province and make those 
changes for the provincial loan program so that our students in this 



 

 

province won't have to suffer because of the lack of leadership by some of 
the other provincial ministers and the federal government.  Why don't you 
show some leadership and show our students that you're really behind them 
and you will implement some of those changes that you have recommended. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I think we've shown a great 
deal of leadership in this province because I think that the Saskatchewan 
student loan program is one of the best that you'll find any place in 
Canada.  We have made a lot of changes to it.  It's the basic criteria that 
we follow that's been used by the Canada student loans program. 
 
But I think if you consider some of the changes that we have introduced 
with regard to the money that single parents, disabled can get, when you 
consider as well the fact that parental assets have been excluded as 
assessment criterion for dependent students, that was something that was a 
real irritant.  When you had, for example, in the farming sector where 
people might have a fair amount of land, but they had no income.  So when 
that government, of course, was in power, it was very difficult for some of 
the rural students to get a student loan because they always looked at the 
assets and it had absolutely nothing to do with the income that the parents 
had.  So there are examples of the relief, the interest relief that has 
been provided.  A lot of the program criteria has been changed. 
 
So there is a fair bit of change there in what you would find in the other 
provinces, which makes it possible for more students to get a larger amount 
of money in some cases, and also a larger amount that can be forgiven.  So 
I think we have led the way in a lot of areas there, Mr. Chairman.  But 
obviously, as times change we have to continue to take a look at what we're 
doing and act on the suggestions and advice that is being given to us by 
student unions on the different campuses. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, I want to pursue that a little further, but I 
want to ask you a question.  It is true that you've made a number of 
changes, some of them more certainly positive.  Would you mind telling me, 
Mr. Minister, when was the change made to cancel the bursary program?  And 
can you also tell me when the bursary, at what level the bursary program 
kicked in when it was in existence? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, the change came in 1987-88 and I 
would point out that I think that some of the changes that were made were 
really a lot better than some of the things that we had before.  Forgivable 
loans replaced bursaries in '87-88 and are targeted to high-need students 
and contingent upon successful completion of studies -- no longer a 
give-away program.  Students receiving assistance above $180 per week are 
eligible for forgiveness of loans above this amount if they successfully 
complete their studies.  The student assistance program is intended to 
supplement and not replace the resources of students and their families. 
 
And the average authorized forgivable loan in '89-90 is projected to be 
more than two and a half times that given in bursary assistance in 1981-82.  
In other words, it changed from 955 to 2,517.  So even though the bursaries 
provide . . . that was a good program, but in fact that we find that today 
that the amount of forgiveness is two and a half times what the students 



 

 

would have got through bursary assistance.  So I think even though it was a 
change, the change was for the good. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, you still didn't answer my question: when did 
the bursary kick in?  At what level did the bursary kick in? 
 
(2045) 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, I think this is what the member 
wants.  The Canada student loan was the first one that, of course, they 
would be eligible for and would apply for.  Once they got up to $80 a week 
on that, then the Saskatchewan student bursary kicked in at that point, so 
that was $70 a week.  The next category then, there could be another Canada 
student loan after that of another $25 a week.  And then that was followed 
by the Saskatchewan supplementary loan of $75 a week, for a total of $250 
per week for regular students. 
 
Special incentive bursaries over and above that, then, could be another 110 
per week to a maximum of $360 a week for those special incentive students.  
But the key point here, of course, is that we make maximum use or get 
maximum federal dollars before our own kicks in.  And I think that that's 
good management to do that. 
 
Right now then, since '87-88 when the change came about, now a Canada 
student loan would kick in first up to $105 a week.  The Saskatchewan 
student loan then, the repayable portion, would be $75 per week.  And then 
the third category will be the Saskatchewan student loan, forgivable, of 
$70 per week, bringing it up to the 250 per week for regular students.  But 
we're getting an extra $25 per week then from the Canada student loan fund.  
The special incentive supplement again, which is forgivable, is another 
$110 a week.  So that was the equivalent of the bursary before.  It's the 
same amount. 
 
So the fact of the matter is, the maximum assistance levels are $75 per 
week more than they were in '85-86.  And the main thing is to maximize the 
federal dollars input first. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, isn't it true that, when the bursary was in 
effect, that when a student received a student loan of $1,800 -- around 
$1,800 if they were eligible for the bursary -- it was at that point that 
the bursary kicked in?  Isn't that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the member opposite is going 
back a long time in history to go back to when it was $1,800, and at that 
time they could get the loan of $1,800 and then there was an $1,800 
bursary. 
 
Now the fact of the matter is that the changes were partially brought about 
to make more of that free money as such, available for the higher need 
students.  And I think that we recognize today that there are students that 
have greater need for one reason or another, and so we should be 
recognizing that.  So that's why some of those changes have been made and 
the money has been targeted to that particular group. 



 

 

 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, what you're saying to me is that when students 
under this government were eligible for bursaries after $1,800 student 
loans, today you're saying to that student, you must take out $5,960 before 
you're eligible for any forgiveness at all.  So what you're saying to the 
students is that you must take out another $4,100 a year in student loans 
before you receive anything that is forgivable.  And over a four-year 
period, you're saying to the students, run yourself further and further in 
debt with student loans.  That's exactly what you're saying to the 
students.  And you don't make enough money available to the universities so 
they have to substantially increase tuition fees.  That was my point 
before. 
 
So you're saying to the students, well we can't make enough money available 
to the universities so they have to increase your tuition fees, but we are 
going to take away the bursaries and ask you people to take on a much 
greater debt through student loans.  That's what you're saying to them.  
And that's the point that I wanted to make to you, Mr. Minister. 
 
Yes, you made some changes.  But some of the changes you made, a 
fundamental change here, was to take away a very good bursary program from 
students and saying to students, but we'll make more money available to you 
in loans -- in loans -- that's what you're saying to them.  And then you 
don't even give them the same interest rates as you give some of the 
multinational corporations, after they find employment.  In fact, you ask 
them to pay considerably more. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, don't tell me that you've been so generous, because you 
haven't been.  You've taken from the students a very good bursary program 
and asked them to put themselves further in debt.  That's the point that I 
want to make, and if you were honest with students you'd tell them that.  
That's what you did. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, let me point out to the member 
opposite that we are targeting more money for those that have a higher or 
greater needs.  These are some of the people that that party over there  
_- and we've heard them say this before -- they don't believe in welfare 
reform.  They'd rather see some of these people simply remain on welfare.  
And we've made it possible for some of them to . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . And I've touched a nerve; I've touched a nerve over 
there, Mr. Chairman, but that's exactly what their philosophy is. 
 
So there were some changes that were necessary.  And we don't say to 
students, Mr. Chairman, what money they have to take in student loans.  
There are lots of students that go to university today without taking any 
money out in loans.  And I would also point out, when he always keeps 
harping on Cargill, and let's consider what is going to be happening in so 
far as jobs that are going to be created as far as the fertilizer plant is 
concerned, that maybe more students will have opportunities for jobs at 
places like Cargill. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- In Alberta and B.C. 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well you'd rather have all of these industries go 
to Alberta or go down into Montana and then buy our product back from them 
and the jobs would all be over there.  So you can't have it both ways. 
 
Maybe if we can have a little bit more industry like this in Saskatchewan . 
. . You don't think that some students get jobs in the paper mill in Prince 
Albert, or in the bacon plant in North Battleford?  I can see certainly 
that students are going to have an opportunity for getting jobs at the 
fertilizer plant as well, Mr. Chairman, and then maybe fewer of them will 
in fact need student loans when they want to go back to university. 
 
So let's be fair about this.  We can talk about this all we want and the 
difference in philosophy, but that's the way it is, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Cool down. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Yes, cool down.  I don't like those hypocritical words from 
the minister.  And that's exactly what they are -- hypocritical words.  Mr. 
Minister, when you subsidize Weyerhaeuser to the tune of $420 million, 
don't tell me on the one hand that you have any sympathy for the students 
who you soak more for loans.  That's being very hypocritical.  You ought to 
know better, as a former educator.  I could take that from the former 
minister of Education who obviously didn't understand education, but I 
expect better from you. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you had a little more authority, a little more power in 
cabinet, maybe you would get some more funds for our students.  Mr. 
Minister, when you support 8 per cent loans -- an 8 per cent loan which is 
a 6 to 7 per cent reduction in interest rates for Weyerhaeuser, as I just 
pointed out to you; is a subsidy of $420 million over a 30-year period -- 
don't tell the students of this province that you have any sympathy for 
them.  None at all. 
 
Cargill . . . Anybody, Mr. Minister, could produce one job if you give them 
$3.7 million.  And that's what it's been estimated one job will cost at the 
Cargill fertilizer plant -- $3.7 million.  Now that's not being very 
economical about spending the money in this province. 
 
Mr. Minister, I asked you before and I want to ask you again: is it not 
true that what you have done through some of the changes that you have 
made, and in cancelling the bursary program, is to ask students to go 
further and further in debt because they simply do not have the money to 
pay the high cost of tuition fees and other costs that are connected with 
going to university?  Isn't that what you're asking the students to do? 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, isn't it true today that many of those students, those 
students in need, are going to be in debt to the tune of 25 or $30,000 by 
the time they graduate from a five-year program?  Isn't that true? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, we don't have to be ashamed at all of 
the student loan programs that we have introduced in this province.  And I 



 

 

can take the member back to when we had student loans that were at 6 per 
cent interest rates, and that's something that you never, ever did over 
there when you were in power.  So you like to talk about all the great 
things that you did. 
 
I would also point out, Mr. Chairman, that the fact of the matter is that 
some students may well have higher student loans by the time they have 
completed their courses, but I would point out that because of some of the 
changes that we have made in the student loan program, that more people now 
have an opportunity to access those loans and have more loans forgiven than 
ever before.  So I think that we have made university and technical 
schools, in many cases, a lot more accessible because of some of those 
changes that we've made where there has been more money made available for 
them and more opportunities where money was forgiven. 
 
There are some of those students, granted, that will have a higher debt 
load when they have graduated from college, whatever that might be.  But, 
again, that's going to be determined by the amount of money that their 
parents can provide to assist them when they go to university.  It's also 
going to depend on the amount of money that the students can earn prior to 
going to university or during summer school, or during the summers when 
they're not at university. 
 
So there are lots of students today that are not solely relying on student 
loans to go to university, and you know that.  Many of the students that 
you taught in high school haven't gone and got student loans because they 
went out and got jobs in the summer, or their parents assisted them in 
going to university.  So we can't hang it all on the student loan program. 
 
We are providing a great deal of money as far as student loans.  In 1981-82 
the total loan assistance was only $12.9 million and only 5,400 recipients.  
Now we've got over 105 millions of dollars and over 19,000 recipients. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, the very point that you are making, the very 
point that you are making is the point that I'm trying to make.  And that 
is that you're denying, you're denying children, young people of poor 
families, the opportunity to go to university. 
 
Many of those students today simply . . . As you yourself indicated just a 
little while ago, jobs are not available; they're much more difficult to 
obtain.  You yourself mentioned that.  So what you're saying to those 
students who are coming from poor and low income groups, low income 
families, you're denying them the opportunity to go to a post-secondary 
education.  That's what you're doing.  And before this, when we had a 
bursary program, those students qualified.  Those students qualified and 
were able to go on to university. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to go on to some other topic as it relates to student 
loans, but my colleague, my desk mate, has some questions that he would 
like to direct to you at this particular time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Just to correct the member opposite, Mr. Chairman, 
on one thing he's talking about -- total loans may be amounting to $25,000 



 

 

at the completion of their programs -- estimates that we have that the 
average debt load will be approximately $11,500 in federal and provincial 
loans for students currently graduating from three years of post-secondary 
study. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- I said five years. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well depending on how long they're going to be 
going.  There aren't that many who are going to be going for five years.  
I'm telling you what it is for three years and if you want to just take it 
over a four-year period or even five, it's not going to be $25,000 as 
you've suggested. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, could you tell me how many . . . Now that you 
have that statistic, you would also have the statistic, what per cent of 
the students have loans, total loans of over $20,000.  What per cent of the 
students have loans over $25,000?  If you have the other statistic, you 
certainly would have that, too. 
 
(2100) 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, I am told that we do not have that 
information. That's federal statistics.  And this, of course, is 
information that we have been able to get, but we do not have the other.  
Maybe we can get more of that, but we do not have it at the present time. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, would you mind telling me what was the average 
loan last year for students at the university? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- We'll provide you that information Wednesday. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- That's not good enough.  You provided that to me in January; 
you provided that to me in January.  You have that information now. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Did you forget it? 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- No, I've got it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, I've indicated to the member opposite 
that we do not have the information with us tonight.  We'll have that for 
him on Wednesday.  He may, in fact, even have it over there right now and 
he's just being . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Yes, I do. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well then quit being silly about it if you've 
already got it. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- The minister says I'm being silly.  I want to show to the 
minister that you're not being . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

Mr. Rolfes: -- Oh there's Mr. clapper.  Mr. Minister, I want to show you 
why I wanted you to give me that answer, because in a January letter that I 
wrote to you and you answered, you said the average loan was $5,000 -- 
$5,000.  Five times five is $25,000, Mr. Minister.  So if the average loan 
is $5,000 and the student goes to university for five years, that student 
would have a debt of $25,000.  Those were your words in a letter you wrote 
to me.  You also indicated to me, Mr. Minister, that the average loan for a 
student attending private vocational school was $7,700.  Isn't that 
correct? 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, when you say that the average debt load is $11,000 over 
three years, I want your officials to check out whether I am right in the 
answer that you gave me in January -- and I've got the letter here with me 
-- or whether now the officials have changed their minds.  Would you please 
indicate to me which is correct, the figure you gave me in January or the 
figure you're giving me tonight? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, as I indicated earlier, we do 
not have those particular figures here right now and we will check it out 
and we will give you that information on Wednesday. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, I want to let my seat mate ask a few 
questions, and I will go through my files to find the letter that you sent 
me in January and read it back to you so that we are on the same 
wavelength. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, you will 
be well aware that in the first year of your second term in government, the 
fiscal year 1986-87, a student qualified for a bursary from your government 
if they borrowed $2,640 or more.  And of course, in fiscal year 1987-88 you 
changed that, Mr. Minister, so that a student at university in an 
eight-month program had to borrow $5,960 before they were eligible for any 
loan forgiveness, and you changed the program from a bursary program to a 
forgivable loan program. 
 
Now my question to you, Mr. Minister, is this: with respect to the 
University of Saskatchewan and the University of Regina, can you tell me 
how many students were eligible for bursary assistance at the University of 
Saskatchewan and at the University of Regina in 1986-87?  And how many 
students at the University of Saskatchewan and the University of Regina, 
last year, were eligible for forgiveable loans, Mr. Minister?  Can you give 
us those two figures. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, the member opposite is asking for 
some pretty detailed information and the officials inform me that they are 
going to have to take a little bit of time to get that information for you.  
We'll be happy to provide as much of it as we can, but we can't do it 
tonight. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I understand that.  I would ask that 
you have that information available on Wednesday, so that it can be 
discussed during the estimates, instead of being provided after estimates 
are over.  Because, Mr. Minister, I venture to speculate that we will see a 



 

 

very significant reduction in the number of students who were eligible for 
loan forgiveness last fiscal year and this fiscal year, in comparison with 
the number of students at the universities of Regina and Saskatchewan who 
were eligible for bursaries four years ago, Mr. Minister.  And we'll 
discuss the details when you provide them here to this legislature. 
 
But there can be no doubt that if a student had to borrow more than twice 
as much money before they became eligible for any loan forgiveness, 
obviously the number of students eligible for loan forgiveness declined 
dramatically.  And you yourself, sir, have pointed out that the average 
student loan is in the range of $5,000 now for a university student.  And 
what that means, Mr. Minister, is that that student, of course, is no 
longer eligible for any loan forgiveness, whereas four years ago, of 
course, they would have been eligible for a very significant bursary.  And 
you know that full well. 
 
Now I want to ask you another question with respect to students who are 
married and who are not able to obtain a student loan that parallels their 
assessed need, Mr. Minister.  And I want to ask you why it is that a 
married student with children to support is only eligible for a maximum 
student loan that just exceeds $8,000 even though their assessed need may 
be in the range of 13 or $14,000, Mr. Minister.  I wonder if you can 
explain that discrepancy to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, each situation is treated on an 
individual basis, and I'm sure that we have many situations where married 
students are going to university where in many cases, one or the other, the 
spouse is probably working.  So they may in fact not qualify for any 
additional forgiveness or any additional loans. 
 
So they're all treated on an individual basis as I indicated.  In some 
cases if there are special needs, then there may have to be other 
considerations given as to how much they could borrow and under what 
conditions. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Mr. Minister, you know full well what I'm talking about.  
I'm talking about the fact that under your government's policies a married 
student is only eligible for a maximum in student aid of just over $8,000.  
Now under the formula that the student loan plan uses, their assessed need 
can be in the range of 12 or 13 or $14,000, but the most that they can 
qualify for from your government is $8,000.  Now can you explain to the 
Assembly, sir, why it is that you don't provide student assistance that 
parallels the assessed need of the student?  Why do you allow this large 
discrepancy to exist? 
 
And this discrepancy is based on assessed need by your department, sir.  In 
other words I'm talking about a student who after all revenues are taken 
into consideration from employment and all other sources, has an assessed 
need from your department of $14,000, who is married, who has children to 
support, but who can't get more than $8,000 from your student loan plan.  
When are you going to change your policy and start providing student 
assistance that parallels a student's assessed need? 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, in answer to the member's question I 
could simply say that the $8,000 is the maximum unless there are any other 
special circumstances.  But I think that what we have to keep in mind here 
is that the student loan program is there to supplement other income.  It's 
not the intention that the student loan program should be paying for all of 
the costs, whether it's a married couple or not, for that individual to go 
to university.  So it's there as a supplement. 
 
And I would anticipate that we have many people in this particular 
situation who would at least be out working when they're not at university.  
And maybe it's not always possible for the spouse to work, but there is 
generally some other source of revenue for them to go to university.  It's 
not the intention that the government should be paying for all of it. 
Otherwise, how would you ever control it? 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Well, Mr. Minister, if it's the intention of your 
government, which actually I believe it's not, to assist low-income 
families to get an education and to be able to earn a good living in this 
society -- and to earn a good living, one really does have to have 
post-secondary education today, sir, and you know that full well -- then 
clearly what you're telling us that if a student's assessed need, because 
they have several children to support, is several thousand dollars higher 
than the loan program that you're operating, that you're not prepared to 
look at increasing the ceiling.  And I'm very disappointed at that, sir, 
very disappointed indeed.  What you're telling married students with 
children to support, is that unless they can find upwards of half the 
amount of money that they will need on an annual basis to attend 
university, that you're not prepared to come up with the money that they 
require for a student loan. 
 
Because what you're doing in many instances, sir . . . And I've had 
several, several students in the constituency that I represent, the riding 
of Saskatoon University, who are married, come to me and show me how they 
are 6 or 7 or $8,000 above the maximum ceiling that you will give for a 
student loan, based on the assessed need calculated by your department 
officials, sir.  And you're not prepared to assist them at all, and I find 
that very disappointing indeed and you've just confirmed that here again 
tonight. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to ask you another question and this is with respect 
to the family income plan as it pertains to student loans, so it involves 
both the Department of Social Services and your department, sir.  And I 
want to ask you how it is, as a matter of policy by your government -- 
because obviously you and the Minister of Social Services have planned this 
together -- working families, Mr. Minister, in this province who are 
eligible for family income plan are now, for the first time, as a result of 
a policy change that you made in January, that you and the Minister of 
Social Services made in cabinet, by order in council, you've made a 
decision that someone who is applying for family income plan and attending 
university can no longer have considered as . . . for the first time, I 
might say, must have considered student loan moneys as a source of income. 
 
(2115) 



 

 

 
And when a student who is supporting children has to go out, Mr. Minister, 
and borrow money from your government for things like tuition and books, 
Mr. Minister, they are then being told by the Minister of Social Services 
that they're no longer eligible for family income plan benefits. 
 
Now you said earlier, sir, that you were concerned about helping low-income 
families get an education.  Now, Mr. Minister, how can you explain this 
order in council that took place in January, while you were at the cabinet 
table as Minister of Education.  How can you explain allowing such an order 
in council to pass that for the first time says to a low-income working 
mother who's trying to take university classes, that for the first time she 
must consider money that she receives for a student loan for tuition and 
books as income, that therefore disqualifies her for the family income 
plan?  You explain that policy change to me, sir. 
 
And by the way, don't tell me that it's simply in the domain of the 
Minister of Social Services.  It is clearly your responsibility as well, 
and I want an explanation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, let me say that our 
responsibility is to do with student loans, and when we're dealing with 
them, the officials consider the sources of income that people have.  Any 
changes that have been made, as the member is pointing out here, were made 
within the Department of Social Services, and I would suggest that maybe 
you ask that question of the Minister of Social Services when he's in his 
estimates.  So I'm not going to make any other comment on that at this 
point. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I suspected such an answer, but the 
answer comes from someone, the man who is responsible for advancing the 
position of low-income families in this province getting an education. 
 
It's your responsibility, sir, to make education more accessible to 
low-income families in this province.  And what your cabinet and you, Mr. 
Minister, have done is, you have implemented a policy change, a policy 
change, sir, that makes it more difficult for low-income working families 
to pursue an education, and you know that, sir. 
 
And what you are now saying as a government is, that because someone gets a 
student loan, that is going to make them ineligible for family income plan 
benefits.  And that, sir, is not only the responsibility of the Minister of 
Social Services, it's your responsibility at the cabinet table as well. 
 
What did you do, sir, to speak up on behalf of those low-income working 
families before this new policy was put into effect? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, I think I indicated earlier that the 
student loan program that this government has provided and changes that we 
have made have assisted a tremendous number of students.  And I think that 
some of the changes that we have made with regard to those who have special 



 

 

needs have gone far and beyond anything that that government did when they 
were in power. 
 
Let me point out that we've got somewhere in the neighbourhood of ten and a 
half times as much provincial assistance available for this past year to 
what there was when they were in power, Mr. Chairman.  So at that same 
period of time the number of students assisted will have tripled. 
 
Now we know that there are still changes that we have to look at, but we've 
got an awful lot of students today who are taking advantage of our 
programs.  And I would point out that just the Saskatchewan student loan 
program alone, that an estimated 13,000 students will be authorized for 
loans from that program this year, and about half of those students will be 
eligible for forgiveable loans. 
 
And that, Mr. Chairman, is going to be a substantial amount of money. 
 
We've got students today that can take a good part of their education and 
have the loans almost totally forgiven.  And with other special incentive 
remission programs that we have and interest write-down programs and so on, 
Mr. Chairman, I think that the students are getting a tremendous amount of 
assistance from this government, but we will continue to look at ways in 
which we can improve the system and make it possible for more and more 
people to take advantage of it. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Mr. Minister, I want to ask you a question that follows 
your comment just now.  You said that half the students . . . Did you say, 
sir, that . . . I believe I heard you say that half the students receiving 
student loans also receive loan forgiveness.  I wonder if you can break 
that down, Mr. Minister, with respect to the number of those students, how 
many of the students who are receiving forgiveable loans are students from 
private vocational schools, Mr. Minister?  Because the key question here, 
Mr. Minister, is that we believe that the numbers of students receiving 
forgiveable loan assistance at university and at technical institutes have 
declined; that the numbers of students receiving forgiveable loans at 
private vocational schools has increased. 
 
What percentage, Mr. Minister, of the students who receive loan forgiveness 
are attending private vocational schools?  Give us the percentage and the 
numbers, sir, and contrast that with the numbers at university and 
technical institutes, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- While the officials are looking that up for us, I 
would just comment on an earlier statement that you made with regard to 
people in need and the fact that if the student loans do not cover the 
expenses or the particular student's needs if they're on social assistance, 
they can still apply for the FIP (family income plan) program.  So there 
are moneys that are still available for them if the loans won't cover it. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I mean that is an incredible comment.  
Because what you've done is that you've made . . . We'll find out from the 
Minister of Social Services the numbers of people who've become ineligible 
for the family income plan as a result of the policy change.  But for the 



 

 

first time your government is considering money borrowed by students for 
things like tuition and books as income.  No other government in the 
country does that, Mr. Minister.  No other government in the country 
considers student loan money borrowed for tuition and books as income. 
 
And I might add to that, Mr. Minister, that you've also set a new record in 
that now when students borrow money for student loan purposes, if they have 
family to support and they're unable to get a job over the summer, and they 
have to go to the Minister of Social Services to apply for social 
assistance, again you're the first government in Canada, Mr. Minister, to 
deny those students assistance during the summer because, Mr. Minister, 
you're the first government in Canada that requires students who borrowed 
student loans for the September to April period to save money to live on 
all summer if they can't get a job. 
 
They're unable to go to the Minister of Social Services for social 
assistance, Mr. Minister, because the Department of Social Services expects 
that they will have saved a goodly portion of their student loan money to 
live on over the summer.  So don't give me any nonsense about the kind of 
help, so-called help, that you're offering to low-income families, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Now would you answer my original question.  What percentage, Mr. Minister, 
of the students who get forgiveable loan money are students who attend 
private vocational schools?  Give us the percentage and give us the number 
and contrast that with the percentage and number of students receiving 
forgiveable loan assistance at universities and technical institutes in 
this province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, private vocational schools in 1988-89 
accounted for about 22 per cent, and the public institutions the balance.  
Now as far as the number of students, the private vocational schools 
accounted for about 15 per cent of the students.  So 22 per cent of the 
authorized loans, 15 per cent of the students.  You got that? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- The numbers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Total numbers? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Yes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Let's see.  Number of assisted students attending 
private vocational schools increased up to 2,886 in the past three years. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- That was the total number of students? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Yes.  Twenty-eight hundred and eighty-six students.  
That was in '88-89. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, a couple of 
questions.  Not only do you not provide adequate support for students 
financially, but for students who want to take certain courses you don't 
provide the courses. 



 

 

 
I have corresponded with you, and I know others have corresponded with you 
and me, with regard to a problem regarding certified dental assistants who 
want to take the dental hygiene program at SIAST but are unable to do so 
because in order to do so, they have to have the dental therapy program 
which is no longer offered in Saskatchewan.  And the proposal that has come 
forward to you, and I have forwarded it to you, was that there should be a 
bridging program in which dental assisting be the prerequisite for the 
dental hygiene program. 
 
Now I was somewhat optimistic when your office responded to me in January 
and they said, somebody in your office said the following: 
 

 A proposal has gone to SIAST that would see a bridging program in place 
this fall between dental assistant and dental hygienist, and there may be 
something in this spring's budget. 

 
Can you report now, Mr. Minister, whether there indeed is something in this 
spring's budget in order to provide this badly needed bridging program so 
that these people who want to expand their professional training and 
ability are able to do so? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- I would inform the member that in fact the answer 
he received before was accurate.  The bridging program will be in place by 
September 1, and the money for that will be coming out of the outreach 
program. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Likewise, Mr. Minister, can you explain where the 
program will be located? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- It will be located at Wascana Campus. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, I certainly appreciate that answer.  I'm sure 
there will be a number of people in Saskatchewan that welcome that 
initiative on your part, and I want to certainly congratulate you on that 
part. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to go back to the answer you gave us before in regards 
to private vocational schools and the number of students who were eligible 
for the forgiveness part.  I don't think we quite got the figures.  Were 
you saying that there 2,886 students -- well in that neighbourhood -- who 
had been eligible for forgiveness and had attended private vocational 
schools?  Is that correct? 
 
(2130) 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- The total number of students assisted in the 
private vocational schools was 2,886, that was for '88-89.  And in the 
public institutions it was 16,345. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- We have some difficulties with the number.  Maybe we're not 
on the . . . 16,345 students in the public institutions were eligible for 
the forgiveness part of the loan?  That's what we're asking.  We want the 



 

 

numbers that were eligible for forgiveness, those who attended private 
vocational schools and those who attended public institutions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Okay, you have the 2,886; that's the total number 
of students in the private vocational schools.  And now remember we're 
speaking of '88-89, the ones that got assistance, and of that number 2,083  
_- 2,083 then qualified for forgiveable loans; 2,083 qualified for 
forgiveable loans. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order.  I'd ask the member to ask his question. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- The 16,300 . . . Mr. Minister, the number you gave me for 
the public institutions of 16,345, is that the number of students who had 
loans forgiven? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- The 16,345 was the total number that qualified for 
loans, nothing to do with forgiveness.  The officials are telling me that 
they don't have the number here -- we can get that for you -- that 
qualified for forgiveness.  The only one I can give you there is on the 
private vocational schools. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- We would appreciate for Wednesday if you could find us the 
other numbers. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to also ask you . . .  And I will have to eat a little 
bit of crow; I thought I had the letter with me.  I can't seem to locate it 
in the files here; I'd have to check my files downstairs.  But I wish if 
you could provide me with the average loan that students in public 
institutions received, the question I asked before. 
 
Mr. Minister, I do, however, have a couple of letters here that you did 
write to me, and I want to . . . You may have them with you there.  I refer 
to October 31, 1989.  You may not have that, but if you don't have it, 
maybe you could bring it with you on Wednesday; and also one on January 11, 
1990. 
 
In those two letters I am given conflicting information.  And let me read 
it to you so that there will be absolutely no mistake.  In the last 
paragraph in the first page in the letter dated October 31, 1989, you write 
the following: 
 

 With respect to your question about loans to students attending private 
vocational schools in 1988-89, 3,215 loans totalling 10.9 million in 
Canada student loans and 14 million in Saskatchewan student loans were 
authorized to students attending these schools.  The average loan value 
was 7,758. 

 
In your January . . . pardon me, in . . . yes, your January 11, 1990 
letter, I have the following: Number of loans in 1988-89 were 2,886 -- 
don't correspond to what I got before; Saskatchewan in millions of dollars 
was 12.8 -- does not correspond to the other answer I received; Canada, it 
was 9.4 million, which does not correspond, and the total value is 22.2 
million, and the other one is approximately 25 million.  The last part was, 



 

 

the average loan was 7,703 in this one, and in the other one was 7,758. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder whether you could have your officials check those 
two letters and bring back the one that is correct for Wednesday. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Herman, we could speed this up a lot if you'd make these 
questions either multiple choice or true and false. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- I know, Mr. Chairman, that the present Minister of Finances' 
knowledge of education was so limited last two years, we had some very 
difficult times communicating with him on Education, so I wish he'd stick 
with Finance. 
 
Mr. Minister, could I ask you to undertake that for me for Wednesday. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Yes I will do that.  The one thing that, as I say, 
could be possible is that we're confusing fiscal year versus loan year and 
the dates are different, but we'll get that for you for Wednesday. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, I was not being accusatory in this particular 
. . . I just want some clarification to know what they are. 
 
I do, Mr. Minister, want to remind you again that private vocational 
schools, as you and I have discussed these quite often, I have a real 
concern about some of the private vocational schools, and some of the 
things that are happening, and I will pursue this on Wednesday.  I only 
have a few minutes left because my colleague from Saskatoon Nutana wants to 
pursue another item for the remainder of the period. 
 
I want to know, Mr. Minister, if for Wednesday . . . Mr. Minister, if for 
Wednesday you could provide for us the information, first of all, that I 
had requested in Public Accounts; I would like to have that information for 
estimates.  I've asked a number of questions in regards to student loans 
and private vocational schools.  I really would appreciate having that 
information for Wednesday to expedite our estimates a little faster. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Minister, I wondered whether you would consider for Wednesday 
or even before, if you can, to provide us with your rough draft of the 
regulations that you are considering for private vocational schools.  Would 
you undertake that undertaking? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- We'll endeavour to have that information that 
you've asked for, for Wednesday.  With regard to the regulations, what I 
will table, if you wish, or give to you on Wednesday would be a copy of the 
draft report.  I can't give you a copy of the regulations because they are 
not completed.  They're still in drafting, some questions that Justice had 
with regard to them.  But I can give you a copy of the report which will 
give you an idea as to the recommendations that we're basing the 
regulations on, so that should suffice for now.  And we would hope to have 
the regulations fairly soon. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Just a very brief question, Mr. Minister, and that is with 
respect to the current fiscal year, 1990-91.  You've been giving us figures 



 

 

for 1988-89.  Those are two years out of date now, of course.  We would 
like to know with respect to the current fiscal year the number of student 
loans that you expect to go to students attending private vocational 
schools, the total dollar amount, and, Mr. Minister, more importantly, your 
expectation about the numbers of students who will receive loan forgiveness 
who are attending private vocational schools, what the dollar amount there 
will be, Mr. Minister.  If you could provide us with that information on 
Wednesday, we would appreciate that very much. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well any figures that we give to the member, Mr. 
Chairman, would be purely speculative because at this point in time the 
best that we could go on was the number of loans that were given out, say 
for 1989-90 and the amount of them.  I would anticipate though that because 
of some of the changes that we're going to be making -- and they will be in 
place by August 1 for the new loan year -- some of the changes that we're 
making as they apply to the private vocational schools, that the loans in 
that particular area could be down from what they were last year because we 
are going to tighten things up considerably. 
 
We'll be happy to provide you a copy of those in the very near future. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, I have a very quick question.  I want to know 
if, by Wednesday, we would have the 1988-89 student aid fund annual report 
. . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- And if not, why not? 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- That's correct.  If not, why not has that been tabled?  
What's the problem with it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, I am informed that the '88-89 report 
is still with the auditors, so we don't have it yet.  That's the 
information from the student aid fund. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- I'll be asking some questions on why it's there on 
Wednesday. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Okay. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairperson.  Mr. Minister, last 
Monday I believe, April 23, 1990, you released a press release indicating 
to the people of the province that your government required more time to 
implement the Fransaskois School system in the province of Saskatchewan.  
Mr. Minister, I wrote you a letter with respect to your announcement of 
your delay, or your decision not to introduce in this current legislative 
sitting the government's component for the Fransaskois schools. 
 
Mr. Minister, one of the questions that I asked you was in relationship to 
your news announcement that said that because of legal and legislative 
complications and constitutional issues it was impossible to proceed with 
this legislation in this current sitting.  Mr. Minister, can you tell me 
what the constitutional issues are that have caused the delay in the 
implementation of this legislation? 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I find it very amusing that 
it's taken the critic across the way a week, and to this point has not 
asked a question in question period with regard to my announcement and 
francophone governance of the schools in this province. 
 
Now, we're in the process of addressing the concerns that you raised in 
your letter, but I would point out to you that the Supreme Court decision 
that was brought down in Alberta on March 15, and of which we just received 
a copy a very short time ago as to the ruling that came down, and this is 
the first decision across the country that's come down that has really come 
out in any definitive way to talk about section 23 of the charter of 
rights, which is what determines the francophones having the right to 
govern their own school system. 
 
So the reason for the delay in this particular legislation is, in looking 
at the Supreme Court decision, that there are a lot of questions that it 
raised when we compared it to the legislation that we were very well along 
with in drafting, in that there is a concern about where numbers warrant. 
 
(2145) 
 
And what it really boils down to is whether or not we would be open to a 
lot of challenges with regard to that if you've got a Supreme Court 
decision which is not really saying the same thing that our legislation 
would have said.  So we feel that there is some constitutional problems in 
that, that need further addressing.  Justice feels very strongly that this 
is a very significant document and that it now can be used as a guide in 
drafting our legislation. 
 
Another concern that we had with it was, in fact, that our legislation 
could have very well disenfranchised some of the francophone people.  And I 
don't think that any of them want that at all.  So using this as a guide 
and taking a little bit more time to ensure that our legislation is going 
to be right and that it will protect those rights, we have to take more 
time with it. 
 
There are also other concerns with regard to the rights of parents, with 
regard to the rights of school boards, and it's something that we just have 
to take more time for it.  And there's no way -- if we wanted to have this 
in place for the first of September, you know as a teacher that the 31st of 
May is a deadline by which teachers have to indicate what they're going to 
be doing the following year.  And if we're going to be staffing these 
schools, we would have to of course give the teachers an opportunity to 
determine where they wanted to teach, and there is no way that this 
legislation could be available and passed by the end of this month. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Minister, I'm afraid I don't understand what you're 
saying.  As I understand it, in 1982 we had a charter of rights introduced 
where section 23 recognized francophone linguistic rights in separate 
school facilities.  In 1988 we had a Saskatchewan court ruling, the Wimmer 
court ruling, which confirmed school governance entitlement for Fransaskois 
parents, Mr. Minister. 



 

 

 
Now I'm afraid that you've lost me and my colleagues in your articulation 
of what is preventing you from introducing this legislation.  Explain to me 
exactly what are the constitutional problems that your government is facing 
in light of this Alberta court decision, Mr. Minister.  Can you be very 
clear on what you are talking about because the press isn't clear.  As I 
understand it the francophone community is not clear.  And, Mr. Minister, I 
wrote you a letter a week ago asking you to clarify these issues and I 
haven't yet received a response, and that's why I'm asking you the 
questions today. 
 
Because you know perfectly well, Mr. Minister, that if we're talking about 
complicated legal and constitutional arguments, which your press release 
indicated, then those complicated and legal arguments have to be 
articulated very carefully.  And that's something that question period 
doesn't lend itself to, and I think you'll acknowledge that, Mr. Minister, 
that question period does not lend itself to complicated legal and 
constitutional arguments.  This forum certainly does, Mr. Minister, and I 
want you to be very specific, very specific on what those constitutional 
and legal arguments are, and I'd ask you tonight to tell us exactly what 
they are. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, you've never let not having the facts in the 
past prevent you from asking questions in this House, so I don't know why 
you would have talked about it right now. 
 
I will slow down and I'll try and be clear.  I realize and recognize that 
it is a complex issue.  And with regard to the francophones in the 
province, we will be meeting with the different groups.  We've already met 
with one group and we will be meeting with the other groups in the very 
near future to explain in detail the reasons why the legislation is being 
delayed. 
 
If you want the significant portion or part of the ruling of the Supreme 
Court in Alberta, I'll read it to you: 
 

 The unanimous ruling by the country's top court is the first detailed 
ruling based on section 23 of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms, which 
declares that members of French and English minorities have the right to 
education in their own language where numbers warrant. 

 
And what they did with the Alberta decision was that they looked at a 
sliding scale as to how they would determine the actual rights that the 
francophones had. 
 
In other words, at the top end of the scale, if numbers did warrant, it 
could mean that they would have a full-blown board that would be in control 
of the francophone schools.  But when you went down the scale you could 
reach the point where, in fact, they did not have any rights whatsoever. 
 
It might mean that they could have a representative on the regular school 
board, or in fact, it could mean that there might only be a special class, 
depending on how many students they had.  Or, if there were very few 



 

 

students, it could mean that there were no rights at all.  So, that was a 
significant part of that ruling and it did have a sliding scale. 
 
Now in our particular legislation, section 29 was in no way shape or form 
really the same as what this section 23 says.  And that's the point that I 
made about the fact that some francophones in fact could be disenfranchised 
because of the way that the thing was drafted.  So I don't think that's the 
intent of the legislation.  I don't think that's what the francophone 
people want.  They want the right to govern their own schools, and so it's 
just something that we have to take a little bit more time.  But I would 
point out that that's the significant part of it, as I've read it to you. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Now, Mr. Minister, as you know, your government had a task 
force that reported in June of 1989 on the question of francophone school 
governance in the province of Saskatchewan.  And it was a unanimous 
decision of the task force members that represented many significant 
communities in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
This really, Mr. Minister, is an amazing document, because it was a 
unanimous decision of the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association, the 
Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation, LEADS, various representatives of the 
francophone community.  And, Mr. Minister, this document was hailed as a 
major achievement by your government and by the task force because there 
was a consensus, Mr. Minister, a consensus that isn't often seen in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, as a result of this report your government endorsed the 
contents of this report in August of 1989.  And then you set about and you, 
Mr. Minister, announced an implementation committee to implement the 
contents of this report, Mr. Minster.  Now I think that it's fair to say 
that this report was proposing that the establishment of seven possible 
school boards in the province of Saskatchewan come September of 1990.  And 
as you probably know, Mr. Minister, in Regina, Saskatoon, Prince Albert, 
North Battleford, Vonda, Gravelbourg, and Bellevue, that there are probably 
significant numbers of people who might be interested in francophone school 
governance. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want you to articulate very clearly what you're talking 
about.  There were seven schools that were proposed for September of 1990.  
How does this differ from the judgement in Alberta in terms of significant 
numbers, Mr. Minister?  I want you to be clear on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- I certainly recognize what you're saying about the 
report, and it is a very well-done report.  We have discussed that with the 
task force and certainly we have endorsed the contents that they have in 
there.  But I think at the same time there's a recognition that there are 
still some problems that have to be worked out and that it is going to take 
more time. 
 
The Mahe pé decision in Alberta, which I indicated to you came down on 
March 15, is a very significant document.  I think there's some 70 pages or 
more in it and it's a very complex document.  It was not received here in 
Saskatchewan until about three weeks ago, I suppose, and then Justice went 



 

 

through it. 
 
The best advice that we had then, when we compared that to the legislation 
that we were preparing, was that there were a lot of technical difficulties 
within our legislation.  For that reason, and since we now had a guide to 
go by, it just made a lot of sense to delay the introduction of our 
legislation to give Justice an opportunity to ensure that they were coming 
in with the proper legislation. 
 
Now I don't think that there should be anything wrong with that.  I fully 
realize that there are many people in the francophone community that are 
disappointed because this is not going ahead.  But at the same time we are 
still committed to the constitution.  We certainly are committed to the 
work that was done and brought forward on the Gallant report, and it's just 
a matter of taking a little bit more time to ensure that we bring in the 
proper legislation which is going to fit this particular situation.  And 
not all situations are different. 
 
And I think you have to keep in mind that the Supreme Court decision 
supersedes the Queen's Bench decision that came down here in the province 
of Saskatchewan.  So we're still committed, but it's just a matter that 
with getting the boards in place, the staff hired, and getting facilities, 
all of these things have to take place but none of that can take place 
until this legislation has been drafted in the proper form and passed in 
this legislature. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- When do you now propose to circulate a draft copy of this 
new legislation, and when do you now propose to introduce this legislation?  
If it's not in this current sitting of the legislature, when do you propose 
to introduce it?  The next sitting? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well I've indicated that we are meeting at the 
present time with the different groups to explain the reasons why this has 
been delayed, and we will continue to do that until we have met with all of 
them. 
 
I had indicated to them that I was hopeful that the legislation was going 
to be introduced in this session; that not being the case, that the next 
opportunity would be in the next session of the legislature, would be next 
spring. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- So, Mr. Minister, are you saying that you'll introduce 
this legislation in the next sitting of the legislature? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- That's what I have indicated to the groups, that I 
would hope that everything is in readiness, that we can go ahead with it 
during the next session, which wouldn't be until next spring. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Minister, was this a unilateral decision of your 
government, or did you at all talk to the implementation committee prior to 
making your announcement on April 23? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- The only discussion that took place following the 



 

 

information coming to us from Justice was with myself and the officials of 
the department and Justice.  The decision was made then, because of the 
time line, that it was important that we get this out to all of the people 
involved just as quickly as possible.  And now we're setting up the 
meetings to explain the detail within this particular legislation. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Minister, I am surprised that you wouldn't even 
consult or tell your own implementation committee, that you appointed last 
October, that you were going to delay the implementation of this 
legislation.  I am surprised, Mr. Minister.  I mean, you were the man, you 
were the minister that issued the press release announcing the various 
persons who were going to be part of this new implementation committee, and 
you didn't even have the courtesy of talking to them prior to your 
announcement. 
 
What's even more shocking is that the people of Saskatchewan learned about 
this in La Presse, in the Montreal press.  This information wasn't even 
available to the people of Saskatchewan prior to it being talked about in 
the Montreal press, Mr. Minister. 
 
Now, you know, you have some fairly significant people who are sitting on 
this implementation committee, Mr. Minister, representing the Saskatchewan 
Teachers' Federation, the school trustees association, and various members 
of the Francophone community.  Mr. Minister, I'd like you to explain why 
you didn't have the courtesy to consult these people prior to making your 
decision on April 23.  And why do these people have to read about it in La 
Presse?  And why weren't these people told about it prior?  And why did you 
have to set up a telephone conference call, I understand, to inform them as 
to the reasons why you were delaying it, Mr. Minister?  If there were legal 
and constitutional reasons, which you say there are, surely that 
information could have been shared with these people before you went ahead 
and made this unilateral decision. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, the member from University getting carried 
away over there.  Mr. Chairman, let me point out to the member opposite 
that she's totally inaccurate in what she has just said.  The fact of the 
matter is, that all of the secretariat, the members of the secretariat, the 
members of the task force, the members of the implementation committee, the 
seven schools involved, the board chairman, the directors of education, the 
parents, the ACFC (Association Culturelle Franco-Canadienne), were all 
phoned on Thursday and Friday, the week before I made the announcement. 
 
Also, every member was also followed up with a letter.  In fact, the letter 
went out on a Friday and it went to every director of education in the 
province.  It went to every board chairman in the province as well as all 
of the other groups as that I've already indicated to you.  So, wherever 
you're getting your information from is totally inaccurate because 
everybody in fact did not learn about it from the press.  They were phoned 
on Thursday or Friday, the week prior to the announcement being made. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Minister . . . 



 

 

 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order!  It being near 10 o'clock, the committee will rise 
and report progress. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:02 p.m. 
 


