





























































Hansard: May 10, 1990


 

 

May 10/90 
 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It gives me a great deal of pleasure 
today to again introduce to you, Fred Steininger and his grade 12 class 
from Robert Usher Collegiate in the constituency of Regina North.  There's 
27 students with Mr. Steininger today, and included amongst them there's a 
Rotary exchange student from Mexico, Ane Torres. 
 
So I ask all members to join me in welcoming this group from Robert Usher 
to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to introduce to 
you, and through you to the members of the legislature, four grade 10 
students from Milestone High School.  I believe they're in your gallery, 
Mr. Speaker.  With us today are Trina Kuffner, Shellan Kinvig, Krista 
Siebert, and Stacy Schiefner.  With them is their chaperon, B.N. Kinvig. 
 
Mr. Hodgins and I will be meeting with these four students at 3 o'clock to 
talk about various environmental issues.  These students have prepared many 
questions about recycling plants, composting, reforestation, organic 
farming, and other important environmental issues. 
 
I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that these students are on top of many of the 
environmental issues today, and the minister and I will be very pleased to 
meet and talk with them.  And I would ask this legislature to welcome them 
all here. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to introduce to 
you and through this Assembly 22 grade 8 students from the Ituna, 
Saskatchewan high school in Ituna, Saskatchewan.  They're visiting today 
and they are seated in your gallery.  They are attended by their teacher, 
Mr. Bill Hudema, who annually brings the grade 8 class to this Assembly.  
And they are driven here today by their bus driver, Mr. Walter Petrowsky. 
 
I meet with them every year.  Of course they're not the same people, but I 
meet with the grade 8's every year from Ituna, Saskatchewan.  They are 
always well-informed and they always ask intelligent questions.  I'll be 
meeting with them at 2:30.  I invite the members opposite, along with the 
government, to welcome these students to this Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

Mr. McLaren: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's certainly a pleasure for me 
today to introduce to you and to all members of the Assembly some students 
that are visiting from outside our Saskatchewan borders today, Mr. Speaker.  
There's 54 students from the Medicine Lake School in Medicine Lake, 
Montana.  They're located in the west gallery.  And they are accompanied 
today by two of their teachers, Kathleen Murray and Cathy Trouba, and their 
bus drivers, Bill Danielson and Alan Bummer.  I hope I am saying your name 
correctly, sir. 
 
It's always a pleasure to have people, and I want to congratulate your 
teachers for bringing you into Saskatchewan and here to Regina.  We hope 
you enjoy the Assembly and your tour here today.  So I would ask all 
members to please welcome these students in their usual manner. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I too would like to join 
with my colleague, the member for Yorkton, in welcoming the students here 
from Montana.  I know that they probably have toured the state-house in 
Montana and will notice a significant difference in the way that the 
legislature here functions.  I hope it's a learning experience for those 
students, and hope that they enjoy their trip here to Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

WESTBRIDGE Acquisition Costs 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 
minister responsible for WESTBRIDGE.  Mr. Minister, I have here one of the 
valuation documents that you referred to yesterday, and I want to refer you 
to page 36 of the December '88 WESTBRIDGE prospectus filed with the TSE 
(Toronto Stock Exchange). 
 
On page 36 under the column for Mercury Group, half-way down the column, we 
find a line that reads for the Mercury Group net assets acquired at 
assigned values.  And it reads for the Mercury Group, $2.4 million.  The 
very next line then gives the excess of acquisition costs over the assigned 
values, and for the Mercury Group, that reads $2.5 million. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you tell us where in this prospectus, this two and a half 
million dollar excess acquisition cost is explained, and why you paid Urban 
Donlevy and the Mercury Group two and a half million dollars more than the 
value of the company? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- We now, Mr. Speaker, have the third New Democratic Party 
member to stand up in this House and not understand, one, a financial 
statement, secondly, a balance sheet or, thirdly, a prospectus.  Because, 
Mr. Speaker, one year ago in June we tabled before this Assembly, for the 
opposition, and we sent a letter to the member from Regina Centre including 



 

 

this information to him, giving him the opportunity to meet with the 
WESTBRIDGE officials.  And in this document -- a public document tabled 
before the House, Mr. Speaker -- are the independent evaluations by 
Richardson Greenshields, Mr. Speaker, who are an investment house in this 
province, in this country, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, they lay out page 15; they lay out the valuations for 
each of the assets.  Mr. Speaker, they lay out, Mr. Speaker, the $4.9 
million to Mercury, the 6.5 to Leasecorp, and the other ones done at that 
time, but for the following: the subsequently acquired assets after the 
merger which the opposition -- $13 million -- which the opposition never 
asked for, which I have, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But having said that, Mr. Speaker, the valuations include what would happen 
in any business transaction.  The fixed assets, the assets that are 
available, goodwill, contracts, leases, cash flow, income stream, all the 
things valued in a normal commercial transaction, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, to the same minister.  Mr. 
Minister, I understand enough to know that you're dealing with fantasy and 
not with fact. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- And I want to ask you: if the Mercury Group had assets 
worth two and a half million dollars more than the assigned value, they've 
got to be in that prospectus somewhere.  You filed that prospectus; you 
wouldn't have filed it without complete information.  And if that 
information is there, tell us where it is in that prospectus. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Well again, Mr. Speaker, we now have . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Mr. Speaker, on any initial public offering for which a 
prospectus is prepared, there is a due diligence certificate filed by those 
doing the valuations, in this case, independent valuations by Richardson 
Greenshields.  And, Mr. Speaker, we have tabled a year ago, the valuations, 
and in that at page 15.  The fact that the hon. member, the NDP chose not 
to read the publicly tabled documents, not the fault of the government, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The 4.9 million payable to Mercury is equivalent to 7.9 per cent of the 
total value of WESTBRIDGE.  Richardson Greenshields recognizes this is less 
than the contribution of the Mercury Group to WESTBRIDGE's net tangible 
assets, current and future earnings, and current and future cash flow from 
operations.  This divergence between the proportion of the consideration . 
. . 
 



 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order! 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Mr. Speaker, new question to the same minister.  Mr. 
Minister, let's try this again with Leasecorp Western, with Leasecorp 
Western, which was formed, incidentally, only 11 months prior to this deal 
taking place.  In other words the company was barely off the ground.  And 
if we go to column one, over one column from the Mercury column that we 
just talked about, you'll see that Leasecorp Western was assigned a value 
of $276,000, and the excess of acquisition over the assigned value is just 
a little under $5 million.  Mr. Minister, where are those 5 million in 
assets identified in this legal document you filed with the securities 
commission? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Mr. Speaker, the valuations are filed for the purposes of 
an initial public offering, which is done in the case of all initial public 
offerings, Mr. Speaker, as was done in this case. 
 
It's interesting, Mr. Speaker, as well, having tabled the valuations here, 
obviously the respective securities commissions, and made those documents 
public a year ago, that . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- The business people really believe . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- The business people in fact do believe this government.  
What they don't do is believe the opposition. 
 
We had more phone calls, Mr. Speaker, from the business community overnight 
saying that the NDP don't understand how to read a prospectus, a balance 
sheet, or, Mr. Speaker, an annual report.  That's what came about last 
night, Mr. Speaker.  The documents were all public; the valuations were 
made. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, if the NDP are saying that Richardson Greenshields did 
not make a fair, independent valuation which, as some are now saying from 
their seat, Mr. Speaker, they're now saying . . . that is an attack on one 
of Canada's financial institutions, highly respected.  They're saying that 
Richardson Greenshields ripped off the people.  That is false. 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- New question to the same minister, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 
Minister, we're saying that you haven't protected the public interest. 
 
Let's try it for Leasecorp Systems.  There we find an assigned value of 
zero, zip, and an acquisition cost of . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  We're having other hon. members engaging in 
question period, asking questions and answering them, and we can't hear the 
member from Saskatoon Sutherland, that he give him the opportunity. 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Mr. Minister, for Leasecorp Systems we find an assigned 
value of zero and an excess in acquisition costs of $1 million.  That one 
you've identified as goodwill.  Why is that so-called intangible benefit 



 

 

the only one identified in the prospectus? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Mr. Minister, I will now repeat for the third time today 
that the valuations and the valuation opinion, which I have here which was 
tabled in June, publicly, Mr. Speaker -- publicly, Mr. Speaker -- so that 
the public could see the valuations as made by Richardson Greenshields, an 
investment house in this country, Mr. Speaker, they did the valuations, 
they put the values on the assets that were pooled, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- You're trying to put the blame on them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I'm not blaming them for anything.  What I'm saying, what 
you don't understand and what the NDP don't understand is there were 
independent evaluations, Mr. Speaker.  The NDP refuse to accept the 
independent evaluations, which is a direct attack, Mr. Speaker, on 
Richardson Greenshields, the securities houses in this country, Mr. 
Speaker.  They're afraid of the truth, Mr. Speaker; that's why they try and 
distort it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Final question to the same minister, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 
Minister, these documents establish that you paid eight and a half million 
dollars for nothing more than goodwill.  Leasecorp got 6 million and 
Mercury got two and a half million dollars worth of goodwill. 
 
Yet when you look at the only column in this document where there was no 
excess paid over valuation, which column is that?  The column for the 
Government of Saskatchewan.  I'd say that now considering that 75 per cent 
of WESTBRIDGE business is done with the Government of Saskatchewan and 
considering that SaskTel and SaskCOMP have had long-term, long established 
contracts with the government, why were they not entitled to the same kind 
of level of goodwill that you gave these other two companies? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Let's, Mr. Speaker, go right to the same prospectus and 
I'll show you, Mr. Speaker, and to the public which I think understands it 
obviously better than the NDP. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  We're having problems hearing the Minister 
of Justice, and I'm sure all members in the House are anxious to hear the 
answer.  So let us give him the opportunity as well. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Let's just deal with the 
Leasecorp that you just made the allegations, what they just said goodwill.  
In fact, Mr. Speaker, right in the prospectus that you referred to, if you 
had read the rest of it, it said the goodwill resulting from the company's 
marketing rights with the licence suppliers of the software system.  There.  
Now you know.  Now you know what goodwill is. 
 



 

 

Didn't understand that.  Didn't understand it, doesn't understand it today, 
Mr. Speaker, and then we go through, Mr. Speaker, take a look at the 
significant accounting policies, all of which are public documents, Mr. 
Speaker.  Corporation as lessor.  And it begins, Mr. Speaker, to tell you 
what the leases are, the values of the lease is $125 million in leases 
which generate a cash . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I address my question to the same 
minister and I have here minutes from a board meeting of directors of 
WESTBRIDGE Corporation, a meeting held at the offices of the corporation, 
eighth floor, 1801 Hamilton Street in Regina, on August 11, 1988, 
commencing at 11 a.m. 
 
Mr. Minister, at that meeting there was an issue raised about the purchase 
of Lease Corporation Ltd. from Leonard McCurdy for $13 million.  Now the 
board also agreed at that meeting that before the acquisition, Mr. McCurdy 
could strip away or withdraw certain assets from the corporation before 
purchase. 
 
I want to quote from the minutes: 
 

 That the following items would be removed from Lease Corporation Limited 
prior to the acquisition of the shares (what was removed?): 

 
 i) Existing dividends already paid, 

$1,000,000 
 ii) Additional dividends to be declared, 

$1,200,000 
 iii) Westbridge shares, $2,900,000 
 iv) Leasecorp Systems shares, $1,200,000 
 v) Miscellaneous accounts receivable, 

$800,000. 
 

For a total of $7.1 million that Mr. McCurdy was able to strip away. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  Does the member have a question? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Yes I do. 
 
The Speaker: -- Please put the question. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- My question to the minister is this:  after Mr. 
McCurdy stripped away that $7.1 million worth of assets, leaving by the 
prospectus and the annual report's own comment, $59,000 in assets, what was 
left that you paid $13 million for in that corporation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, when I tabled a year ago, all of these 



 

 

documents including the valuations . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- There's nothing in there on valuations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- No, just let me answer the hon. member.  It was a 
response to an opposition request for the merger documents which led to 
WESTBRIDGE.  Subsequent to WESTBRIDGE being established, they did acquire 
these assets for the $13 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was not asked for the valuation of transactions subsequent 
to the merger.  I have here the valuations done by Richardson Greenshields 
of that very transaction.  And I'm going to quote, Mr. Speaker, and this is 
Richardson Greenshields at page 16: 
 

 The value we have placed on Leasecorp, between 20 and $24 million (Mr. 
Speaker) can be paid with cash and common shares of WESTBRIDGE or a 
combination of both. 

 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, the $13 million that was paid, the valuation was 
between 20 and $24 million, Mr. Speaker, far in excess, Mr. Speaker, of 
what was paid. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, a question to the same minister.  You 
remember back in 1986, this is the same minister that estimated the deficit 
at 390 million and ended up at 1.2 billion.  You have to keep that in mind. 
 
I want to say to the minister, Mr. Speaker, this: that on page 4 of the 
same document that he quotes from it tells you how the assessment was done 
of Leasecorp group.  And I say, number one, that the fact is that unaudited 
financial statements of Leasecorp were used to base the appreciation and 
the value -- unaudited. 
 
Internal valuation of Leasecorp Western Ltd. was used to base the 
evaluation of the company.  There wasn't a single independent valuation 
done on the corporation before you paid $13 million for it.  My question to 
you, Mr. Minister, is this.  Privatization in this province has proven to 
be a bust.  The simple fact is the majority of people are sick and tired of 
this kind of operation by your government.  Why is it that you work on 
behalf of your buddies and cronies in the Tory party and not on behalf of 
the people of the province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Deliberately, Mr. Speaker, deliberately wrong again, Mr. 
Speaker, are the NDP.  Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Mr. Speaker, in June of 1988 the valuation was done of 
Leasecorp Corporation by Richardson Greenshields.  And they took into 
account . . . and I could go through many of the items, Mr. Speaker.  They 



 

 

talk about the synergistic benefits which would in fact increase the value. 
 
They talk about, Mr. Speaker, the fact that Leasecorp currently has over 
500 customers of which 200 are Canadian subsidiaries of major, fortune 
1,000 accounts, and they're listed, Mr. Speaker.  These indicate, Mr. 
Speaker, that considering the nature of the long-term leases which are in 
place, existing customer loyalty, the developed contacts in these accounts, 
WESTBRIDGE services and products could easily be promoted.  Leasing 
revenues ultimately will be further increased and growth accelerated.  Mr. 
Speaker, they value it between 20 and $24 million, Richardson Greenshields. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we see today nothing more than the attempt of the NDP to do 
two things: attack the senior management of WESTBRIDGE, as they've done 
with other corporations, Mr. Speaker.  The personal attacks are very much 
part of their strategy, their philosophy, their beliefs.  And secondly, I 
believe they want to destroy WESTBRIDGE, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Speaker, I too have a question for the minister 
responsible for WESTBRIDGE. 
 
Mr. Minister, when you announced the formation of WESTBRIDGE, you said that 
the purchase of Mercury was an integral and necessary part of this new 
computer giant.  You said the purchase of this Saskatoon printing company 
would assist WESTBRIDGE in its diversification. 
 
Yesterday, Mr. Minister, Mercury was sold.  Mr. Minister, what has changed?  
Why is it no longer necessary to have Mercury as part of the WESTBRIDGE 
Computer company? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Mr. Speaker, I am prepared, I am prepared to loan at zero 
interest, Mr. Speaker, the money so that the hon. member can buy a share in 
WESTBRIDGE, buy a share in WESTBRIDGE so she can go to the annual meeting.  
It is now a publicly traded company and, Mr. Speaker, WESTBRIDGE has made 
several divestitures since that time.  They can go and ask management about 
that.  They are in the computer business; they are running it. 
 
Every one of the employees and 98 per cent of the employees of WESTBRIDGE 
have bought shares; they can go to the meeting and ask the question.  The 
hundreds of Saskatchewan people that have bought shares can go and ask the 
question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP have the same right.  The difference is, Mr. Speaker, 
if I gave them the information, they wouldn't take it at face value; and 
secondly, Mr. Speaker, they wouldn't read the information if I did give it 
to them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Minister, the taxpayers of Saskatchewan own 60 per 



 

 

cent of WESTBRIDGE.  When you announced the formation and privatization of 
SaskCOMP and SaskTel, and your government paid $4.9 million for Mercury, 
you said it was necessary to diversify the Saskatchewan economy.  That was 
two years ago.  I ask you, Mr. Minister, what has changed in this two-year 
period?  Answer the question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Mr. Speaker, I understand from the public information 
yesterday, the press information, that they did sell part of the assets of 
Mercury, Mr. Speaker.  They did keep, I understand as well, some of the 
computer division or activities of Mercury which fits in with whatever 
decisions they're going to make in the best interests.  In fact, Mr. 
Speaker, that information is available to anyone who is a shareholder, as 
to what changes in operation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have little doubt that companies in this province are going 
to make changes in how they operate from time to time just like governments 
have to do.  Mr. Speaker, the only party that stands up in this House and 
says no change, we're married to the old ways, are the New Democratic 
Party, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Speaker, new question to the minister.  Two years ago 
this government paid $4.9 million for Mercury when Mercury was valued at 
$2.4 million.  They said that they needed Mercury because it would add to 
the diversification of this province. 
 
Now you said time and time again, Mr. Minister, that the true worth of any 
company is what the market will pay.  Yesterday you sold Mercury and I want 
to know, how much did you sell it for? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Mr. Speaker, they still don't understand that when a 
company is out with public shareholders, it's now run by the company and 
the shareholders and the management, not by the government, Mr. Speaker, 
not by the government. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, she has just stood up, the hon. member has just 
stood up and again questioned the valuation, which is $4.9 million by 
Richardson Greenshields.  Stand up and say what you really mean which is 
that you do not, the NDP does not believe the independent valuation of 
Richardson Greenshields, because that is what they have said now, I 
believe, for the fifth time today. 
 
I say that the NDP, Mr. Speaker, the NDP are just plain anti-business, 
anti-WESTBRIDGE, Mr. Speaker, anti the investment community that, Mr. 
Speaker, do valuations for hundreds of public companies, never having been 
questioned before except by the New Democratic Party of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 



 

 

Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- New question to the minister.  Two years ago the 
Government of Saskatchewan exercised its ownership when it paid $4.9 
million to Urban Donlevy, a well-known Saskatchewan Tory, for Mercury when 
it was only worth $2.4 million.  Now I want to give the government a little 
lesson in business.  The point of business is to buy low and sell high, but 
the Tories' privatization agenda has turned that upside down.  What these 
guys do is they buy high and they sell low. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- And, Mr. Speaker, when they're buying high and selling 
low, they're losing millions of taxpayers' dollars. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- The people of Saskatchewan know this and that's why they 
say no to privatization, Mr. Minister.  And I want to know, tell us the 
sale price of the Mercury company, tell us the sale price, and let the 
people of Saskatchewan decide whether you've got such a great deal. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I've now offered for three times today 
that the shareholders of WESTBRIDGE, including 98 per cent of the 
employees, can ask management what that price would be. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  We have members here engaging in their own 
separate question period.  The member from Saskatoon Nutana has asked the 
Minister of Justice a question.  Let him answer the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Mr. Speaker, there are two questions that the 
shareholders of WESTBRIDGE can get answers for, and the employees.  They 
can ask what was the selling price of Mercury.  Secondly, what assets, Mr. 
Speaker, because the NDP and I know a couple of members of the press are 
assuming it's the same assets that are being bought and sold.  And I gather 
from the press report that's not correct. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, we use independent valuations, Mr. Speaker, 
which we tabled.  But you and the leader of the New Democratic Party never 
tabled a valuation of the potash industry.  Mr. Speaker, never tabled a 
valuation of the P.A. pulp mill, not . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 25 -- An Act to amend The Provincial Court Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I move first reading of a Bill to amend The Provincial 



 

 

Court Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next 
sitting. 
 
The Speaker: -- Now I'm going to ask the member from Quill Lakes and the 
Minister of Justice to refrain from what sounds very much like an argument 
across the floor and allow the business of the House to proceed.  The 
Minister of Justice and the member from Quill Lakes: your co-operation 
please. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 
The Speaker: -- Now I'm going to ask the members once more and I would 
expect the members to co-operate, after all, they are all hon. members.  
And I would expect  
 Dtheir co-operation to let the business of the House proceed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Order!  Now I hardly sat down and already the member for 
Quill Lakes was speaking.  And I'm going to ask him to rise and apologize. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- I apologize, Mr. Speaker, I'm sorry. 
 
The Speaker: -- Thank you.  Order.  I'm going to do the same thing with the 
member for Regina Elphinstone.  I'm going to ask him to rise and apologize. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I do apologize, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  Before I leave I'm going to ask the member for 
Saskatoon South . . . the member for Saskatoon South, who may think it's 
funny but it's not funny to disrespect the authority of the Chair, who's 
heckling the Chair from his seat, to rise and apologize. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Speaker, I apologize. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motions for Interim Supply 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, I want to ask 
the minister some questions with respect to payments which were made 
without authority by the Crown investments corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
The minister will recall that the Crown investments corporation entered 
into a contract with a consultant to evaluate and review the overall 
effectiveness and efficiency of all government departments and to report 
thereon, and that payments of $2.7 million were made with respect to that 



 

 

contract, and that subsequently the Provincial Auditor ruled or opined that 
that particular expenditure was made without proper authority and that . . 
. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order.  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, the item before the committee is 
interim supply, and I think the member's questions are out of order.  
They're referring to some one or two years ago events.  And there are 
forums for those questions to be dealt with and I'm prepared to answer them 
in the proper forum, but the issue before the committee today is interim 
supply, resolution no. 1. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- If I may speak to that.  It is the tradition, Mr. 
Chairman, that this House and all Houses have grievance before supply.  
We're entitled to ask questions.  It may be that the minister does not have 
the information with him, in which case he usually says so.  But questions 
on government expenditures have traditionally been in order in this forum. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order, order.  I'd ask the members to be quiet while the 
Chair is making a ruling. 
 
I find the point of order well taken.  I've allowed a wide-ranging debate 
on this interim supply resolution, but members must realize that this is 
not an appropriate place to get into detailed questions on the operation of 
specific departments' programs.  I refer all members to debates of June 14, 
1989 as follows: 
 

 Detailed questions should be asked of the minister of that department.  
Interim supply covers the whole government and all its expenditures, but 
not any detailed questions should be asked of separate departments under 
an interim supply Bill. 

 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I wanted to ask this question.  It 
has to do with appropriations and proper accounting for each and every 
government department there is, and you didn't allow me to put the question 
before you ruled it out of order.  Now I want to ask you: can I ask the 
question before you rule on it? 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- According to my ruling, a member can only ask questions 
applying to the interim supply that's before the committee today, 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  May I again inquire, in 
terms of phrasing the question: am I allowed any introductory comments to 
the question?  Or should the question just be directly put? 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Members are allowed . . . order.  Members are allowed 
introductory remarks certainly, but the questions have to pertain to the 
interim supply Bill that's before us. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- I appreciate that then, Mr. Chairman, so I'm going to 
carry on then with my introductory comments to the question, and I am sure 
that you'll find the question is entirely in order.  Even if some of the 



 

 

lead-up to the question involves events from two years ago, my question is 
going to be about the minister's activities, departmental activities, and 
any expenditure of government money with respect to the supply Bill before 
us. 
 
And before I was interrupted, Mr. Speaker, I was setting the stage and I 
was letting the people of Saskatchewan know -- and after all, we must 
remember that this is an open stage that the people of Saskatchewan can 
see, even if the minister and his government look for every opportunity to 
deny discussion on this topic.  The topic before us concerns an 
unauthorized expenditure some years ago by the Crown investments 
corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now since that unauthorized expenditure was made by the Crown investments 
corporation, and since that was pointed out by the Provincial Auditor, 
there have been a series of events take place leading up to the very 
recent, Mr. Chairman.  And that series of events includes an opinion by the 
auditor that this $2.7 million expenditure by CIC (Crown investments 
corporation) was wrong.  It should not have been authorized.  Subsequent 
opinions proffered by the lawyers for CIC, I believe one Larry Kyle, who 
said that the expenditures were in order.  A further review by the 
solicitor for the Crown investments corporation, Mr. Kyle, to say that no, 
he subsequently or he did now agree with the auditor that the expenditure 
was not legal and was not appropriate. 
 
And the question now is one of, Mr. Speaker, if that expenditure was not 
appropriate and if the expenditure should not have been reported under the 
Crown investments corporation, it then begs the question of what department 
should it have been reported under. 
 
We were given to understand by the Crown investments corporation that 
personally they feel -- this is the officials talking -- that they're not 
responsible for any more than 5 per cent of that particular expenditure of 
$2.7 million.  How they could determine that they're responsible for 5 per 
cent of the expenditure when they also said to us they've never seen the 
study in question is another matter, but we'll let that one go for now. 
 
But it still begs the question of the 95 per cent of this expenditure of 
$2.7 million having then to be made by line government departments.  And my 
question is, Mr. Minister, what activities are underfoot by your government 
and in the context of this interim supply, what are your officials doing to 
ensure that there will be a proper accounting for this $2.7 million? 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- I'd like to make a ruling on the question.  This money has 
been spent two years ago; it has nothing to do with this interim supply 
Bill.  I find the question not in order. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Mr. Chairman, I don't know where it is then that 
members of the Legislative Assembly can inquire of the government as to 
millions of dollars of expenditure made without proper authority.  I'm 
trying to ascertain from the minister if any of the money in the interim 



 

 

supply Bill before us will be going to pay for the salaries of civil 
servants and if any of their activities will be involving a proper 
accounting for this expenditure. 
 
The fact that this money was not properly accounted for took place two 
years ago, but the real revelations that it should be properly accounted 
for only came to light within the last few months, Mr. Chairman.  So 
therefore, it's reasonable to ask what is the government doing now to make 
sure that it's being properly accounted for? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order.  This question would certainly be in order under 
the Department of Finance and Crown investments corporation . . . and 
Committee of Finance estimates with the Minister of Finance. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm trying to understand your ruling 
here and I want to . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- This is not Committee of Finance, this is . . . It's 
Committee of Finance but it . . . Order.  The question before the committee 
is the interim supply and it is not the Committee of Finance under the 
Department of Finance.  It's not the Department of Finance estimates; it's 
interim supply.  So I'd ask the member to keep his questions on the interim 
supply that's before the committee. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- My question then would be: are any of the expenditures 
with respect to this interim supply, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, going 
to correct the accounting oversight that was pointed out by the auditor? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- I doubt that there would be anything in here to 
correct the error or abnormality, as you would see it, from two years ago.  
All I can say is I think all officials, at whatever level, in whatever 
departments do their best to provide the taxpayers with full accountability 
and value for their tax dollar.  That doesn't mean to say that they're 
always perfect.  That doesn't mean to say that on occasion the auditor 
doesn't have commentary, but I can say that at the end of the day I'm of 
the view that we're all working towards the same goal and that is on behalf 
of the taxpayer. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- I find this curious, Mr. Minister.  We have a 
significant accounting oversight, to be charitable, involving some $2.7 
million.  The fact that there was an oversight -- and again I use the word 
. . . I'm trying to be charitable here -- that this sort of came to light 
very recently, now it seemed to me that your officials would be or should 
be involved in trying to correct the books, as it were. 
 
Are you now saying that you're not going to be correcting the books on 
this; that there will not be any subsequent appropriation to all the 
involved departments? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- There is nothing in here relative to the expenditure 
which you refer to of two years ago, to my understanding and knowledge. 



 

 

 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Well I find this extremely curious, Mr. Chairman, that 
these kinds of gross errors in payment can be made.  And it's clearly 
recognized that this particular expenditure, Mr. Chairman, was straight 
political decision making.  I find it curious that we are not now 
attempting to rectify the error that was pointed out and subsequently 
agreed to by the Crown investments corporation. 
 
Let me then ask you. Mr. Minister, we have two more incidents of incorrect 
payments, that is to say payments made without proper authority, by the 
Crown investments corporation.  One was for a post-budget telephone poll.  
This was reported in the Report of the Provincial Auditor for the year 
ended March 31, 1989. 
 
I want to know, seeing as this has now just recently come to light, what 
activities you will be ensuring to make sure that this $42,000 will be 
properly accounted for in the expenditures of your government? 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Interim supply number two, agreed? 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Mr. Chairman, I asked a question; I didn't get any 
answer.  I wonder if the minister might get up and give an answer on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, the hon. member refers again to an item 
of two years ago.  I thought the exercise in this committee was to . . . 
given that the budget has yet to be approved in its entirety, to give 
interim approval to a certain sum of money to advance, to pay the bills, to 
operate hospitals and nursing homes and schools and whatever else must go 
on as the regular business of government, until all of the estimates from 
the various departments can be examined.  I think your question, if it 
isn't out of order, is irrelevant. 
 
As I said before, if there has been in your mind, or for that matter in the 
auditor's mind, errors in the past, we will try to correct those.  It is 
our view that we try to do the best; we try to provide value for dollar and 
follow acceptable accounting procedures, etc., etc., etc., as we conduct 
the business of government. 
 
I am not saying we're perfect, but that's what we strive for.  And I would 
just suggest, in the interest of all of the public, that we move to the 
issue before the committee, and that's interim supply and whether we should 
vote to pay the bills in education and hospitals and health care and so on 
and so forth. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, this is beginning to remind me of 
Brooke Shields; nothing is going to come between me and my politics except 
a few unauthorized expenditures. 
 
I have here a letter, Mr. Chairman, dated March 26, 1990, and it's 
addressed to the Hon. A.B. Tusa, Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan, and it's from the Acting Provincial Auditor.  And he says 
that he has the honour to submit his annual report. 
 



 

 

Now that letter and that report was received by members of this Legislative 
Assembly, I think shortly after April 1, certainly during this fiscal year.  
And I do believe the fiscal year for the government runs from April 1 to 
the end of March next year. 
 
And in this report which was laid before members of the Assembly subsequent 
to March 26, and I think subsequent to the introduction of the new fiscal 
year, the auditor points out some unauthorized expenditures.  And the 
question I have . . . in fact, he goes on to say, the auditor goes on to 
say that: 
 

 Section 24 of The Crown Corporations Act which sets out the powers of 
C.I.C., does not delegate to the corporation any responsibility for the 
Province of Saskatchewan Estimates (budget). 

 
I just want to emphasize that.  It: 
 

 . . . does not delegate to the corporation any responsibility for the 
Province of Saskatchewan Estimates (budget).  Therefore the payment does 
not have adequate statutory authority. 

 
Well, Mr. Chairman, we're dealing here with estimates budget, or at least a 
portion thereof.  Now the auditor is saying, if the CIC didn't have that 
responsibility for the province of Saskatchewan estimates (budget), then it 
follows that the . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order.  I'd like to bring it to the member's attention, 
we're not dealing with the full estimate budget, we're dealing with interim 
supply.  And the purpose of interim supply is to grant money for the 
operation of the government departments and programs on an interim basis 
while reserving to the Legislative Assembly the right to complete the 
detailed review of estimates at a later time.  For this reason members must 
reserve their detailed questions on estimates and government financial 
policy for the regular review of the main estimates. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Could I just ask the minister, are we dealing with . . 
. is it one-twelfth or two-twelfths of the spending for the coming year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, members of the committee, what we will 
be voting on this second interim supply is two-twelfths except in the 
following instances: for education, school grants, operating grants, there 
will be $90,069,600; grants to libraries, 1,397,700, which would be in 
excess of two-twelfths as well; in health we have in excess of the 
two-twelfths, $1.1 millions; and for legislation in excess of two-twelfths 
we have 3,137,600.  So the total in excess of two-twelfths with those that 
I've mentioned is 95,704,900. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Mr. Chairman, it's just been reported to us as of 
March 1990 that there was $42,000 spent inappropriately.  I want to know if 
any of the expenditures or any of the notes that you have suggest that 
$42,000 for a political telephone survey, which was paid for by the Crown 
investments corporation, will in fact now be properly accounted for in the 
expenditures you have before you? 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- The expenditure to which you refer, I think, is one 
that occurred two years ago, and hence there is no interim supply being 
voted on that issue.  I view it at minimum as not relevant to this 
committee's examination of the request for the supplies to provide for 
interim payments to school boards, etc. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, it sounds to me like this Minister 
of Finance is just acting like the previous ministers of Finance, and no 
matter what he says about openness and no matter what the Premier says 
about openness, they don't act very much like they want to be open with the 
public of Saskatchewan. 
 
We have a series of unauthorized expenditures, including for political 
undertakings, and they refuse to discuss it.  They refuse to answer any 
questions.  I'm frustrated here, Mr. Speaker.  I think that the people of 
Saskatchewan are frustrated by the performance of this minister.  The 
people of Saskatchewan are frustrated by the words from the Premier one day 
and the actions of his minister subsequently.  I feel like the door has 
been shut here to legitimate inquiry about government expenditure.  And 
that's what we're talking about here today, is government expenditure. 
 
I think we have to put this in context, Mr. Chairman.  We have to put this 
in context that this government's overall accumulated deficit is 
approaching the figure of $5 billion, $5 billion, Mr. Chairman.  This is a 
figure that was unheard of eight years ago.  This is something that was 
unimaginable, unimaginable eight years ago when this government took over. 
 
This is a government that said that we could mismanage and still come out 
ahead.  But we haven't come out ahead.  We're in the hole.  We're way 
behind.  We're almost $5 billion behind.  We're spending significant 
taxpayers' dollars to clear off the debt.  Spending considerable taxpayers' 
dollars to pay off this debt.  Yet every opportunity, every opportunity 
that comes our way as members of the Legislative Assembly where we feel 
that we should be asking questions about the government's fiscal 
accounting, we're met with a wall of silence.  We're met with a flurry of 
procedural wrangles all designed to deny us legitimate inquiry. 
 
(1500) 
 
This deficit, this deficit, Mr. Chairman, is not so much the result of 
fiscal and economic conditions in this province.  This deficit is the 
result of an attitude.  This deficit is the result of an attitude by a 
government that simply fails to recognize that if you spend more than you 
bring in, you're going to get behind. 
 
And that attitude displays itself again today, Mr. Chairman.  And frankly I 
must say that, as I said, I'm frustrated.  The people of Saskatchewan are 
frustrated.  They want answers to why we're in the grave problems we are.  
I am frustrated that I cannot be given the opportunity to ask these 
questions, and I'll leave it to other members of this Assembly to ask 
questions. 
 



 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  The questions I intend to 
ask first of all to the minister relate to expenditures out of this interim 
supply in regards to, as the minister has defined, various programs and 
various entities and various departments of the provincial government.  And 
I'm raising them, Mr. Chairperson, in the context of some grave 
reservations as to the proper accounting of government expenditures that 
were expressed in the 1989 Report of the Provincial Auditor.  And I do so 
in that light. 
 
We are asking taxpayers to spend money in a way which the Provincial 
Auditor has deemed to be inappropriate.  And I intend to ask a series of 
questions in this regard because as my colleague, the member from Regina 
Victoria, has pointed out, the people of this province are sick and tired, 
they're sick until death of paying taxes and not feeling that they are 
receiving value for that tax dollars, nor receiving value for the services 
that are presently being provided by the provincial government.  That's the 
preface, preface my remarks with that, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Minister, the auditor in his report of this year, on page 45, puts 
forward a reservation of opinion as to your accounting methods, the way in 
which you as Minister of Finance account for the taxpayers' money of which 
this interim supply Bill represents but a portion.  The auditor says: 
 

 My auditor's report on the 1989 Consolidated Fund (from which this interim 
supply shall be drawn) financial statements contains a reservation of 
opinion. 

 
 The auditor's report reads in part as follows: 
 

And this is where I think what is pertinent in terms of today's debate is, 
today's questioning in regards to spending the taxpayers' money is: 
 

 Loans to crown entities include disbursements to the Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation of $385,136,000 (1988 -- $340,836,000).  It is 
inappropriate (this is the auditor's words; this is not my words; this is 
the Provincial Auditor) to record these disbursements as assets of the 
Consolidated Fund since their repayment depends upon future appropriations 
from the Consolidated Fund. 

 
Presumably that includes the appropriations that you're asking for here 
today. 
 

 Accordingly, these disbursements should have been recorded as 
expenditures. 

 
And the auditor goes on to point out why they should have been recorded as 
expenditures, Mr. Minister, because it would give a much clearer financial 
picture to the people of this province. 
 
The auditor goes on to say: 
 

 If these disbursements had been recognized as expenditures, loans to crown 
entities would have been reduced by $385,136,000. 



 

 

 
In other words, the debt to the Crown entities would have been reduced, and 
in 1988 would have been reduced by 340.836 million.  Net debt, net debt of 
the province of Saskatchewan would have been increased by 385.136 million.  
In 1988, 340.836 million.  And excess of expenditure over revenue -- to 
which my colleague, the member for Regina Victoria, previously referred -- 
excess of expenditure over revenue would have been increased by 44.3 
million; and in 1988, 158.843 million. 
 
In other words, Mr. Minister, what the auditor of this province says is 
that the money that you use in the budget, and presumably from the money 
that you obtain through interim supply, is not accurately reflecting the 
true financial picture of this province; that in fact that you're cooking 
the books, to coin . . . not to coin a phrase but to use a well-known 
phrase.  That you're cooking the books; transferring debt load into the 
Crown corporations to hide your financial and fiscal mismanagement of 
taxpayers' dollars.  That's what the Provincial Auditor says in his report. 
 
My question to you, Mr. Minister, is are you going to continue on with the 
same type of practice in this period of time, using money appropriated 
through interim supply to once again try to paint a false picture of the 
real fiscal situation of this province.  Are you going to use any moneys 
appropriated through this interim supply to, for example, pay off loans or 
advance loans to Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- For example, for a hospital or a  
 Dschool project that's been built and payments that have to be made as 
part of the amortization schedule, we're asking in this interim supply 
two-twelfths of what that total payment would be listed, whether it be 
under Health or Education or elsewhere. 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Well you're not going to duck the question that way, Mr. 
Minister.  That has absolutely nothing to do with the question that I 
asked.  Yes, you may pay some hospital, and yes, you may pay some 
education. 
 
But are you also going to make payments in a manner which disguises and 
covers up the true financial position of this province, as indicated, not 
by myself but as indicated by the Provincial Auditor?  Are you going to 
make payments and follow procedures in the manner which you have done in 
the past to off-load debt to the Crown corporations in order to hide your 
own fiscal incompetence?  And are you going to continue to make the kind of 
payments out of this interim supply Bill, using the manner which the 
auditor has questioned, in order to fund, for example, the Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation? 
 
That was the question.  It had nothing to do with health.  It had nothing 
to do with education.  It has everything to do with your jiggery-pokery 
when it comes to playing fast and loose with the real financial position of 
this province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- No, not knowingly. 
 



 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you say, no, not knowingly.  No, not 
knowingly, what?  No, not knowingly, you're going to make payments to 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation?  Is that what you're saying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- There's a statutory advance to the Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation that would be outside the purview of this 
interim supply.  And as I said earlier, the payments that have to be made, 
whether it's in health or education for school or hospital projects, 
two-twelfths of those sums will be advanced if this Bill is voted. 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- You say, Mr. Minister, that there's a statutory provision 
based on payments to Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation.  
Obviously, in order to be able to continue on to meet the provisions of 
that statutory provision, funds have to be withdrawn from the Consolidated 
Fund.  Isn't that correct?  Am I correct in making that statement, or am I 
incorrect?  That's my first question to you. 
 
And secondly, in meeting the provisions of that statutory provision . . . 
or meeting the requirements of that statutory provision, are you using any 
of this money from interim supply to funnel funds out of the Consolidated 
Fund to repay any loans which the auditor has identified as part of the 
problem of your inappropriate fiscal procedures? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- The advances for the statutory advance for 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation as outlined in page 103 of the 
Estimates that were tabled on March 29 and that this year will be estimated 
to be $182.1 million. 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- No, that's not the question.  Once again, Mr. Minister, 
that's not the question.  And you can sit there and play politics with the 
answer and so on and so forth, but I want to remind you what the auditor 
said about the use of taxpayers' money, including money I presume will come 
from interim supply because it's beyond the purview of the statutory 
requirement in regards to SPMC; I want to remind you on page 46 of the 
auditor's report: 
 

 The auditor's report is advising that the funds required by the 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation (SPMC) to repay the loan to 
the Consolidated Fund must be paid from the Consolidated Fund (back) to 
SPMC and, therefore, there is no financial asset (as the auditor says). 

 
In other words, for SPMC to pay off its loans, it must borrow from the 
Consolidated Fund to pay back loans which it took from the Consolidated 
Fund in the first place. 
 
The question I'm asking you is: is there any money in this interim supply, 
any money at all, that will be used to pay back the Consolidated Fund from 
itself via routing it through the SPMC? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, members of the committee, I'm advised, 
no. 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Mr. Minister, you say, no.  Are you saying no that there will 



 

 

not be any funds used to repay loans owed to the Consolidated Fund by SPMC 
(Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation) from the Consolidated Fund?  
Could you tell us if your answer is no to that particular question.  By 
what method is it that you will repay those loans to the Consolidated Fund 
from the Consolidated Fund, those loans which appear in your books as loans 
owed to the Consolidated Fund by the Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation? 
 
(1515) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Maybe I'll give the hon. member, Mr. Chairman, 
members of the committee, an example of the kind of thing we're talking 
about here and what two-twelfths would be advanced for.  Page 33 under 
education, for example, you would see an item -- Vote 5, Item 14 -- where 
the Education department will: 
 

 Grants to Saskatchewan Universities -- Repayment of principal and interest 
on capital loans from the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation -- 
$21,553,500 -- 

 
and university capital expenditures are financed by loan advance from SPMC 
with department-run universities with funds for repayments of principal and 
interest on these loans. 
 
In 1991, an increase provides for costs of loan repayments associated with 
completed capital projects, higher interest rates -- in particular the 
College of Agriculture building at the University of Saskatchewan -- 
contributes $1.8 million of the increase.  So that would be a typical 
example in Health and Education sector of how it would work. 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Mr. Minister, again, I wasn't asking you regarding the Health 
and Education sector per se.  I was specifically talking about the 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation.  Obviously you have no 
intention of answering the questions put to you on that line, so I am going 
to ask some more questions on another topic. 
 
That is, is that there was an arrangement made between the federal 
Government of Canada and the province of Saskatchewan in regards for 
certain undertakings made and the commitments made by the government of 
Saskatchewan, not to proceed with work done on the Rafferty-Alameda 
project.  I am wondering whether or not -- have there been any cheques 
received from the federal government?  And if so, how many have been 
received from the federal government?  And if so, if any of that revenue 
was included within the Consolidated Fund. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- I would like to bring to the member's attention that what 
he's questioning the minister on is not a payment out of the Consolidated 
Fund; it has nothing to do with the interim supply.  And questions 
regarding government accountability for past expenditures and financial 
policies may be asked in several other forums, such as the Public Accounts 
Committee, Crown Corporations Committee, the Committee of Finance on the 
estimates from the Department of Finance, or in the House in debate on the 
budget.  This type of question is out of order in the interim supply 



 

 

proceedings. 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairperson.  I'll put it this way to get 
around that particular ruling of yours. 
 
Mr. Minister, out of interim supply presumably payments will be made to the 
provincial Department of the Environment -- yes or no? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, yes. 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Mr. Minister, as you know the federal department . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order.  Detailed questions on specific programs within the 
department are not part of the interim supply.  Detailed questions should 
be put to the minister in the full Committee of Finance on the Department 
of Finance. 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Well thank you very much, Mr. Chairperson, for your ruling.  
I haven't asked a question regarding specific programs.  I asked whether 
there was an expenditure going to be made to the Department of the 
Environment. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- That's certainly within the purview . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- No it is not.  It is a specific question.  Order.  Is the 
member from Regina Rosemont challenging . . . 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Yes, I am. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Okay.  The committee will rise and call in the Speaker. 
 
The Speaker resumed the Chair. 
 
Mr. Muller: -- Mr. Speaker, during consideration of interim supply 
resolutions, I ruled a question by the member for Regina Rosemont out of 
order on the grounds that the question was detailed and not relevant to the 
interim supply.  My ruling was challenged. 
 
The Speaker: -- Shall the ruling of the chair be sustained? 
 
Ruling of the chair sustained. 
 
The Assembly will return to the business at hand. 
 
(1530) 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motions for Interim Supply 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Well, Mr. Minister, we appear to be caught somewhat in a bind 
here by your refusal to answer questions of either a general nature or 



 

 

those questions which have somehow be deemed specific.  So I want to ask 
you this and try to be as general as I can.  Does the agreement between 
Saskatchewan and Ottawa in regards to the construction of the 
Rafferty-Alameda project affect the asset . . . the balance of the 
Consolidated Fund in either a negative or positive manner? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- The Saskatchewan Water Corporation which could be one 
of the departments that would be germane to the question you ask, we're 
asking the committee to vote two-twelfths in the grant to the Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation. 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- So if I'm to understand that answer correctly, Mr. Speaker, 
what you're doing is asking this Legislative Assembly to provide you 
interim supply so that the Government of Saskatchewan can go ahead and pay 
to people sums in contradiction . . . in contradiction of agreement between 
the province of Saskatchewan and the federal Government of Canada, an 
agreement which was signed, I might say, in good faith on the basis that 
the Government of Saskatchewan would not proceed any further with the 
destruction of the environment in the Souris Valley until a legally 
constituted board, with which you agreed, and to which you agreed to in its 
establishment, and to which you agreed to in terms of its terms of 
reference, and to which you agreed to in terms of the kind of methods of 
operations. 
 
When it was found that that board was beginning to raise questions as to 
the viability of the province . . . the viability of project and the 
expenditures of taxpayers' money, your government went ahead and proceeded 
with that project in contradiction to that agreement.  And you're now 
asking the taxpayers of Saskatchewan to fund those agencies which will put 
money, which will take taxpayers' money into a project which the federal 
government has the power to legally shut down in terms of withdrawing its 
licence. 
 
Is that what you're asking the Assembly to do -- to spend taxpayers' money 
on a project which may be shut down if you guys annoy Bouchard enough?  Is 
that what's happening? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- I can only reiterate the point I made before about 
advancing two-twelfths to, for example, the water corporation, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Well by your silence, Mr. Minister, I take it that in fact is 
precisely what you're asking the legislature to do, to ask us to spend this 
kind of money. 
 
Mr. Minister, are you worried that those expenditures may prove to be 
worthless expenditures if in fact the signatories to that agreement, one of 
whom is the federal government, decides to withdraw the Rafferty-Alameda 
licence, the licence to construct under the International River 
Improvements Act.  Are you worried that the federal government may in fact 
withdraw the licence because of your non-compliance with the ERP 
guide-lines? 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- The details of those expenditures are best raised 
with the minister in charge, Mr. Chairman, members of the committee. 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chairperson, Mr. Minister, I am not 
asking you for the details of the expenditure, I'm asking whether you are 
or you are not worried that in making those expenditures, that they may be 
all for naught; that it may be a waste of taxpayers' money if, as 
indications have it, first of all that the board which is empowered, that 
under the federal Environmental Assessment Review Process says to you, this 
project is not viable economically, or it not viable environmentally; that 
the money that you expend through this interim supply will be needless 
expenditures.  Aren't you worried about that particular expenditure . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order, order.  The details of what the Department of 
Environment or the water corporation may do with its two-twelfths 
appropriation is an appropriate question under the estimates for the 
Department of Environment or the Sask Water Corporation, but not in the 
forum under interim supply. 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Mr. Chairman, the purposes of questioning in this interim 
supply, vis-a-vis the minister, is to find out how taxpayers' money in the 
province of Saskatchewan will be expended. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Those questions are very appropriate under different 
forums in the full estimates of Finance, the full estimates of the water 
corporation, or the full estimates of the Environment.  And those questions 
are certainly appropriate under those forums, but not in this forum. 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Well, Mr. Minister, by your previous answer to the questions 
which were put, it is clear, it is absolutely clear, as has been clear to 
the people of Saskatchewan for these last eight years that you are not 
concerned one little drop, one little drop about the kind of mismanagement 
of taxpayers' money that you have. 
 
By your own silence and by your stonewalling and by your refusal to answer 
questions and by your hiding behind legal jiggery-pokery, it is clear, it 
is absolutely clear to everybody in this province.  And it doesn't matter 
whether it's public accounts or it doesn't matter whether it's 
Rafferty-Alameda, or it doesn't matter whether it's health or whether it's 
education or any other issue that we try to raise, that you're not going to 
give the kind of accounting of the expenditures of taxpayers' money that 
the people of this province legally and rightfully deserve.  That you stand 
there in your place, playing your political games, hiding behind legal 
niceties, trying to cover your answers, refusing to answer direct 
questions, refusing to answer the kind of questions that, for example, the 
member from Regina Victoria put to you, on the expenditures of this money. 
 
Why do you think that we would have any confidence in you or your ability 
to wisely expend the taxpayers' money of this province when we look at 
things in the auditor's report that says you went out last year and you 
hid, you hid $385 million of provincial debt and buried it in the Crown 
corporation.  That's what the auditor's report said, Mr. Minister. So why 
should we have any confidence that you're not going to hide the real nature 



 

 

of the provincial debt to the people of the province. 
 
You stand in your place; you refuse to ask questions over whether or not 
you may be concerned that the money that is spent on the Rafferty-Alameda 
project may go to waste because the federal government may lift that 
licence, or the federal environment review board may say to you that this 
isn't a viable project . . . money paid for, the project paid for by the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 
 
And what do you do?  You once again hide.  You run and hide and refuse to  
give an accounting of that money.  People raise a legitimate question as to 
the continuation of throwing good money after bad, of throwing taxpayers' 
dollars into a mud hole.  And what do you do?  You stand there and say 
nothing except try to hide behind the kind of legal jiggery-pokery that 
we've already seen here today. 
 
Is it no wonder, Mr. Minister, is it no wonder that the people of 
Saskatchewan have absolutely no confidence in the fiscal integrity, in your 
fiscal integrity, in your political integrity, or in the integrity of this 
government when it comes to managing taxpayers' dollars?  You can bet your 
bottom dollar, because the taxpayers of Saskatchewan are betting their 
bottom dollar that when they are presented with the opportunity to change 
the fiscal managers of this province that you will not be sitting in your 
seat. 
 
You will not be begging this legislature for interim supply.  You will not 
be there because the people of Saskatchewan say, you don't know how to 
handle your own money; you don't, let alone the taxpayers' money of the 
people of Saskatchewan.  You are not concerned; you are not concerned about 
the kind of expenditures which have been raised here.  All you do is 
stonewall.  All you do is refuse to answer questions.  All you do is sit in 
your seat and laugh and make jokes. 
 
But it's not a joking matter to the people of Saskatchewan.  It's their 
hard earned tax dollars, Mr. Minister.  It is their hard earned tax 
dollars, and they know that you're squandering it.  They know that you're 
squandering it to the Urban Donlevys. They know that you're squandering to 
the Leonard McCurdys.  They know that you're giving it in fat salaries to 
Chuck Childers.  They know you're giving it in fat salaries to the George 
Hills of the world.  They know that kind of bloated salaries that your Tory 
friends that you put in patronage positions are taking home, because 
they've seen the kind of monstrosities and obscenities when it comes to 
personal remuneration that you're handing out. 
 
And it's not the government's money; they know that it's the taxpayers' 
money of Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister.  They also know, as we know, that the 
people of this province are on the edge of a tax revolt.  They've had it 
with paying more taxes so you can give it to the banks, so you can give it 
to your big corporate friends, so you can give it to your patronage 
appointments, so that you give it and line your own pockets. 
 
They don't want any more Taylors running off to Hong Kong, playing in the 
tennis clubs, out there in the yacht clubs, up on the 14th floor, the 



 

 

jockey . . . going to the jockey club, betting their money -- betting money 
that they've paid for, worked hard to pay for, sweated to pay for, in the 
race-tracks of Hong Kong. 
 
They don't want any kind of more mismanagement and corrupt kind of 
practices like that, Mr. Minister, and that's why you're sitting where you 
are in the polls. 
 
They don't want any more Bob Andrews running off.  They don't want Bob 
Andrew running off to Minnesota, living the high life in the big city, down 
there spending their tax dollars, taking their kind of severance packages 
that Mr. Andrew did, taking their taxpayers' dollar in the form of that 
kind of severance package. 
 
They're sick and tired to death of that kind of squandering of public 
money.  They don't want to see high-paid cabinet ministers coming into the 
legislature day after day after day and refusing to give an accounting of 
where their taxpayers' money is going.  They're sick and tired of that, Mr. 
Minister.  They have had it up to here with that kind of thing. 
 
So you sit there, Mr. Minister, and you may smirk and you may smile and you 
may think it's funny now, but let me see how funny it is, Mr. Minister, let 
me see how funny it is the day after the election is called.  Let me see 
that smirk on your face then, Mr. Minister.  Let me see that grin as you 
squander taxpayers' money.  Because there's going to be a grin on another 
side of another face, you can bet your bottom dollar on that, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much.  Mr. Minister, I have a couple of 
questions, and I will not take for ever on them.  I do want to try to 
elicit something in the nature of an intelligible response for you on the 
subject matter which my colleagues from Rosemont and Victoria raised. 
 
Mr. Minister, in all governments except this one, the Minister of Finance 
is not just someone who pays the bills -- to use the phrase which you used 
from your seat a moment ago.  The Minister of Finance is also someone who 
keeps the accounts.  He's someone who is generally thought of as being 
responsible for the efficient operation of government.  Mr. Minister, that 
is what my two colleagues have been asking you to assume some 
responsibility for. 
 
The Provincial Auditor's report would be intolerable to any government 
except this one.  The Provincial Auditor has in fact given this government 
qualified financial statements.  I doubt very much if there's another 
government north of the Texas-American border with a qualified financial 
statement.  I doubt very much if there's another government in Canada or 
the U.S., state or national, in which the auditor says, the books are in 
such abysmal, abominable shape that I cannot tell.  And that's what he 
said.  I bet you there isn't another one in North America. 
 
Mr. Minister, this is your responsibility to deal with it, and we would 
like some assurance that some heed is being paid to the embarrassment that 
constitutes the auditor's report.  You, Mr. Minister, your government, has 
got a qualified financial statement.  I didn't think that was possible 



 

 

until I saw you people get one.  I did not think it was possible for 
government to get a financial statement which was qualified.  But you got 
it.  And you have got it more than one year in a row. 
 
(1545) 
 
And, Mr. Minister, there's no evidence that you've done anything about it.  
No evidence that you have given any thought to the financial morass in 
which you've allowed this government to slip.  I ask you, Mr. Minister, 
would you outline for us what steps you have taken to try to bring some 
sanity back to the management of this province's affairs? 
 
I want to reiterate, Mr. Minister, what is obvious to all of my colleagues 
and I think all of your colleagues, that the public are also getting 
concerned about the mess you people have made, and if you cannot, Mr. 
Minister, give them some assurance that you're going to deal with the 
problem, they are going to elect a government which will deal with the 
problem. 
 
So I say, Mr. Minister, it is at your peril that you continue to give these 
inane, asinine answers to legitimate questions put to you about the 
financial management of this province's affairs. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister, for a sober, thoughtful response to the questions 
which, I think, have been very legitimately put to you on the morass in 
which this government's finances have fallen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, members of the committee, the sums 
we're asking the committee to advance today carry the same expectation as 
we would have for any moneys that are going to be expended.  Whether it be 
by third parties or government departments themselves, we would expect that 
these expenditures will be made providing full value for the customer, the 
taxpayer of Saskatchewan.  We would expect that they would be made 
prudently and in the best interests of the public. 
 
That doesn't mean to say that from time to time there are . . . there have 
been, I suppose, errors.  I'm not suggesting even for a moment that there 
haven't been differences of opinion when the auditor has examined those 
expenditures.  But all I can say to you and to the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan is that we give our commitment to not knowingly make errors, 
to make the expenditures in a prudent and wise fashion, give value for the 
dollar, and provide accountability to the public. 
 
As well, we'll admit that on occasion relationships . . . the relationship 
between the Provincial Auditor, private auditors, the Provincial Auditor 
even in . . . and officials of various Crowns has maybe not been as one 
would have expected in terms of co-operation.  Our Premier asked for that 
issue to be addressed last year.  I think it's safe to say that we've seen 
better co-operation amongst all parties and officials, and I hope that 
that's something that we'll see continue as we all work -- the Provincial 
Auditor, ourselves here as elected members, our officials -- to see that 



 

 

that co-operation is the order of the day, along with a full accountability 
and the most prudent expenditures of the public's funds possible. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Minister, if you are not aware that something more 
than a bit of co-operation is needed, you're one of the only people in 
Saskatchewan who are not.  Mr. Minister, everywhere I go in this province, 
and I do a fair amount of travelling in this province, everywhere I go this 
is something people mention to me in one form or another.  They ask, Mr. 
Minister, not just for a bit of co-operation; they want to know what's 
going to be done to clean up the mess.  And that's the language in which 
they put it. 
 
I want to hear, Mr. Minister, not whether or not you think that you and the 
Provincial Auditor can get along.  It isn't his responsibility to get along 
with you, and in the end result it is not your responsibility to get along 
with him.  It is your responsibility to follow and implement the 
recommendations he made, none of which have been done. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to hear not about the sorry state of co-operation 
between yourself and the Provincial Auditor; I want to hear what's being 
done to clean up the mess. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, members of the committee, as I 
said earlier, we have an expectation of all of ourselves as elected 
officials, as well as our officials, to make expenditures this year, and 
past years, in a vigilant and prudent manner, and that same expectation is 
there today as it has been in the past. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Well, Mr. Minister, that's sad news.  If all you have 
to say to us is that your expectations now are what they've always been, 
then I guess we may conclude that this embarrassing mess is going to 
continue until a new broom is brought in to clean up the mess. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Minister, one of the things that has got your 
government into serious difficulty is your relationship and your approach 
to industrial development.  You have went at this as if you were children, 
with little thought for the morrow, very little study, very little analysis 
of what you're doing. 
 
Mr. Minister, what I want you to do is to tell me how much this province 
has committed in all of your megaprojects.  What have you got out . . . 
What is the extent of this province's commitments in your various 
industrial development projects?  I'd like you to add up for me the amount 
you've got out in Weyerhaeuser, the amount you've got out in Cargill, the 
amount you've got at risk in the Rafferty.  That's not industrial 
development as the other two are, but it is a project undertaken with 
ultimately that in mind. 
 
Mr. Minister, we have to go no further than the WESTBRIDGE scandal which we 
had today, when a few directors, with the apparent contrivance of the 
Minister of Justice, helped themselves to $20 million.  And don't deny that 



 

 

that isn't what happened. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- You going to say that outside? 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- I said it right here, and I'll . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Well say it outside. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- I certainly will.  I certainly will.  I certainly will. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order, order.  Allow the member to make his comments. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- The reason, Mr. Minister, the reason why, the only 
reason those financial statements appear in the prospectus is that the 
Toronto Stock Exchange would not allow you to use that prospectus until you 
disclosed that you were paying $20 million too much for the assets. 
 
That's why the information's in there.  That's the only reason it's in 
there.  Because if the Toronto Stock Exchange hadn't made you disclose that 
fact, you'd have never done it.  And that's why that information is in 
there, and don't deny it, Mr. Minister.  I've read far more prospectuses 
and far more financial statements than you've ever seen, Finance minister 
or otherwise, Mr. Minister.  That's why it's in there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- We will all say it in here and we will all say it out 
there.  You paid $20 million too much for those assets and very well you 
know it, very well you know it, Mr. Minister, very well you know it.  This 
is just . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order, order.  I think this has gone far enough. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Minister, you and your government, you and your 
colleagues view government as one long trough, and what government consists 
of is a feeding frenzy.  You feed for as long as you can until someone 
gives you a boot and the pigs are out of the barn.  And that's how you view 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- And if you think I'm angry about this, Mr. Minister, 
you just try walking down Main Street in any community in this province and 
you'll meet exactly the same anger. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- This government is not just inefficient; it is not just 
ridden with an accounting system which no one can make any sense of; this 
government is crooked, Mr. Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

Mr. Chairman: -- Order.  I'd ask the member to rise and apologize for that 
last remark. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order.  I'd ask the member for Regina Centre to rise and 
apologize.  Order.  I'd ask the member for . . . Order.  I'd ask the member 
from Regina Centre to rise and apologize to the House for calling the 
government crooked.  Order, order.  I'd ask the member for Saskatoon Nutana 
to be quiet while the Chair has the floor.  Order, order.  The member for 
Saskatoon Nutana refuses to be quiet. 
 
I would ask the member for Regina Centre to rise and apologize to this 
House for calling the government crooked. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- I apologize for calling the government crooked. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- An unequivocal apology. 
 
Order.  The Chair repeated it; it does not have to be repeated again by the 
member.  I've asked for an unequivocal apology. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- I tender an unequivocal apology. 
 
Mr. Minister, I would like you to tell this Assembly how much we have at 
risk.  Let's start with NewGrade oil.  What is the extent of our current 
commitment to that project?  Mr. Minister . . . (inaudible interjection) . 
. . NewGrade Energy, that's right.  My colleague from Saskatoon Nutana 
reminds me it's NewGrade Energy.  What do we now have at risk in that 
development? 
 
And I want to go to the other megaprojects which are going sour and I want 
to get a look at all of your success stories in industrial development. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, members of the committee, I'm advised 
that there's no moneys in this interim supply for NewGrade.  The 
government's investment in NewGrade is held in CIC, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- And I take it you're not going to disclose to us, Mr. 
Minister, how much the government has at risk in that project. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, what I'm attempting to do is to 
provide what detail I can relative to the request here for interim supply.  
As has been pointed out by the chairman and I think myself on occasion, I 
simply cannot respond to detailed questions in some instances because we 
just don't have proper officials; in some cases we just don't have the 
information ourselves as a department. 
 
There are forums for those details, and I'm sure that information can be 
forthcoming in those forums where proper officials are available to advise 
ministers, including myself. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Well, Mr. Minister, don't get into too much detail.  



 

 

Just give it to me to the nearest hundred million dollars how much we have 
at risk in that project. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Minister, some of my colleagues wonder why the minister 
isn't answering the question.  The minister's not answering the question 
because he's ashamed of the answer.  That's why you're not telling me how 
much you have at risk, Mr. Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Minister, are you equally ashamed of the amount 
that is now at risk with respect to Cargill?  Are you equally ashamed of 
that fact, or will you give me similar information with respect to Cargill?  
What is our exposure on this project? 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Relative to the government's role in the joint 
venture with Cargill and the fertilizer company known as Saferco, I think 
as has been said in this House before, the province's position there will 
be 49 per cent ownership, which will roughly translate into a $64 million 
equity investment.  And as well, we will be guaranteeing the loan that 
Saferco undertakes for the financing in the project. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Well now I know how to put the questions.  I simply ask 
you to round off these figures to the nearest hundred million.  Would you, 
Mr. Minister, go back and tell us to the nearest hundred million what we 
have at risk at this point in time in NewGrade Energy? 
 
 DHon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, as I said earlier relative to 
NewGrade, there's no moneys in this interim supply for NewGrade.  The 
government's interest in NewGrade is held in CIC and some of the details 
that you might like to have answered, I think as legitimate questions.  I'm 
just saying that that kind of detail I don't have (a); and (b), there's no 
moneys in this interim supply for NewGrade, and so I'm not asking for the 
committee to vote moneys for that project. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- But nevertheless, Mr. Minister, the  
 Dmoneys which we vote are at risk because we have guaranteed the 
indebtedness, Mr. Minister, as I understand the matter. 
 
Mr. Minister, are you able to give me . . . Mr. Minister, the last time you 
were before this committee for interim supply, we asked you what your 
interest rate assumptions were, and you said they were twelve and a half 
per cent.  If the minister's shaking his head, that bothers me.  Things 
tend to fly apart when that happens; you can hear it rattle.  But, Mr. 
Minister, would you tell me what your interest rate assumptions were?  I 
thought it was twelve and a half per cent.  If it's some other figure, you 
can correct me, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, the question which I was going to ask is then, what is your 



 

 

interest rate assumptions and in the light of continuing high interest 
rates, are you not prepared to admit that those assumptions are not valid. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, the answer today is the same as it was 
the last time we did interim supply and what we're modelling our budget 
around is an interest rate of 12 per cent. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- And are you now prepared to admit that those 
assumptions simply aren't valid in the light of continuing high interest 
rates? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, there's no question since we delivered 
the budget on March 29, the whole question of Canadian fiscal and monetary 
policy, high interest rate policy of the Bank of Canada, the high Canadian 
dollar is causing us great difficulty here as a government as well as it 
does farmers and home owners and small-business people across Canada. 
 
Having said all of that, and certainly the interest rates have risen since 
March 29, budget night.  And that concerns us, given the debt that we do 
have as a province and do carry as a province and it has to be serviced. 
 
Having said that, there is yet nearly 11 months to go in the year and we 
base this on an entire year.  And I think our estimate, our model is 
relatively conservative compared to some others, not the least of which, 
Mr. Wilson's. 
 
And having said all of that, because I think we in Saskatchewan . . . or 
one of the trade marks of the Finance department has been the very good 
management we get out of the debt management side.  And I'm happy to tell 
the House that today, even in this difficult environment we find ourselves 
in, this very morning we went to the market and we were able to get 2 or 
$300 million dollars at 12.25 per cent which I think is very good, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Minister, you can't be serious about the interest 
rates coming down.  You could not have heard the Governor of the Bank of 
Canada, John Crow before the House of Commons finance and banking committee 
yesterday, warning members of the government and opposition of the House of 
Commons that lower interest rates were unlikely with the advent of the GST 
(goods and services tax). 
 
Mr. Minister, in light of his comments that interest rates are unlikely to 
come down, are you prepared to stop being obstinate, which is what you're 
being?  Are you prepared to stop being obstinate and admit that your 
interest rate projections were unduly optimistic and that is going to mean 
that your deficit is going to be larger than what you predicted? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- The hon. member asks if I'm going to quit being 
obstinate.  Are you going to quit denying reality, hon. member?  Did you 
not hear what I just said?  You should have been congratulating some of the 
officials that work in the debt management division. 
 
I just finished telling you that we went to the market this morning for 2 



 

 

or $300 million dollars in what is a very difficult market environment, I 
think you will agree. Any reasoned person would agree to that, any reasoned 
person.  Mind you, you spent most of this morning and most of the early 
part of this afternoon kicking investment houses around because you don't 
think they're competent to do investment and/or evaluation analysis. 
 
What I said to you just a moment ago, if you would have listened, is that 
even in this difficult environment and even though interest rates have gone 
up, we were able to go to the market-place this morning and place a 
substantial sum at 12.25 per cent.  Not bad I would say, and very, very 
close to our target, Mr. Chairman.  Give some credit where credit is due, 
if not to myself, at least to those who work there; they do a very good 
job, I would argue. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Minister, the competence of your officials has 
never been at issue.  Your competence is very, very much at issue, Mr. 
Minister.  So, Mr. Minister, let me, since it's evident that you're going 
to continue to stonewall the question of interest, let me deal, Mr. 
Minister, with another subject which is something of a chestnut from the 
last time you came forward for interim supply. 
 
Mr. Minister, at that point in time we discussed the proceeds of the sale 
of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan.  The answer appeared to me at 
the end of the day, the final answer lay in the CIC annual report.  You 
still, Mr. Minister, don't have the annual report that the CIC for the year 
ending 1989.  I wonder, Mr. Minister, with your breadth of knowledge of 
government, do you know of any reason apart from the concealment of the 
facts, if there's any other reason why the annual report of the CIC is now, 
I think, almost a month overdue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- I can't answer that question precisely because I'm 
not sure of the detail.  But I expect it will be tabled fairly shortly. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Minister, are you able . . . On a different 
subject, and returning to the subject of yesterday afternoon, Mr. Minister, 
are you able to update this Assembly with respect to where we stand on the 
question of aid to farmers?  A good deal of time was spent yesterday 
afternoon.  Since then, and reading the press today, there are apparently 
some new developments.  I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you'd be prepared to 
bring this Assembly . . . if you could be prepared to tell this Assembly 
what the current situation is with respect to this badly needed assistance 
for the province's farmers. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well I can't stand before the committee today any 
different than I could yesterday and say that the cheques are in the mail.  
I do know that the Premier met with the Prime Minister and the Deputy Prime 
Minister.  I think it's fair to say that he got a sympathetic ear and 
progress was made.  I don't know as the issue is resolved totally yet, but 
certainly, my sense is there's been a recognition, I think, of the 
arguments that Saskatchewan and all other provinces have been making 
relative to the federal government's role in this international agri-food 
trade war and what it's doing to, not only our treasury, but to 
Saskatchewan farmers and farm families. 



 

 

 
Mr. Shillington: -- Do I take it, Mr. Minister, that your current target is 
to have the money out around the middle of August in time for a fall 
election now that the window for a June election has passed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- No, the timing of the payment has nothing to do with 
elections; it has everything to do with trying to help farmers. 
 
And it's unfortunate that the hon. member . . . I think it's regrettable, 
quite frankly, that everything in the NDP's mind has to be cast in some 
kind of political angle, and that it's unfortunate we can't have a sensible 
debate sometimes in this House on farm policy as opposed to farm politics. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Minister, apart from the . . . Mr. Minister, do I 
take it, Mr. Minister, that you have no concrete information with respect 
to the negotiations between . . . My colleague from Riversdale very aptly, 
a good image, calls it a pillow-fight, between the Premier and the Minister 
of Agriculture.  It is indeed a pillow-fight.  At the end of the day, 
nobody's going to get hurt and everybody's going to go on and do exactly 
what they intended to.  It is a phoney war. 
 
Mr. Minister, apart from what you've said, are you telling us that you have 
no more information than that with respect to this badly needed payment to 
farmers?  We are still left not knowing anything except that the 
pillow-fight continues. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well as I said earlier, Mr. Chairman, members of the 
committee, I think it's fair to say that our Premier made progress.  I 
think, reiterating the arguments that Saskatchewan has been making, I think 
there was a sympathetic ear there.  We're happy about that. 
 
Obviously, as I said before, we can't announce a day or a date or an amount 
precisely as to the size of the payments for individual farmers or even for 
the entire . . . what the entire payment will be for the farm sector.  But 
I think it's fair to say that progress was made. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Minister, the progress in this . . . I don't want 
to recreate yesterday's debate.  Mr. Minister . . . while the minister 
rolls his finger, if the minister would roll the answers as fast as he 
rolls his finger, this interim supply would have been through a long time 
ago.  The reason why this interim supply takes so long is getting answers 
out of this minister is like drawing teeth from a hen.  It is almost 
impossible. 
 
Mr. Minister, do I . . . Mr. Minister, are we to assume from this, Mr. 
Minister, that you are . . . that the farmers in this province are still 
left in limbo while you and your government continue to play . . . you and 
the federal government continue to play these silly political games with 
their lives and their farms? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- The point I would make, Mr. Chairman, to you and 
members of the committee, relative to the farmers of Saskatchewan and the 
farm groups and the farm leaders -- and I think if the Premier was here, 



 

 

he'd make this similar comment. 
 
He's been very appreciative of the support he had prior to going to Ottawa 
to meet with the Prime Minister and the Deputy Prime Minister.  And I think 
if the Premier was here, he would say -- and I know since he is not, I will 
say on his behalf -- he would say, thank you very much to all those groups, 
whether it be the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, the 
Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, wheat pool, wheat growers, 
all those who wrote either to himself or to the Deputy Prime Minister in 
Ottawa, making Saskatchewan's case and standing behind our Premier.  I 
think he would say thank you, and I think it helped in making his arguments 
once again to the federal government yesterday. 
 
So I would officially and publicly put it on the record today, offer the 
thanks of myself and the Premier and other members of the government caucus 
for that support that they've given the Premier; they're behind him all the 
way.  They too would like to see the cheques as soon as possible.  I think 
their efforts were a substantial help yesterday to the Premier down there 
in Ottawa. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- The point, Mr. Minister: there are quite a number of 
people in this province; the majority, I think, of the farmers are assuming 
that the Premier never needed any help to get the money that's always been 
there.  He's just playing games with it. 
 
What the Premier needs a lot of help with is getting re-elected.  All I can 
say, Mr. Minister, is I hope he has a lot of people writing because he's 
going to need a lot of help in getting re-elected.  That's been the whole 
point of the exercise. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have a question with respect to the amount being voted.  
Why are we voting two-twelfths this time, instead of what is often done 
which is one-twelfth? 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, members of the committee, with the 
exception of perhaps the last year or two, I think for the most part 
two-twelfths has been the order of the day; '86-87, the second interim 
supply was two-twelfths; '85-86, the second interim supply was 
two-twelfths; '84-85, May 1, although the reading wasn't given until April 
25, two-twelfths, '83-84 two-twelfths.  I'm just trying to make the case 
that for the most part it's convention, two-twelfths, and I read into the 
record the appropriations over and above the two-twelfths. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Thanks, Mr. Chairperson.  Mr. Minister, you will recall 
last year when you were the Minister of Education, school boards had some 
difficulty with their grants because your government delayed forwarding 
those grants to individual school divisions. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you tell me, once this interim supply Bill goes through, 
what percentage of school operating grants will then be forwarded to 
respective school divisions? 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- The issue you raise and the concern that we have had 
in prior years -- and I know when I was Minister of Education, relative to 
school grants, operating grants -- I think you'll be happy to know that 
that's precisely why what we're asking the committee to vote here, in 
excess of the two-twelfths, is the other $90,069,600 for school operating 
grants and as well for grants to libraries because of this concern.  And 
what that will mean is by June 30, we will be able to have six-twelfths of 
their total year's operating grants, provided by the government, in their 
hands. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Minister, with this interim supply Bill, will school 
divisions have three-twelfths of their grant, once this money is forwarded 
to them?  Four-twelfths, five-twelfths, what percentage or fraction of 
their total operating grants will be forwarded to them once this is passed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Six-twelfths, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- So, Mr. Minister, you are saying that with this interim 
supply Bill and the previous interim supply Bill, we have agreed to forward 
to school divisions six-twelfths of their budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- That's correct. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Chairperson, I'd like to congratulate the Minister of 
Finance for dealing with what I think has been a very serious problem for 
school boards in the past.  This has not been the previous record of the 
provincial government.  In the past, school boards have been put in the 
position where the grants have been delayed, and consequently they've had 
to dip into their reserves in order to meet their obligations. 
 
So on this occasion, Mr. Chairperson, at times when the opposition is often 
viewed to be only critical of the members opposite, I do want to 
congratulate the Minister of Finance. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- 
 

 Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to Her Majesty on 
account of certain expenses of the public service for the fiscal year 
ending March 31, 1991, the sum of $761,792,600 be granted out of the 
Consolidated Fund. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, be it: 
 

 Resolved that a sum not exceeding $131,884,200 be granted to Her Majesty 
on account for the 12 months ending March 31, 1991. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman: be it: 
 

 Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to Her Majesty on 
account of certain expenses of the public service for the fiscal year 
ending March 31, 1991, the sum of $131,884,200 be granted out of the 
Saskatchewan Heritage Fund. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- I move that the resolutions be now read the first and 
second time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the resolutions read a first and second time. 
 

APPROPRIATION BILL 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- By leave of the Assembly I move: 
 

 That Bill No. 26, An Act for Granting to Her Majesty certain sums of Money 
for the Public Service for the Fiscal Year Ending on March 31, 1991, be 
now introduced and read the first time. 

 
Motion agreed to and the Bill read a first time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly and under rule 
48(2) I move that the Bill be now read a second and third time. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a second and 
third time and passed under its title. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
Bill No. 14 -- An Act respecting Certain Payments to the Meewasin Valley 
Authority, the Wakamow Valley Authority and the Wascana Centre Authority 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, this Bill is 
required so the level of funding from the participating parties for Wascana 
Centre Authority, Meewasin Valley Authority, and Wakamow Valley Authority 
for 1990-91 will be held at the same level as in previous years. 
 
It should be recognized that in the face of the current fiscal environment, 
Mr. Speaker, urban parks funding has been maintained at the same level 
without any decrease.  This level of funding is in accord with the fiscal 
responsibility measures outlined in this year's budget address.  It should 
also be recognized, Mr. Speaker, that these urban parks have and will 
continue to receive valuable assistance from other provincial departments 
such as New Careers Corporation and Economic Diversification. 



 

 

 
Mr. Speaker, it is the provision of this combination of resources which I 
believe underscores our commitment to Saskatchewan urban parks.  I 
therefore move second reading of this Bill to amend the Wascana Centre 
Authority, The Meewasin Valley Authority Act, and The Wakamow Valley 
Authority Act. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Stand up. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- The member from Regina South offers some prudent advice in 
being recognized, and I will do my best to identify my standing on this 
issue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to make a few brief remarks in second reading to this 
Bill, and I know that there are one or two of my colleagues who would also 
like to speak to the Bill. 
 
As the minister has said, what it does is simply to continue the funding 
for the three urban parks in Moose Jaw, Regina, and Saskatoon at the same 
level as last year. 
 
And I would say there are really two matters in general response to this 
Bill on second reading, Mr. Speaker, that I would like to address.  There 
are a number of questions and concerns that I would like to address more 
specifically in Committee of the Whole debate on the Bill.  And I admit 
quite freely, Mr. Speaker, that my bias is centred in the concerns having 
to do with the funding for the Wakamow Valley Authority which is in Moose 
Jaw. 
 
But first of all, Mr. Speaker, let me make recognition of the fact that it: 
(a) it is the Minister of Parks who has introduced this Bill; but (b) it is 
my understanding that the Minister of Parks is not the minister responsible 
for all three of the authorities that are impacted by this Bill.  It is my 
understanding, and I'm sure if I'm incorrect I will be corrected, that the 
Minister of Energy is responsible for the Wakamow Valley Authority. 
 
And with that being the case, Mr. Speaker, I'd just like to express on the 
record a bit of disappointment.  It was encouraging to me last year that 
the authority for the urban parks had been transferred from Urban Affairs 
to the Department of Parks.  I thought that that made a great deal of sense 
and put the appropriate minister with the appropriate department 
responsible for the administration of the Acts of the urban parks, and that 
it provided for more sensitive dealing with the issues that they face as 
parks rather than urban entities per se.  However, it is a bit of a 
disappointment to me if as a matter of fact I am correct that it's the 
Minister of Energy who is responsible for supervision of The Wakamow Valley 
Authority Act. 
 
(1630) 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to refer to a comment that was 



 

 

made by the minister when introducing the parallel Act related to The 
Wakamow Valley Authority Act last year when a similar Bill was before this 
House.  And I would like to read into the record the minister's comments at 
that time, verbatim.  Mr. Speaker, they're found on Hansard of July 6, 
1989, page 2427, at which point the minister said: 
 

 It is the intention of the Department of Parks, Recreation and Culture to 
carry out a comprehensive review of the funding formulas for all of the 
urban parks.  This will be done over the next several months, and it will 
be done in consultation with the parks' authorities to ensure that their 
views will be taken into consideration. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I simply remind the Assembly that a year ago, when the 
minister of the Crown stood up and addressing . . . to introduce an Act to 
deal with the funding for, in that specific case, Wakamow Valley Authority, 
rolled into a larger Bill this time.  What was said is that the funding 
formulas would be reviewed, and that came as good news to many, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
However, here we find ourselves a year later coming to this Assembly with 
the minister indicating with his Bill that once again the formulas for 
funding for all three urban parks will be exactly the same as they were 
last year. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I must admit that it is a bit confusing to me how you do 
a major review of the funding formula and then come back a year later 
saying the review has been conducted fairly.  And we find that the funding 
should continue under exactly the same formula as it was before we started 
without there having been any changes at all. 
 
Now I will address the funding related to the Wakamow Valley Authority more 
specifically in Committee of the Whole.  But I simply want to bring to the 
attention, Mr. Speaker, of the Assembly, and again I refer back to Hansard 
of August 18, 1989, page 4197 in which I ask the minister of Parks at that 
time, and I will quote verbatim the question that I put: 
 

 Would you be of the view, Mr. Minister, that in light of, as well, of the 
fact that both again Wascana and Meewasin have third-party funding from 
the universities, and that Wakamow in Moose Jaw does not, in light of that 
fact as well as the lower level of mill rate funding from the province and 
the lower proportion of provincial funding, 40-60 versus 50-50, I simply 
ask if you would be of the opinion that the Wakamow Valley Authority is 
not being funded by the province in an equivalent manner to the other 
three developmental authorities in the province? 

 
And in response to that question a year ago, Mr. Speaker, the minister 
stood in his place, not this minister, but the previous minister of Parks, 
and he said, and again I quote: 
 

 What I have said to the officials is when we get  
 D down to negotiations and into discussion we should take that into 

consideration. 
 



 

 

That was the commitment of the minister.  That would seem to me, Mr. 
Speaker, to imply that it's reasonable to expect that some change might be 
made to remedy what I, and I believe the minister of the day a year ago, 
felt to be some natural inequity in the funding formulas, particularly as 
they affect Wakamow Valley Authority in Moose Jaw. 
 
And then just a moment later in estimates of . . . or in Committee of the 
Whole of last year, Mr. Speaker, again I want to read into the record a 
quote of a question I put to the minister in which I said: 
 

 Well just finally, Mr. Minister, let me make it clear that I'm not asking 
for preferential treatment . . . but simply that Wakamow receive funding 
to a level that is equitable with the other authorities. 

 
To which the minister responded on August 18, and I quote: 
 

 Mr. Chairman, we'll do our level best subsequent to negotiations. 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I simply continue to be of the same view as I was a year 
ago, that there are some inequities that need to be addressed in the 
funding for all of the authorities as a matter of fact, but in particular 
for Wakamow Valley Authority in Moose Jaw. 
 
I know we addressed this issue in the very same form a year ago, with it 
being apparent that there was reason to expect that come this time now, 
there would be some kind of a different formula being proposed to deal with 
urban parks funding and particularly to deal with the inequity as it 
affects the Wakamow Valley Authority in Moose Jaw. 
 
So having said that, Mr. Speaker, I simply want to put on record my, first 
of all, my support for the Wakamow Valley Authority and the fine role that 
it plays in the community of Moose Jaw and the contribution it will 
continue to make for the quality of life of our citizens as well as 
visitors to our fair city. 
 
And secondly, Mr. Speaker, to put on record my disappointment that an 
apparent inequity in funding which I believe that there was a common 
understanding on both sides of the House, has not been remedied in this 
Bill.  And as I said previously, Mr. Speaker, I will address these matters 
in more detail at the appropriate forum which would be in Committee of the 
Whole. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- Mr. Speaker, I welcome the opportunity to take part in 
this debate on Bill No. 14, An Act respecting Certain Payments to the 
Meewasin Valley Authority, the Wakamow Valley Authority and the Wascana 
Centre Authority which may be cited as The Urban Parks Financial 
Arrangements Act.  Well I believe more accurately, Mr. Speaker, this could 
be referred to as the urban parks restraint arrangements Act. 
 
I have before me the estimates of this government.  I have before me the 
debate last year on Bill No. 59 which was dealing with Meewasin Valley.  
And I also have before me public comment about how this government treats 
Meewasin Valley Authority.  I will direct the bulk of my remarks towards 



 

 

Meewasin Valley Authority because I'm sure the other authorities will be 
addressed by members quite adequately. 
 
Last year in bringing down Bill No. 59, an Act to amend The Meewasin Valley 
Authority Act, the minister at that time rose in the House and said, "this 
Bill is required to ensure the level of funding for Meewasin Valley 
Authority . . ."  Well it's doing the same thing this year that it did last 
year.  It's restraining the funding to Meewasin Valley Authority. 
 
The minister continued to say: 
 

 . . . it is the intention of the Department of Parks, Recreation and 
Culture to carry out a comprehensive review of the funding formulas . . . 
for all the urban parks.  This will be done over the next several years 
and, I should also suggest, in consultation with the parks' authorities to 
ensure that their view will be taken into consideration. 

 
I assure you, Mr. Minister, I want you to come prepared to the committee of 
this Bill to explain what progress is being made on this consultation about 
the funding with regard to parks, these urban parks. 
 
Last year when I spoke on this Bill, Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 59 which this 
year is covered by Bill No. 14, I reminded the minister at that time that 
this government was hostile to the creation of the Meewasin Valley 
Authority and they demonstrated it at the time that it was created. 
 
At the time it was created they sat over here, Mr. Speaker, and we were the 
government over there creating the Meewasin Valley Authority.  And in a 
manner which could probably be best described as underhanded, this present 
government, in its position as opposition, did everything it could to 
torpedo Meewasin Valley Authority.  It was clear from their actions and 
clear from those who acted on their behalf that they were there to torpedo 
the Meewasin Valley Authority at that time. 
 
It became even more clear when they formed the government because the first 
Act, the first opportunity this government had, they cut the funding to 
Meewasin Valley Authority.  They cut the statutory funding to the 
authorities.  This Bill, Bill No. 14 which we have before us today, marks 
the fourth failure, the fourth failure of this government towards the 
authorities and in particular the fourth failure with regard to Meewasin 
Valley Authority. 
 
Their first failure was at the first opportunity they cut the statutory 
funding to Meewasin Valley Authority.  Then in 1988, the second 
opportunity, they restrained the funding to Meewasin Valley Authority.  In 
1989 they restrained the funding to Meewasin Valley Authority and the other 
authorities.  And again this year they again restrain the funding to 
Meewasin Valley Authority and all the other authorities. 
 
The minister stands in his place . . . And it's unfortunate I came in part 
way through the minister's remarks, but I gathered from the remarks that I 
did hear that the minister was complimenting himself and the government for 
maintaining these funds. 



 

 

 
Well I suppose in this day and age in Saskatchewan we should be thankful 
for small mercies, none of them being the member from Weyburn.  But we 
should be thankful for small mercies because this minister retained the 
funding at the level that they restrained it before.  But when this 
minister's patting himself on the back about what a good job he's doing for 
these urban parks, the minister . . . I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if you want to 
restrain the member from Weyburn.  He seems to have not got enough in his 
interim supply today and he wants to get into this debate as well. 
 
The minister in charge of this Bill was patting himself on the back.  I 
tell you, Mr. Minister, you require patting on that side of your body, but 
a little harder and lower down with regard to the authorities and how you 
handle those -- a little lower and a little harder, Mr. Minister. 
 
And the member from Weyburn could do with some of that kind of application 
as well because his performance this afternoon, previous to this, left a 
lot to be desired on behalf of the minister. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I think that all members should perhaps keep 
their wits to themselves and allow the member from Saskatoon Westmount to 
continue. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for that ruling.  I appreciate 
it. 
 
At the time that this government took the first opportunity to fail the 
authorities, I was a member of Saskatoon city council.  Saskatoon city 
council raised a motion asking this government to return the funding to its 
statutory level that had been there when the previous government was in 
power. 
 
The motion was very clear.  The resolution from the city council in 
Saskatoon, that the city of Saskatoon inform the provincial government that 
we appreciate their financial support for MVA (Meewasin Valley Authority) 
and encourage the provincial government to re-establish funding level at 
five mills for the year 1984-85. 
 
That was promised by Paul Schoenhals in this Chamber.  You failed to 
deliver on it, Mr. Minister.  Your predecessor has failed to deliver on 
that.  And before that, their predecessors failed to deliver for these 
authorities. 
 
It's unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, that this government has failed.  They've 
shown restraint.  I said they've shown restraint for four years.  The 
evidence is clear and I want to read some comment into the record with 
regard to the effect of what the minister is doing.  Keep in mind, Mr. 
Speaker, that the money that goes to these authorities goes to 
labour-intensive projects.  The unemployment rate in Saskatchewan is 
serious.  It's quite serious in the city of Saskatoon where the Meewasin 
Valley Authority is. 
 
The headline in the Star-Phoenix reads on April 6, 1990, "MVA forced to 



 

 

abandon projects."  It lists some of the projects: the MVA Trail section 
between Broadway and University bridges on the east side of the river; 
restoration of Cranberry Flats south of the city; clean-up of the 
north-east part; a master plan for developing the north-east area in and 
around Silverspring and the Forestry Farm. 
 
These are some of the labour-intensive projects to which the funding -- if 
it was returned to its original level of statutory funding, which this 
government has failed for four times in a row to do -- would have gone 
towards these projects and created employment in city of Saskatoon to say 
nothing of Regina and Moose Jaw as well. 
 
(1645) 
 
So the minister need not pat his government on the back for this.  Need 
not.  There is only one thing I can compliment the minister on, and it's 
very little but it's all I can give the minister. 
 
Last year, the previous minister introduced three Bills -- Bill 57, 58, and 
59 to deal with this issue.  Mr. Minister, your efficiency has reduced this 
to one omnibus Bill 14 to restrain the money to all these authorities.  
That is the only compliment I can give this minister for this Bill. 
 
And I regret, I regret severely that this minister carries on the policies 
of the previous ministers who have gone against the wishes of the people of 
Saskatoon as voted by their city council to return this funding to the 
statutory level it was when the authorities were created.  I regret that 
very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee 
of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 16 -- An Act to amend The Mortgage Protection Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second reading of 
Bill No. 16, An Act to amend The Mortgage Protection Act. 
 
In early 1982 mortgage interest rates were at a level of 19 per cent and 
higher.  Saskatchewan home owners were facing severe financial hardships 
because of those exorbitant rates and many of them were in danger of losing 
their homes.  This most serious situation had been getting worse year by 
year. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, the government in power, the NDP, prior to April 26, 
1982, had done nothing to provide any relief to Saskatchewan residents 
facing the hardships caused by exorbitant mortgage interest rates. 
 
I'm pleased to say, Mr. Speaker, that our government, the government of our 
Premier here, responded to the needs of the people of Saskatchewan.  We 
introduced the mortgage interest reduction plan in July of 1982.  The plan 
reduced mortgage interest rates to thirteen and a quarter per cent for 
Saskatchewan home owners on their principal residences. 
 



 

 

Mr. Speaker, the mortgage interest reduction plan was a tremendous success 
providing 62.8 million in direct cash benefits to over 43,000 Saskatchewan 
home owners, interest rate relief that allowed them to keep their homes and 
enjoy a better standard of living. 
 
Fortunately, Mr. Speaker, by 1986 interest rates were no longer at record 
high levels and immediate interest rate relief was no longer required, but 
we felt that there was a need to provide long-term stability.  We therefore 
introduced the mortgage protection plan to provide Saskatchewan home owners 
with the assurance that they would not be faced with exorbitant mortgage 
interest rates for a 10-year period of September 1, '86 through August 31, 
1996.  This plan reduced mortgage interest rates to nine and three-quarters 
per cent on new or renewed mortgages negotiated on or after September 1, 
'86. 
 
I am pleased to report to you in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, that to date 
almost 76,000 Saskatchewan home owners have received more than 53 million 
in benefits from the mortgage protection plan. 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, despite repeated pleas from our Premier, the Bank 
of Canada continues to keep interest rates abnormally high.  The high 
interest rate policy of the federal government, the off-loading of the 
federal budget, and the worsening crisis in agriculture has made it 
necessary for us to make some tough decisions.  We had to balance the need 
to protect the home owner against other priorities such as agriculture, 
health, and education. 
 
The subsidy rate is therefore being increased from nine and three-quarters 
per cent to ten and three-quarters.  The change affects mortgage protection 
plan benefits beginning April 1, 1990.  It will result in a reduction in 
the average subsidy of approximately $23 per month and savings to the 
province and taxpayers of $35 million over the next two years. 
 
We have not reneged on our promise to the people of Saskatchewan.  The 
mortgage protection plan remains in place to protect Saskatchewan home 
owners from high mortgage interest rates.  Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 
No. 16, An Act to amend The Mortgage Protection Act be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- It is not, Mr. Speaker, our intention to delay the 
passage of this Bill for any length of time.  I do however state that we 
are opposed to this legislation.  It's typical of this government, Mr. 
Minister, that when they need more money, you look to the ordinary 
individual and the services which they need and rely upon.  It is also 
typical that when you have largess to spread around, Mr. Minister, that 
goes to the corporate world. 
 
One of the Bills, Mr. Minister, which the House Leader told us would be 
called later on today is The Corporation Capital Tax Act.  It is my 
understanding -- and I stand to be corrected if the minister wishes to do 
so when he gets there -- it is my understanding that there is a small 
additional exemption being given to small resource companies in The 
Corporation Capital Tax Act.  It's typical that when this government needs 



 

 

money, it goes to ordinary people; when it's got largess to spread around, 
it gives it to the corporate world. 
 
This protection, Mr. Minister, is no less necessary now than it was when 
you introduced it.  Interest rates are still a very serious burden for the 
public.  Mr. Minister, the public of Saskatchewan would far rather that you 
brought to an end the waste and mismanagement, that you would tackle 
seriously as we urged you earlier to do, the recommendations of the 
Provincial Auditor, run a more efficient ship, and not continue to deprive 
the public of benefits which they need.  There are far better ways to solve 
your fiscal problems than this method, Mr. Minister. 
 
As I've said on more than one occasion, raising the taxes . . . That's 
effectively what this is; by this legislation you get additional money from 
the public.  That is not the solution to your financial woe, any more than 
it's the solution to someone who's living beyond their means.  An 
additional bit of income doesn't solve the problem.  They just blow that 
too. 
 
Mr. Minister, this additional revenue is not going to solve the fiscal 
problems of this government until you learn to bring your expenditures 
under control, and you haven't done so.  Mr. Minister, you're making no 
attempt to do so, as we discovered earlier in the Committee of Finance 
under the interim supply. 
 
Well the member from Yorkton and the member from Lloydminster are anxiously 
engaging in the debate.  I know their comments will be scintillating and 
sparkling when I'm finished.  I'm sure they'll both be on their feet to 
drop these pearls of wisdom at our feet that we may anxiously pick them up. 
 
Mr. Minister, this is not the solution to a government's financial 
problems.  The solution, Mr. Minister, is better financial control of your 
expenditures.  Until you do that, you're going to go on having problems.  
And if you don't soon begin to do it, the public are going to find a party 
which will exercise some discipline over expenditures. 
 
I say therefore, Mr. Minister, that I and my colleagues will be voting 
against this legislation. 
 
Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 17 -- An Act to amend The Education and Health Tax Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise to move second reading of Bill 
No. 17, an Act to amend The Education and Health Tax Act. 
 
This Bill makes two separate changes to The Education and Health Tax Act.  
The first change is to amend the Act to provide legislative authority for 
the province's existing tax prorate plans.  Mr. Speaker, these amendments 
are necessary as a result of the Supreme Court of Canada's decision in the 
B.C. Airlines case, brought down in May 1989. 
 



 

 

The court ruled that a province cannot levy tax on interprovincial 
undertakings on a prorate basis unless the prorate scheme is expressly 
authorized by provincial tax legislation. 
 
Our prorate plans for truckers, railways, and contractors do not have 
legislative authority and have been in existence on an administrative basis 
for 15 years or more. 
 
These plans, Mr. Speaker, provide for the prorating of tax payable by 
interprovincial firms and non-resident contractors on equipment used 
temporarily in the province.  The tax is prorated based on the equipment's 
use in the province relative to its use in the rest of Canada. 
 
This Bill provides the legislative authority to prorate the tax on goods 
used in the province on a temporary basis.  Firms affected by this 
legislation will not pay any additional taxes. 
 
The second change being made by this Bill, Mr. Speaker, is to provide 
legislation to implement the reduced tax rate announced in the budget on 
mobile homes, modular homes, and ready-to-move homes sold for residential 
use. 
 
Effective March 30, 1990, the tax rate is reduced to 3.5 per cent.  Prior 
to this change, other forms of residential accommodation such as stick 
built homes faced a lower provincial sales tax burden because builders are 
only required to pay the tax on their materials. 
 
This resulted in an inequitable tax situation for sellers of mobile homes 
and ready-to-move homes.  The reduction of the tax rate on mobile homes, 
modular homes, and ready-to-move homes sold for residential use will ensure 
that all forms of residential housing are taxed on a similar basis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 17, An Act to amend The 
Education and Health Tax Act. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much. I can be quite brief on this Bill 
without getting into the detail of it, and there is some detail in it.  We 
accept the minister's comments at virtually face value.  We will not be 
opposing this particular piece of legislation. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee 
of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 18 -- An Act to amend The Stock Savings Tax Credit Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second reading of 
Bill No. 18, An Act to amend The Stock Savings Tax Credit Act. 
 
Our government, Mr. Speaker, introduced the stock savings tax credit in 
June of 1986 to encourage Saskatchewan residents to make equity investments 
in Saskatchewan public companies.  Furthermore the program was established 
to improve availability of capital to Saskatchewan businesses for use in 
financing future expansions. 



 

 

 
I am pleased to say, Mr. Speaker, that the program has been a success on 
both accounts.  There were 25 certificates of eligibility issued to 
corporations.  Twenty of these share offerings were proceeded with and they 
raised over $115 million in gross proceeds. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, 6,711 Saskatchewan residents who participated in 
these share offerings received about $15 million in benefits by opening a 
stock savings plan. 
 
When the program was introduced in '86, Mr. Speaker, we established a 
three-year sunset date of June 13, '89.  However, given the success of the 
program, Mr. Speaker, we extended the stock savings tax credit last year 
for an additional two years, to June 30, 1991. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, we are facing difficult economic times which 
necessitate a reduction in government spending.  As a result, Mr. Speaker, 
I announced in the budget address of March 29, '90, the stock savings tax 
credit program was being terminated.  This will save the government about 
$3 million per year in tax expenditures. 
 
This Bill, Mr. Speaker, terminates the stock savings tax credit program and 
provides that no new certificates of eligibility can be approved after 
March 28, 1990.  Investors who have shares in a stock savings plan must 
continue to hold those shares in their plan for the required holding period 
of two years plus the year of investment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The Stock Savings Tax 
Credit Act. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  The minister says in 
his introductory remarks that this program has been an enormous success, 
but he decided to cancel it.  It has succeeded with such vigour that we 
decided to cancel it. 
 
The truth of the matter is the program's been a flop and that's why they're 
cancelling it.  And I suspect that governments are more likely to cancel 
unsuccessful programs than cancel successful programs.  I think that's what 
they've done in this case. 
 
Notwithstanding the government's putting an end to one more of their 
failures, we don't particularly object to the end of this one.  I and my 
colleagues have always taken the position that it is . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- My colleagues and I. 
 
(1700) 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- My colleagues and I have always taken the position that 
. . . The member's going to have us all speaking English yet before the 
legislature comes to an end. 
 
My colleagues and I have always taken the view that it is inappropriate and 



 

 

improper to be attempting to achieve industrial development by exemptions 
to the income tax.  That is a system and that is a process by which the 
affluent pay less than their fair share of taxes with the supposed benefits 
of industrial development. 
 
We have always taken the position there are far cheaper ways to achieve 
industrial development and ways which don't foul up the tax system.  My 
colleagues and I have therefore always taken the position that these tax 
exemption schemes are inappropriate and should be brought to an end. 
 
We are encouraged, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, to see that federally 
these programs are being wound down as more and more of the public and the 
federal government has begun to see that they're unjust and not very 
efficient use of money. 
 
So we do not, Mr. Minister . . . we will be voting for this, Mr. Minister, 
notwithstanding the nonsensical nature of your remarks when you introduced 
it. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee 
of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 23 -- An Act to amend The Corporation Capital Tax Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second reading of 
Bill No. 23, An Act to amend The Corporation Capital Tax Act.  This Bill 
introduces a corporation capital tax resource surcharge deduction that will 
reduce the tax burden of smaller resource corporations operating in 
Saskatchewan.  It also allows the minister to deem a fiscal year end to 
occur immediately before a major reorganization of a corporation and enacts 
various other technical amendments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me briefly explain how the corporation capital tax is 
determined.  The corporation capital tax is basically an annual tax on the 
wealth of the corporation.  The corporation, other than a financial 
institution, computes its corporation capital tax based on one-half of one 
per cent of its taxable paid-up capital.  The taxable paid-up capital of a 
corporation is essentially equal to the sum of long-term liabilities and 
shareholders' equity less a deduction of $10 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in July 1988 we introduced a resource surcharge on resource 
corporations in addition to the normal corporation capital tax paid by 
corporations.  The resource surcharge is equal to the difference between 2 
per cent of the corporation's value of resource sales in Saskatchewan and 
its existing corporation capital tax liability.  Mr. Speaker, the resource 
surcharge has generated additional tax revenues of approximately $34 
million in 1988-89, and approximately $41 million in '89-90.  It has helped 
ensure that large resource corporations pay their fair share of taxes to 
the province.  When new taxes are introduced, Mr. Speaker, inequities 
sometimes surface during the early stages of implementation.  Such is the 
case with the resource surcharge.  Some resource corporations have been 
subjected to large amounts of resource surcharge relative to their size. 
 



 

 

Mr. Speaker, resource corporations with gross assets of less than $100 
million will be entitled to a resource surcharge deduction.  The amount of 
the surcharge deduction will be dependent upon the proportion of total 
salaries and wages paid by the corporation and its associated corporations 
to its Saskatchewan employees. 
 
Corporations which allocate all of their salaries and wages to Saskatchewan 
will be able to deduct up to two and a half million from their value of 
resource sales.  This equates to a maximum tax reduction of $50,000 per 
year.  This Bill, Mr. Speaker, also allows the minister to deem a fiscal 
year end to occur immediately before a major reorganization of a 
corporation.  Corporation capital tax is calculated using values as at the 
fiscal year end of the corporation.  A corporation which reorganizes by 
transferring assets just prior to the end of its fiscal year may reduce its 
corporation capital tax liability. 
 
This amendment will ensure that all corporations pay an equitable share of 
corporation capital tax regardless of corporate restructuring.  We are also 
enacting various technical amendments in order to clarify our position on 
certain issues and to conform with the change in the federal Income Tax 
Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The Corporation 
Capital Tax Act. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Once again, Mr. Minister, we do not intend to vote 
against this legislation.  I just point out once again the unequal 
treatment between your resource corporations and the public under the 
mortgage interest protection plan. 
 
During the period of time that this government has been in office, our 
taxation system has got progressively more and more unfair.  The public 
have begun to pay a higher portion of the bills and the corporate and 
business world have paid less.  That process has been ongoing all the time 
you've been in office.  This is one small step down that road. 
 
We don't, Mr. Minister, object as such to the exemption provided to the 
small resource companies.  We do feel, Mr. Minister, that you're at fault 
in continually asking individuals to pick up the tax bill and exempting the 
business community. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee 
of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Being past 5 o'clock, the committee is recessed until 7 
p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 


