





























































Hansard: June 18, 1990


 

 

June 18/90 
EVENING SITTING 

 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 
Bill No. 22 -- An Act to establish the Saskatchewan Communications Network 
Corporation 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Seated beside me is Bill Bruce, 
chief executive officer of SCN (Saskatchewan Communications Network) and 
behind me, Bob Hersche, director of operations of SCN. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Minister and officials, welcome to 
the SCN Bill. 
 
Minister, I want to start by expressing my dismay that your government has 
taken what should essentially be a non-controversial Bill, in other words, 
a non-political Bill, and made it partisan politically. 
 
I see the minister wondering what it is I am saying.  Well, Minister, you 
had a Bill last year to set up the distance education network -- you called 
it SCAN (Saskatchewan Communications Advanced Network) last year -- and 
that Bill died on the order paper.  Then you wound up creating SCN by order 
in council, setting it up, selecting the sites for some of the distance 
education.  And you did that, sir, with the board in place being none other 
than five cabinet ministers, five members of the Legislative Assembly, all 
of them government members, and no other input on the board of directors.  
So I want to start by saying, you've got that strike against SCN. 
 
Now the good news about SCN is it fills a void in distance education and 
that we welcome.  On this side of the House we think that that's a good 
move.  We hope it works well.  We wish SCN the very best in distance 
education. 
 
We're a little bit concerned with the potential for propaganda, and in 
fact, we've already seen that.  The Premier has used his own private -- or 
public -- television network, if you like, to do some politicking.  And I 
don't think anyone would in their wildest dreams describe that as anything 
other than blatant political usury of this television network. 
 
Minister, on page 5 of the Bill, I see that the chief executive officer and 
the secretary to the board are both named by order in council.  In other 
words, there's no public input.  But then you go on and describe how all 
employees do not have to be hired through the Public Service Commission or 
through a more normal hiring process. 
 
You have in fact created a little fiefdom of SCN, where SCN can quite 
literally fill it full of whoever they want.  For the sake of argument, 
let's say you could fill SCN plumb full of none other than political hacks, 
and there's very little that can be done to prevent that under the terms of 
this Bill. 



 

 

 
Why is it, Minister, that you have set SCN up so that all of the hiring is 
done by order in council? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- With the greatest respect to the hon. member, that's not 
the case.  If you'll check section 12(1), it's the board that does this.  
Let me just clarify the board.  The member is correct when he says the 
present board consists of members of the Executive Council.  Understand 
that there has to be an independent board before our application can be 
filed before the CRTC (Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications 
Commission) under their regulations.  Any distance education or 
communications network established by a government under CRTC regulations 
must have an independent, arm's-length board.  So certainly cabinet was the 
board to get it up and set up, but before we make our application to the 
CRTC, there must be an independent board appointed.  But again if you refer 
back to 12, it's the board which will be independent when we make our 
application before the CRTC because of their regulations.  But certainly we 
did at cabinet for start-up. 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Certainly I see that in section 12, but in section 13 I see, 
and I quote, subsection (1): 
 

 Notwithstanding The Public Service Act, the corporation may: 
 
 (a) employ any employees that it considers necessary for the purposes of 

this Act; and 
 
 (b) fix the remuneration, assign the duties and determine the terms and 

conditions of the employment of its employees. 
 

And that's very clearly stated that that is done notwithstanding what I 
will refer to as more normal hiring practices.  It is done at the pleasure 
of the board of directors. 
 
We've seen SCN operate for some 17 months now, not 17 weeks, 17 months with 
five government MLAs consisting -- that's what the board of directors 
comprises -- five government MLAs.  And you tell us that after 17 months, 
well you're going to some how make it non-political.  It's just difficult 
for us to believe that, given the actions of the government, of your 
government, and given the actions of SCN over the past 17 months, quite 
frankly.  It's been operating 17 months.  The board of directors has been 
named.  The funding has been started coming from the province of 
Saskatchewan at that time. 
 
And again I point out . . . I mean, you correctly point out, Minister, that 
section 12 refers to the make-up of the board and that is appointed by 
order in council, but I'm suggesting to you that section 13 deals with the 
hiring of all other employees.  Those employees are hired at the pleasure 
of the board, and the board serves at the pleasure of the government; ergo, 
the government can fill SCN full of employees.  I see you have a response 
to that, and I would be most interested in hearing it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I'm going to explain to the hon. member a couple of 



 

 

criticisms.  You said earlier that the site selection was political.  In 
fact, the sites were selected, the old STELLA (Saskatchewan Tele-Learning 
Association) sites.  So if you're saying they're political, then you have 
to look at the previous government, as a matter of fact, if that's the 
case.  That's not the case. 
 
Secondly, you can't stand up here and say that although it's been operating 
for 17 months that it's been political.  I don't think that that's fair.  
And I've got to advise the hon. member, you don't set up what I believe to 
be one of the most advanced communication networks anywhere in the world 
overnight.  And it's been a difficult process. 
 
I'll indicate a couple of areas where . . . a couple of policy decisions we 
made, one in particular, which will impact on section 13.  We made the 
decision at the outset because SCN is not only distance education.  We 
wanted to take the opportunity based on the telecommunications network that 
Saskatchewan has in place to be able to use that network for all sorts of 
people across the province.  Corporations can use it for training programs.  
Professionals can use it for training programs, and I could go on.  It's 
not only distance education.  Okay? So it's more broad than, say, Access 
Alberta or TVOntario.  And it's got the potential for two-way interactive 
television because of the network that we have in place in Saskatchewan.  
So it's far more advanced than what is being done elsewhere. 
 
The second policy decision we made at the outset was we were not going to 
do it in-house.  We believe that there is an opportunity with the 
development of this network to build an industry around it.  And in order 
to build that industry around it, we had to make sure that it wasn't being 
done in-house.  To date I'm advised that since SCN got started, I believe 
it's 35 production houses have started up in the province.  Not government 
ones; people involved in the industry. 
 
The industry tells us that this is the only province in the country where 
people involved in the communication, the arts, the cultural development, 
the programming, are coming into a jurisdiction because of SCN.  That will 
mean, because we made the policy decision not to do it in-house, that from 
time to time there will have to be contractual arrangements made with some 
of the experts -- be it children's program, be it whatever.  And so the 
board has to have that flexibility.  And rather than have a system where 
it's all done in-house, this was a deliberate policy decision.  I've given 
the reasons for it. You may disagree with the reasons.  I believe they're 
sound; I believe that we're seeing the success. 
 
And I believe it fair to say that the people that are out there now 
developing this new industry in Saskatchewan are writing in support of SCN 
and its concept.  They're not standing up and saying, oh, it's just 
political.  They're very pleased with the way it's going.  Certainly 
everybody would like to have it done 17 months ago, but that's frankly not 
realistic.  I believe the interest we're starting to see from other 
provinces and the United States in what we're trying to do here that this 
will be the most advanced system anywhere in the world.  So those are the 
policy decisions that led up to the need for flexibility which lets them do 
short-term hirings under section 13. 



 

 

 
And again, it's the board that hires the CEO (chief executive officer).  I 
mean we can debate this.  I've told you what the CRTC regulations are, that 
it must be at arm's length; that applies to other provinces -- Ontario, 
Alberta, whomever; that it's set up by educational television.  In order to 
get your licence, CRTC must approve the board and it must be at arm's 
length from the government, and independent. 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Minister, you talked about the site selection and it being the 
old STELLA sites.  I had a representation to me from a town in Saskatchewan 
that wanted to be considered as a site for the SCN operation.  That town is 
in the Souris-Cannington constituency. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Is it Carlyle? 
 
(1915) 
 
Mr. Trew: -- No, it's Redvers.  The people there informed me that they had 
contacted the member, who was also . . . the member for Souris-Carrington 
who also was responsible for SCN prior to his resignation.  They were 
applying to him in either capacity; take your pick. 
 
What they were really saying is: all we want is a chance to make the 
representation.  Now the time for that has gone by because as I understand 
it Carlyle is one of the sites.  I'm just expressing my dismay, on behalf 
of those people that I spoke to from Redvers, that they never got -- not 
only to first base; all they really wanted, Minister, was an opportunity to 
have their day with whoever was responsible for making the decision. 
 
They simply wanted to know what are the ground rules.  They had put 
together what, in my opinion, was a very good presentation.  They had a 
fairly significant number of arguments why Redvers should be selected and 
they were quite frank with me.  They said, this doesn't guarantee us we 
would get the site chosen.  But they did feel it would at least guarantee 
that their expression of interest was listened to, and the last time I 
spoke with them that simply had never happened.  So I'm more than a little 
frustrated by that. 
 
How was is it again that the sites were selected?  And if it was simply the 
old STELLA sites, would you table the document that listed the old STELLA 
sites from the old STELLA information and then we can see that all of the 
sites are the same.  But how was it, Minister, that the sites for the SCN 
distance education were chosen? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Well there are a number of communities that obviously 
weren't chosen.  I do find it difficult when you say that it's all 
political, and here it's one riding in a Tory seat that doesn't get a site.  
And it's political if a Tory doesn't get it and it's political if a Tory 
gets it.  So I'm a little confused by your earlier statements. 
 
Having said that, the Redvers situation, as in all cases, the board took 
the list of centres presented to it by the local regional colleges.  Each 
college presented 10 locations in order of their priority.  Okay?  So it's 



 

 

up to them. 
 
Because of budget limitations we can't supply them all and we hope over 
time that they're all included.  That's the objective.  But because we 
couldn't get them all, we took the first three communities identified by 
each regional college.  Now quite frankly I was a little upset in the 
Redvers situation, and so wrote to them stating that the choice was the 
regional college as to which three sites were to be located in that area. 
 
And I don't think that resolved it, but I gather someone down there was, 
frankly, avoiding their responsibility, having participated in the 
decision, advised Redvers that he hadn't participated in the decision, and 
we have brought that to the attention of the local people down there as to 
how the choice was made. 
 
Again I'll supply the information on the STELLA sites, and I'll give you 
what information we can on sites if we've got, you know, target dates as to 
when other sites can be chosen.  But in all cases it was the community 
colleges, the regional colleges, and they all submitted 10 in order of 
priority.  And in all cases it was the first three because we couldn't, for 
financial reasons, budgetary reasons, supply them all. 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Minister, would you share with us, table the situation, 
letters, and information regarding Redvers, and the list particularly, that 
the regional college submitted to you?  Because what you're saying is that 
regional college submitted 10 and you chose the first three. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Their first three. 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Their first three, in order of priority.  And that was not, at 
the time I spoke with the people from Redvers some time ago, that was not 
their understanding.  So I'm simply trying to confirm that.  If in fact 
Redvers was fourth or further down the list, then that will take care of 
the Redvers situation.  I see you nodding so I'm going to . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . You want to respond, fair enough. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I'll certainly give the correspondence that I've had with 
regard to Redvers, and theirs.  I have no problem supplying the list given 
by the local regional colleges; I would ask for their okay first.  I don't 
think that there would be a problem.  I don't think that's my place to give 
that, but if they don't have a problem I certainly have no problem with 
giving you that information. 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Okay.  And further to this, Minister, because I suspect that 
the Redvers situation won't simply disappear, can I have your undertaking 
that you and I communicate about that back and forth, and we'll try and 
resolve this situation.  I see you nodding.  Thank you, Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Well, I'm not sure that we can resolve it.  Frankly we 
had a situation where one of the officials involved in making the decision 
down there was trying to have it both ways of running and saying that you 
should have it.  I called that to their attention down there because I was, 
frankly, a little upset with that type of approach.  All the other 



 

 

situations, they were up front about what they were doing, and made it 
clear to the local people that they had made their priorities and they were 
standing by them. 
 
We had one exception and I thought it was a little unfortunate.  But yes 
I'll be glad to stay in touch with you over the matter, and I've basically 
communicated that down there. 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Okay, thank you, Minister.  You mentioned earlier some 
comments about the production houses welcoming the SCN and I concurred.  
That's what they're telling me too.  They think this is an opportunity to 
do some further work in their chosen field. 
 
My question is: when you're doing production does that -- I know it's not 
in-house; it's all pieced out -- does that go through an agency or is it 
direct from SCN to the various production houses? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- There's no agency. 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Okay.  Minister, section 15(2)(i) talks about ". . . 
extra-provincial powers and rights and exercise its powers beyond the 
boundaries of Saskatchewan . . ."  Can you tell us what it is that you are 
contemplating operating SCN outside of Saskatchewan?  Tell me what was 
envisaged when that particular section of the Bill was drafted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- We're sharing programs and joint venturing with say . . . 
or will be able to joint venture with . . . access Ontario, for example, or 
. . . I'm sorry, Access Alberta, TVOntario.  Any of those type of networks, 
we want the power to be able to contract and joint venture in development 
and programming. 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- We're also sending K to 12 programming to Yellowknife 
already.  So we need that power to do interprovincial . . . carry on 
interprovincial activities. 
 
Mr. Trew: -- I gather that would be by agreement of the Government of the 
Northwest Territories. 
 
Minister, section 16 of the Bill, subsection (5), deals with the valuation 
of American money, and it says an American dollar is worth a Canadian 
dollar.  The section before, as I understand, it simply says that the 
corporation can borrow up to $10 million, and then the section I'm 
referring to says that may in fact be 10 million American, or something in 
excess of 12 million Canadian.  Why would you choose to write an American 
dollar as a Canadian dollar?  Why wouldn't you simply leave them both the 
same? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Well the reason is that we've got the limit of borrowing 
and they can borrow in . . . say in American currency.  There will be 
changing levels of that.  Supposing -- and it won't happen but just on the 
off chance that it was -- the 10 million was all borrowed in the U.S., 



 

 

instead of saying that that is over the $10 million that we have stated 
here, that for the purposes of interpreting that, it would still be $10 
million.  That's the reason for that provision. 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Okay.  It's interesting that we're now arguing about what I 
would think should have been a very fine line, because in essence what this 
will allow is for SCN to borrow $10 million American which is something 
well in excess of $12 million Canadian, so they can net an extra $2 
million.  They can still get up to that limit. 
 
I hear the minister saying that's not the purpose.  When there is a 
fluctuation in the exchange rates, I don't think anybody has gotten that 
hung up if the Canadian dollar went down 3 cents versus the American dollar 
and suddenly instead of borrowing $10 million we were at 10.2 million.  I 
don't think anybody would have gotten very upset.  I hear your explanation; 
I just have to . . . well I'm going to ask.  The purpose is not that you 
can borrow 10 million American and in fact turn it into extra money.  As 
long as I have that assurance, I won't make a big fuss over it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- No, and I mean for the purposes of the legislation, I 
mean we could have said $12 million effective July 1 and varying exchange 
rate, whatever it may be from time to time, we could have modified this and 
complexified it.  It's simply for the purposes that when they do borrow 
it's the 10 million limit. 
 
And that's what it has to . . . We have to have some borrowing power stated 
in the legislation so that the corporation has the legal capacity to 
borrow, and we put the limit in at 10 million. 
 
Now we could argue whether it should be 9.9 or 10.1.  If they do borrow, 
though, in the American currency, for example, this just takes into account 
the exchange rate.  They still can't use it for another 2 million, and 
frankly I think even if they did at that level, it wouldn't be much of an 
issue in the floor of the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Minister.  Moving to section 23, which is the 
distance education development fee.  What that section says is that you are 
going to be charging every cable subscriber in Saskatchewan a distance 
education development fee.  Every subscriber whether they want the service 
or not simply has to have it. 
 
Why did you decide to charge cable subscribers this fee as opposed to 
distributing it in right throughout the piece?  We have just under a 
million people in Saskatchewan.  I don't know how many taxpayers we have, 
but certainly the number of taxpayers would be much wider than the number 
of cable TV purchasers.  So why did you decide to do it that way? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Well understand that the people that are receiving cable 
television will be getting probably ten hours of programming every day, 
continuous, which not everybody else will get.  So they will be getting the 
service 10 hours . . . at least 10 hours every day, as I say, which other 
people out there not hooked up to cable will not have access to. 
 



 

 

To say that the people though that don't have cable aren't paying for this 
is not accurate.  They'll be paying for it when they use the sites; they'll 
be paying for it as they use that type of programming; people that want to 
use the SCN network, for example, professions, corporations, whatever, of 
course, would pay a fee; people would be paying a fee for classes.  I could 
go on and on.  It's being paid by several sources. 
 
But the one group that would have continuous programming of the education 
and cultural all the time, like I say, the 10 hours a day, would be the 
cable subscribers.  So that's why that component was chosen. 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Was there any thought given, Minister, to having the SCN 
programming as optional for cable subscribers and thereby giving cable 
subscribers one more option?  What thought went into that process? 
 
(1930) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Well, it is optional for some cable companies, the 
smaller cable operators.  And understand that because of a policy change we 
made a few years back, we're now getting cable into very small communities 
out there.  It's optional in their case.  Yes, they're on the C-SAT cable 
system, or satellite system.  It's optional for the very small ones.  It's 
the larger ones, that have a different licence, that will in fact collect 
this fee.  It's obviously to help fund the program development, to give a 
stable source of income for program development as well, so those were the 
reasons.  But again, they get 10 hours of programming every day. 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Minister, if I were a cable subscriber in what you refer to as 
a small cable operator service area, if my neighbour also gets cable and my 
neighbour does not want SCN and I do, is that possible or is it all or none 
in the case of these small operators? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- It's all or none at those smaller-level cable systems.  
The option that they have to get the continuing program is to convince the 
cable operator to supply that programming as part of the service. 
 
Mr. Trew: -- So why, Minister, would you allow the small cable operators 
off the hook, so to speak, from the charge for distance education 
development fee?  Why is it you would let those smaller cable companies and 
their subscribers, who are certainly as important as the subscribers in the 
major centres . . . but why would you differentiate and say to the people 
of Saskatoon and Regina and Moose Jaw, Prince Albert, North Battleford, 
that you have to pay this fee and yet if you happen to be in a smaller 
centre, you don't?  How could you arrive at that two-tier system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- A lot of those very small ones simply can't afford it.  
We put in a grant, for example, of $2,000 to start up some of those very 
small cable operators.  I don't look upon it -- and I'll say this quite 
bluntly -- I don't look upon this as letting anyone off the hook.  I happen 
to believe that this has the potential to be a vital and important service 
to the vast majority of people in this province.  I think it's a fair way 
to raise money.  I don't expect everybody to like it, but certainly I 
believe that the type and the quality of programming that will go on air -- 



 

 

and as I say, we're now very, very comfortable that we can deliver 10 hours 
every day -- that it's a worthwhile service.  It's a service that has to be 
paid for.  It's a service that one group benefits more than others because 
they get the 10 hours. 
 
I don't look upon it as letting anyone off the hook.  I believe that this 
service has a great potential for the people of this province.  I think 
they will see it as a worthwhile service, and I believe that as well that 
they think that it's a fair way of building this service up, building the 
programming up, giving the options of the programming, improving the 
program development in Saskatchewan, improving cultural program development 
in the province.  All of these things have tremendous potential.  And as I 
say, I don't look upon it looking off the hook.  I believe the people at 
the end of the day will see this SCN and the way that it is being funded as 
a fair way to fund it at a very reasonable cost. 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Well, Minister, you talk about it providing options, and yet 
you're the one that is deciding who's going to have options.  What is the 
cost for a cable company to get the SCN feed?  Is it a flat fee?  Is it a 
fee that is based on subscribers, and is there any initial hook-up costs if 
a cable company starts getting the SCN programming? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Basically it costs them nothing as long as they've got a 
Ku band receiver, which I gather most of them have.  They can just pick it 
off the air. 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Then, Minister, I am much more perplexed by your decision to 
allow the small cable operators off the hook.  You are not giving any 
option to cable subscribers in the major centres. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- I'll answer that. 
 
Mr. Trew: -- And I see the minister saying he will answer it.  Before my 
speech gets inflamed, I will allow you to answer the question, Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Understand that what's being required is part of their 
CRTC licensing.  What's being required with the large ones is different 
than the small one because of CRTC licensing, not something that we do.  
Okay?  That is something that's decided upon by the CRTC, not ourselves. 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Based on the application that you submit to the CRTC.  Now I 
need an explanation, because it's your application to the CRTC, and you're 
saying the CRTC is saying, oh well you can only do this much.  So tell me 
how it is you can have it both ways. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Well we're not having it both ways.  Our application is 
to set up the system and to be able to broadcast certain types of programs.  
Their application depends on what they receive.  Okay?  Two totally 
different things.  And so the CRTC has ruled consistently, I believe, since 
cable came in.  They put higher standards on the ones that have the greater 
number of subscribers -- usually the urban centres, large urban centres -- 
and they generally carry more programming as well.  So they get some 
benefits of that.  They can give more options; at the same they get more 



 

 

requirements.  And the requirement that they give a channel for educational 
television has been a long-standing one. 
 
So there's a difference in the tiers of the licences granted by CRTC.  It's 
not something . . . We get a licence to send, they get a licence to 
receive, and they have different categories depending on the size of their 
operation, really, or the number of subscribers.  And there's totally 
different rules for larger ones than there are for the very, very small 
ones. 
 
Mr. Trew: -- If I can say what I think I heard, Minister, you're saying 
that if we have a beef, it's with the CRTC for the fact that Regina, 
Saskatoon, the major cable companies don't have a choice, they simply have 
to take the SCN, and the small companies do in fact have a choice, because 
what I hear you saying is that SCN will offer those services. 
 
If they accept those services, they will be paying the dollar a month I 
believe you set the charge at right now and, of course, they'll be paying 
whatever the charge is at a given point in history.  But you're saying that 
it's the CRTC that cable subscribers, if they have complaints, it's the 
CRTC that cable subscribers should go to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Understand that on the smaller ones . . . that the big 
ones will have no choice.  The smaller ones, we have the following choice, 
and we haven't made the decision.  We can charge them the fee anyway, based 
on the number of subscribers.  That may, in some cases, some very, very 
small ones may cause them some real difficulty because they pay a much 
higher fee. 
 
This gets complicated for another reason: that we have been fighting the 
CRTC on the charges that it has allowed to be charged the very small 
communities.  So we're trying to get them reduced now, but we haven't made 
the decision whether we will give them the choice.  We may charge them the 
fee based on number of subscribers; we haven't made that decision.  The 
information I gave you is on my belief that some of them are so very small 
that it may be a difficulty for them, so we haven't made that decision.  We 
may take that choice away, in which case, if we're going to charge them the 
fee, they might as well take the service obviously. 
 
We haven't had our meetings with the very small operators yet -- many of 
them community-owned, most of them community-owned, I think it fair to say.  
And we'll see what the assessment is in each of those communities before we 
make that decision. 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Minister, the fee charged in Regina -- I'll use Regina; it's 
my city -- the fee that SCN is charging Cable Regina is based on the number 
of subscribers.  Correct?  And therefore what you've admitted in your last 
series is that you are making, whether you've made it or not, you are 
making a conscious decision to allow cable subscribers in smaller centres 
to be able to not pay the fee that you are forcing Regina and the other 
major centres to pay.  Does Cable Regina, Minister, have any choice at all?  
Cable Regina must accept the SCN programming or not? 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: -- No, they won't.  But understand that CRTC . . . There's 
two questions you ask and I want the hon. member to understand the 
difference.  The CRTC has required of the cable companies for many years 
that they are to reserve a channel for educational television.  They do 
that in Ontario; they do it in Alberta, Manitoba, or wherever.  Okay?  So 
that's one. 
 
What I haven't said: there may be no choice in some of the very, very small 
ones, which are a totally different system altogether.  Okay?  I think it's 
different satellite system as well, so it's for more isolated communities.  
They pay a much higher price right now than Regina or Saskatoon per person 
-- considerably higher and generally fewer choices.  We're trying to get 
that down.  You get to a limit in this where people will disconnect from 
cable.  Okay?  So you have to be conscious of that. 
 
And in some of the smaller areas, it gets very, very expensive per 
subscriber, and they're paying a very high fee now.  We're trying to get 
that down.  If it means that people are going to disconnect in the smaller 
areas because the fees keep going up, then obviously we need the 
flexibility.  That's all I'm saying to you.  So there may be a choice.  I'm 
not, though -- I don't want you to interpret it saying that Regina has no 
choice and they have no choice.  In fact, they may not have a choice.  
We're doing the analysis; we'll be meeting with them to see; we haven't 
made that decision yet. 
 
But the hon. member should understand that there are considerable 
differences between those very small communities and that type of CRTC 
licence than the one that applies to larger centres, not just Saskatoon or 
Regina, but the larger centres, and the problems are different.  They may 
well not have a choice in the smaller ones. 
 
We want them to take the programming; that's the way we're coming at it.  
We want as many people in the province to have access to this as possible.  
But I'm telling you the specific problems.  You get a community of maybe 
150 subscribers -- it may be a problem, and we're . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- So does Regina have a choice? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Regina doesn't have a choice, as I said at the outset; 
Saskatoon won't have a choice; larger centres won't have a choice.  And in 
terms too, remember that the smaller ones may not have a choice depending 
what decisions we make in our analysis and our meetings with them. 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Well, Minister, I can tell you that there is a good and 
growing number of people in Regina and I suspect in the other major centres 
that have chosen to disconnect their cable because the price is ever 
spiralling, ever going up.  I know we can debate whether they're getting a 
good bargain or not, but I can assure you that one of the two of us having 
this conversation had his cable disconnected because it simply cost too 
much for what I perceived that I was getting.  So to argue that in the 
small centre, if you have to charge this dollar a month for 10 hours of SCN 
programming, may cause a disconnect, I can tell you it's happening in the 
major centres as well. 



 

 

 
(1945) 
 
Minister, I want to refer to section 29, subsection (d) which deals with 
defining, enlarging, or restricting the meaning of any words or phrases 
used in this Act but not defined in this Act.  And that can be changed, any 
of the wording, by order in council -- in other words by cabinet.  So 
cabinet can define, enlarge, or restrict the meaning of any words or 
phrases used in this Act but not defined in this Act.  In other words 
cabinet can do whatever they want with . . . well cabinet can do whatever 
it wants with this Bill. 
 
Minister, what you're saying here is that you're not going to have to come 
to the legislature if you're making any changes in the Act.  Certainly the 
government is responsible for administering legislation, but what you are 
saying is that if you decide to change it you don't have to come back 
before the Legislative Assembly.  In other words we don't have to ever get 
an opportunity to amend or review this legislation.  And there may well be 
some problems with it, that after you've been operating for a year you see.  
And if that's so -- hopefully the government will be different -- and we'll 
bring on the amendments that are required.  But I'm curious about why you 
would give yourself that power. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- It's a standard interpretive fee provision in any statute 
giving the power to do regulations.  Understand that it doesn't apply to 
section 2, where the definitions are set out.  If in the future you've got 
a word that you think should be defined for all purposes, then you need a 
House amendment to do that.  That's not the practice, and the definitions 
are the ones that you expect to last for the longest time.  They're put in 
the Act.  The other one gives you the power to interpret those.  That's not 
any different than any other when you've got the power to implement 
regulations. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- The Chair asks for leave to go page by page. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Pages 1 to 12 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Mr. Speaker, before I move the committee report the Bill, 
I would like to thank the officials that are here with me tonight and the 
other people in SCN.  As I say, I believe and I think hon. members opposite 
believe that this communications network has tremendous potential for the 
people of our province.  It will be one of the most advanced, if not the 
most advanced, in the world.  It's creating a new industry here already and 
a great deal of excitement from those involved.  I want to thank the 
officials for doing their part to make this happen, and it's a job very, 
very well done.  Mr. Speaker, I move the committee report the Bill. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 



 

 

Bill No. 30 -- An Act respecting the Saskatchewan Heritage Foundation 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Would the minister introduce her officials. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Tonight with us is the deputy 
minister of Culture, Multiculturalism and Recreation, immediately to my 
right, Elizabeth Knebli.  I have Dean Clark to my left, director of the 
heritage branch; Steven Schiefner behind me, legislation officer for the 
department; and Heather Sinclair, the solicitor with the Department of 
Justice. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to welcome the officials 
to this committee stage of this Bill.  I want to indicate to the minister 
that we're quite pleased with the concept and the principle of the Bill.  I 
have one problem which I brought to the attention of the minister in my 
remarks on second readings, and I will just summarize very briefly at this 
time.  The problem relates to the make-up of the board that is to 
administer this heritage foundation as outlined in Bill 30. 
 
Bill 30 makes provision for the corporation to consist of 7 to 15 members 
appointed by the Lieutenant Governor in Council.  I am suggesting on behalf 
of members on this side of the House, and people involved in this field who 
have had experience with boards, that the minister put in an amendment to 
this Bill that would make provision for the nomination of people to the 
board by parties that have an interest in the Bill. 
 
I am suggesting for example that the Heritage Saskatchewan Committee be 
asked to nominate people to the board, that the Saskatchewan Council of 
Archives be asked to nominate people to the board, that the Western 
Development Museum, Heritage Regina, Saskatoon Heritage Society -- each one 
of those be asked to nominate people to the board.  And then in addition to 
that, the minister would nominate or appoint people over and above that. 
 
The purpose of this of course, Mr. Chairman, is to make sure that the board 
that is comprised is made up of those people who are directly interested 
and knowledgeable of heritage properties in Saskatchewan and have worked 
with them, and that the appointment of these people not be subject, or even 
suspect, of anything to do with politics of the government of the day. 
 
I believe that if we make provision for the minister to appoint several 
people over and above the ones nominated by each of the individual groups, 
that that would give the minister some flexibility and leeway just in case 
there was some group that was left out, or there was some particular group 
that the minister might want to emphasize or to have on the board.  And one 
that comes to mind, for example, it might be advisable to have somebody 
there representing either the multicultural aspect of our province, or the 
aboriginal population of our province.  And if the minister has those 
people then of course this provides for that flexibility. 
 
So then my question, Madam Minister, is: will you be prepared to either 
accept an amendment or to present one yourself? 



 

 

 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- Mr. Chairman, the hon. member and I did have a fairly 
lengthy discussion on the issue.  And I have to tell the hon. member 
tonight that, in fact, I did go back and had some discussions with the 
officials and also thought some more about the concept.  And I would like 
the member to know that I don't have difficulty with the concept.  However, 
after talking to the officials and getting some briefing material from the 
department, I looked at it and compared it I guess with some of the 
committees or the boards that you may very well find in place to do with 
other agencies in the province.  And whether it was the, for example, the 
Teachers' Superannuation Commission was one, the educational relations 
board, and I have to admit -- and I may have missed some -- but it was for 
certainly the educational field where I believe most of them are in place, 
done by the concept that the member has suggested. 
 
I think one of the differences -- with what is in place with some of those 
boards and commissions where in fact the organization is guaranteed that 
seat as opposed to government simply doing the appointing -- is that the 
organizations are not what I would call voluntary in nature.  For example, 
the Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation, within some of those boards and 
commissions, whether it's the superannuation commission or other -- the 
Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation gets to do the appointing or the 
Saskatchewan School Trustees Association, and of course, their members in 
turn is what funds those particular organizations.  So there were some 
differences in there. 
 
In dealing and setting up with this particular agency, we took a look 
across Canada, and I would like to think that the drafting of it and the 
research that was done on it . . . it was finally concluded that here we 
have the opportunity perhaps to take the best of what everybody else had 
and leave out perhaps what didn't work so well.  Hence the legislation 
before us, Mr. Chairman.  And I believe that it probably is taking the 
better parts out of places like British Columbia, Ontario, and Alberta. 
 
It would be our intent while not to put this into legislation, the 
guarantee of membership . . . I will share with the hon. member some of the 
things that I think need to be in getting this up and running. 
 
First of all, there should be a process of inclusion rather than exclusion.  
Are you going to in fact exclude some organizations?  Because you're well 
aware of all the organizations out there, and there's many of them.  
Granted, there are some that are more predominant than others in the 
heritage field and you've already listed some of them.  But I would also 
suggest that there are a few others out there that they in turn would 
suggest that they deserve perhaps as much as some others. 
 
It would be my intent, while this legislation says government will do the 
appointment of this corporation or this foundation, that in fact this is 
done in consultation and with a request of names to be submitted from the 
various organizations. 
 
Now I will be the first to admit that that in fact does not guarantee, for 
example, the museum association of a seat or the Western Development 



 

 

Museum.  But I think that any government in setting up this type of 
foundation would indeed be looking at various fields of expertise and 
interest when putting the board together. 
 
So I guess to answer your question very simply, it would be no; it would be 
our preference not to have that in legislation, but in fact, we would be 
following the principle in practice.  And while it may not be put into the 
legislation, we indeed would uphold that in practice. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Madam Minister, I was hoping that you would be putting it 
at least part way -- implementing the concept that I've outlined for a 
couple of reasons.  First of all, we know that although, you know, the Bill 
is being brought in today with you as minister, but your duties could 
change and within a couple of years somebody else is going to be minister; 
then there's going to be another minister, and then there's going to be 
another minister, and every minister can come in who might want to make his 
or her own appointments -- and you lose that kind of continuity.  And 
though I believe you when you say that you will take those concepts into 
account when you make the appointment, that is not guaranteed for the life 
of this Bill. 
 
I am cautioned by my previous experience with some boards.  We have had 
boards appointed by this government, members of this government, which act 
merely as puppet boards.  They get appointed and they end up doing exactly 
what the minister's office tells them to.  They rely on the minister's 
office for advice and the minister may as well not have the board.  It 
simply gives the minister an out of not having to answer questions that are 
tough because what he does is redirects the questions to the board. 
 
(2000) 
 
A good case in point right now is a board that's costing this government $5 
million a year, that's taking money away from the four campuses of SIAST in 
the province of Saskatchewan and setting up an empire of its own above and 
over delivery of programs that should be done directly through the SIAST 
campuses themselves.  It just becomes another layer of bureaucracy.  
There's nobody on that board that's got the guts to say anything to the 
government when they really should be screaming and hollering for money, 
just like there's nobody on the board that should be protecting the Western 
Development Museum or the Saskatchewan Arts Board has got the courage to 
stand up and yell out at the government when you've short-changed them from 
this department, for money.  So I will be proposing that amendment in a few 
minutes, Madam Minister. 
 
I want to ask another question before we proceed though.  What then is the 
main purpose of this foundation if it isn't to provide an organization that 
is at full arm's length?  Because what you've got here is the powers given 
to this foundation are run parallel to the powers already given to the 
minister through the Saskatchewan heritage property Act, The Heritage 
Property Act.  Some of the words are in sentences are taken directly out of 
here, I would suspect.  So why have two parallel outfits if one isn't going 
to operate differently from the other?  The whole system is completely 
suspect when you do it that way. 



 

 

 
Now I can think of a good reason to have the two -- and I suggested this in 
second reading, why there is a good, logical reason for it -- to have one 
that's independent and in one with the government.  But doggone it, you got 
to make it independent and you've got to assure its independence -- not 
just say that it's going to be independent. 
 
So what is the purpose of this thing, of this new board that's going to be 
different?  That it's going to really set it apart from what the minister 
can already do underneath the old Heritage Property Act? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- Let me address one of your latter questions first, and 
that is the purpose of this foundation.  It is one that would be to assist 
the preservation and development of Saskatchewan's heritage resources and 
in fact to foster the province's heritage industry. 
 
Now I know that statement has been said to you before, and you have 
maintained that, well you don't need to do this; you can simply do it under 
the ministerial powers that are presently there now.  And while some of 
that in part may be true, it is not the whole picture. 
 
We currently have individuals and businesses and organizations that have 
very few means in fact to actively participate in the major heritage 
conservation projects.  There's no instrument that exists by which 
individuals and organizations can form partnerships in heritage projects 
with businesses through donations of money or property.  That is not unlike 
what happened in the rest of Canada in fact before various instruments were 
set up to form partnerships. 
 
The foundation's ability to acquire and manage property, receive gifts, 
make investments, and earn interest provides some greater flexibility and 
in fact more opportunities to carry out heritage projects then now exist in 
Saskatchewan.  And I believe that to be true. 
 
We have seen the heritage trusts and foundations -- call them what you may 
-- in other provinces such as British Columbia, Alberta, Newfoundland, 
Ontario, and they've proven to be a very effective economic instrument for 
managing and developing heritage resources and in fact stimulating tourism.  
And up until recently we have not made that connection in terms of our 
heritage within this province and tying it into our entire economy, whether 
that be tourism or some other aspect of it. 
 
So that was the main purpose in setting it up.  It was also in fact to 
allow this agency its funding mechanism, which is much different than 
simply having the ministerial power, doing it through the minister, or 
anything that is presently there now where, as you well know, it would 
simply go into the Consolidated and from there it becomes one of, I 
suppose, putting forth your arguments as to why the expenditures should go 
back into Heritage when the revenues came from there.  So it allows those 
kinds of opportunities. 
 
I want to go back to the make-up of the board.  Well I've said I agree with 
you in theory and I would make every effort to in fact carry that out in 



 

 

making this appointment.  In part what you say is true, that there's no 
guarantee that this minister is going to be here tomorrow or the next 
minister for six months or whatever.  All of that is very true. 
 
But I would say to you any minister -- it doesn't matter what government it 
is or what minister it is -- that in fact takes boards that are put into 
place, particularly when it's one of creating partnerships between the 
business community, individuals, the heritage community, and other factors 
out there, any minister that would not take the expertise and let them run 
with it, I believe, probably shouldn't be in the portfolio. 
 
While that sounds good in terms of political rhetoric, it does not work 
when it comes to practice.  Ministers should not be doing that, and I think 
any minister would probably place in jeopardy their own ministerial 
appointment if that were to be the case on this. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clause 2 agreed to. 
 
Clause 3 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- We're on clause 3 now then, Mr. Chairman?  Consistent with 
the remarks that I made just a couple of minutes ago, I would move that 
with respect to clause 3 that we: 
 

 Amend section 3 of the printed Bill by striking out subsection (2) and 
substituting the following: 

 
 (2) The corporation is to consist of not 

more than 10 members nominated as follows: 
 
 (a) two by the Heritage Saskatchewan 

Committee; 
 
 (b) two by the Saskatchewan Council of 

Archives; 
 
 (c) one by the Western Development 

Museum; 
 
 (d) one by Heritage Regina; 
 
 (e) one by the Saskatoon Heritage 

Society; and 
 
 (f) three by the minister; 
 
 and appointed by the Lieutenant Governor in Council. 
 

Implication being there that they're all appointed by the Lieutenant 
Governor after being nominated by the people given. 
 



 

 

I here move that amendment, seconded by the member from Prince Albert-Duck 
Lake. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- I won't go over my previous remarks on whether this is 
in theory or practice.  I would simply like to say to the member: if 
anything, he affirms why we shouldn't close the door and exclude a whole 
lot of expertise and individuals out there, whether it has to do with 
individuals that don't belong to an organization but simply work in the 
field or have a specific interest in it.  For example, I see a lot of 
exclusion on the part of communities.  And while one can make arguments 
that, you know Heritage Regina, and it should be the Saskatoon Heritage 
Society . . . I would suggest to the member that there are a whole lot of 
other communities out there that are becoming interested in the area and in 
fact have organizations in place within their communities. 
 
And so therefore, Mr. Chairman, this simply says to me we do not want to 
exclude the possibility of tapping into the best, and it may very well 
include these people when the appointments come down to it.  But to put 
this in and exclude communities and individuals outside of that, I believe 
is not in the best interests of this province. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- I just want to answer to the minister that the 
Saskatchewan Heritage Committee is an umbrella group which includes the 
Saskatchewan Museums Association, the Saskatchewan History and Folklore 
Society, the Saskatchewan Genealogical Society, the Saskatchewan 
Archaeological Society, the Architectural Heritage Society and the 
(Saskatchewan) Natural History Society.  And I am sensitive to the concept 
that these . . . you wouldn't want to exclude any groups.  And that is why 
I have in my amendment added three members to be nominated at large by the 
minister. 
 
Amendment negatived. 
 
Clause 3 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 4 to 16 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 17 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- I would ask the minister whether there's any need for the 
treasury board to be given the powers to make orders and issue directives 
to any board about the financial conduct of the corporation?  In a case 
like this I've just pointed out that we want the board to have 
independence, and then we give the treasury board complete powers over the 
financial transactions of this board.  I would ask the minister to withdraw 
this particular item. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- Mr. Chairman, the directives referred to in section 17 
have to do with administrative matters and I am told it is standard for 
corporations.  It has to do, for example, with procedures and protocols for 
handling invoices and paying bills.  And in essence it is an obligation on 
the part of the corporation to abide by the financial administration 
manuals which all departments are required to follow.  The foundation could 



 

 

not divert moneys back to government.  They cannot do that.  The moneys 
that they raise are designated by legislation to the heritage aspect, and 
government cannot take that back and nor can the corporation divert those 
funds back to government. 
 
(2015) 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Could the minister indicate where, from what department, 
this foundation is going to be funded, with respect to the government, and 
when this funding is expected to go forward to the foundation from the 
government. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- This is going to be funded through the Department of 
Culture and Multiculturalism, and as soon as this is up and running the 
funds will be put over. 
 
Clause 17 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 18 to 22 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- Mr. Chairman, if I could just thank the officials and 
my hon. colleague across the way for the prior consultation we had and for 
his co-operation tonight.  And with that, Mr. Speaker, thanks to the 
officials and I report the Bill. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 24 -- An Act to amend The Municipal Revenue Sharing Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- I move that this Bill be now read a third time and 
passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 15 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Embalmers Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill be now read a third time 
and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Bill No. 10 -- An Act respecting the Manufacture, Sale, Use, Consumption, 
Collection, Storage, Recycling and Disposal of Ozone-depleting Substances 
and Products 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that the amendments be now read a 
first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that the Bill be now read a third 



 

 

time and passed under its title, with leave. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Bill No. 36 -- An Act respecting a Report on the State of the Environment 

 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill be now read a third time 
and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 12 -- An Act to amend The Municipal Hail Insurance Act 
 
Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill be now read a third time and 
passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Bill No. 22 -- And Act to establish the Saskatchewan Communications Network 
Corporation 
 
Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill be now read a third time and 
passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 30 -- An Act respecting the Saskatchewan Heritage Foundation 
 
Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill be now read a third time and 
passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Economic Diversification and Trade 
Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 45 

 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- I would ask the minister to introduce his officials to us, 
please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  They've already been 
introduced. I think he's been introduced before, but the deputy minister, 
Henry Kutarna, has returned for today's session. Everyone else has been 
introduced in the past. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Yesterday we were on the issue relating to the firing of Mr. 
Gach but also the transaction related to Mr. Clarence Cardinal.  I'd like 
to get some clarification on a couple of questions there. 
 



 

 

First of all, this was never answered whether or not there was any form of 
severance pay or any benefits provided for Mr. Gach upon his dismissal. 
 
Hon. Mr. Gerich: -- There has been no severance package. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- No severance package or any other form of benefit then? 
 
Hon. Mr. Gerich: -- None at all. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- You mentioned that certain bills were under investigation in 
the department in relation to the dismissal of Mr. Gach.  Now I would like 
to know whether or not some of these bills include the one to Mr. Jacobson 
for over 15,000 and the one also to Quandt Enterprises, and also to Van 
Coughett's IGA for about approximately $31,000, and Sumlic Mechanical and 
Welding for 5,000.  You said some bills were under investigation. Does the 
investigation cover these bills? 
 
Hon. Mr. Gerich: -- Yes, these bills are part of the comprehensive audit 
that the Department of Justice is doing. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- These bills that I mentioned, which ones have been paid for 
and which ones have not been paid for to this date? 
 
Hon. Mr. Gerich: -- Jacobson logging has been paid for and the other bills 
are being reviewed by the Department of Justice. 
 
(2030) 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- When I total the amount that Mr. Cardinal got, it was 
32,000.  The total amount of the bill, of course, is approximately in the 
neighbourhood of $56,000. 
 
One of the things that was very strange is that the bills came directly to 
the economic development branch, and I was wondering whether or not this 
was part of the policy of the department to have these bills come directly 
to you.  Especially when they totalled 26,000 over what the limit was for 
Mr. Cardinal. 
 
Hon. Mr. Gerich: -- Mr. Lou Gach at the time was in charge of the loan, and 
he had the suppliers mail the bills direct to the department for payment. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- So what you're saying is that every time somebody gets some 
money from the department, that all the suppliers can send their bills 
then, directly to the department.  Is that what you're saying is 
departmental policy then? 
 
Hon. Mr. Gerich: -- No, I'm not saying that.  I'm saying that Mr. Gach 
authorized the suppliers to send the bills to economic development 
department in La Ronge.  And that's currently being investigated by the 
Department of Justice -- why they were. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- So what you're saying is that this definitely was not 
government policy, that there was something wrong with this whole process 



 

 

then.  Is that what you're saying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Gerich: -- That's correct. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Something is wrong with the process then.  All of these 
bills are going to be held for payment.  And following that, if the moneys 
that are . . . is there any way of recovering the money?  Is there any plan 
to recover any of the money? 
 
Hon. Mr. Gerich: -- Yes that's what the Department of Justice is looking 
at; how we can currently bring back and get our funds back. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- I would like to know what . . . Again, another question on 
policy.  What is your policy in regards to repossession as it pertains to 
sales and salvage, or any other system that you might have other than the 
equipment and the repossessions going back to sales and salvage?  Is there 
any other system that is utilized by the department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Gerich: -- Under the Act the minister has, through the 
regulations, the power to . . . when these items are repossessed, to sell, 
rent, or lease.  And if they're a fixed asset, they can be put up for 
public tender and disposed of through agreements, leases to purchase, 
purchase options, or just a straight lease. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- In regards to the investigation we've talked about certain 
contracts.  One example we gave was the Cardinal contract.  Is the 
investigation also covering, you know, that aspect related to fixed assets, 
Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Gerich: -- That'll be part of the management review process that 
the Department of Justice is looking at. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Could you tell me who is involved in your management review 
process and what are the parameters of this review process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Gerich: -- Okay, the investigation is being done by the Department 
of Justice and Finance.  It was authorized by the deputy minister. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Could you get me a complete list of -- I've asked you the 
other day -- on the repossessions that have occurred in the department?  
Have you got a complete record of all repossessions that the department has 
had and whether or not they were fixed assets, and all other assets and all 
other equipment as well?  And could you provide me with the detailed 
information on this and whether or not these have gone through tendering or 
if they went through a non-tendering process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Gerich: -- On the articles that are repossessed, I won't be able 
to provide the information to you.  It affects the credit ratings to the 
individuals that are involved, and the Provincial Auditor is the one that 
checks and audits to see that we're within the regulations. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- I guess the reason why some people have alleged that some of 
the equipment has been utilized by other people in the area, and some 



 

 

people are asking me whether the proper authority was provided wherein it 
has gone through sales and . . . (inaudible) . . . has been properly 
tendered.  The appearance is such that the information is required so that 
we will know the complete story behind it.  If we don't have the 
information on the repossessions, then we will not know whether or not 
there is any way to make clear the allegations because there are a lot of 
stories going on on this and that piece of equipment. 
 
But I want to get into a specific one in that regard.  A power plant was 
held by Predco in Pinehouse, and there were about four power plants that 
were, I think, repossessed.  Could you tell me whether or not one of these 
repossessions ended up with Syd Nelson on fish hatchery program and whether 
or not this fish hatchery was supported also by the branch? 
 
Hon. Mr. Gerich: -- In regard to the Nelson fish hatchery program, and 
these are in the early '80s: my official here has no knowledge of that 
taking place.  As to the repossessions and accusations, if you'd provide me 
with the information, we can have the Department of Justice and Finance 
look into that also. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Maybe check out the serial numbers as you would get from the 
records on the repossessions, because there's been about four major power 
plants that people simply don't know where they've gone to, and it would be 
very important to find out whether they were legally transferred to the 
people that it allegedly has gone to. 
 
And one of them definitely was, you know, that people mentioned to me, was 
the one at the fish hatchery.  And the reason why people told me about that 
is because Mr. Syd Nelson was the president of the PC Party in La Ronge at 
one time and he got his money on the hatchery, and then he got also 
supposedly, allegedly this power plant during that time, and people were 
wondering whether or not these were proper and legal transactions because 
there was sort of an implication that you know the wrongdoing that Gach, 
which the investigation is presently into, may have occurred at that time 
as well.  So would you also check on that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Gerich: -- I'll pass that on to the department concerned. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Would you also check the aspect of a truck.  There was a Mr. 
Doug Pearson whose truck was also repossessed and later on it ended up in 
La Ronge.  And could you have the Justice check out the . . . again the 
legalities on that transfer in this case, and whether or not a lease 
agreement or anything had been done, you know, prior to the take-over of a 
truck that was in possession of a Mr. Watt.  Could you also check that out, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Gerich: -- If you were to put it down on paper and list out all 
your accusations, and all the problems that are arising from the 
investigation in the North, we'd be more than glad to look after it. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Well the reason why I put these on the record is because I 
think they're very important.  We know that there is a lot of tie-ins with 
the Conservative Party in the first case that I mention, and also in the 



 

 

second case.  And the reason why I say this, is this: I saw a bill going 
into the department again.  And this was a bill, again by a Mr. Watt, 
wherein after he got this truck, after the repossession of the truck, he 
was able to get this truck, and after he got that truck, so whatever 
arrangement that it was, the department paid for his tires, after the fact. 
 
(2045) 
 
Now I looked at the cost of the tires, and the tires were $3,519.55.  But a 
strange thing about that, I even have a copy of the actual invoice, and 
this is the surprising thing about the Tory connection.  Because I found 
that the invoice didn't go even directly to economic development branch.  
This invoice went to the -- this comes from Michelin, from Dorval, Quebec, 
where the tires were sent in from.  Now the billing came to Saskatchewan 
government, northern health services branch. 
 
Now here you have economic development handling these things, all of a 
sudden this Bill goes to northern health services.  The public might be 
wondering why northern health services.  Well a certain Mr. Tom Frook works 
in northern health services who also ran for the PC Party in . . . 
(inaudible) . . . in 1986. 
 
So here you have a leading high official of the PC Party, he works for 
health services branch.  We have a problem with some of the billings coming 
to the office in that they're overcharged in connection with the amount of 
the loan, but this one is fairly blatant.  It goes directly to the PC 
person who ran in the last election in health services branch.  Could the 
minister tell us whether they have a suboffice in the northern health 
services branch where they run their . . . to sell tires from the northern 
health services branch. 
 
Hon. Mr. Gerich: -- I find the member's comments very interesting, and if 
he wants to send over a photostat copy, we'll check into this further.  No, 
we don't have any economic development branch selling tires in the North. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Health services. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Oh, it was in health . . . Okay, I'll send you a copy of 
that later on for your information then.  Mr. Minister, it seems that your 
officials may not be providing you with all the information that you 
require at hand. 
 
The other aspect that was very interesting in regards to economic 
development is this: I wanted to know, on the economic development loans, 
how many loans have we provided for trappers and fishermen in the past 
couple of years, and could you outline the names of the people and what 
amounts, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Gerich: -- The loans that have been disbursed through the northern 
revolving fund number 150 over the last three years, to a total of 750,000, 
and they average about $4,000 apiece. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Of those 750 grants that have been given out, could you tell 



 

 

me how many of them were for trappers and fishermen? 
 
Hon. Mr. Gerich: -- These particular 150 were all trappers and fishermen 
loans. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- The 150 that were approximately 4,000 each then.  That's 
what you're saying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Gerich: -- That's correct. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Could you tell me how much the original loan was to AEL and 
Northern Explosives and how much was the original amount and how much is 
still left owing and are any of them in arrears? 
 
Hon. Mr. Gerich: -- This information that you're asking for, Mr. Member, is 
confidential. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Well most of this information in regards to the amounts that 
have been given out to people on a yearly basis are provided in public 
accounts.  Are you saying then that this would never be reported in public 
accounts?  Is that what you're telling me? 
 
Hon. Mr. Gerich: -- You're absolutely right. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Well I have some information then.  The reason why I asked 
about AEL and Northern Explosives is that the former PC candidate in the 
last election, Mr. Wolkosky, is also part owner in there.  And my 
understanding is that he had a loan of approximately 250,000 bucks, a 
Northern Explosives one which is still owing approximately, roughly 30,000, 
you know, somewhere around then.  I was wondering whether or not these are 
accurate figures, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Gerich: -- Well I can't tell you whether those are accurate, but 
according to the loans . . . And loans are not publicized in public 
accounts, only grants are.  So if you are looking there at the Public 
Accounts, it must have been a grant. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- In regards to the estimates, of course, they report the 
total amount.  What I'm trying to get from you is to confirm whether or not 
I'm anywhere close to accurate with some of these amounts that are provided 
for the people.  In other words, what you're telling me is that of the 150 
that you've given to trappers and fisherman at $4,000 each, you wouldn't be 
able to provide me with any names at all.  Is that what you're saying, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Gerich: -- That's correct. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Then I guess the only way therefore I could ask is to 
provide you with information and ask you whether or not these are accurate. 
 
The other one that's . . . the other interesting amount . . . you know, I 
gave the PC member who ran for them on the last election the approximate 
amounts that were provided.  The other interesting one that I heard about 



 

 

was the one relating to Eagle Point.  This is the golf course. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- When does it open? 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- The Minister of Economic Diversification and Trade is asking 
when it's open.  Well he should know when it should be open because a lot 
of the social welfare money was spent there to build that, over $100,000.  
And also there are a lot of money . . . a big power line was built in there 
and nobody knows exactly how it was ever paid for.  And, you know, the 
public is asking me in La Ronge how that big underground cable was brought 
into that area.  And I see all those posts in that power line, and we were 
wondering exactly how it was done.  And many of the people . . . I see the 
minister's name was written on the big sign that he helped build this 
through the social welfare money.  My feeling is that they should have put 
the names of the social welfare people who worked there, and their names 
should be engraved for having built the golf course in La Ronge, you know, 
rather than the minister's name.  But I could agree that the minister's 
name should be there as well. 
 
But getting back to the . . . so we're talking about the golf course, and 
is it accurate to say that over $500,000 was provided for the Eagle Point 
golf course in La Ronge, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Gerich: -- Well the help that the Eagle Point golf course got is 
through the town or city of La Ronge.  It's a social program, a Social 
Services program to put people to work. 
 
In regard to the power line and some of the moneys that was spent, there 
was a tourism subagreement that the fellow qualified for for $500,000. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- On that tourism agreement, what did it entail?  How did the 
person get a hold of over $500,000 then? 
 
Hon. Mr. Gerich: -- Through the tourism subagreement regulations he applied 
for the loan, and he passed the regulations.  And the grant was for 
$495,000. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- The reason why I raised that one was that it was an 
interesting one because the consultant who was working on that case, who is 
also a part owner of Eagle Point is none other than Dale Folstad.  We know 
that Dale Folstad was a deputy minister of your department a couple of 
years ago.  You may want to correct me on that, but I think it was 
approximately two years ago.  And Mr. Folstad, I understand, is also part 
owner of Eagle Point, and here he was a former deputy minister of yours, 
and they're able to get, you know, half a million dollars. 
 
And I understand that he also worked on another project with La Ronge 
Aviation which totalled over $680,000.  Could the minister tell me whether 
or not this is correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Gerich: -- Okay.  A local group in La Ronge started working on 
building and developing the golf course.  The people, through the city of 
La Ronge, through Social Services, were used to help enhance and clean up 



 

 

the woods and work around the golf course site.  Well through lack of 
support it was then taken over by another group of people who applied for a 
grant under the tourism agreement or tourism subagreement and qualified. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- I guess the reason why I was coming down to this one was the 
amount of dollars were very, very large and also there were well-known Tory 
connections in the town of La Ronge.  And not only that, you had a former 
deputy minister who was working in that situation as well. 
 
I would just like to get some confirmation of other ones.  I understand 
that Longpre's Holdings also got originally a sum of approximately 270,000 
and they still owe about approximately 125.  And there was also another sum 
thrown in, approximately 500,000 -- 539,000. 
 
(2100) 
 
The other number that I have, a large figure that I can get is in relation 
to Thompson's Camps, Osprey Wings, and North Central Helicopters.  In that 
regard, I see Thompson Camps outstanding about 550,000; Osprey Wings, 
originally 50,000, now 35,000 approximately owed; and we also have North 
Central Helicopters, that's $500,000.  It's interesting -- that's about 
$1.1 million, you know, for one person and his associates.  That's a 
tremendous amount of money. 
 
I guess the point that I'm making is that the trappers and the fisherman 
get $4,000 each -- the trappers and the fishermen in northern Saskatchewan 
get $4,000 each.  Then I looked at the sum figure on these four people that 
I mentioned and it's $3 million.  I got a figure of $3 million.  Yes. 
 
So here you have approximately four companies, and this also entails other 
subcompanies that some of these people are involved in, getting 
approximately $3 million.  Four people -- top connections with Tories in La 
Ronge.  Then you look at the regular person who's trying hard to make a 
living in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Have you mentioned the golf course, Mr. Associate Minister?  It's 
interesting on the golf course that another president of the PC Party, a 
Mr. George Pidaychuk, was an important person in the development of that 
course.  I know he's no longer involved in the process but he was also a PC 
president of Cumberland constituency. 
 
So it's very important that in regards to money and large amounts of money, 
four major companies to the tune of . . . and their interlocking 
subsidiaries: they total $3 million for four people; 150 trappers and 
fishermen, $4,000 each.  A lot of people are saying, is there any money 
around?  We say of course there's always a certain degree of money.  But 
it's a lot similar to the farmers down south.  They want money to build 
their developments at the local level, but Cargill Grain gets $370 million 
and they get community bonds totaling $25 million. 
 
So we have a similar process taking place in northern Saskatchewan where a 
lot of the more established businesses in northern Saskatchewan get a lot 
of money and a lot of the people who are struggling don't get the money.  



 

 

As a matter of fact, when their equipment is repossessed, the repossessions 
-- nobody knows where they are going.  Nobody knows whether they're going 
properly into sales and salvage.  Nobody knows how many have been 
transferred to different individuals, and I presume that's what the overall 
investigation will be. 
 
So what we see in terms of . . . I hope that what we've seen in terms of 
secrecy does not happen in northern Saskatchewan.  And we try and make sure 
that in this investigation we come out with the facts, because a lot of 
people are talking in northern Saskatchewan about the way the revolving 
loan fund has been handled, that it is not impacting on so many people, and 
if it does impact on many people it's at such small amounts.  So that's a 
point that has been related to me in that whole area. 
 
I would also like to ask one other specific one.  Eco-Tech -- could you ask 
me whether or for what purpose Eco-Tech is getting some money. 
 
Hon. Mr. Gerich: -- The four people that are involved in the Eagle Point 
golf course and recreational complex . . . it's a four seasons resort 
complex.  It was an environmental impact study done.  It was public 
hearings held in regards to whether it should go ahead or not.  It involves 
quite a bit of money.  It's being built and enhanced and promoted as a four 
seasons resort for tourist attraction.  The construction with the $495,000 
grant provided jobs for 56 people, and it's going to be ongoing over 9 to 
10 years.  The description of the four seasons resort complex includes 
villas, rental cabins, 102 sites for vacation villas, a meeting and 
convention facilities, and golf course and pro shop.  And what we're doing 
through our subtourism agreement is to provide and promote tourism in the 
north. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- I guess, Mr. Minister, I hope that you do a proper 
investigation of the whole situation in northern Saskatchewan as it relates 
to the Northern (Revolving) Loan Fund.  I certainly hope that you can get 
the facts because there appears to be a lot of alleged stories that have 
been taking place in La Ronge as I travel through. 
 
I certainly feel that there is just simply too much secrecy on everything 
that we have done.  We've talked about secrecy of this government, whether 
it was GigaText . . . even Chuck Childers' salary, we had to go to the 
United States to find out what his salary was.  We were never able to find 
out from our questions here in the legislature what his salary was, his 
salary of $740,000. 
 
And a lot of people were saying, why should we put up with such secrecy, 
even in regards to the deal with Cargill Grain on $370 million.  And when 
the auditor wanted information from the government a couple of years ago, 
50 per cent of the audited statements could not be accessed, basically 
because of the secrecy of the government. 
 
And I certainly hope that in this case the investigation, which may go into 
the millions . . . I mean, this may be bigger than the $50,000 deal with 
Saskatchewan Transportation Company.  This investigation may be a lot more 
than the $50,000 there, because what we are talking about is not only 



 

 

hundreds of thousands of dollars of repossessed equipment all these years; 
we may be talking in the millions. 
 
And a lot of this stuff may be done legally and above-board, but some of 
the stories that I'm hearing is that that's not the case.  So we need to 
have a very, very thorough investigation, and I hope that you are able to 
carry it out. 
 
The only thing that I see in regards to the investigation if there is any 
actual wrongdoing, whether the RCMP will be involved and if that's what the 
intent is on the minister, and whether there . . . you know, if there is 
any legal improprieties, whether the police will indeed get involved.  
Could you tell me on that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Gerich: -- I missed one of your questions before.  Eco-Tech, assay 
company in Creighton, got a $25,000 loan or grant through the NEDSA 
(Northern Economic Development Subsidiary Agreement) program.  And a lot of 
the allegations that you have made tonight will be passed on to the 
Department of Justice and Finance. 
 
And regarding our audit and the workings of the northern revolving fund, 
the Provincial Auditor has given the northern revolving fund five clear 
audits, so we must be doing something right there. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Well the information that we got today shows that there is 
something wrong in the department, Mr. Minister, and it shows very clearly 
where the money is going.  Some of the money goes to the trappers and 
fishermen, yes, $4,000 here, $2,000 here, $1,000 here, and so on.  But the 
large amounts of money, 1.1 million for one person and his subsidiaries.  
There was 500,000 bucks on the helicopter. 
 
It was very interesting because I thought that there was going to have to 
have been open bidding on the contract to buy a huge helicopter. I thought 
that it was in regards to the transmission line, and if there was going to 
be a transmission line built up North, which was a reason why I assume the 
helicopter was bought, that there was going to be open bidding.  So there 
is a question of open bidding which I don't want to really get into. 
 
But it's problematic.  I know that this helicopter now is fighting forest 
fires up in Manitoba.  And this money that was utilized to pay for the 
purchase of this helicopter is now not being utilized in Saskatchewan but 
is also being utilized in northern Manitoba to fight forest fires right 
now, is my understanding. 
 
But the basic point here, Mr. Minister, is this: a lot of the PC 
connections 0n La Ronge are getting large amounts of money, and many of the 
people, of course, generally know that.  It's not news.  As a new associate 
minister, I certainly hope that you provide some sort of fairness in 
regards to the distribution of loans, especially as it relates to the small 
businesses.  The people who I have named are the most successful 
businesses.  It's not that part of the money shouldn't go to the successful 
businesses, but when it amounts to four people getting $3 million, and 
everybody else getting $4,000 each, I mean it shows that there is something 



 

 

wrong in the system.  And I certainly hope that you review that whole thing 
and come out with a proper set up, fair guide-lines, etc. 
 
And maybe, in that way then, a lot of the people will be more at ease in 
regards to how economic development is being run because right now the 
level that people have in regards to economic development is pretty low.  
You know, it's not only the fact of one worker being squeezed out from the 
east side, but many other aspects that I've raised there.  I certainly 
hope, as the associate, that he will look into all these things. 
 
And I hope that investigation also comes out, and we can get the facts -- 
and the full facts -- here in the House and that we get all the specific 
nitty-gritty on all these things because the detail needs to be there.  The 
truth has to be there.  That's what the people are asking for. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Gerich: -- I agree with the member, here.  Allegations and hearsay 
evidence is pretty easy to talk about and to promote in the House here, and 
what we need is some hard evidence.  So I would appreciate the member 
sending me any of the information that he has, and we'll look into it 
through the Department of Justice and Finance. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I would 
like to make a few comments about co-ops and the importance of co-ops in 
the Saskatchewan economy.  And I'd like to talk a bit about your record, as 
I see it, as we see it, in relation to not supporting the co-op movement.  
And then I have three or four questions that I would like to ask you. 
 
Certainly co-ops, from a national perspective to many people, Saskatchewan 
and co-ops are synonymous.  Co-ops in Saskatchewan have been an important 
part of our mixed economy along with small-business people and government 
in that mixed economy that has served this province so well over successive 
governments up until this government. 
 
Co-ops of course are important to Saskatchewan.  They have some 400,000 
members.  Perhaps the minister from Melville may even be a co-op member or 
a credit union member.  I think that may be possible.  But certainly co-ops 
are important to the fabric of community life across Saskatchewan.  Co-ops 
are an important part of the grass roots democracy at every level in our 
communities in every community across the province. 
 
I have here a list of the top 100 companies in Saskatchewan, and I just 
wanted to point out as I look through this list, of course the largest 
company is the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool; the second largest is Federated 
Co-ops; and then we have 13th, interprovincial co-ops, co-operative life 
insurance, Dairy Producers Co-op, and so on.  So the first . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Sherwood Credit Union. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Yes, Sherwood Credit Union, number 35.  In the top 35 
companies 11 of them are co-ops. 
 



 

 

An Hon. Member: -- So? 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- The minister of Wilkie says, so.  Well my point is that 
co-ops play a very important part in the fabric of Saskatchewan life and 
the economy of the Saskatchewan people, and I think that comment from the 
member of Wilkie was the kind of disregard that this government has shown 
towards the co-op movement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- So that's my point, Mr. member from Wilkie, is that the 
co-ops play a critical role in not only the economic fabric of our life but 
also the financial aspect through the credit unions.  It's one of the major 
financial institutions.  Co-op members live in our communities.  The 400 
members I talked about live in Saskatchewan; decisions are made in 
Saskatchewan by Saskatchewan people.  They're not made by people in Chicago 
or people in New York.  Co-op members, those 400,000 members, have pooled 
their resources.  They make decisions democratically.  They have worked 
together.  They share the risks, and they share the revenues.  And that's 
the importance of this model that has continued to work almost in spite of 
this government and continued to work because it's a model of people 
working together -- working together with each other, working together in 
their communities and out working together with governments and small 
business people. 
 
(2115) 
 
So co-ops and credit unions are all of us, those of us who are members.  
They're Saskatchewan people, and co-ops are part of the community, and I 
know that the minister's aware of that.  The minister would also be aware 
that just in the retail co-op sector there are some 225,000 members alone. 
 
We have seen over the last four or five very, very tough years under this 
government that co-ops are also very adaptable.  They have adapted to tough 
economic times, and a number of the co-ops have become very efficient.  
They have made the adjustments that they need to make, and they are 
adapting.  They are surviving, and they are helping in a very significant 
way to stabilize.  To the extent that small rural Saskatchewan communities 
are being stabilized, co-ops are playing an important role in doing that. 
 
So co-ops in Saskatchewan and credit unions have a very proud tradition in 
this province.  It's proven itself as a very workable model.  The co-ops 
generate, as the minister will know, some 25 per cent of all the economic 
activity in the province, all of the business volume.  And I think that the 
minister would acknowledge that.  While they've ignored co-ops as one of 
the major engines of the mixed economy, 25 per cent of the business volume 
is a significant portion of the Saskatchewan economy. 
 
I'd like to talk just for a few minutes about ways in which co-op people 
throughout the province are telling me that this government has treated the 
co-op movement with little respect.  There are many examples of this. 
 
In the area of agriculture, I recently met with the rural agricultural 



 

 

co-op association, some 62 small, rural co-ops, and they're very concerned 
about this government's position regarding no stabilization programs for 
the co-op sector.  They're concerned about this government's lack of a land 
transfer policy, lack of dealing with farm debt.  They're concerned about 
erosion of the wheat pool that this government supported in terms of taking 
oats out of the wheat pool, rather the wheat board.  They're concerned 
about this government's privatization agenda and schemes and about 
deregulation and transportation subsidies and so on. 
 
So the small rural agricultural co-ops are very concerned as is, in many 
cases, the wheat pool.  In many cases, this government is on the wrong side 
of the wheat pool in terms of the agricultural policies it's put forward. 
 
Another indication is that this government was the first government to 
phase out the department of co-ops, phased out the department of co-ops 
early in its mandate and replaced it for the first time ever, as I 
understand, with a department of privatization.  No minister of co-ops, a 
sector that generated 25 per cent of all the business volume, but a 
minister of privatization.  Well they've abandoned that minister with good 
reason, mainly that privatization has been a disaster in this province for 
many reasons.  And my colleagues will talk about that in a few minutes. 
 
But they phased out the department of co-ops, and that signalled a message 
to the co-op movement that it wasn't a significant part of the Saskatchewan 
economy. 
 
This government also -- and this is something that really upsets people in 
the co-op sector and if the minister is in touch with the co-op sector, he 
will know this. 
 
What really upsets them is that you continue to reorganize the department 
of co-ops.  I think you've reorganized the department of co-ops for the 
last four years in a row.  And the co-op people don't know whether it's got 
branch status, or whether it's part of another branch, or where to go to to 
find out information about co-ops.  People in the co-op movement are 
confused about the role and the mandate of the department of co-ops because 
you keep shifting the branch.  You keep shifting it to some other 
department. 
 
And so there's a concern about the continual reorganization of the co-op 
sector.  And they're mainly concerned about the signal that you always tuck 
away co-ops somewhere without giving it some full-fledged prominence in the 
economic activity.  You can't track funding; you can't track staffing; you 
can't track your government's intent in terms of the co-op movement, and 
you can't track what the role of the co-ops is from the government's 
perspective.  I can assure you -- and I assume that you know this -- that 
the co-op sector is concerned about that. 
 
Now these moves don't reflect, in the co-op sector, a sense of sound 
planning by your government, and they don't convey a message to the co-ops 
that co-ops are important.  I've had a number of people in the co-op sector 
ask me if anybody knows what's going on in government about co-ops.  Quite 
frankly, I don't know that, but they don't either.  And that's the main 



 

 

point -- they don't.  There are many other signs that you convey in terms 
of the co-op sector.  And one of the, I think, real danger signals that 
worries the co-op sector is that since you people came to power in 1982 -- 
and I assume that the minister will know this -- that the co-op sector has 
lost some 6 to 7 per cent of the economic pie since you people came to 
power. 
 
Now 7 per cent is pretty significant.  I see the minister is confused.  I 
will send you over a table that demonstrates that that in fact is the case, 
that the co-op sector under your government has lost 6 to 7 per cent of the 
economic pie, the overall economic pie, to particularly the large corporate 
sector.  And again, that's a loss of real jobs; that's a loss of decision 
making in Saskatchewan by Saskatchewan people; that's a loss of money that 
is not returned to the province of Saskatchewan and reused by Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
The co-op sector is concerned.  Not only are the co-op people concerned 
that the co-op sector has lost 7 per cent of the economic pie, but the 
Catholic bishops, the Catholic diocese of Regina, the social justice 
department, is concerned that privatization . . . In a recent letter to the 
Premier, May 15, and my colleagues will be referring more to this later on 
when they talk about privatization, but this open letter to the Premier by 
the social justice department . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I will 
table it.  I certainly will table it.  It went to the Premier, so I assume 
that the Premier would communicate this to the minister responsible for 
economic development.  But I will certainly table it if the Premier hasn't 
done that. 
 
But they are concerned.  They say, and I quote: 
 

 Privatization as a system of economic distribution has serious 
implications for people in our society.  We see and hear that the dignity 
of the people in our communities is not considered when decisions are made 
that affect the whole community. 

 
That's what the Catholic Church in Regina says about your privatization 
agenda.  So they're also concerned about decisions that are made not in the 
best interests of Saskatchewan people, and not made by Saskatchewan people. 
 
Yes, Mr. Minister, I will table that.  I will table that.  And as I say, 
I'm very surprised that you don't have a copy of an open letter that went 
to the Premier.  That's an example of how uncoordinated things are in your 
government. 
 
Another concern that the co-op sector has is that you have cut back on 
field workers.  You have cut back on field workers, small rural-based 
co-operative development, that there are fewer field workers in terms of 
child-care co-ops and other small co-op initiatives.  A number of co-op 
child-care centres have called me and have indicated that, and I know the 
minister from Melville does not support co-operative child care.  He has 
made that very clear, particularly in the last session.  He supports 
commercial child care, commercial day care; he does not support child-care 
co-ops.  Well the co-op sector is concerned about that, Mr. Minister. 



 

 

 
And they're also concerned about your refusal to fund the centre for the 
study of co-ops at the University of Saskatchewan.  The president of the 
University of Saskatchewan is concerned about that, and the co-op sector is 
concerned about that.  It's a program that was supported by the previous 
minister.  It's a program that I understand was supported by the associate 
minister who doesn't have the authority to get this decision through.  I 
assume that the minister is the one who is blocking the funding for the 
centre on the study of co-ops. 
 
But the point is that this is an important research and development and 
educational program for co-ops throughout the province; it's got a very 
proud record. And there's no money to support that centre.  I think they 
want about $400,000 from the government.  And you don't have money for them 
but you've got $370 million for Cargill and money for GigaText and 
Supercart and so on.  But no money to share in the funding at the 
University of Saskatchewan with the co-op sector, no money to share the 
burden of the centre on the study of co-ops. 
 
As I said, the co-op people were upset about that, and they're feeling that 
that again is another signal that this government does not support, on a 
day-to-day basis, does not support the co-op movement in the province. 
 
I did a major survey of the retail co-ops in the province.  They are very 
concerned, as is Federated Co-op, they're very concerned about this 
government's support of the GST (goods and services tax).  Now you're 
saying now that you don't support it, but you have supported in the past.  
You have supported it until you realized that it was politically not 
popular to support in Saskatchewan.  But they know that you're on record as 
supporting the GST.  They know that you, when your support, when your 
opposition would have been critical to turn this decision around, critical 
to press the federal government, you people didn't press the federal 
government.  The co-op sector knows that they're just simply going to have 
to pass on the GST to their consumers.  So they made their concern about 
that. 
 
The other thing that the co-op sector that I talked to is a bit sceptical 
about and that is your seriousness with regard to the advisory committee on 
co-ops.  They're sceptical about that and I would say with good reason.  As 
I said earlier, the retail co-op sector has some 225,000 members. 
 
And again I have a letter here dated May 9, 1990 that again was sent to the 
Premier.  For some reason, people in the co-op sector aren't sending 
letters to the minister responsible.  And I assume that they are well aware 
of his lack of support to the co-op sector. 
 
They sent a letter to the Premier, this is the Saskatoon Co-op Association 
Limited, the president.  She sent a letter to the Premier indicating that 
-- I won't read it but I will send this over to the minister.  She's 
expressing, the president is expressing their concern that at a recent 
board meeting there was a unanimous decision to ask the government why on 
earth they did not put a retail co-op person, representative, on their 
advisory board to co-ops.  If they were really serious, if they were really 



 

 

serious . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Is she an NDP candidate? 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- She's the president of the Saskatoon Co-op Association 
Limited.  She says in a unanimous decision, Mr. Minister . . . I assume, 
Mr. Minister, that you're not taking seriously that the Saskatoon Co-op 
board is concerned that you have not put a retail representative on your 
advisory committee even though there are 225,000 retail co-op members in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now the minister is laughing as if that is funny.  That is a serious 
oversight.  If you're really concerned about a working advisory committee 
to you in the co-op sector, how on earth would you have left out a 
representative of the retail co-op sector? 
 
That's another message to the co-ops that you don't take them seriously.  
And I'll be wanting to know from you, Mr. Minister, if that committee has 
met, how many times, and what advice, if any, they have given to you, and 
what your plans are regarding that.  And I'll be asking you if you have any 
intentions of adding a person to this advisory committee from the retail 
sector. 
 
Now for your information if you don't know this, Federated Co-op is also 
concerned about this. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Table a letter. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- I will table a letter, and again I'm surprised that you 
don't have a copy of this. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- So are we. 
 
(2130) 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Well so are you.  It's an indication that the Premier is 
not even communicating with you. 
 
Mr. Minister, what I would like to do is to have you send over, and it 
doesn't have to be tonight but in the next week or so I would like you to 
send over if you could, a copy of the senior person in the co-ops branch.  
First of all is the co-op branch a branch within your department or which 
status does it have?  Who is the senior person in there?  What salary does 
that person have?  Did that person get an increase or a decrease over the 
last year?  Where are your field staff located in the co-op sector?  Where 
are your field staff located? 
 
I want to know the number that are in the co-op branch.  I want to know the 
number that are in the co-op branch.  I know there's a business services 
branch or division, and I don't know where that fits in with the co-op 
branch, but I'd like to know how many staff you've allocated to the co-op 
branch.  I'd also like to know how many staff are allocated to child care 
from the co-op branch.  You can send that over to me. 



 

 

 
I would like to know the current mandate within this new structure, the 
current mandate of the co-op branch, the priorities for the year, and your 
work plan for the next year.  I'd like to know that and have that over the 
next week or so if that would be possible. 
 
I would also like to have a list of the co-ops that have been registered 
within the last year, if I can have that.  First of all, I'd like to know, 
Mr. Minister, if it's in order for you to send me all of that information 
within the next week. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Chairman, after listening to that speech it seems 
to me that I should point out to the member opposite that I happen to know 
a little bit about co-operatives.  It was about 60 years ago that my 
grandfather was an original founding member of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool.  
My father spent 19 years as an elevator manager for Saskatchewan Wheat 
Pool.  I grew up in a Saskatchewan Wheat Pool elevator shovelling coal slag 
out of box cars, and digging skunks out of the boot.  I know that system 
from the bottom up.  The member opposite should know that I graduated from 
co-op college when I was a youth; my father was on the board of the Duff 
co-op; that I'm a member of the Melville co-op and the credit union, and 
have been for about 20 years. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- And the chamber of commerce, too. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- And as my friend points out here, and am also a member 
of the Melville chamber of commerce.  And I buy regularly at the Melville 
co-op.  I buy lumber; I buy grain bins; I buy food, whenever I'm home and 
have a chance to buy food, because most of the time I'm spending my time 
here answering your questions when I could be at home buying food at the 
Melville co-op. 
 
Another thing you should know about the Melville co-op is that if you think 
. . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- I don't think you need to buy any more food, Grant. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Well, the Leader of the Opposition probably is 
accurate on one point; maybe I don't need to buy much more food.  But 
that's about the only thing I can agree with the Leader of the Opposition 
on. 
 
That member opposite should also know about the Melville co-op, where I 
happen to be a member, that the Melville co-op has participated in the 
venture capital program, has built a new store for an excess of $1 million, 
that Federated Co-op Ltd. invested a million dollars in a venture capital 
corporation, a program sponsored by this government which led to them 
building a new co-op store in the city of Melville. 
 
Now you're going to say I'm treating the co-ops in my constituency too 
well?  I take that criticism.  We're pleased to have a new co-op store in 
Melville.  We're pleased to have 46 employees there, and we're pleased that 
they participated in the venture capital corporation.  You say we don't 



 

 

treat the co-ops too well?  Well, we only invested with the Co-op refinery.  
We invested $560 million in a NewGrade upgrader, the biggest project in the 
history of Saskatchewan, that we also . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Oh, the members opposite say the figure was too low.  All right, let's 
raise it a little bit if you're not happy with how much we invested in the 
Co-op here in Regina. 
 
But certainly you cannot deny that that was the largest project in the 
history of Saskatchewan when it was built.  The only project that may be 
larger is the Husky upgrader, and that is between Saskatchewan, Canada and 
Alberta.  The Biggar malt plant, half of which was sold to the Saskatchewan 
Wheat Pool . . . You complain about privatization, and the co-ops are 
joint-venturing in the case of the NewGrade upgrader with the Government of 
Saskatchewan.  In the case of Biggar malt, the co-op is joint-venturing, 
having bought out the government interest with an American corporation.  
These co-ops, some of the largest in Canada, know business when they see 
it.  They will do business in a commercial manner and not follow the 
ideology of the movement as you express it. 
 
You should also know that the co-ops employ over 14,000 employees in 
Saskatchewan.  And you want a list of the newly incorporated co-ops. I'd be 
pleased to send you a list because in the last year exactly 100 new co-ops 
were incorporated in Saskatchewan, bringing the total number up to 1,200.  
Out of the 1,200 co-ops 100 were incorporated this year; about 8 per cent 
of all the co-ops in Saskatchewan were incorporated in 1989. 
 
These new co-ops include: farmers' markets; feeder associations -- 57 out 
of 60 feeder associations are co-operatives; they include a railroad, a 
co-operative railroad in this province which we never had before; they 
include small 
_business loans associations which will lend out $1.8 million to their 
members this year; they include child-care co-ops; they include rural 
development associations -- 19 of 24 rural development corporations are 
co-operatives.  Twelve out of the top 50 co-operatives in Canada are 
located in Saskatchewan.  We have 4 per cent of this country's population 
and 12 of the largest 50 co-operatives in all of Canada. 
 
And you say we haven't done enough to help co-ops.  Well you ask the 
Melville co-op and you ask the dairy producers whether we stand behind 
them.  And you ask Biggar malt and the wheat pool whether that expansion is 
worthwhile.  And you check the Newgrade upgrader, something that you tried 
to build for years and years and could never get going.  You were going to 
build it north of Moose Jaw, and you never got it going. The site is still 
bare.  That was built through a co-operative effort between this government 
and the co-operatives of Saskatchewan. 
 
And you have the audacity to stand up here and say: I don't know anything 
about co-ops; this government hasn't done anything for co-ops.  Well you 
will get a list of 100 new co-operatives that have been incorporated -- 8 
per cent of all the co-ops in existence, and then you produce a letter 
written by an NDP candidate in Saskatoon.  And I said to you from the floor 
here, tell us that that person's not an NDP candidate.  You wouldn't have 



 

 

the nerve to stand up on television and deny that.  I haven't seen it yet, 
but the information I get is that you're holding up a letter from an NDP 
candidate complaining about how we treat co-operatives.  And so you should 
at least come clean and tell me that you got your NDP friends writing 
letters for you that you can wave around in the legislature.  That is the 
limit. 
 
Now I took it rather well when you said I didn't understand co-ops, and I 
took it rather well when you said that we hadn't done anything for co-ops, 
but that's the limit.  But to try to use that kind of a tactic -- wave 
around a letter from NDP candidate in Saskatoon and say, well that 
represents everybody in the co-op movement -- that's the limit. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Now, Mr. Minister, enough rhetoric, Mr. Minister.  If 
you're so committed to co-ops, how come the co-op sector around the 
province is very upset with you?  The six or seven examples I talked about 
are serious issues conveyed to me by people in the co-op sector around the 
province.  They reflect on your record.  If you're so committed to co-ops, 
why has the co-op sector lost 6 to 7 per cent of the economic pie since 
1982?  So don't give me a bunch of hog-wash about a few examples. 
 
There are many other examples of where co-ops are concerned about your 
record and the issue of this letter . . . I'm going to send you a copy of 
this letter.  It's not by an NDP candidate, and I think that that is . . . 
that typifies the way you people offend.  That typifies. 
 
This is from the Saskatoon Co-op Association Limited board, a unanimous 
decision to the Premier of this province in a serious matter, in a serious 
matter, asking why you didn't put a representative from the retail co-op 
sector onto your advisory board if you were serious about working with the 
co-op sector.  If you were serious about their input, why would you not 
have done this?  Mr. Minister, you should have this letter.  The Premier 
should have given you this letter.  The Premier should have responded to 
the letter, which he has not done.  This letter was sent on May 9.  May 9, 
that's how little regard you people have for the public of Saskatchewan.  
He hasn't even responded to the letter with an indication of whether or not 
he was going to add a representative to that committee; took great delight 
in a great public relations initiative, setting up this advisory committee; 
hasn't got a retail representative on it and has not made that commitment 
as of this very day. 
 
And I can assure you that Federated Co-ops is also concerned about this.  
And you should know that, if you're serious about your job.  We don't have 
to take any lessons from you on the co-op sector in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Minister.  Those 11 co-ops you talked about, those 11 big co-ops are no 
credit to your government.  They were in place long before 1982, so don't 
take any credit for those.  Our party does not have to take any lessons 
from you.  We've a proud history of working with the co-ops.  The co-op 
movement, and the CCF, the NDP, have deep roots.  They go back many years. 
 
And like the co-op sector, we're opposed to your sweetheart deals with 
Cargill.  We want you to give more support to the co-op sector.  You won't 
even fund a centre for the study of co-ops at the university -- $400,000 is 



 

 

all they're asking for a contribution from you, and you won't even support 
them. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I want a straightforward answer: will you appoint a 
representative from the retail co-op sector on the advisory committee? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, could the Clerk please give me a 
copy of the letter the member has tabled so that I can examine it? 
 
Mr. Chairman, while I wait for the member to table that letter and look at 
the copies, I should point out to him some of the co-operatives that have 
been incorporated in the last year, 1989:  the North East Bull Test 
Co-operative Limited, the Prince Albert Montessori Preschool Co-operative, 
the Old Wives Lake and Area Conservation Co-operative, the CCF Flying 
Co-operative Limited, the West Central Forage Co-operative Limited, the 
Pipestone Valley Rural Development Co-operative, the Pleasant Valley Feeder 
Co-operative Limited, the Coteau Hills Rural Development Area Co-operative 
Limited, the Lashburn Community Hall Co-operative, the Burgis Beach 
Co-operative Limited, the Swift Current Downstream Pumpers Co-operative 
Limited, the Rose Hill Building Co-op Limited, the Prince Albert Dance Club 
Co-operative, Thickwood Hills Feeders Co-operative Limited, Woodland 
Childcare Co-operative, the Cool Springs Rural Development Co-operative, 
the Weirdale Valuable Business Co-operative, the Gateway Rural Development 
Co-operative, the Kamsack First Co-operative Loans Association Limited, the 
Little Chicago Loans Co-operative Limited -- I presume that's somewhere in 
Saskatchewan; I'm not familiar with it -- the Naicam Business Opportunity 
Co-operative, the Regina Economic Development Co-operative for Women, the 
Lemberg and District Economic Development Co-operative Limited, the Canora 
. . . And it goes on and on, pages and pages of co-operatives incorporated 
last year for all kinds of co-operative ventures throughout all of 
Saskatchewan.  And they cover every part: Esterhazy, Lancer, Rocanville, 
Kipling, Kuroki, Porcupine Plain, Shaunavon, Cabri, Rose Valley, 
Langenburg, Beechy, St. Walburg, Prince Albert, Star City, Canwood, Zenon 
Park, Kelvington, Prud'homme.  It goes on and on: Melfort, Kinistino, 
Garden City, Battleford, Kelliher, Maple Creek.  The entire province is 
covered with new co-operatives, and the member opposite has the audacity to 
come here and say that there are no new co-operatives and nothing is being 
done to assist co-operatives. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Minister, you lost sight of my question there.  My 
question was and my question now is: are you going to appoint to your 
advisory board a member from the retail co-op sector in Saskatchewan -- yes 
or no -- and when? 
 
(2145) 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Chairman, the answer is yes.  Those positions on 
the advisory board have been rotated.  This is one of the years where the 
retail co-ops that you refer to do not have a position.  We expect the next 
year when new appointments are made other co-operatives won't have 
representatives.  For example, this year Co-op Trust doesn't have a 



 

 

representative.  Possibly Co-op Trust will have a representative next year 
or the year after.  So the positions on the board are rotated. 
 
And the answer is yes, when the next appointments are made a retail 
representative will be on the board. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Minister, you're admitting that in setting up an advisory 
board to advise you on co-ops . . . We've got the retail co-op sector 
network throughout the entire province, and you didn't start out with the 
retail sector co-op member on your advisory board -- and there are 225,000 
retail members.  How on earth is the retail co-op sector supposed to take 
seriously that you're interested in getting good advice on how to run your 
co-op department and how to co-operate with the co-ops so that the 
government is supportive to co-ops -- the retail sector that has outlets 
across Saskatchewan in small communities that are hurting in this time of 
economic crisis and out-migration and depopulation. 
 
Mr. Minister, I find it absurd that you would not have started with the 
retail co-op representative on your board if you were really serious about 
good advice.  And that reinforces my point that I made earlier, and the 
point that many co-ops feel around the province, that your co-op advisory 
board is just a public relations initiative.  And I want to know: how many 
times has that board met?  And have they given you any advice? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Well I think the member opposite should know that 
Federated Co-op is a member of the board, and Federated Co-op certainly 
represents all of the retail co-ops in Saskatchewan.  It is the key backer 
behind the retail co-ops.  The board's make-up is the way it is, because 
the co-ops agreed to have representation on a rotating basis.  And the 
board was set up through a steering committee, which meant four times had 
representatives of all of the major co-ops in Saskatchewan on the steering 
committee.  The new board has just been set up and had its first meeting on 
May 24, and will be meeting again in a few months. 
 
To say that there is no retail representation, because Federated Co-op is 
on the co-op advisory board and not a specific retail co-op, certainly is 
going way too far in stretching the argument that there is no 
representation.  I really don't know what more you want here.  They agreed 
to this kind of a format.  Why are you complaining? 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Minister, I hope you meant what you said there because 
I can tell you that it's my information, directly from Federated, that 
they're not satisfied, that they're not satisfied with the composition of 
the board.  So I'll leave that for the moment. 
 
I would like to ask you one more question, Mr. Minister.  Do you have any 
intention or will you reconsider your decision not to fund, jointly, at the 
university, the centre for the study of co-ops? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Chairman, that was a five-year program, the co-op 
studies at the University of Saskatchewan.  In total, the provincial 
government spent $641,451 on that program over five years.  And if the five 
_year program has ended, I've indicated to the leaders to the co-op 



 

 

organizations that money is scarce and that the five-year program has 
ended, and that we are not in a position to renew it at this time because 
we don't have the money to do it. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I want to first of all 
start off, Mr. Minister, in asking you a few questions on the sale of the 
assets of the Silver Lake farm in Green Lake.  As you're aware, in 1989 a 
group from Prince Albert known as the Prince Albert holding company 
purchased the Silver Lake farm from the Government of Saskatchewan, and all 
the assets.  Included in those assets, Mr. Minister, were 1,800 head of 
pure-bred cattle.  I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you could indicate tonight 
just how much was paid for the assets of the Silver Lake farm. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Chairman, there were four farms in northern 
Saskatchewan which were losing approximately $1 million per year.  The 
provincial government decided that four farms could not be subsidized $1 
million per year, and we decided to deal with these farms in what would be 
a fair manner with respect to the local citizens. 
 
In Ile-a-la-Crosse a local community development group, the community, took 
over the farm.  It's operating the farm.  In Cumberland, it was part of a 
settlement made with the community of Cumberland.  In Green Lake the 
central farm has been offered to the community.  The negotiations 
continued.  We anticipate that there will be a finalization where the farm 
will be held in trust by the community for the benefit of the community. 
 
With respect to the Silver Lake farm, we tendered that.  There were 13 
bids; one of the 13 bids was the mayor of Green Lake on behalf of Green 
Lake.  There were other bids that were better bids than the bid from Green 
Lake.  In any event, we are still prepared to complete the negotiations on 
the central farm.  The Silver Lake farm was sold according to tender.  The 
central farm, which was the main farm, we are prepared to finalize 
negotiations with the community. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Mr. Minister, I most certainly never asked you any 
questions regarding farms, the Central Lake farm or the farm at 
Ile-a-la-Crosse or the farm at Cumberland House.  All the answers that you 
gave just now had nothing to do with the question that I asked.  Now I 
asked you specifically a question: how much money did the province receive 
for the assets of the Silver Lake farm?  Now that was the only question 
that I asked you.  And I would appreciate if you would answer that 
question, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- The answer to the question is that the sale is not 
finalized because of the caveats placed by the Green Lake community.  And 
when the final legal transaction is completed, the sale price will be 
public.  As a matter of fact, it will show up on the title, as is the case 
in all land titles documentation. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Mr. Minister, then you indicate that a sale of the assets 
of the Silver Lake farm have not been finalized, and those assets have not 
been turned over to this group from Prince Albert.  Is this right? 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- We have received some cash.  However, the sale of the 
farm was a total sale and the caveats are still there.  We still haven't 
been able to clear the title.  Without clearing the title and conveying the 
title to the purchasers, the sale is not final and complete.  Therefore, 
since the sale isn't final and complete, I'm not in a position to give you 
the sale price. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, what happened in 1989 . . . And you 
indicate quite clearly that the sale of those assets has not been finalized 
by your government.  Yet you allowed that group from Prince Albert to come 
in there and take over the farm; you allowed them to fire the employees 
that had worked there, some of them up to 30 years; you allowed them to 
sell off the assets including cattle, and grain, and feed.  So how, Mr. 
Minister, can you stand up in this House and indicate that that group from 
Prince Albert have not finalized the deal?  They are not the owners of 
those assets, yet they can go ahead and do away with the assets. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Minister, that that's not fair.  Are you sure that that 
deal has not been finalized?  I ask you that question specifically. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Well there's a difference between equitable ownership 
and legal ownership.  The purchasers have equitable ownership.  However, 
until legal title is conveyed, they do not have legal ownership of all of 
the assets with respect to the tender and sale.  The caveats are still 
there to the best of my knowledge and as long as the caveats are there we 
cannot finalize the sale.  We will do everything possible to clear the 
title and complete the matter.  As you know, there are people trying to 
apply pressure with caveats, and we'll have to see how that results.  It's 
a legal matter. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Are we dealing with . . . Mr. Minister, the group from 
Prince Albert, did they purchase 100 per cent . . . Do they have 100 per 
cent equity in the Silver Lake farm? 
 
(2200) 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Chairman, I indicated earlier that the purchasers 
have equitable ownership of the property, but they do not have legal 
ownership in the common law sense that we inherited in 1870 from the 
British judicial system, so that the sale is not final and absolute until 
legal title is conveyed, although they do have 100 per cent equitable 
ownership. 
 
I realize this is relatively complicated, but we have a Torrens land titles 
system.  And under our Torrens land titles system you do not have legal 
title until you have your name on the title.  But you can, under the common 
law system that also is applicable in this province, have equitable 
ownership.  That's what the purchasers have.  The money cannot be released, 
the details are not final until under the Torrens system you have the legal 
title that has been conveyed at the Land Titles Office. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Well after that confusing statement, Mr. Minister, I 
wonder if you could answer the question that I proposed to you or asked 



 

 

you.  The sale, did it include a hundred per cent of the assets of the 
Silver Lake farm?  Are we dealing with a hundred per cent, or are we 
dealing with a percentage of the Silver Lake farm? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- The total farm was not sold to the tender group.  
There was an employee that made an offer on 80 or 90 acres, and my 
understanding is that employee purchased those 80 or 90 acres.  They would 
also be tied up with a caveat I believe. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Other than the 80 acres that were sold to the manager -- 
Wilfred Morin, the former manager who was released from his duties -- the 
rest of the assets were sold to the group from Prince Albert.  Is this 
right? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Your statement is substantially correct except I 
should point out that none of the employees went on to unemployment or 
anything like that.  They were retained with employment of some other sort 
so that none of them lost jobs completely.  They all had other employment.  
The man you refer to, I believe, is still working at that particular farm 
or is working at the central farm right now. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Oh yes, I'm aware of that, Mr. Minister, but I want to 
indicate to you that they most certainly lost their jobs at the Silver Lake 
farm where they had worked in some cases up to, I believe the oldest 
seniority there was 29 years. 
 
And I just want to close off by saying to you, Mr. Minister, that what you 
have done here is you have sold off the assets; that the community of Green 
Lake had put in a bid and you just totally ignored the citizens of Green 
Lake. 
 
And I want to also indicate to you, Mr. Minister, in closing off, that it 
was the citizens of Green Lake who were working at that farm over the 
years, and many, many individuals had put a lot of time in to clean the 
land.  And we're dealing with 4,800 acres of land that were sold -- we 
don't know what the deal is -- but were supposedly sold to the group from 
Prince Albert. 
 
And I just say that that is a very bad deal, Mr. Minister.  I'm just 
surprised that you only went as far as Prince Albert to sell it.  I'm 
surprised that you didn't go down across the border into the States and 
sell it to some Americans down there, like you've done with most of the 
assets that we have in this province. 
 
I just want to close off by making that statement, that it most certainly 
is a bad deal for the citizens of Green Lake and the folks that live up in 
that north-west part of Saskatchewan. 
 
I now want to ask you a few questions, Mr. Minister, about another 
situation which I consider is far more blatant than this one, where we have 
lost the assets of 8 million acres of our prime forest land that your 
government in your wisdom in 1986 decided to sell off the Prince Albert 
pulp mill and all their assets to the Weyerhaeuser corporation of 



 

 

Washington.  Mr. Minister, included in that deal was a deal that until the 
paper plant was built, the Weyerhaeuser corporation from Tacoma, Washington 
were in partnership with the Government of Saskatchewan, and they had to 
pay a lease in view of that.  Up to 1988 when the paper mill went into 
production, there were $63 million owing to the citizens of Saskatchewan on 
that original deal.  To date, as far as I know, $53 million have been paid 
and there is still $10 million that is still owing.  Could you confirm 
that, Mr. Minister, that Weyerhaeuser corporation still owes the province 
of Saskatchewan $10 million? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Chairman, before we sold the Weyerhaeuser pulp 
mill to Weyerhaeuser corporation, it was losing $91,400 a day.  I don't 
know what that works out to per year, but that was the average loss during 
the period of time that the government owned that particular pulp mill.  
The members opposite don't believe that.  The calculation was done and 
that's the figures.  And you want to know why there's deficit is because 
those are the kind of losses you incurred: a million dollars a year on 
farms and millions per year on pulp mills.  Now they deny that.  Well the 
figures are there. 
 
But the answer to your question directly is that the $63 million was the 
payment that Weyerhaeuser made in the first year pursuant to the sales 
agreement terms whereby they were to pay in accordance with the profits 
they made.  The question would be properly put to the Crown Management 
Board minister. 
 
The information I have as a member of Crown Management Board is that all 
payments from Weyerhaeuser are current to date, and that in accordance with 
the agreement they have made all payments.  They are not in arrears.  There 
would be some sum still to be paid on the payment plan on the purchase of 
the paper mill . . . or the pulp mill and the building of the paper mill.  
But the $63 million is the payment we received in the first year; it is not 
a debt; $63 million was the first payment.  All payments are current up and 
to date. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Mr. Minister, are you saying that the Government of 
Saskatchewan received a cheque from the Weyerhaeuser corporation for $63 
million? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Actually it was two cheques in the first year 
totalling $63 million. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Fifty-three, Mr. Minister, or 63? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- The answer is $63 million paid in the first year. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Okay, Mr. Minister, I want to rephrase the question.  Of 
the $63.5 million owing on the dividends on the agreement that work in 
conjunction with the province of Saskatchewan, you're saying that the 
province of Saskatchewan received the full $63.5 million payment on the 
dividends? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- That's the information I have, and that's the 



 

 

information that I recall being announced in the public press release when 
they made the payments. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Well that's not the information we have, Mr. Minister.  
The information that we have is that there was $53.5 million that were paid 
on those dividends, and that there were still $10 million outstanding.  And 
the reason that the $10 million was not paid is that the Weyerhaeuser 
corporation wrote a letter to the Government of Saskatchewan indicating 
that they had a cash flow problem.  Mr. Minister, is this right, or is this 
a wrong statement that I've just made? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- I know nothing of any $10 million owing. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Mr. Minister, I just want to indicate to you that that's 
the information that we have.  That's the information that I presented to 
the House when I asked the question and that was the answer that I got back 
-- that that was still owing.  So I think that maybe you should get 
together with the Minister of Finance and just find out if that information 
is wrong.  I say to you that the information that we have is the right 
information. 
 
You talk about the pulp mill in Prince Albert losing $91,000 a day.  Well 
that just is not the facts, Mr. Minister.  You're just picking those 
figures out of the air.  Those were assets. 
 
I want to quote by Mr. Bill Gaynor of Weyerhaeuser, and he quoted in the 
P.A. Daily Herald on April 8, 1988, and he talks about the good deal that 
they received, "Weyerhaeuser was fortunate enough to purchase the mill for 
a good price just before market conditions improved." 
 
Mr. Minister, I'm sure that your government was aware that the pulp and 
paper industry and the lumber industry in Canada was in problems, and that 
it was starting to turn around.  It was also forecast from other outfits 
and individuals in the United States, who were in the lumbering industry 
that the next 25 years were going to be bright years for the forest 
industry.  And you turned around and sold that deal. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to ask you now how much of the principal has been paid 
back, and I speak specifically of the $236 million that the Weyerhaeuser 
corporation owes the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Chairman, the pulp and paper industry is cyclical, 
and up until the sale of the pulp mill to Weyerhaeuser, we were not in the 
paper business.  So now we can benefit from the paper business and also 
from the computer paper business. 
 
This deal was a good deal for the province.  There were 700 construction 
jobs -- 80 per cent were local Saskatchewan people; 169 permanent jobs 
after the mill was completed.  They're continuously adding more jobs now as 
they're putting in the sheeting machines.  Weyerhaeuser directly employs 
1,000 Saskatchewan people at Prince Albert, Big River, and Saskatoon 
Chemicals. 
 



 

 

The construction of this paper mill was $250 million.  There's $25 million 
expansion at Saskatoon Chemicals; $6 million mill modernization at Big 
River; there was a $20.8 million expansion of the paper mill for the new 
sheeting machine.  And as a result of free trade, duties coming off, we now 
have access to the U.S. market and we have a capital investment of $300 
million, total, capital investment in this province, instead of a $91,000 a 
day loss. The figures are there. 
 
After all these years, this is the first time you've ever questioned the 
figures of $91,400 a day.  You probably are getting closer to an election, 
and you want to play with the figures, but why haven't you questioned these 
in the last three or four years?  The figures have been out there all along 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . .  Well the member from Prince Albert 
now is there speaking from his seat. 
 
I suppose he's denouncing the project.  I suppose he's another like the 
member from Moose Jaw, against the fertilizer plant.  The member from 
Prince Albert, if he's opposed to the Weyerhaeuser plant and its 
construction and opposed to the building of the mill and if he's opposed to 
adding $20 million worth of sheet equipment, then he'll have a chance to 
stand up and tell us how he's opposed, and he can beam that back to Prince 
Albert so that his voters know where he stands on the jobs in his own 
constituency.  That opportunity I will give him right now. 
 
(2215) 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Mr. Minister, you never answered the question, and it 
looks like you are not prepared to answer that question. 
 
I just want to close off by making a few closing statements.  You talk 
about the paper mill that they built up in Prince Albert.  I just want to 
indicate to you, Mr. Minister, that your government signed an $83 million 
guarantee to Weyerhaeuser corporation to borrow money to build that.  It 
just seems like you continually are signing promissory notes to all the 
individuals that are coming into our province and taking over our assets.  
We have no assets left in this province, and that's why . . . you know 
there's an election coming up, and you indicate it's getting closer and 
closer, and I tell you, the citizens of this province are looking forward 
to the day when your government gets up enough courage to call an election.  
Then we will compare the economic philosophy of your government compared to 
the economic philosophy of this government. 
 
And one just has to take a look at what you inherited when you took over 
this province.  We had those assets.  We also had $139 million in the bank.  
That is operating.  Now we have a debt of over $4 billion in this province, 
and it's rising every day.  Two weeks ago your government -- and you talk 
about good management -- borrowed $300 million on the money market to pay 
back the money market for moneys that you had borrowed to put us in debt in 
the first place.  And you call that economic stability in this province.  
That's why we're $14 billion in debt, totally, in this province.  And you 
are going around to the money markets to borrow money to pay back money 
that you already borrowed from the money markets at high prices. 
 



 

 

And I say that that deal up in Prince Albert was a bad deal in 1986 and 
it's still a bad deal.  And I say to you, Mr. Minister, that there's a 
letter indicating that the Weyerhaeuser corporation did not pay back the 
loan because they had a cash flow problem.  Now how could they have a cash 
flow problem when they had profits in 1985 of $132 million?  And it goes up 
-- 1986 they had a profit of $180 million; 1987 they had a profit of $379 
million; 1988 they had a profit of $516 million; and last year the 
Weyerhaeuser corporation had a profit of $377 million.  And they got a cash 
flow problem they indicate to you so they don't have to pay any money back. 
 
They got a sweetheart deal when they signed this agreement -- no money 
down, 30 years to pay off the debt, eight and a half per cent interest, and 
if their profits are less than 12 per cent in any given year they don't 
have to pay any money back.  Plus, we have to build 32 kilometres of 
highway for the Weyerhaeuser corporation -- taxpayers' money.  We have to 
maintain all the road system that's in there at the taxpayers' money. 
 
I don't blame the Weyerhaeuser corporation, Mr. Minister.  They came into 
this province, they knew who they were dealing with, and they seen a good 
deal and they took it.  And let me tell you, Mr. Minister, they got a good 
deal.  But the taxpayers of this province are paying for it.  They are 
paying for it. 
 
And look what they're paying their top executives, mister.  We talk about 
Chuck Childers in the potash corporation making $740,000 a year, so that's 
really peanuts compared to what the chairman, Mr. G. Weyerhaeuser, the 
chief executive officer of the Weyerhaeuser corporation makes.  He makes 
$1.06 million a year, Mr. Minister, $1.06 million a year.  The top 
executives, almost $3 million a year, and then they don't pay for the 
assets that they received from this province. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Minister, that they still owe in dividends $10.3 
million because they had a cash flow problem.  That's in writing.  And I 
say to you, Mr. Minister, that they still owe the province of Saskatchewan 
$236 million on the principal, on the assets that they took over from the 
Government of Saskatchewan.  I say that that is a bad deal and I say to 
you, Mr. Minister, you can talk about political posturing, but once the 
election is called in this province we'll find out whether that you can 
look after the economic problems of this province.  You have destroyed this 
province, and it's going to take a little while to get it back, but I'll 
tell you, we will as New Democrats.  And when the election is called, 
you'll be gone, the same as you were in 1934.  You're going to be lucky to 
get one seat back. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- I wasn't here in 1934, so I'm really not responsible 
for 1934 or 1944.  But I can say this, that the two members from Prince 
Albert are sitting over there.  They won't get up and denounce 
Weyerhaeuser; you've got to get a member from way out of town to denounce 
it here in Regina.  Will your party stand up and say that in Prince Albert?  
Will your party be consistent and say, we're opposed to Weyerhaeuser and 
the $22 million a year they spend on payroll in the city of Prince Albert? 



 

 

 
The members for Prince Albert are absolutely silent.  They don't denounce 
Weyerhaeuser, just like the members from Moose Jaw don't denounce the 
Saskatchewan fertilizer plant.  They get other people from other parts of 
the province to stand up and complain about it for your own political 
purposes.  What about the jobs?  There are a thousand people working there, 
and you're opposed to it.  What else are you opposed to?  You're opposed to 
everything that makes money.  That's what you're opposed to. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Mr. Minister, that's what the Conservative government 
stands for: anything that makes money you want to give it away, and you pay 
them to take it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- And you want to take a look at Hansard, Mr. Minister.  And 
in 1986 we said that it was a bad deal, and we elected two members in 
Prince Albert. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- In 1988 we said it was a bad deal, and you said it was a 
good deal, and we elected 10 members to the federal House of Commons.  So I 
tell you, Mr. Minister, the voters in Saskatchewan know full well that it 
was a bad deal for this province. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, for the benefit 
of the minister I'm going to tell him exactly where the two Prince Albert 
members stand with respect to the sale of the PAPCO (Prince Albert Pulp 
Company) assets, just so the minister will be for once clear in his mind. 
 
The only problem with the sale of the PAPCO assets was the incompetence of 
the people who negotiated the deal on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan 
-- your cabinet.  That's what the problem was, Mr. Minister.  And for you 
to stand in this House and talk about $91,000 a day being lost at that pulp 
mill is an insult to every person who spend their working lives working at 
that mill and making money and making returns on behalf of . . . for the 
people of this province.  That's what you've just done.  You don't need to 
stand up and put words in anybody's mouth, Mr. Minister. 
 
You will know that it's very clear that we're supportive of the 
Weyerhaeuser corporation because they're a big corporation and employ a lot 
of people in our province.  And we have no quarrel with the deal that they 
cut with you, not on their behalf.  They did what they needed to do on 
behalf of their shareholders.  It's a problem that you didn't look after 
the shareholders of the people of the PAPCO's assets and you weren't 
looking after their interests when you sold it to them with the agreement 
and the deal that you sold.  That's the problem, Mr. Minister.  And if you 
want to repeat this in Prince Albert or in any other community in this 
province that's fine because that's the way it is.  The deal stands that 
you have delivered an incompetent deal and you've cost the people of 
Saskatchewan an awful lot of money. 
 



 

 

It's no different than your deal with Cargill or with Pocklington.  With 
Pocklington and the Gainer operation in North Battleford, you end up 
costing the people of this province an awful lot of money, and you've done 
it with GigaText, and you've done it with Joytec, and you've done it with a 
number of different operations in this province and, Mr. Minister, you 
ought to be ashamed of yourself. 
 
I've listened to you in these estimates for hours, and you know what still 
isn't clear to me, Mr. Minister, is what kind of economic indicators that 
you look at when you make a determination as to whether the economy of this 
province is in good shape or whether it isn't.  And that's the one question 
I have for you tonight: can you tell me what economic indicators tell you 
that you've done such a fine job on behalf of the people of this province 
when you're standing on a $14 billion provincial debt and a four and a half 
billion dollar deficit?  Can you tell me that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well the member opposite 
hasn't, of course, looked in his own backyard at the Weyerhaeuser 
expansion, the new jobs in his own city.  He complains about the new jobs 
in Battlefords.  He complains about a new recreation vehicle manufacturer 
in Battlefords.  He complains about a bacon plant in Battlefords.  Ask the 
NDP member for Battlefords if he's opposed to the bacon plant and if he's 
opposed to the manufacturing plant in Battlefords. 
 
It seems to me that the NDP, when they get jobs in their own 
constituencies, are always opposed to these new jobs.  And then I have to 
remind them where the jobs are.  They're in Battleford which is an NDP seat 
right now.  They're in Prince Albert.  The jobs are in Moose Jaw.  The jobs 
are in Regina where you have 80 per cent of the seats.  And the biggest 
project in the history of Saskatchewan was built right here with thousands 
of workers working on that project.  Manufacturing is up in the term of 
this government by 585 per cent -- approximately 600 per cent increase in 
manufacturing. 
 
Do I have to give you an explanation about the price of wheat or can you go 
out there and look at the facts and figures on where this province is?  
When you did not diversify this province, we have to live with the 
consequences.  We are diversifying while the price of grain is low, while 
the price of oil is low, while the price of potash is low. 
 
And your leader asked today: why is New Brunswick doing better?  And I told 
him in question period, because they've got our potash mines.  The potash 
mines are in New Brunswick because you bought potash mines in Saskatchewan.  
And then you did that with our own money and shipped our money out of the 
province so that those companies could use our own money to build mines in 
New Brunswick. 
 
And then you wonder, under your diversification, why, when we bought holes 
in the ground and shipped money out of the province, we don't have jobs, 
and why we don't have an infrastructure that is industrial based.  At the 
same time, Alberta -- which was not into Crown corporations, which did not 
go spouting about a mixed economy -- Alberta diversified so that 70 per 
cent of their income in agriculture is now not from grain but from cattle 



 

 

and hogs.  And they have a processing industry.  And it just so happens 
that Alberta has a brand-new $30 million packing plant built by Cargill 
Grain.  What's wrong with Cargill Grain owning a packing plant in Alberta?  
But if they would have built one in Saskatchewan, you'd be opposed to that 
too.  Even if they built it in your own backyard and they hired all of your 
relatives, you'd still be opposed to it because you are opposed to progress 
in this province. 
 
I really don't know what the NDP stands for if it isn't for everything 
negative, everything that can bring people and drag them down to your low 
level.  And I tell you, the people of Saskatchewan don't want to live at 
your level.  They don't want to have your lifestyle.  They don't want to 
have a planned economy.  They don't like your plans, and they don't like 
your mix in a mixed economy.  Saskatchewan has rejected your ideas.  The 
world has rejected your ideas.  And in your own constituencies you will be 
rejected if you don't start respecting the employers that you've got there. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Minister, let me tell you this: if there's a lack 
of respect from members on this side of the House, it's for you and your 
cabinet and that government who's almost destroyed this province.  That's 
where the lack of respect comes from. 
 
I asked you what economic indicators that might tell you Saskatchewan is in 
a buoyant situation with respect to our economy and clearly you don't have 
any answers or you don't want to talk about them.  But let me tell you what 
the men and women in this province, the business men and women and the 
working people look at when they look at whether or not their province is 
doing well. 
 
They look at the number of jobs that their governments have helped to 
create.  They look at the number of new housing starts.  They look at the 
number of small businesses that opened.  They look at a population growth, 
and they look at a low number of bankruptcies with respect to existing 
businesses.  Those are the kinds of things they look at.  They look at 
whether or not they can maintain their family farms.  And I'll tell you 
what, Mr. Minister, the figures are here.  And they're not my figures; 
these are from StatsCanada, and your own government figures.  It tells us 
that you clearly have failed in every one of these areas in Saskatchewan, 
and since 1982 you have almost brought the economy of this province to its 
knees. 
 
You talk about diversification, Mr. Minister.  You compare Alberta to 
Saskatchewan, and that Alberta doesn't use Crown corporations.  A man, Mr. 
Minister, with your education and your background, and the years of 
experience with this government, clearly you would know that Crown 
corporations are a part of Alberta's economy, just as they used to be in 
this province before you gave away every one of the lucrative ones.  And 
you should know that, and I don't understand why you don't know that, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
(2230) 
 
Mr. Minister, I'm going to ask you again: the items that I outlined, are 



 

 

you happy with the number of jobs that have been created in this province? 
 
I want to know if you're happy with the number of housing starts, this year 
probably the lowest on record in this province.  I want to know if you're 
happy with the numbers of small-business people who have closed their doors 
and who have gone bankrupt. 
 
I want to know if you're happy with the exodus of our young people from 
this province.  I want to know if you're happy with the lower bond ratings.  
And I want to know if you're comfortable with the direction you've taken 
with respect to privatization that has in no small part caused a lot of 
these problems. 
 
And I want to tell you, Mr. Minister, if you want to sit here till 2 or 3 
in the morning, we can explain where these numbers have taken the people of 
this province.  We can talk about how many businesses have gone bankrupt, 
and the thousands of young people who have left this province looking for 
work.  We can do that.  But I want to know how you feel with respect to 
these issues, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- I will never be satisfied with the number of jobs 
created in this province until we have so many jobs that socialism is 
erased from the minds of our people for ever.  That's when I'll be 
satisfied.  And I think it will take a few more years to erase that kind of 
thought from the minds of our people. 
 
Now let me give you an idea of what is job development and 
decentralization.  I was a member of your party when it was part of your 
platform to decentralize the province.  And where is the decentralization?  
Where are the government offices that never were moved to Melville and to 
Swift Current and to Saskatoon?  But let me give you an indication.  In 
Delisle, Delsa Foods, eight new jobs; in Dysart, Veltek furniture, seven 
new jobs; in Melville, Babcock & Wilcox, 22 new jobs; in Moose Jaw, 
Phillips Cables, 30 new jobs; Northern Reel, 14 new jobs.  Might I also say 
that the water corporation head office is in Moose Jaw, a decentralization 
that you would never do even though you promised it.  In North Battleford, 
Hunters RV manufacturing, 200 jobs; Gainers, 150 jobs; and Prince Albert, 
Weyerhaeuser paper mill, 169 jobs in total; Continental Lime, 10 jobs; 
Regina, NewGrade upgrader, 40 permanent jobs; Gelco Steel, 35 jobs; 
Saskatoon, Intercontinental Packers, 150 new jobs; Hitachi, the Japanese 
turbine manufacturers, 30 jobs; Flexi-coil, 100 jobs; Swift Current, 
Midwest Glass Tempering, 13 jobs, a possible 12 more; Flexibrick, 12 jobs; 
Spar packaging group, 50 jobs; Hara Products, 10 jobs; Weyburn, Austrak 
manufacturing, 20 jobs, possibly another 80; Wolseley, Saskatchewan, 
Canapharm, 45 jobs; Wynyard, Quill Natural Spring Water.  The member from 
Quill Lakes knows that right in his own constituency this government is 
diversifying with eight new jobs in his seat.  And you were opposed to this 
kind of diversification: the Saskatchewan fertilizer plant, with 70 or 80 
permanent jobs, right near Moose Jaw; Cypress resort, 8 new jobs, 20 in 
season; the Shand power project in Estevan, 87 jobs; the Lloydminster 
bi-provincial upgrader, 150 jobs; Manitou springs hotel has an application 
that they're applying for, 10 new full-time jobs; the Millar Western pulp 
mill, in Meadow Lake -- that's the one you cancelled after you got elected 



 

 

when you defeated Ross Thatcher -- it's now being built at 125 jobs.  Then 
an amusement, RV park, in Moose Jaw; Federal Pioneer's new plant, 65 jobs 
in Regina.  You paved over the PCB spills.  We're building a new plant. 
 
It goes on and on: irrigation, 353 jobs; Saskatoon Westcoast Reduction, 65 
jobs.  Wynyard is planning on the expansion of their water plant.  Harvest 
Meats Co. Ltd. in Yorkton just opened with another 15 jobs.  These are the 
kind of projects that no Crown corporation ever would build or could ever 
operate if it did build it.  So don't tell me that you had plans to do all 
that. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Can you tell, Mr. Minister, if all of these jobs that 
you've listed, have been the salvation and that things are so great in 
Saskatchewan, can you tell me why our labour force is shrinking in this 
province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Your labour critic is quoted in the paper -- and he 
can come and deny this tomorrow if he wants to -- but your member from 
Moose Jaw North is quoted in the paper admitting that between 1971 and 1982 
when the NDP were government that the province lost 45,000 people.  Now 
that's when the price of wheat was high, the price of oil was high, the 
price of potash was high.  When commodities which you said we should invest 
in, which you said would be our future in the resource industry, when those 
prices were high, 45,000 people left Saskatchewan.  Those people voted with 
their feet when the prices were high. 
 
And I have the quote, and you can look at it in your own newspaper, The 
Commonwealth, where Allan Blakeney was asked when he was buying the potash 
mines: what would happen, Mr. Blakeney, if the price of oil and the price 
of potash and the price of wheat all went down at the same time?  And do 
you know what his answer was?  That would be a catastrophe, but that will 
never happen.  That's the kind of forward thinking that you had when you 
were government, that you would rely solely on wheat prices, potash prices, 
oil prices.  And what happens if those all go down?  Well that's a 
catastrophe and that's what we have right now -- a catastrophe because you 
put all our money in commodities which are cyclical. 
 
It wasn't good enough to put it in potash, it wasn't good enough to simply 
pump out the oil and not produce chemicals, petrochemicals, it wasn't good 
enough to produce natural gas and try to make fertilizer as Alberta has 
done.  You had to go and buy the holes in the ground and ship millions of 
dollars of our money to New Brunswick. 
 
I stood up to your leader, I stood up in front . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . You weren't even there; you were probably way too 
young; you were probably in high school.  I stood up to your leader and I 
said to him that buying holes in the ground will not do anything for this 
province.  And you know, I convinced at your NDP convention, one other 
person, and that other person is probably a Liberal or a Conservative right 
now -- one other person. 
 
But you will never change.  You won't even admit now that that kind of a 
policy of taking our tax money and investing it in holes in the ground is 



 

 

not building for the future.  When Alberta and British Columbia were 
diversifying their economy, you were buying holes in the ground, and 45,000 
people left this province during the time that you were government.  And 
you say, now what happened?  Well a catastrophe happened because you 
planned it that way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Minister, I can only say one thing.  I'm glad the 
former premier of this province never listened to your advice because under 
his leadership and under his direction we were able to balance 11 budgets 
in a row in this province, something that your Premier has never done one 
time since he was elected in 1982, Mr. Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Minister, last year we lost 23,705 people from this 
province.  Business bankruptcies were up from the year before, some 24 per 
cent, and you've got a record of increased business bankruptcies ever since 
you've been in power.  And that's why our labour force is shrinking, and 
that's why people are leaving this province. 
 
You've totally ignored the one vehicle that you could have used to 
stimulate this economy, and that's the small-business community.  You've 
totally ignored that sector of our province.  You've left them out to the 
wind.  Instead you hinge your wagon to the horse that pulls Cargill and 
Weyerhaeuser.  And that's your problem, Mr. Minister; you've got blinkers 
on, and you're not willing to use the tools that this province has used 
over the years in order to create a stable economy. 
 
You talk about what would happen if agriculture went to pot, which I agree 
there's been some problems.  But you know you've squandered away hundreds 
of millions of dollars in oil revenue since 1982, and you can't deny that 
because, Mr. Minister, it's in Public Accounts; the record is there.  And 
if you had taken the resource revenue to cross-subsidize for agriculture 
when you could have, you wouldn't have a $14 billion provincial debt, you 
wouldn't be on the hook $4.5 million in terms of general revenue.  That's 
where you made your mistake, Mr. Minister. 
 
You weren't willing to take the resource revenue when you could have and 
when you should have.  And don't come in here and cry that you never had 
any resource revenue with respect to oil.  You dealt with some of the 
highest priced per barrel oil that was a lot higher, Mr. Minister, than was 
ever around in the 1970s when the former premier balanced budgets in this 
province 11 times in a row.  But not you.  You chose your friends, Exxon 
and the large multinational oil companies, over the people of this 
province. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Minister, you've talked about how I was probably in high 
school when you were giving advice to the former premier.  What I want to 
tell you right now is, Mr. Minister, there are young people going to be 
going to the ballot boxes in 1990 or 1991, whenever you have the courage to 
face the electorate, who have never seen anything in their voting years 



 

 

other than your incompetence and your mismanagement.  And I want to say 
they're not all of them walking up to this Premier and explaining why 
they're leaving the province, but a lot of them are. 
 
But I want to say to you, Mr. Minister, that a lot of the young people that 
are staying in this province are waiting for a chance to tell you that 
they're fed up with the number of business bankruptcies.  They're fed up 
with seeing their neighbours leave their farms.  They're fed up with seeing 
their friends and neighbours in the cities working part-time jobs where 
they can't afford to support their families.  And that's part of the 
reasoning, Mr. Minister, that you have the large out-migrations, and 77,000 
people since 1985 have had to leave this province because of the direction 
of your government. 
 
Instead of apologizing to the people, you stand up and tell them that 
everything is fine.  But, Mr. Minister, they know better.  You can't tell 
hungry children that you're doing such a wonderful job and that things are 
great for them and have them believe you.  It doesn't work.  And you don't 
tell young people who have been refused entrance to university that your 
government has created a viable and a great place for them.  You can't do 
that, Mr. Minister, because you don't have any credibility with respect to 
that.  And I'm going to ask you again: can you tell me what economic 
indicators with respect to the number of jobs in this province -- and I 
don't want to hear your list of what might have been or what could have 
been.  I want you to talk about housing starts in Saskatchewan and how many 
people are employed building new houses in this province, and I want you to 
tell me a little bit about the number of small-business bankruptcies that 
have happened since 1982 at an ever-growing rate and an ever-increasing 
rate. 
 
I want you to tell me how people in this province are going to believe that 
you have created a buoyant economy.  You've got those figures at your 
fingertips.  Why don't you stand up in this House and read them to the 
public and let them know exactly what's been happening with respect to 
those issues?  Why don't you do that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Chairman, the Saskatchewan labour force increased 
by 17,000 since April of this year and 3,000 over last year.  Clearly we 
are showing some economic progress despite the low grain prices.  The total 
employment increased by 19,000 since April and by 5,000 over last year.  
The number of employed youth increased by 10,000 since April, 1990.  We are 
turning the corner.  We are starting to make some progress. 
 
I don't deny that it isn't difficult, but certainly those of us on this 
side have been working 70 hours per week plus trying to get this province 
going, and all you've had to contribute so far is negative criticism and 
not one good idea. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Minister, I'm going to ask you to table those 
documents, because I think you might be the only person in this province 
who believes them. 
 
But let me go through some of the youth unemployment rates in the 15- to 



 

 

24-year-old category.  And I want to tell you, you know that it's 
consistently higher with other provinces that are right surrounding us -- 
Manitoba and Alberta.  I want to tell you, Mr. Minister, that your record 
since 1982 is not one that you want to be proud of.  The rate in 
Saskatchewan for youth was almost twice the normal rate of unemployment in 
this province.  And I know you know that and I know you understand that. 
 
Mr. Minister, in this year's budget, no program for youth employment -- not 
a one, not a one.  You cut back from what you had the year before.  And I 
want to tell you, Mr. Minister, that the facts and the figures don't lie.  
They're there and they're there for you to know, and I think you know them.  
And what I'm asking you is: because you know those figures, why don't you 
change the direction of your government? 
 
(2245) 
 
You haven't delivered what this province needs and you haven't delivered a 
stable economy for our young people.  And that's why they're walking out of 
this province in droves.  You can look through any community you want -- 
you see empty homes; you hear of families moving.  And it's not just 
agriculture-related, it's through the whole piece.  The construction 
industry is dead.  The agricultural community is facing larger and larger 
numbers of bankruptcies, and I know you know that.  But instead, what you 
do here, Mr. Minister, is you stand up and won't even admit to the fact 
that you have made some mistakes since 1982, and clearly you have. 
 
And I would like, Mr. Minister, for you to table those documents that you 
just read from.  I'm asking if you'll do that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- There's some interesting statistics, Mr. Speaker.  
First of all, youth unemployment rose more when the NDP were government 
than it has since we are government.  In 1975 youth unemployment was 5.1 
per cent.  By 1982 when the NDP were defeated, it had doubled to 11.4 per 
cent.  Under our government, it went from 11.4 per cent to 12.2 per cent in 
1989.  Really not much of a change in youth unemployment for all of the 
time that we were government, from the time that we took over from the NDP 
until now.  The NDP had high prices to work with; we have low prices to 
work with.  So the record of the former government during easy times is not 
very good. 
 
The population increase in the first seven years of our government in this 
province, population rose by 3.1 per cent.  During the first seven years of 
the NDP government, from 1971 to '78, the population rose by 1.9 per cent.  
So given three or four more years, we could probably do even better, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Clearly our programs are working.  We will even try to solve the 
international grain wars and do our part to help solve that.  The Premier 
has made a large effort and the Premier and I will both make a contribution 
with respect to what can be done in the GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs 
and Trade) negotiations.  There is nothing like peace in the international 
grain wars to bring prosperity to Saskatchewan. 
 



 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well, Mr. Minister, let's get to reality.  And I'm 
going to ask you again if you'll table the documents that you read from.  
But let me give you some numbers.  In 1982 there were 107,000 jobs.  In 
1990 there are 84,000 jobs for young people, and that's a drop of 26,000 
jobs, Mr. Minister.  And these are your statistics, not mine.  Not mine.  I 
just didn't pull them out of a hat. 
 
Mr. Minister, I'm going to read down the list of jobs and how the decreases 
happened since 1982: 1982, 107,000; 1983, 103,000; 1984, 101,000; 1985, you 
had a little rebound there to 103; '86, you're down to 101,000; '87, you're 
down to 95,000; '88, you're down to 90,000; '89, to 88,000; and 84,000 in 
the year 1990, Mr. Minister.  These are your figures. Mr. Minister, not 
mine, and I want to see the document that you're quoting from.  Will you 
pass that across to us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- The document's a public document, Mr. Chairman, and 
it's available to the opposition.  There's a very elementary explanation: 
this is another example of NDP logic, which is an oxymoron, I would say.  
But with respect to the NDP logic, there are fewer youth in the '80s than 
there were in the '70s, accordingly because of the baby boom.  You would 
have more youth in the job market in the '70s, there would be more youth 
employed.  Once that bolds and the demographics comes out of the population 
cycle, there are fewer youth -- you cannot have more youth employed.  It's 
the percentages that you're looking at; the number of youth employed, if 
you take into account the post war baby boom.  And when they hit the job 
market, it will explain perfectly clear why your statistics give you the 
conclusion that you believe you have reached when you haven't taken into 
account the factor of the number of youth in each category during the '70s 
or '60s or '80s. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well, Mr. Minister, baby boom or no baby boom, I want 
to take you back to some numbers.  The net migration in this province in 
1982 between the ages of 15 and 24, we gained 1,703 young people between 
those ages.  These are federal government statistics, Mr. Minister.  And I 
tell you, that was the first year you took over government.  Between there 
and 1985 there was a slight influx of young people, but from '85 on they 
disappeared like the wind. 
 
In 1990 we lost 5,598 people between the ages of 15 and 24 years.  Now are 
you telling all of those young people that you had decent employment 
opportunities for them and that they had an opportunity to work in this 
province and should have stayed here?  I don't understand what you're 
saying, Mr. Minister.  In 1988 we had 3,116 people leave this province.  In 
'87 we had 2,100 people between the ages of 15 and 24 leave this province.  
In '86 we had 3,251 young people leave this province. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I ask you to give me the source of the documents you 
were quoting from.  You say they're public records.  Could you tell us what 
the source is. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- I'd be pleased to.  Statistics Canada press releases 
with respect to job opportunities and population migration statistics, and 
the Saskatchewan bureau of statistics. 



 

 

 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Minister, I have a few questions that deal with 
the economy of the province.  I noted earlier in your comments you were 
saying how the revenue in the province since you took over has continually 
gone down.  I just wondered whether you could indicate to us what was the 
revenue from oil, the total revenue from oil, in 1981, the last year that 
the previous government was in power, just so we can make a fair 
comparison. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- We'd have to look it up.  We could call the library in 
to bring us the figures.  I don't have the oil statistics at the top of my 
head because I've never had that portfolio.  However, my officials are 
looking it up rather quickly so maybe I'll be able to give it to you. 
 
In 1985, my recollection is the price of wheat went down to a low that was 
the lowest in history, and 1987, I believe, was the first year when that 
cycle came through where our net take on income tax -- it was either 1985 
or 1987 -- our net take on income tax went down for the first time in 
history.  So since income tax was temporarily invented back in World War I, 
every year the province's receipts in income tax went up.  And I recall, as 
you know and will admit, when I was a member of your party, one of the 
biggest concerns at the annual convention was how are we going to spend all 
of the income coming in.  Because you had an inflationary cycle, the price 
of wheat was high, and farmers for the first time were en masse paying 
income tax, that money flowed into the cities.  City people were paying 
income tax.  The income tax revenues went up so fast you had a hard time 
figuring out how to spend the money, so you wasted it.  That was the simple 
answer of what your policy was in the 1970s. 
 
And so now we have had a second year, and I believe it was 1989 when income 
tax revenue fell for a second time.  So what you have is a system where 
annually the expenses of the province rise by 10 per cent.  And Health has 
been very consistent; an increase of 10 per cent per year for Health.  
Education has been trekking along at that rate. 
 
You have your expenditures in the 1980s increasing by 10 per cent and you 
have your revenue to the province increasing by 5 per cent.  Anyone can 
tell you that that will lead to a graph that will show a deficit.  The 
Premier in addition indicated that he would put the treasury of 
Saskatchewan on the line for agriculture, and he did. 
 
You can only put the treasury on the line once.  It was done.  We now have 
a deficit.  Agriculture has been saved, although I can tell you that in 
agriculture it is not -- it is not -- easy going.  But agriculture in this 
province has been saved from prices that were the lowest in history. 
 
Now when you calculate your prices as always -- and I know that money is a 
disdainful topic for the members of the opposition, as are profits and all 
the things that the world runs on like efficiency, profits, money, capital.  
Those are all dirty words for the NDP, I know that, but you have to take 
into account the current value of money.  What would a dollar buy in 1952 
or 1982 or 1990?  That's what you have to take into account.  So whenever 
you're comparing statistics you have to compare current value and current 



 

 

dollars. 
 
If you had a price, a barrel of oil at $14 in 1977 and you have a price of 
oil going down to $14 in 1989, the price of oil is not the same.  You have 
to take inflation into account and that $14 will not buy you now what it 
would buy you in 1977.  So grain prices and oil prices have to be adjusted 
for inflation into current dollars so that all comparisons are in current 
dollars.  I don't know if that's too complex for you, but I'm trying to 
explain as simply as possible so that you understand you have to compare a 
1990 dollar to an adjusted 1970 dollar or whatever year you're adjusting 
for. 
 
Taking that into account, I will give you an example of the price of wheat.  
I recall saying to my grandfather who bought our farm in 1920 and paid 
$4,000 per quarter when it only had about 20 acres on it.  I said to him as 
a young boy: grandfather, why did you pay so much -- $4,000 per quarter?  
He said, grandson, you have to keep in mind that the price of wheat was 
$2.20 a bushel in 1920. 
 
Now that was in 1920 dollars.  When the price of wheat peaked in 1928-29, 
the price in 1928-29 dollars was in the range of $2.57.  In 1985 the price 
of wheat in actual 1985 dollars was less than it was in 1929.  And when you 
take into account what a dollar would purchase.  The price of grain from 
1929 to 1985 had fallen by about tenfold, and that is what we're dealing 
with in the 1980s in this province. 
 
We have relied completely on grain; we have not gone into processing of our 
grains or of our agricultural products.  This government is diversifying 
into processing.  Because we are diversifying into processing we are using 
large amounts of capital.  We are trying to maintain health and education 
and we are trying to maintain agriculture.  That results in a deficit. 
 
I stand behind the Premier when he said he will put the the treasury on 
line for agriculture.  He did, and I stand behind him, and this entire 
government stands behind the Premier for having put the treasury in line 
for agriculture and having defended agriculture here in this legislature, 
all over this province with cash dollars out of the treasury.  And in 
Ottawa and internationally in Geneva where the GATT negotiations are going 
on, the Premier has stood up for this province. 
 
We have gotten through very difficult times.  We are turning the corner now 
and there is a bright future for this province if only the opposition could 
come up with some positive criticism and stop being so negative about all 
of the good things that have been done. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well, Mr. Minister, when I asked you the question 
about the price of oil about 15 minutes ago, I noticed that you skated 
around the issue but it didn't go unnoticed.  I want to say to you, Mr. 
Minister, that the price of oil, the income from oil in 1981 was in fact 
relatively low.  And in fact the revenue from oil did not go down as you 
indicated when you took over. 
 
Now here I have a document, your own document, and if you open up the 



 

 

inside page there's the smiling face of the former minister of Finance, and 
in that statement he indicates that in 1981 the income revenue from oil was 
821 million -- 821 million -- and on that $821 million we got revenue of 
$368 million.  A little under 50 per cent of the amount of the total 
revenue from oil was collected in taxes by the provincial government.  By 
1985, the total revenue had increased to $2.3 billion.  That's an increase 
of 300 per cent in five years, in terms of revenue from oil. 
 
(2300) 
 
Now what did you take on that $2.3 billion on oil revenues?  Well you got 
about $600 million -- about $600 million on revenues of 2.3 billion, or 
about 25 per cent. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, had you continued to collect the tax, to levy the same 
amount of tax on oil that was levied in 1981 in 1985, you would have got a 
revenue of something in the area of $1 billion in 1985 on oil alone.  And 
that would have been a major increase and there would have been no deficit. 
 
If you follow the line through on oil revenue, you find in 1981 it was $821 
million.  It went to 1.2 billion in 1982, 1.7 billion in 1983, 2.1 billion 
in 1984, and 2.39 billion in 1985. 
 
Now those are dramatic increases in revenue from oil.  But the simple fact 
is, Mr. Minister, that during those years when the income revenue from oil 
was going up by 300 per cent, you were running the first deficits that this 
province had seen for many, many years.  And there was no money to going to 
farmers at that time.  There was no drought on.  In fact, if you look at 
the revenue to farmers during that period from the price of grain, they 
stayed very, very constant.  They didn't go down. 
 
The fact is, Mr. Minister, when this province got in trouble with the 
deficit was not during a time of down prices for grain.  And it certainly 
wasn't when the price of oil was down.  In fact, it increased 300 per cent, 
and you know that.  And what the people of the province are saying is, 
where did the money go?  Where did the money go?  Well here, Mr. Minister, 
is where about $2 billion extra went to oil companies.  This is on one 
item, about an extra $2 billion in that five-year period. 
 
That is when we started the slide into the deficits that we now find 
ourselves.  That was a decision made by your government.  It had nothing to 
do with the price of wheat; this had to do with the oil resource that 
belongs to all the people in the province.  Had nothing to do with 
privatization at that point; it had to do with mismanagement and paying off 
your buddies who had paid for your campaign in 1982.  And that's where we 
started the slide. 
 
What I want to say to you, Mr. Minister, is that in about 1983 and '84, you 
began to privatize; your government began to privatize the economy of 
Saskatchewan.  And I just want to ask you, in the area of the Crown 
corporations, in terms of employment and debt, can you tell me what has 
happened to the deficit in the Crown corporation side since you people took 
over as government in Saskatchewan.  Has it gone up or down?  And if it has 



 

 

gone up, what is the level of debt in the Crown corporation sector at the 
present time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Chairman, this isn't Crown corporations estimates.  
I don't have all of those figures before me at this time.  On the economic 
development side, let me tell you this: that first of all the corporation 
I'm responsible, SGI, has gone from losing money to making money; has gone 
from being subsidized by the taxpayers' gasoline tax to being 
self-supporting and putting money aside for a rainy day.  With respect to 
SaskPower Corporation, its debt has gone up.  It has built a power plant, a 
hydro plant, it borrowed for that.  It is building a thermal plant at 
Estevan, it has borrowed for that.  If you look at last year's annual 
returns, it paid off millions of dollars last year out of its own internal 
earnings.  With respect to other Crown corporations, the P.A. pulp mill, we 
discussed earlier, has gone from a loss situation of $91,000 per day 
average during the time the NDP owned it, and it has now gone to not losing 
any money.  It has $63 million paid back since we sold it. 
 
But let us go into what you do with the oil industry when you choke it by 
royalties that are out of line with the market.  And I know the members 
opposite don't understand the market.  And even if they did understand the 
market, they wouldn't like the market.  Market is a dirty word for them. 
 
But in 1973 when the members opposite were elected, we had 13 million cubic 
metres of oil production.  By 1981 they had choked that down to half -- 7.4 
million cubic metres of oil production.  So in 1981 you had choked the 
industry in half, in the time that you were the government.  And you said, 
well you've got a large percentage of money, you got a large percentage of 
money on half the production.  If you would have charged 25 per cent, you 
would have got the same money and you would have had some activity. 
 
Then during our government coming to power, the oil industry has got back 
up.  While we were in power, the 12.3 million in production . . . and you 
were producing in the period of time when the fields were new.  We're now 
developing enhanced oil recovery in that same period of time.  You bought 
natural gas from Alberta at an inflated price and didn't give any incentive 
to our own Saskatchewan companies to find the natural gas that is there.  
And when you were the CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) you told 
my grandmother and me, as a small boy, there's no natural gas in 
Saskatchewan.  That's what you told us -- there isn't any.  That's the kind 
of information you fed me as a child.  It's bad enough you come in here 
with that kind of information and talk to adults; that's what you fed to 
children -- there's no natural gas in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now when the natural gas is being used to make fertilizer you say, oh it 
shouldn't be used to make fertilizer; oh no, sorry we've changed our mind; 
you've now changed your mind -- it should be used to make fertilizer.  And 
it's all right if you do it in Moose Jaw where you hold the seats, and it's 
all right if you do it close to Regina -- that's fine; make fertilizer.  
But oh, don't do it with an international company, don't buy 49 per cent of 
the Saskatchewan Fertilizer Company.  Do as the NDP would do -- buy 100 per 
cent of the fertilizer company. 
 



 

 

Doesn't matter that you don't know anything about making fertilizer or 
selling fertilizer, but do it through the government.  And if you lose 
$91,000 . . . or $90,400 a day it doesn't matter; the taxpayers will pay, 
you can tax somebody.  Well there aren't enough somebodies out there to tax 
for that kind of inefficiency. 
 
And you say, oh well, we were government; yes, and we did this and that.  
You know, the only smart thing you ever did was you called an election 
before the people knew where the prices were going.  And you tried to get 
away with it.  And I remember when you called the election in 1982 the 
eastern media said: ho hum, Allan Blakeney called an election; he's going 
to win easy again.  And then the people found out that you had squandered 
the money when it was easy to come by and that you knew the prices were 
falling. 
 
I'll give you the prices.  The price of wheat peaked in 1980-81 at $222 per 
tonne.  By 1986-87 it had dropped to $130 per tonne.  It's now $135 per 
tonne.  In today's dollars it is less than half; it is probably 25 per cent 
of what it actually was when it peaked.  It shows up as 50 per cent down.  
When you take inflation into account and the cost of production of farmers, 
wheat in actual fact has gone down to 25 per cent of what it was worth when 
you called an election because you knew that was going to happen, and you 
tried to sneak in a new mandate. 
 
Oil -- oil peaked at $33.16 per barrel in 1985, and now it's back down to 
$14.44 per barrel in 1990 dollars.  In reality, oil is down at about $7 a 
barrel.  Potash peaked in 1981 at $157 per tonne.  It went down to $87 per 
tonne in 1986 and has now come back up to $141, and it's fallen again. 
 
Uranium in 1980 was selling for $43.40 U.S. per pound; that's U.S. dollars.  
I know you have a hard time comprehending a U.S. dollar, but that was in 
U.S. dollars; $43.40 was the price of uranium in 1980.  In 1990 the price 
of uranium is $8.35.  It's crept up a little bit now.  I think it's 9.50 or 
so. 
 
So that is the kind of commodity prices we are facing, and when Allan 
Blakeney was asked when you started taking over potash mines, what would 
happen if oil, potash, and wheat all went down, he said it would be a 
catastrophe.  And he was right. 
 
And all you did was squandered money and prepared us for catastrophe, and 
now you say why is there this deficit?  Why is there this deficit? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Where did the surplus come from? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- You say there was a surplus?  That is the biggest 
economic joke I've ever heard.  You had an election budget, and you 
wouldn't even pass it.  You called an election.  When we added up what was 
actually there, there was no . . . there was $80 million, 8 per cent cash 
in the Heritage Fund, and holes in the ground and hospitals are assets.  
That's what you had down as assets -- holes in the ground as assets in the 
Heritage Fund.  And you said there was a billion dollars. 
 



 

 

You had a surplus projected of $139 million and you called an election.  
Would you live with that?  No.  The result was that you were hiding $200 
million of deficit right during the 1982 election. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan saw through that.  The people of Saskatchewan 
rejected you, most of you.  Well I can say that there's a few members here 
survived that; maybe they tried a little harder in the northern seats in 
particular.  There's one member here who would never give that kind . . . 
he probably didn't even agree with the budget at that time.  He survived 
that election. 
 
All of you who believed that that was true that there was a surplus were 
misled by your Finance minister, and as a result, the people defeated you 
on the spot in 1982 -- a record loss for the NDP, one from which you have 
not yet recovered.  You lost anybody capable of governing in 1982, and 
you're now left with members who have never run anything bigger, nothing 
bigger than a sale out on a street -- nothing bigger than a Kool-Aid sale.  
That's the only thing any of you have ever run, and you want to come up 
again and govern this province. 
 
That's all you're qualified to be is Kool-Aid salesmen when you were little 
kids.  You don't understand profit.  You've gone broke trying to run Dairy 
Queens.  None of you have ever ran a business.  None of you have ever made 
a profit.  And now you want to govern Saskatchewan.  You can't even add 
these statistics.  And then you say, oh we would make it wonderful. 
 
Well I challenge you, for once and for all, come up and tell us one policy 
that would make Saskatchewan wonderful if you were elected.  And you can't 
even come up with one.  What were you going to do?  "We believe in a mixed 
economy," you tell us.  Are you going to run the Crown corporations ad -- 
the wonderful family of Crown corporations?  Is that the kind of families 
we're going to have in Saskatchewan? 
 
I don't believe that the people of Saskatchewan will ever go for any kind 
of the mediscare that you've ran through in the past.  They won't go 
through all those kinds of political promises. 
 
I remember when I was a little boy, every time there was an election, the 
highway stake business was the best business in Saskatchewan.  I remember 
the curve around the village I grew up in had three sets of stakes put 
around it while you were government.  Now when we are government, when the 
stakes go up, the dirt goes on the stakes.  That is the kind of government 
you had, a highway stake government, a government of little cheap promises 
that go snap in the wind.  That's the kind of government you ran, and 
that's what you want to run again. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well, Mr. Minister, this is going to take a long time 
to finish these estimates if you keep talking about your family history and 
all the problems you had with different political parties, getting kicked 
out here and there, and why parties wouldn't keep you, and why you couldn't 
win nominations. 
 
But when you talk about the debt in the province, and the fact that you 



 

 

tell us that there was no surplus in 1982, when you took over, your own 
Finance minister, the previous minister of Finance, indicates in his report 
that there was a surplus of 139 million.  Now I say to the minister as he 
leaves the door, that this is the simple fact that's signed by the minister 
. . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order, order.  Members aren't to make reference to 
members' absence or presence in the House.  Order, order.  You are not to 
make reference to people's absence or presence in the House. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelfter: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Here's yet 
another document signed by the government when they took over in July of 
1982.  This one's signed by Bob Andrew, the minister of Finance.  And in 
that report he says, on a combined basis the Consolidated and Heritage Fund 
showed a budgetary revenue of $2.6 billion and expenditures of 2.5 and a 
combined surplus of $139.3 million. 
 
Now the minister comes to this committee and he should try to tell the 
truth, Mr. Chairman.  He really should try to tell the truth.  And coming 
here and giving misleading statements to the committee is no way for a 
minister of the Crown to carry on. 
 
Our documents in 1981-82 showed that we had a surplus of 139 million.  The 
documents signed by the minister, then minister in 1982, Bob Andrew, showed 
that there was 139 million in surplus.  And then the next Minister of 
Finance, the member from Qu'Appelle-Lumsden, also signed the same kind of a 
statement that indicates that there was a surplus of 139 million. 
 
(2315) 
 
Now I don't know where this minister has been hiding.  If he's being 
instructed by his staff, I don't believe that he's being given the wrong 
information.  I think the minister chooses to mislead the committee and 
chooses to give us information that isn't accurate, and he's been doing 
that all evening.  And I say to you, Mr. Chairman, it makes it very 
difficult to complete these estimates if the minister is going to keep 
misleading the committee on facts that he has in front of him. 
 
But I want to say there's one set of facts that we can't argue with and I 
know that he can't argue with, and that is that privatization in this 
province has led us to rack and ruin when it comes to the deficit of the 
province. 
 
In their own document, the budget of 1990, March 1990, it shows an 
estimated debt by 1991 of $13.2 billion -- $13.2 billion that has been run 
up in debt; that at a time when we have shown that oil revenues were higher 
than any time when we were in government.  The only difference in oil is 
that this government chose not to collect revenue on the vast amounts of 
income that was being brought in from oil. 
 
What they did with the money from the sell-off of assets, nobody knows.  
What they did with the money from the sell-off of the coal mines and the 
oil wells and the gas wells and the highway equipment and the potash mining 



 

 

equipment.  No one knows where that money has gone, but it certainly has 
not gone to pay down the deficit.  Because you know, Mr. Chairman, that the 
total deficit in the province, the total debt in the Crown corporation 
sector was a little over $3 billion in 1982 and that has now risen to $9 
billion.  Now how can a government do that?  At a time when it's selling 
off the assets -- coal, oil, gas, highway equipment -- they sell it all 
off.  PAPCO, they sold off the assets of that corporation and have driven 
the debt from $3 billion to $9 billion. 
 
Now the minister indicates that he has obviously some trouble with facts 
and figures and that has been indicated by not knowing what the debt in the 
province was or the surplus when he took over government; by not knowing 
what the revenue from oil was in 1981 versus 1985.  He's indicated that 
very clearly.  He misled the committee when he said that the revenue from 
oil went down after 1981 and it didn't.  The revenue from oil went from 800 
million to 2.3 billion between 1981 and 1985.  And I'm glad that the 
minister has moved back into his seat again. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order.  I've let . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Order.  The members are not to make reference to absence or presence in the 
Assembly . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Order.  The member from 
Regina Centre . . . 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I wasn't referring to whether the minister was in the 
House or not, I was referring to him moving from one seat to another, Mr. 
Chairman, so I hope that doesn't upset you.  I know it's getting late at 
night and nerves get frayed. 
 
But I want to say to the minister this: that when you talk about the 
revenue from oil going down after 1981 when you took over, you are 
misleading this committee.  That isn't the truth and you know it.  You know 
that the revenue from oil went from 800 million in 1981 to 2.3 billion in 
1985.  And during that period you ran the deficit up even though those 
revenues went up and went up handsomely, about 300 per cent.  Now the 
revenue that you took in taxes didn't go up 300 per cent; that's for sure.  
But that was your choice.  That was your choice.  And when you privatized 
the corporations in this province and ran the deficit in the Crowns from 3 
billion to 9 billion, that was your choice.  No one was arguing with you to 
do it.  In fact, the public didn't support any of those privatizations. 
 
I have here a letter from the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Regina, from 
the Social Justice Department.  This is the letter that was sent to the 
Premier.  This letter was sent to the Premier of the province, and I want 
to quote from it.  It says: 
 

 The Honourable Grant Devine, Premier of Saskatchewan, Legislative 
Building, Regina, Sask. 

 
 Dear Mr. Premier: On the occasion of the May Privatization Conference in 

Saskatoon, the Social Justice Commission of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese 
of Regina invites you and the government to reflect with us on the 
implications of wealth distribution systems (of) our communities. 

 



 

 

And it goes on to say that: 
 

 Privatization as a system of economic distribution has serious 
implications for (the) people in our society. 

 
And this goes on . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The member from 
Regina South can ridicule the Catholic church about bingos, and that's what 
he's doing from his seat.  And you can ridicule the Catholic church if you 
want for having bingos, but I'll tell you that this . . . Pardon? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Because it's mine. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Because it's yours.  Well that's maybe true that you 
think it's yours, and you may try to tax it and those kinds of things, on 
bingos and lotteries.  But I'll tell you, you had to back off from that. 
 
But I want to go back to the letter which clearly indicates problems that 
many people have with privatization.  It's not only the New Democratic 
Party; it's not only the other political parties and political members 
because the polling clearly shows that the majority of now Conservatives 
are opposed to your privatization of SaskEnergy and SaskPower and SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance). 
 
But it goes on to say that, "We see and hear that the dignity of the people 
in our communities is not considered when decisions are made that affect 
the whole community."  And here referring to privatization. 
 
And what they're saying is that your privatization madness, when it comes 
to privatizing SGI and privatizing SaskEnergy, you're not taking the needs 
of the people into consideration when you do that.  You're certainly not 
taking the consideration of the economy of the province into consideration, 
because you've got the deficit now up to close to $14 billion. 
 
And what the Catholic Church is saying here, at least the Archdiocese of 
Regina, is that when it comes to the needs of people, privatization isn't 
working.  Privatization isn't working.  Now I want to go on and quote some 
other parts of this letter.  It goes on to say that the Canadian Catholic 
bishops, in the Ethical Choices and Political Challenge, state that the 
model of developing the economy cannot be based solely on economic growth.  
And, quote: 
 

 To be authentic, development must be integral, encompassing the social, 
economic, cultural and spiritual needs of the whole person.  Integral 
development there encompasses both the personal and communal dimensions of 
human living. 

 
And they go on to challenge the consumption/power/profit orientation of our 
economies.  And they say, in quotation: 
 

 . . . economic strategies aimed at maximizing private profits and 
consumption and technological growth designed to maintain power and 
domination, constitute distorted models of "development" and must be 
resisted. 



 

 

 
Now, Mr. Minister, the reason they're sending this letter to the Premier is 
that they believe your privatization, of selling off major assets and 
control of our economy to people outside the province, enriches the few at 
the expense of the many.  And that's why they're opposed to privatization.  
And I think in many words, non-politicians, the bishops of Canada, can say 
it much more ably than I, that the reason that we are opposed to 
privatization is because the main beneficiaries are people like Chuck 
Childers -- $740,000 a year. 
 
Now you know, Mr. Chairman, that that is not acceptable in today's economy 
where your neighbours and friends are being driven off the land -- 10,000 
have already left since you've become part of this government, have left 
the land, and 10,000 more . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order, order.  The member is not to include the Chair in 
his debate.  He's to address his questions through the Chair.  You're 
involving the Chair in the debate and the members aren't to do that. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, I did not refer to the Chair at any 
time.  If you check Hansard, I didn't say the Chair.  I said you will know 
that since you became part of the government; I was referring to the 
minister. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- You were involving the Chair in the debate, so I'd ask the 
member to refrain from that. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Okay.  If the chairman felt I was involving the Chair 
I will discontinue that.  I wasn't.  I'm referring to the minister.  Since 
he became part of the government, 10,000 farmers have left the land.  And 
you will know, Mr. Minister, that during that time period, many, many 
people have suffered as a result of your economic plans and strategy. 
 
You will also know that in addition to the 10,000 who have already left, 
another 10,000 face foreclosure -- 10,000 people now face foreclosure and 
will be forced to leave the land if this kind of economic strategy 
continues. 
 
Now you can talk about how terrible it was back in the 1970s, but you can't 
prove any of the facts that you state because there is no evidence.  
Housing construction was at record highs during that time period.  New job 
creation was high.  Small businesses were starting all over the place. 
 
It only started in 1982 with your economic strategy to privatize and sell 
off the assets of the province to a few of your friends.  And as the 
bishops says, maximizing profits for a few at the expense of the many that 
we've gotten into this position. 
 
Now there's a reason for that, and it was learned a long time ago after the 
last bout of Tory economic policies between 1929 and 1934.  And you 
referred to that, that that was the last time we had a major depression and 
major problems of out-migration.  But it may be just a coincidence that 
during period we had a Conservative government in Saskatchewan as well.  



 

 

But I don't think it is a coincidence. 
 
I think what happens when you try to maximize profits in this province at 
the expense of the many, you ruin the economy.  And that's why we developed 
an economy in Saskatchewan that was based on the three engines of growth, 
the three engines of growth being the co-operative sector, the 
small-business private sector, and the public sector.  And what you've done 
is basically destroyed the engines that have built this province to where 
it was. 
 
You've shut down two of the engines, and we're basically trying to fly on 
people like Chuck Childers and Peter Pocklington and Guy Montpetit, and it 
doesn't work.  That's what the people are telling you.  That's why the 
Premier in this province's popularity rating has now dropped below 20 per 
cent.  It's simply not acceptable in this province. 
 
and here we have yet another letter from another group, the bishops in 
Canada and the Archdiocese of Regina talking about why they feel that 
privatization has failed as an economic strategy.  And they go on to say 
that: 
 

 We feel very strongly that the natural resources are for the use of all in 
our society.  Therefore, the infrastructure supporting the use of the 
resources should remain in the hands of the society as a whole. 

 
Now nothing could be more clear than that, Mr. Minister.  And I think that 
in saying that, Mr. Minister, I want to let you know that your continuation 
of privatization, which you have explained again even as recently as a week 
ago, that you intend to privatize SGI, is not going unnoticed by the public 
of Saskatchewan and not going unchallenged.  Because when you and the 
president of the corporation . . . it may only happen by coincidence that 
it's when the Premier's out of the province, because he has indicated that 
he doesn't want any more privatization, at least till after the next 
election.  You wait until he's in Ottawa and the first ministers' 
conference and you start making announcements that SGI is going to be 
privatized. 
 
Now I find it interesting that now that the Premier's back in the province, 
that now you're silent on privatization.  And this may be an attempt by the 
minister to start a bit of a leadership undercutting here in the province 
of Saskatchewan.  Now that wouldn't surprise me when the Premier's at 20 
per cent and has been there consistently for months, that this would begin 
to happen. 
 
But I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you can explain why you choose to talk about 
privatization one week and now you're silent?  Have you given up on 
privatization?  Are you now listening to the people or do you intend to 
continue with this privatization mania that you started seven or eight 
years ago when you came into government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Chairman, I haven't seen the letter that the 
member refers to, but I will tell you that it is typical NDP that they will 
use anything to try to gain political power; that the NDP will go so low as 



 

 

to drag religious letters, to drag churches into this Assembly. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- This was sent to the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Well I haven't seen the letter, and I say to you . . . 
The NDP say the letter was sent to the Premier and they won't say who 
signed the letter, so I don't know if it's authorized by the church or not.  
There are members of that same church in the government who are questioning 
who signed the letter.  It is clear that if the NDP have a copy of the 
letter, that they are up to some political games here trying to drag the 
church into politics, something that the people have resisted for years and 
years. 
 
But let me say to those people who want to drag the church into politics 
and those people who think that the church would be better off in a 
socialist system, let me say this to them clearly: let them look in the 
collection plates of eastern Europe and the collection plates of Cuba and 
see if they are getting one-tenth of what?  One-tenth of next to nothing is 
nothing. 
 
And so I say to anyone in any church that thinks that socialism is a friend 
of the church, I say this: don't ever get social programs and socialism 
confused or the church will suffer as a result.  That's my answer to the 
NDP.  They should keep socialism out of the church and they should not 
confuse socialism with social programs. 
 
As for SGI, SGI will not be privatized.  SGI may be expanded. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Just one short question.  I want you to know if you 
grabbed a copy of the Prairie Messenger . . . this is an open letter from 
the Archdiocese of Regina, an open letter to the Premier of the province.  
If you want to go the library or get one of your staff to slip over there, 
it's still open.  It's in the Prairie Messenger, an open letter to the 
Premier, outlining their concerns about privatization because they see what 
privatization is here in the province is the giving away of resources that 
used to belong to all the people to a chosen few.  And they talk about 
maximizing profits for those few at the expense of others. 
 
That's what they're saying clear and simple, and if you wanted to read the 
Prairie Messenger, that letter is there and it was sent to the . . . in the 
letter it says, the Hon. Grant Devine, so I would expect it's also in the 
Premier's office. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Chairman, I just want to say in closing these 
estimates, that I'm hoping for the people of this province, that this is 
the last time we'll have to face this minister in this forum, doing 
Economic Development Estimates. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(2330) 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- One would hope that this government will have the 



 

 

courage to take the ideas and the thoughts of this minister, and the rest 
of cabinet, to the people and let them decide as to whether or not this 
province is going in the direction it should be. 
 
One day he talks about privatizing SGI, and yes it's a good idea; tonight 
it's not a good idea.  His Premier is back in the province so now he's off 
the privatization agenda, and he's put the muzzle on it.  But when the 
Premier leaves the province, the first thing the minister is doing: he's 
out scheming and plotting to privatize the Crown corporation -- one of the 
Crown corporations -- that the people of this province do not want to see 
privatized. 
 
They know the damage that privatization has caused the economy and caused 
their province.  They know the damage that these ministers on that side of 
the House have caused.  And they know that it's going take 50 years to 
rebuild this province and to cure the damage that is being caused by this 
Premier and by his cabinet. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Minister of Economic Diversification, what they want 
to do is start that rebuilding process now.  And they want to start 
rebuilding with politicians and with a political party who they can trust, 
and who they know is going to work on their best interests, and not in the 
interests of the multi-national corporations of the world. 
 
Mr. Minister, they're looking for a government that will work with them and 
not against them.  And they know that your government has not been that 
since 1982, and they know that the future with your government in power is 
a dismal, dismal situation for them.  And they're looking for an 
opportunity to ask the young men and women who've left this province to 
come back and help us rebuild this province.  But they know full well they 
can't do it with your political agenda and the attitude you have towards 
this province. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to close by saying to you on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan, your display, your government's display, and the performance 
that you put on not only tonight, but throughout these estimates is an 
absolute shame. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Minister, if you have any influence with the Premier 
why don't you go over and ask him to call an election so that the people 
can judge you on the real record; so that they can judge you on the number 
of unemployed, and the number of people who've left the province; so that 
unemployed construction workers can say to you, Mr. Minister, and Mr. 
Premier, we've had enough, we want our jobs back; so those that are working 
on part-time minimum wage jobs trying to support their families can have 
some hope that there is a future for them in this province.  Mr. Minister, 
full-time jobs are not a new and novel idea.  They're what all young people 
aspire to but they know that clearly under your administration it's not 
going to happen. 
 
So I say to you, Mr. Minister, why don't you walk over to the Premier's 
office tomorrow, tell him it's time to call an election.  If you're so 
confident that you can win the riding you represent, that should make you 



 

 

happy.  And you should also know and you should be reminded that this fall 
is the four years of this term of government.  But I tell you, I believe, 
that you're going to the full five and it's simply because you haven't got 
the courage to go to the electorate because you know that they know you've 
destroyed this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Items 10 and 11 -- Statutory. 
 
Vote 45 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Economic Diversification and Investment Fund 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 66 
 
Items 1 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 66 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments 
Economic Diversification and Trade 
Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 167 

 
Item 1 -- Statutory. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1990 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Economic Development and Tourism 
Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 45 

 
Items 1 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 45 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- I'd like to thank the minister and his officials. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- On behalf of the opposition, I would like to thank the 
officials for having attended the session and having stayed to this very 
late hour.  We appreciate your assistance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Chairman, the officials you see here are officials 
that have come together from four different departments to form a new 
department.  They have done it very quickly, and they have served me very 
well in these estimates.  They are serving the province very well, and they 
will do a fantastic job in Economic Diversification and Trade in the next 
while.  And I want to thank them also for the efforts they've put in so 



 

 

far. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 11:41 p.m. 
 


