





























































Hansard: March 27, 1990


 

 

March 27/90 
EVENING SITTING 

 
SPECIAL ORDER 

 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in reply which was 
moved by Mr. Toth and the amendment thereto moved by Mr. Pringle. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Just before supper 
break I had been talking about the throne speech and something called 
Consensus Saskatchewan, and I had briefly stated, Mr. Deputy Speaker, not 
as briefly perhaps as some people would like, but nevertheless briefly, 
that if I had to sum up Consensus Saskatchewan in one word it was with the 
word "change."  Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, having the supper break to think 
a little bit more about this changing world that we live in and the process 
called change, I thought about while the world is seeing all these changes 
around us, it is apparent to some of us in the province that Saskatchewan 
has been in at least a decade of rapid change, at least a decade. 
 
I would suggest if you even went back the decade before that then and sat 
down and thought about it, you would be able to note in fact the changes 
that have taken place, whether it was on the farm, in the city of Regina, 
or a small village or hamlet out in the country.  I say some of us, Mr. 
Speaker, because I recognize that in fact just the thought of change in 
one's life often creates a great deal of fear. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we in fact have seen some fundamental changes 
over the last 10, 20 years in this province.  We've seen some of those 
fundamental changes in agriculture, and I know at least one or two of the 
members opposite have seen those directly. 
 
We've seen structural changes in our economy from the way we do business, 
our lending institutions, our farm economy, our natural resources.  Tied to 
that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we've seen some fairly substantial changes in our 
communities, be it rural or urban.  Those changes have ranged anywhere from 
the ageing population to trading patterns to the changes in the economy on 
natural resources that are around those communities. 
 
We've seen change in the education system from kindergarten to our 
post-secondary.  We have seen those changes in education that has given our 
general population a higher level of education than it's ever had before.  
We have seen those changes in education present opportunities to our young 
people -- choices in making decisions of what they are going to be doing in 
their future. 
 
We've seen changes in technology.  School computers are almost like a 
textbook was in my day -- each school has several.  Coupled with that, the 
technology on high tech, biotech, and industries tied to that within the 
province of Saskatchewan -- something we would have not thought of 15, 20 



 

 

years ago. 
 
Changes in technology, Mr. Deputy Speaker, have in fact created some 
fundamental changes in our transportation system.  We rely heavily on a 
good transportation system, whether it's a road network or something else 
in this province, simply because of our communities where they are located 
and our smaller population.  That technology and its change has also given 
our people the ability to communicate with various forms of communications. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, these fundamental structural changes have also meant 
changes for the fiscal realities in the province.  If we in fact are to 
manage this change and position ourselves for the future, I believe that 
our people must have a say in the future, and it must be one step more than 
a vote through their MLA within their constituency.  I believe, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that the Saskatchewan public has in fact determined its priorities 
and where they want their say. 
 
Economic development and diversification. I don't think there is any MLA in 
this Assembly that disagrees that that should be a priority -- not one.  
How we get to that end we may have some disagreement on, but nevertheless, 
it's a priority. 
 
Agriculture. They have determined that in fact, being the primary base of 
this Saskatchewan economy, it must be a priority.  If the Saskatchewan 
farmers, the agriculture community, and all the industries that spin off 
from that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are to position themselves in the future, 
then we must continue to seek solutions to the agriculture crisis that we 
have out there. 
 
I also believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that our respective communities are 
searching for opportunities to secure their community.  In several ways, 
they are looking for that security, whether it be on the law and order side 
or perhaps on diversification, more businesses bringing in a larger tax 
base to provide some of the services that are in the larger centres. 
 
At the same time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the public has spoken loudly and 
clearly when they have said they believe that governments must learn to 
live within their means, and of course that means fiscal responsibility.  I 
believe that must always be uppermost on the minds of government at all 
levels, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Consensus 100 is designed for the public to discuss in a very open manner 
their future.  And, Mr. Speaker, it's designed that it take place from the 
grass roots up, not the top down; that if they are going to be long-term, 
meaningful solutions, then we must include people.  You know, the NDP are 
great with the rhetoric about including ordinary citizens, and when 
somebody else outside their own party suggests that perhaps there is a 
mechanism so that in fact ordinary citizens can have a say, for whatever 
reason, it becomes a bad idea.  It is not a bad idea, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  
It in fact is a good idea.  Mr. Speaker, will it work, Consensus 100?  I 
believe, given a chance, it will.  And I think, given the public's desire 
to have a greater say in the affairs of the day, that we should not 
prejudge the process but in fact should bend over backwards to make sure 



 

 

that these reforms and this change does take place in the way government 
does business. 
 
Many things have been said about the matter of change, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  
It's better to manage change than simply to sit there and let it happen and 
have no control over your life.  I think that people in general have been 
left feeling as though change in the past hasn't been handled very well, 
and I think that goes way back 20 years, 10 years, five years.  I also 
think when it comes to change the people are ahead of the politicians.  I 
believe that people are worried, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about change because 
of those past problems.  I also think that taking calculated risks in doing 
something different, different from the way that it's ever been done 
before, enables people to direct their own lives and to manage the changes 
that they encounter.  I also believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that it leaves 
people with a can-do attitude and not one of doom and gloom and that 
nothing can be done to do it better. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that's what the throne speech is all about, is change.  
Now we can either face it head on or we can sit and we can call foul play 
and we can be negative about it, and we can continue to require an 
attitudinal adjustment like some of them require.  The reality is people 
are demanding a say in their future, and this process, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
is designed to facilitate for the people. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will be supporting the throne speech and I look 
forward to further debate on it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I take pleasure 
in taking part in the throne speech, a throne speech that I want to say to 
you, sir, indicates the direction in which this government is going, a 
government that has lost total control of the province and are now asking 
for help.  And I will relate to some of those statements that I made, a 
little later on in my speech. 
 
When you take a look at a throne speech that we had here the other day, 
usually a throne speech gives some direction as to where the government 
plans to go and how they are going to tackle the problems that we have in 
this province.  And in particular of interest to me was the lack of any 
announcement for northern Saskatchewan. There's absolutely nothing in this 
throne speech that indicates the problems that we have in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that those problems are severe and 
they're getting more severe all the time, especially this winter after one 
of the toughest winters that we've had in northern Saskatchewan where we've 
had extremely cold weather and deep snow.  It's been hard on the fishermen 
and the trappers and the individuals that live in northern Saskatchewan.  
And there's absolutely nothing in this throne speech that indicates that 
there is a problem in northern Saskatchewan.  And as a matter of fact, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, there was an announcement made up in my area yesterday that 
indicates completely the opposite to what should be taking place, where 



 

 

we've just had a massive lay-off with parks and recreation up there.  I 
will get to that too a little later, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . Parks and 
Renewable Resources. 
 
First I want to say a few words about the former speaker, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, who spoke here last night and I just think that that shows you 
just what Tories are really made out of in this province.  When you see a 
former speaker that can stand up in this House and forget all about the 
respect that we should be showing to each other, and especially when he was 
talking to my colleague from -- referring to my colleague from Regina 
Lakeview and not even referring to her as an hon. member, I think that 
alone speaks well of what this Tory party is really made of and it just 
shows why this Tory party is sitting at below 20 per cent in the polls and 
are going down. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- It's individuals like that who have been ministers, who 
have sat in your seats there and really don't realize the type of respect 
that we should be using for one another -- and he really showed what the 
Tory party was made of last night. 
 
The former Mr. Speaker, for the member from Redberry, and the Minister of 
Consumer and Commercial Affairs: last night, Mr. Deputy Speaker, he got up 
here and you can -- for the member from Redberry, you can just get Hansard, 
it'll be out here in a few minutes -- just read the statements that the 
former minister of the Environment and the former speaker of this House 
that he made last night. 
 
And I want to talk about the statement that was made by the minister of 
corporate and commercial affairs and he was talking about the appointment 
of Graham Taylor and he said that this was a great appointment and that we 
in Saskatchewan should be very proud of that.  And then he goes on to say, 
who would be better to sell Saskatchewan than the former cabinet minister 
who was totally familiar with every inch of this province.  Well I want to 
say that the former cabinet minister that he's talking about, one Graham 
Taylor, was the minister of privatization who was out to sell everything 
off in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: --  Most certainly he's capable of selling Saskatchewan out, 
I can tell you that. 
 
But I want to get on to the throne speech and I think that when I see the 
Justice minister there and I know that he's testing the winds now . . . 
About eight to 10 years ago he was testing the winds and made that famous 
move over to the Conservative Party.  I suggest the way the polls are going 
now, that he's going to be testing the winds.  And you just watch, he may 
be going back to the Liberal Party, or he may even stay over there and sit 
as a New Democrat. 
 
I think when you're dealing in a province, and you're dealing with a region 



 

 

like northern Saskatchewan where we have unemployment that's running as 
high as 90 per cent, that something should have been mentioned in the 
budget.  Surely there could have been something in there. 
 
(1915) 
 
And then today, or yesterday, the Minister of Parks and Renewable 
Resources, his department called in 16 individuals up in my constituency 
and Buffalo Narrows region, individuals who have worked every year for 
Parks and Renewable Resources, fighting fires and stand-by crews.  And they 
were just about ready to go back to work.  They're called to work every 
spring, and about three weeks from now they were going to be called back to 
work.  And what happens?  They're called in and they're told that the jobs 
that they have been carrying out, protecting our forests, have been 
eliminated. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I say to you, that's the type of government that we 
have and that's what's putting this government down below 20 per cent in 
the polls, and that's why they're going to be booted out in the next 
provincial election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- It's things like that within the minister's . . . that 
minister, he's been up in the North and he's been travelling around, and he 
claims, as the other ministers over there claim, that they're starting to 
listen to the people in Saskatchewan.  They want to listen.  They want to 
go out and listen to the people.  Well I can tell you that those 16 
individuals that got their walking papers yesterday up in the Buffalo 
Narrows region, specifically in Dillon, and Michel village, and St. 
George's Hill, they most certainly didn't indicate to the minister that 
they wanted to be laid off.  But now he's cut that program off.  And that, 
to me, is quite a joke to those individuals. 
 
I want to also indicate that they talk about the consensus, and I'll get to 
that a little later, but I have a paper here, and it's from The Edmonton 
Journal, dated Saturday, February 17, 1990.  And I suspect that this is 
part of the reasons why they're going to appoint this new body of 
individuals because they've run out of ideas with the group that they have 
right now.  And the headlines in The Edmonton Journal of February 17, 1990, 
the headlines are, "Signs of decline scar the province."  And when you take 
a look at the fact that 23,705 individuals left this province last year, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, because they couldn't find jobs in this province, that 
indicates why you see headlines like that, not only in Saskatchewan but in 
other parts of Canada. 
 

 Saskatchewan, next year country where the horizons are wider and the sky 
is bluer and the hard times always seem harder.  Tough economic times have 
settled in again and people are moving out. 

 
And yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people in this province are moving out.  
They have to move out because there is no jobs in Saskatchewan.  There is 
no way to make a living and that's why 23,705 individuals left this 



 

 

province last year and they're already at the same rate right now in this 
province, they're leaving again.  And when you see things like this taking 
place, it's a wonder, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it's a wonder that you see that 
group over there, how they can stand up and continually support this type 
of a government, this government that cannot govern themselves -- they've 
indicated with Consensus Saskatchewan, and I will get to that in a few 
minutes.  But that's really what's taken place. 
 
It's really a human disaster out there, to the Minister of Finance.  It is 
a human disaster when you see that many people migrating out of this 
province, looking for work; it is a human disaster. 
 
I think that we have to have a commitment to regions of northern 
Saskatchewan, and I sincerely hope that in this budget that's coming up 
that the Minister of Finance will look seriously at programs that have been 
taken out and will put a stop to what the Minister of Parks and Renewable 
Resources is doing right now and laying off individuals up in northern 
Saskatchewan rather than hiring.  He should be hiring people, not laying 
them off.  That's not what we need. 
 
I would sincerely hope that the Minister of Finance will put into that 
budget that's coming up tomorrow night -- Thursday night -- I sincerely 
hope that he will reinstate the fresh food subsidy.  It's not a lot of 
money, but I tell you, it means a lot to the citizens in northern 
Saskatchewan.  And I sincerely say to the Minister of Finance that I hope 
that in your budget that you will reinstate that program.  Now it's more 
severe because the federal government had a mail subsidy where a lot of 
that food was shipped up there through the mail and there was a subsidy, 
but that no longer is there any more. 
 
I sincerely hope that you will have in there the construction of and the 
expansion of some airports that we have in northern Saskatchewan that need 
to be expanded, and namely the one in Ile-a-la-Crosse, the one in Stony 
Rapids, and the airport in Fond-du-lac.  These are important airports and 
they need to be reconstructed, paved, and put in good condition. 
 
But the priorities seem to differ.  All of a sudden the minister of 
Highways -- who no longer is the minister of Highways -- we have an airport 
at Uranium City, we have a small airport at Camsell Portage, so they're 
building . . . They have some individuals in there working on a dam.  So 
the Department of Highways decides that two miles from Camsell Portage 
they're going to build another airport.  They built that airport out on the 
side of the lake.  No one lives there, the community is two miles across 
the lake, and there's no lights on that airport that's in the community. 
 
But they build this airport -- and I just wonder if it wouldn't be because 
the Premier and his group of officials had to go in there to officially 
open the power line.  They say, the department, or the Conservative 
government said, well we built that airport there so we could bring in the 
material to build that power line.  Well I say that there was an airport, a 
paved airport, at Uranium City only a few miles away from there; there was 
an airport two miles away at Camsell Portage where they could have brought 
all that material in. They could have put the lights there so that it would 



 

 

benefit the community; and that community could have taken advantage of 
moving that material out to the power lines.  But no, they go 2 miles away 
and build another airport.  That is . . . And I don't know, maybe this is 
what the Premier was talking about when he said this waste has to come to 
an end.  I suspect that maybe the Premier was talking about that because he 
went in there and he landed on that airport and then he went across to the 
other community. 
 
I sincerely hope that your budget will contain money for sewer and water at 
Stony Rapids, and sewer and water at St. George's Hill . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, if I could get the attention of the 
Minister of Finance or if he could just -- if he wants to make a speech, 
then I would suggest that he stands up and makes it because I would like to 
finish the speech that I am making, and I am just indicating to you, sir, 
what you should have in that budget to solve the problems that we have in 
this province. 
 
You're not going to solve the problems by you sitting there and talking 
about how much infrastructure the Conservative government has put in 
Saskatchewan.  We can all see that; we can see that by the out-migration of 
the individuals who can't get a job in this province.  That's a good 
indication. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- I think it's time, I think maybe it's time for the 
Minister of Finance to start listening, and he keeps talking about that 
airport.  Well you know, you got airports sitting right there where you 
don't need them, but where you should be putting the lights and servicing 
the people, you don't do that.  That's the type of waste that you've got to 
stop, and I sincerely hope that you will start doing that. 
 
It's time to start building some roads up in northern Saskatchewan.  We've 
got Highway 55 that goes from Big River to Green Lake, but that highway, 
it's taken them eight years. They've had two small contracts.  Now I go 
into Big River on Saturday and I'm told that that's the end of the 
contracts -- not going to finish the road between the forks and Green Lake, 
which is another 19 miles.  I suspect the reason for that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is they have built the road up to the boundaries of the Athabasca 
constituency; there's no other reason.  Because here we have a piece of 
road of major length that should have been completed and now it's not.  And 
they're just going to leave it. 
 
But you go on the other side of the lake, on the west side of Cowan Lake, 
and there's a major highway that's being built by the taxpayers of this 
province for Weyerhaeuser.  The priorities are for Weyerhaeuser.  Most 
certainly they are not for the individuals who are living up in northern 
Saskatchewan and the citizens in the Big River and in that area.  That's 
not your priorities . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The Minister of 
Social Services is wondering what I think about the road to Fort McMurray.  
Well I'm just waiting for the highway array to come out, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, so I can see just what the Department of Highways is going to 
build on that road, or that highway. 



 

 

 
I have not seen any money that Highways has put into that major artery that 
would link up Alberta, northern Alberta and northern Saskatchewan.  I 
haven't seen 1 cent of money that has went in there by the Department of 
Highways and Transportation.  The only thing that I have seen is some 
welfare programs where your department, sir, has gone out and hired 
individuals to work for 20 weeks and then they're laid off.  And then you 
hire another group of individuals for another 20 weeks and then they're 
laid off, so they can draw UIC (Unemployment Insurance Commission).  That's 
why people are leaving this province, because that's the type of jobs that 
you are creating in this province -- welfare jobs, welfare jobs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, if the Minister of Social Services, if 
he wants to speak, he can get up on his feet.  He keeps hollering about a 
road.  I'm not talking about a road; I'm talking about a major highway.  
Why would we want to be talking about a road between northern Saskatchewan 
and northern Alberta?  We should be talking about a highway, and that 
budget should be under the Department of Highways and Transportation.  
Since when did the Department of Social Services start building highways?  
I suggest that . . . Mr. Speaker, I want to get on.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
the Minister of Social Services, if he wants to take over the new Minister 
of Highways' portfolio, fine, you talk to the Premier, but just let me 
finish my speech. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- I think the member from Athabasca has the floor, and 
if we could have a little less interruption so that he could get through 
his comments, it would be appreciated by both sides. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I want to now 
turn to the new body of individuals that the Premier has announced and 
that's Consensus Saskatchewan -- Consensus Saskatchewan, 100 individuals 
that are going to be appointed or recommended by the member from Rosthern 
and other members from the other side as to who's going to sit on that body 
of individuals. 
 
First of all, it behoves me as to why they would, say, pick 100, and I'm 
sure 100 had to be picked out of the air.  Why wasn't it 66?  Or why wasn't 
it 64 -- one individual from all the constituencies?  Or wasn't it 126 or 
128 -- two from each constituency.  But no, they . . . Somehow the planners 
have said, well we're going to make it 100.  Sounds good, 100 -- it's easy 
to remember.  I think that as far as I'm concerned, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that body will never see the light of day. 
 
But I just want to say to you and through you to the member from Rosthern: 
why should he have any right or why should I have any right, as the member 
from Athabasca, to recommend to the Executive Council or to the Premier 
individuals in my constituency or his constituency as to who should sit or 
who should be one of the chosen few of that 100 individuals that will make 
up Consensus Saskatchewan?  Well I say to the members, the members of the 



 

 

opposition, or the opposite side of the House, and I say, on behalf of 
myself, that I have no right to nominate or recommend one individual, or 
two individuals from Athabasca. 
 
I was elected by the electorate in Athabasca to come down to this 
legislature to represent that.  Each and every one of us were elected; we 
won by majority vote.  And if I was to go and pick one individual, or two 
individuals from Athabasca, would you call that fair?  I say that that is 
absolutely unfair. 
 
And I say that to the member from Weyburn, that there's no way he should go 
to Weyburn, or he should write to the Premier and recommend one name or two 
names from Weyburn.  No, you shouldn't because that's not the way we do 
things in this province. 
 
(1930) 
 
We have channels that we work through; we have a legislature; we have 
members of parliament; we have elected bodies who operate our schools, 
school boards; we have unit boards; we have villages and town councils and 
city councils.  They're elected by their representatives and they are the 
ones who carry out those duties. 
 
But in your wisdom you're saying that you can't govern this province any 
more, that you can't make those decisions, that you are going to have to 
appoint a body of 100 individuals who will go around this province holding 
public meetings.  Now why do we have school boards, and why do we have town 
councils? Why do we have members of the legislature? 
 
I say that this is a bad, bad move and it's something that should never 
take place in this province.  If you want to give 100 individuals the say 
as to how we're going to operate this province, I say give every man and 
woman in this province who is 18 years and over an opportunity to decide as 
to who should come to Regina and run the province.  I think that's what you 
should be doing. 
 
And I think that you should call that provincial election as soon as 
possible because this is just something that somebody has dreamed up.  You 
just have to take a look at the numbers that you've put on it -- 100 
individuals.  Somebody is dreaming.  And it's not going to work and it's 
putting the Tory party farther and farther down on the ground.  So I think 
before you go ahead with a move like this that you should call a provincial 
election and let's clear the air and let's get a government in here . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Let's get a government in Regina who can govern and who's 
willing to govern.  And I tell you that the New Democratic Party on this 
side of the House would gladly go over there and we will govern this 
province properly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

Mr. Thompson: -- Most certainly if we were not . . . When we take over this 
government . . . We left this Conservative government, and the Minister of 
Finance, the Finance minister from Weyburn, we left you with $139 million 
in the bank.  And here we are, here we . . . And he figures, well that's 
bad.  He said that's bad, you know, because you keep harping on that.  Well 
I'll tell you, I'd sooner harp on $139 million to the good and an 
unemployment rate of just a little over 3 per cent than I would today with 
a total debt of $4 billion, and a combined debt of around $13 billion, and 
an unemployment rate reaching 9 per cent in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- What would you sooner have?  I know what the citizens 
would sooner have.  The member from Melfort, he indicates that, oh, the NDP 
thinks that only the government can develop Saskatchewan.  That's not the 
case.  And going from Hansard to the hon. member from Melfort, he says oh, 
you know, we let the private entrepreneur do it.  Well did you let the 
private entrepreneur do that?  I say no, you didn't.  You can take . . . 
You cut fifteen hundred and fifty thousand dollars for a fresh food 
transportation subsidy.  You cut that off.  You just laid off 16 
individuals up in northern Saskatchewan that were ready to go back to work.  
And that's not a lot of money, but you can take for Cargill -- no problem 
there.  You guaranteed $305 million.  You've got the money for Cargill, but 
you haven't got the money for the individuals in this province. 
 
Let's take a look at Millar Western, the pulp mill that you're going to put 
in Meadow Lake.  You got $135 million for Millar Western.  Well if it's 
such a good deal, then why don't they come in here and invest their own 
money?  Why do we sign a $21 million note for Peter Pocklington? 
 
I say you say one thing and you do another.  You indicate that private 
entrepreneurs will develop the resources in this province, but you provide 
the money for it from the taxpayers' pockets.  And that's how you operate 
in this province. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- You're darn right. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Yes, the Finance minister says, you're darn right.  And 
Millar Western, I want to just touch on Millar Western that's coming into 
Meadow Lake.  When Millar Western announced that they were going to build a 
pulp mill and they indicated that they had to dump the effluent into the 
Beaver River for two years, then the Minister of the Environment stepped in 
and he put a stop to that.  And he said no, that you're not going to dump 1 
gallon of water into that Beaver River.  And what happens? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- That's what he said. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- That's right.  And what happens?  Millar Western all of a 
sudden turns around and said, well that's no problem; we can build a mill 
and we don't have to dump it in there.  Why were they going to dump it in 
there in the first place? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Who do we believe? 



 

 

 
Mr. Thompson: -- Yes this is right.  But I'll tell you, when you're talking 
about $135 billion guarantee they can sure change around pretty fast.  And 
that's what's taken place. 
 
But I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that before Millar Western comes into 
Meadow Lake, I think that we should know for sure that it's going to be a 
clean operation.  We should know for sure that the ash that's going to come 
out of that mill in Meadow Lake is not going to come down and destroy any 
of the environment around the Meadow Lake area and northern Saskatchewan 
and the southern part.  We should know that.  And I say to the Minister of 
the Environment that he has to make darn sure that that happens before we 
put up the money to do that. 
 
I think that there should be a surface lease agreement signed so that the 
citizens of northern Saskatchewan can have an opportunity to take part in 
that, not only in the harvesting of the forest, but in the construction and 
the maintenance of that mill once it's put in.  We have to have some 
guarantees.  When we were in government, we saw the problem and we created 
a surface lease.  It's not working too good because you changed the wording 
around when you came in in 1982, but it was there and it gave Northerners 
an opportunity to take part in that development and they could also bid on 
the contracts.  This is what we're asking for: if you're going to build 
that mill, taxpayers are going to put up the money, then we want to make 
sure that it's safe and we want to make sure that it's fair for everybody 
concerned. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I'm not going to take a lot more time, but I think that 
when we talk about the environment, I think that's something that not just 
Saskatchewan but everybody that lives on this planet has to take very 
seriously because we have some serious problems on the planet Earth and if 
we don't all do our share and we don't get in and take action right now, 
well I tell you, down the road this planet will be unliveable.  And as you 
look at some of the studies that are coming out, it indicates that very 
clearly, that the environment is very important. 
 
There's going to be many decisions that we're going to have to make as 
politicians, as legislators.  We're going to have make those decisions and 
they may not be the most popular decisions to make, but I say that we have 
to make them and if we don't make them pretty soon then we're going to have 
some problems that we're not going to be able to straighten out.  And I 
would just urge the government to realize that. 
 
When I speak to young high school students, I always indicate to them that 
this is something that they should be discussing; this is something that 
they should be debating at this stage of the game because the environment 
is very important.  Nothing else will really count if we can't solve the 
problems that we have with the environment because we just won't be able to 
operate on the planet Earth. 
 
And I say to the Minister of the Environment, this is a very important 
part.  Maybe Saskatchewan is small, maybe we're not involved with the 
supertankers . . . to which I think that we have to adhere to.  If you just 



 

 

take a look at what's happening with the supertankers that we have 
operating in our oceans around the world, and more and more of them are 
having accidents and the terrible destruction that's created by an oil 
spill from a supertanker . . . These supertankers are getting older.  
Economics dictate that they have 10 men operating them instead of 20.  And 
the dangers are there and they're very real and we have to act on them.  
These are some things that we have to act on. 
 
In closing I want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I sincerely hope that 
when that budget comes down on Thursday evening that it will contain some 
money that will solve these problems.  I say that the money that you're 
talking about to hire or to appoint 100 individuals is just a waste of 
time.  We are elected members in here.  We are the ones that should be 
making those decisions, not 100 individuals that will be appointed at 
large.  Unless the rumour is true that I hear that actually what it is, is 
a candidate search by the Conservative Party who cannot get a candidate to 
stand for them, and I think maybe that's really what you're talking about 
these 100 individuals.  It's a candidate search, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  With 
that, Mr. Speaker, I thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muller: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, it's a 
great honour to rise before the Assembly and speak in response to Her 
Honour's Speech from the Throne. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne marks the beginning of a new 
decade, and I don't think many people in Saskatchewan are unhappy to say 
goodbye to the 1980s.  They brought some of the toughest economic times 
this province has faced since the 1930s.  But I'm not going to dwell on 
what went wrong for Saskatchewan in the 1980s.  Instead I want to highlight 
the many great achievements Saskatchewan people have made during those 
years.  Faced with adversity, Saskatchewan people dug deep, drawing on our 
heritage and co-operation, preservation, innovation, and hard work to make 
this province diversify and grow. 
 
The people of this province, in partnership with business and agriculture 
and the government, pulled together and found new ways to deal with the 
problems at hand.  And what was the result, Mr. Speaker?  One result was an 
unprecedented growth of our manufacturing sector of over 600 per cent. 
 
Finally, we have broken free of the practice of shipping all our resources 
out of the province for processing, allowing others to get rich from our 
finished products.  We are taking our crude oil and making gasoline and 
diesel fuel.  In my own constituency of Shellbrook-Torch River, we're 
taking our timber and making paper, and in about one month the new sheeter 
will be in operation. 
 
Some of the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, don't think that we should 
making our own paper or making Xerox paper in Saskatchewan, but they've 
always been against processing here.  They lose control as soon as we start 
processing our own products and people become more affluent from that. 
 



 

 

So we no longer have to ship the rolls of paper down to the United States 
and then have the finished product shipped back here.  We can process it 
here and sell it world-wide. 
 
There's hundreds of families living full, satisfying lives in my 
constituency and in Prince Albert because of the jobs created by that mill.  
Members from Prince Albert seem to laugh about that.  They seem to think 
it's funny that the people in Prince Albert are enjoying good jobs but it 
certainly means a lot to me, I know.  And there will be even more jobs once 
the sheeter is operational, jobs that did not exist in Saskatchewan eight 
years ago but instead went to the United States. 
 
We are manufacturing our own cable and recreational vehicles; we are world 
leaders in fibre optics technology; and our plastic health card is sought 
after by countries all around the world.  Soon we'll be using our huge 
resources of natural gas to make fertilizer for Saskatchewan farmers, for 
export to other provinces and countries.  They don't seem to like that 
either, Mr. Speaker, but I assure you it'll fit very well into my operation 
because I use a tremendous amount of fertilizer in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- You use some here, too. 
 
Mr. Muller: -- The member from Prince Albert says I use some here too, but 
it's not very much -- not as much as some of the members from across the 
way use . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I know.  I'm knee-deep in it 
quite often when it comes flowing across the floor. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, in a decade of challenge and hardship, this province 
has managed to grow and attain a level of diversity never before seen in 
Saskatchewan.  That is something for us all to be proud of, and it shows 
that no matter what adversity we face, the people of this province are 
equal to the task of overcoming these challenges and making progress. 
 
(1945) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, our health and education systems have improved and grown 
as well.  We have built a health care system that is the envy of the world.  
We have built over 2,000 special care beds throughout the province.  Some 
of the members across the way . . . Probably some of the members across the 
way remember the moratorium that they had on nursing home beds, but that 
was certainly lifted in 1982 when we came into power, and I know a lot of 
towns in my constituency and other constituencies that are certainly happy 
with the facilities that are in their towns now, that would have never been 
there under an NDP government. 
 
In the Shellbrook-Torch River constituency, there is a new 30-bed special 
care home in Canwood.  The people in Canwood know how it got there. It 
certainly didn't come from the opposition. 
 
This facility has had a profound impact on the entire community, Mr. 
Speaker.  Seniors who need special care no longer have to move away from 
their families and lifelong friends.  The quality of life for these people 
is substantially improved, and they make a rich contribution to their 



 

 

community. 
 
The list of the government accomplishments in health care is a mile long, 
Mr. Speaker, but I will highlight just a few of them here today.  We have 
added new CAT scanners to all six of the province's base hospitals.  
There's a new cancer clinic in Saskatoon, and this government has provided 
$5 million to the Saskatoon and Regina cancer clinics for new equipment. 
 
Since 1982 this government has increased funding for ambulance services by 
221 per cent.  We have done renovating or expansion work at University 
Hospital, Pasqua Hospital, Regina General Hospital, the Wascana 
Rehabilitation Centre, the St. Paul's Hospital in Saskatoon, and at the 
Shellbrook Union District Hospital in my own constituency.  We have created 
Canada's first province-wide chiropody program with 10 clinics and 23 
satellite locations throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
The government has introduced new community-based programs to combat drug 
and alcohol abuse, and created the Whitespruce Youth Treatment Centre, 
which is the first of its kind in Canada.  I could go on and on, but the 
point is that this government has built a health care system second to none 
for the people of the province. 
 
It's the same in education, Mr. Speaker.  From 1982 to 1989, we've raised 
funding for education in Saskatchewan by 80 per cent.  In Shellbrook-Torch 
River, education capital expenditures from 1982 to 1988 totalled over $7 
million.  There's a new school in Paddockwood, one under construction in 
Smeaton, and there have been major renovations and expansions to the W.P. 
Sandin School in Shellbrook and the Wild Rose central elementary school.  
But more than just spending more money, we have introduced new innovative 
programs to increase the effectiveness of our education system and to make 
good education available to more Saskatchewan people than ever before. 
 
I hear members groaning across the way.  I guess they do recognize that 
we've certainly done a lot in education.  I know they've made a lot of 
promises in previous years about colleges in Prince Albert that they never 
built.  And certainly when we got elected in 1982, that's the first thing 
we tackled.  And we expanded it, and now we have a beautiful SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) college in 
Prince Albert that I'm sure even the members from Prince Albert are proud 
of. 
 
And they know themselves that if the former government would have stayed in 
power, they'd have never got it.  It was a Conservative government that 
delivered that college in Prince Albert, and they know very well that we're 
the government that builds and they're the government that buys. 
 
I refer here, of course, to the new core curriculum, which will better 
prepare our children to the high-tech, rapidly changing world in which they 
will live and work, and the SCAN (Saskatchewan Communications Advanced 
Network) program . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Would you explain that core curriculum using your own 
words? 



 

 

 
Mr. Muller: -- The members opposite think they're such intellects that none 
of us over here have any good ideas.  And maybe they do have more education 
than some of us people, but that doesn't say that they have all the good 
ideas in the world.  And we've certainly proven them wrong on that case. 
 
And the SCAN program which will deliver many university level courses 
straight into rural homes; and the additions of the regional colleges 
curriculum which has made more university and job skill courses available 
in communities throughout Saskatchewan than ever before: as part of our 
vision for this province, and in spite of harsh economic realities, this 
government has developed one of the best education systems anywhere. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I look back at all the Saskatchewan people have 
accomplished, I'm filled with enthusiasm and hope for the future of this 
province.  And when I heard the Speech from the Throne, I became more 
optimistic because the speech shows that we will continue to build on the 
partnership between people and government.  That was the key to our success 
in the 1980s.  All of our progress in diversifying our manufacturing sector 
and in improving our health and education systems could not have been 
achieved without government and Saskatchewan communities working together. 
 
With the creation of the Consensus Saskatchewan, we will continue to use 
and expand on that winning formula.  The 1980s were in many ways a very 
difficult and painful time for Saskatchewan, but the successes of those 
years showed us what can be accomplished when government and people work 
together.  It showed us that if we work together, we can build our 
communities, we can expand our industry and create jobs and opportunity.  
And we can develop the best education and health care systems available, 
even in the face of tough economic conditions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we begin a new decade, Saskatchewan is in a position to 
become one of the most prosperous provinces in the country.  I know we'll 
be successful because it will be Saskatchewan people, getting involved and 
working together to make the province's resources work for them, that will 
make this happen.  Through Consensus Saskatchewan, people from all areas of 
the province, from all walks of life, and from every political stripe, will 
work together to design a blueprint for the 1990s and beyond.  In my view, 
Consensus Saskatchewan is one of the most significant accomplishments of 
this government.  It will give Saskatchewan people more control over their 
province and the future than any other Canadians currently enjoy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some people have been saying that this is wrong; that 
government should not rely on people, but instead chart its own course and 
then wait for an election to see if the people approve.  I don't agree with 
that at all.  Saskatchewan people have the right to actively plan their 
province's future.  Mr. Speaker, our strength has always been the ideas, 
beliefs, and values of Saskatchewan people.  Co-operation and partnership 
has been a dominant theme throughout Saskatchewan's history.  It is fitting 
then that this province be the first in Canada and perhaps even the world 
to develop such a close partnership between government and the people it 
serves. 
 



 

 

This small province of Saskatchewan with a population of only 1 million 
people has become a world leader in agriculture and in fibre optics and 
health care.  And we're also setting the standard for co-operation and 
partnership between government and the people.  At a time when citizens all 
over the world are demanding more involvement in government, Saskatchewan 
is leading the way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I cannot see ahead into the future.  I don't know what new 
challenges and problems Saskatchewan will face in the years to come, but 
I'm confident that by working together, the people of Saskatchewan will 
meet these challenges and continue to grow and build this fine province. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I will be voting against the amendment and in favour of 
the main motion.  I thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, as I rise to enter 
this throne speech debate, I recognize again the privilege that is afforded 
to those of us who sit in this Chamber to be able to speak in this Chamber, 
a privilege that's given to us by the constituents who send us here, in 
many ways an awesome privilege, Mr. Speaker.  So it's with gratitude to the 
constituents of Moose Jaw South who provided the opportunity for me to 
speak in this Chamber, and with a sense of the privilege involved in 
speaking in this Chamber, that I rise tonight to enter this throne speech 
debate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the opposition critic for the Department of Consumer and 
Commercial Affairs, I listened with some keen interest to the comments of 
the new Minister for Consumer and Commercial Affairs as he entered the 
debate yesterday afternoon, and as critic I feel it somewhat incumbent upon 
me to respond to some of the things the Minister of Consumer Affairs 
included in his remarks yesterday, which I might add were relatively 
lengthy remarks.  I do not intend to duplicate the length of the minister's 
remarks, but I would like to respond to some of the things that he said. 
 
For any members on the government side of the House who may have not been 
here yesterday to hear the Minister of Consumer Affairs and his remarks to 
the throne speech debate, I would tell you that a good portion of his 
remarks consisted of a travelogue -- a travelogue of his trips on the 
Pacific Rim including his trip to Hong Kong, and his trip to Japan, and his 
trip to Korea.  I expected at some point in his speech we may see some of 
his slides of those trips.  It might have improved the presentation, I 
think. 
 
But in . . . Mr. Speaker, in responding to some of the minister's comments 
about his travelogue and his trips since last we gathered in session here, 
I thought it might be appropriate for me to share with you, sir, and with 
the minister, and with members present, some of the trips that I've taken 
since last we sat here. 
 
I did find the minister's comments yesterday both to be interesting and 
informative in many ways, and I thought that he tonight might like to hear 



 

 

comments about some of the trips that I've taken since last we sat here. 
 
The member from Wascana is anxious to hear about this.  Now I have to warn 
the member from Wascana, my trips since last we sat have not been quite as 
exotic as the minister's trips.  My travels have been somewhat more humble.  
But I think they too were interesting, and I have things to report from 
those trips. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when the minister was in Hong Kong I was in Gull Lake, 
travelled to Gull Lake.  When he was in Japan, when he was in Korea, I was 
travelling to communities like Biggar, Mossbank; and when the minister was 
being wined and dined in Hong Kong, I was enjoying many good conversations 
in coffee shops along the Main Street of my own city of Moose Jaw.  And 
Rosetown was a . . . I had a good trip to Rosetown, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I'd like to report on some of the things being said in Gull Lake and 
Mossbank and Biggar and Rosetown that I hope the minister and members 
opposite will find interesting as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don't claim to have any expertise.  I do not claim to know 
what people in Japan and what people in Korea and what people in Hong Kong 
are saying, but I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that when I was in Gull Lake 
and sat down with a group of 15 or 20 farmers in the RM office, they were 
talking about the cost of inputs and their operation; they were talking 
about the diminishing tax base in their RMs; they were talking about 
foreclosure notices going to neighbours in their community. 
 
When I was in Mossbank, Mr. Speaker . . . I don't know what they talk about 
in Tokyo, but in Mossbank, at the coffee shop in Mossbank, they were 
talking about a neighbour who was there in the coffee shop who that very 
week was going to the Farm Debt Review Board and with the prospect of 
coming out of that board being a tenant farmer for the banks. 
 
I don't know what they talk about in Seoul, Korea, but when I was up in 
Biggar, I was shown that long list of land for sale owned by FCC, the Farm 
Credit Corporation, the federal government; land that's been taken by FCC 
and is now for sale.  They were showing me this long list from the Western 
Producer. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when the minister was talking to investors in Hong 
Kong, in the community of Biggar, I visited a hardware shop the very day 
they were going through their liquidation process, that very day.  And I 
heard about a dealership that's leaving the community of Biggar, and I 
talked to rail workers that day who witnessed the cutbacks in VIA Rail and 
the loss of the caboose and the trains. 
 
And in Mossbank, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I was Mossbank, I went around to 
Moss Foods, the noodle plant, only to find the door bolted -- bankrupt, 
gone into receivership on the front door.  It says, for more information 
contact Coopers & Lybrand. 
 
(2000) 
 



 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Did you? 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- I did not contact Coopers & Lybrand. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don't know what they talk about at Mount Fujiyama, 
but I do know in Mossbank they're talking about the salt that's blowing off 
Old Wives Lake.  And they're talking about a commitment that was made to 
that community by that very same minister in Hong Kong.  A commitment made 
to that community that's not been acted upon, that in fact has been 
betrayed.  And Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I'm talking to my constituents in 
Moose Jaw -- I don't know what they talk about in Hong Kong and Japan and 
Korea -- but when I'm talking to constituents in Moose Jaw, I tell you 
they're talking, not about Consensus Saskatchewan, they're talking about 
jobs and they're talking about taxes and they're talking about a deficit.  
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I speak to people in my constituency . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- You never listen to them. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- And the minister -- I guess he is the hon. assistant 
minister from Assiniboia -- wants to know if I listen.  Well I listen very 
clearly and this is what they're saying, Mr. hon. minister.  I asked my 
constituents how could the government of Saskatchewan save money?  In fact, 
I recently sent out a communication to some of my constituents and asked 
them to respond to that question in writing.  The response that I received 
this morning, Deputy Speaker, to the questions: how do you think the 
government of Saskatchewan can save money?  The first comment:  curtail 
spending sprees around the world.  That's what the people in Moose Jaw are 
saying.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don't pretend to know what people are saying 
in Japan and Hong Kong and Korea, but I know what they're saying in every 
corner of this province.  They're saying in Saskatchewan, it's time for an 
election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, they're saying the consensus in Saskatchewan 
is it's time for change, it's time for a government that will get the 
priorities straight.  Again, it's time for an election.  That's what people 
are saying. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I travel in the province and speak to people, I 
would report to this House that we not only have a crisis in agriculture, 
not only an economic crisis that touches every working person, every 
household, every business person, we have what I would describe, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, as a crisis in confidence, a crisis in confidence because today we 
have in place in Regina a government that has lost the confidence of 
Saskatchewan people, a government that has lost, has been stripped of, its 
credibility, and when a government has been stripped of its credibility, it 
has lost the confidence of the people it is elected to govern.  And, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I say when a government in a democracy has lost the 
confidence of the people, then it is time to defeat that government and put 
into its place a government that can restore the confidence of the people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm not the only one in this province who shares the view that 



 

 

we have a crisis of confidence in Saskatchewan.  When I was in the 
community of Assiniboia about two weeks ago, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I picked 
up a copy of the Assiniboia Today newspaper, and I find this editorial in 
the Assiniboia Today newspaper of March 12, 1990. To illustrate to you, Mr. 
Speaker, that there is a crisis of confidence in this province, that the 
people of Saskatchewan have lost confidence in this group of men and women 
to govern in their best interests, this is the editorial from Assiniboia 
Today on March 12, 1990.  It's entitled, "A province sinking with a ship of 
fools."  That's the title of this editorial, Mr. Speaker, "A province 
sinking with a ship of fools."  I would like to quote from this editorial 
from the Assiniboia Today newspaper.  The editor says: 
 

 The ancients used a metaphor of a ship for the state, the king the 
captain, his subjects the passengers.  It's a good metaphor. Let's use it 
to describe the state of things in Saskatchewan. 

 
 Firstly we're all in the same boat and sinking fast.  Thousands have 

already abandoned ship.  We must ask ourselves (says the editor, we must 
ask ourselves) if we are sinking because, after all, we ride a ship of 
fools, or because we're at the mercy of a helmsman who doesn't know how to 
negotiate troubled waters. 

 
At the mercy of a helmsman who does not know how to negotiate troubled 
waters.  That's the conclusion of the editor of the Assiniboia Today 
newspaper.  He goes on to say: 
 

 You can't blame the captain for stormy seas, but a good captain can see 
the storm clouds brewing and batten down the hatches. 

 
 The drought we are suffering through has been going on since Grant Devine 

was re-elected, but instead of pulling in the sails, the Devine government 
headed full sail into handing out millions of dollars in grants and 
running up a huge deficit.  They will pass that deficit onto the next 
government and then blame them for it. 

 
 Make no mistake about it (the editor goes on to say), the captain doesn't 

go down with his ship in politics.  He may walk the plank, but he and his 
crew fall squarely into a life-raft which bears them to Elysian shores, 
where life-term pensions will await. 

 
Or, I might add, the trade offices in Hong Kong or Minneapolis.  Meanwhile 
the editor concludes: 
 

 The ship lies foundered on the rocks of mismanagement. 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am not the only one in Saskatchewan who believes that 
there is a crisis of conflict, who believes that we're at the mercy of the 
helmsman who can not guide us through the troubled waters. 
 
And so I say again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I say again that in any democracy, 
when a government has lost the confidence of the people, when a government 
has been stripped of its credibility, then it is time to defeat that 
government and put into place a group of men and women who can govern, who 



 

 

can guide, and who can restore confidence in the government and the 
direction of the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, when it comes to the throne speech 
which is now before us and under debate, this credibility gap, this crisis 
of confidence throws into question even the portions of this throne speech 
which might be described as good.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are portions 
of this throne speech, there are comments in this throne speech to which I 
would heartily agree.  But in this circumstance of the crisis of 
confidence, even those proposals with which I might agree are thrown into 
question because there is no credibility, there is no confidence in the 
government and in the Premier that brings this throne speech.  Let me give 
you one example.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the throne speech on page 3 of the 
printed document you will recall this statement, this statement of the 
Premier: 
 

 People have said they want to see better management of our resources.  
(People have said) they want to see waste eliminated.  They want their 
governments to make sensible choices, provide strong leadership and renew 
their commitment to service and efficiency. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I heartily, whole-heartedly agree with the comments of 
the Premier.  What this comment, what this sentence in the throne speech, 
the question that begs to be asked though, when he says people want to see 
better management of our resources, the people of Saskatchewan ask, who has 
been managing our resources for the last eight years?  When the Premier 
says people want their governments to make sensible choices, they also ask, 
who has been making the choices for Saskatchewan these past eight years?  
When they say they want waste eliminated, they ask, who has been governing 
in this province for the last eight years? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, even these comments in the throne speech to which we 
might agree and whole-heartedly agree, they are thrown into question by the 
crisis of confidence that exists in Saskatchewan.  This government no 
longer enjoys any credibility, any confidence, and therefore it is time to 
get a new government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the time that I have tonight I want 
to say a few words about agriculture because the community I represent, 
like so many communities in our province, is deeply affected by the crisis 
in agriculture.  But again I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is there any 
wonder that we have this crisis of confidence, this credibility gap when we 
look at the sorry record in agriculture. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, you will recall that two weeks ago or thereabouts, the 
Premier of this province went on province-wide television.  He went on 
province-wide television to tell us what?  To tell us that we have a crisis 
in agriculture; to tell us what everyone else in the province has known for 
3 and 4 and 5 years.  It would appear that our Minister of Agriculture has 



 

 

been too busy, too busy promoting free trade in Washington or too busy 
travelling the world or too busy trying to privatize Sask Gas . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well the member from Rosthern reminds me 
that we have an Associate Minister of Agriculture too.  We have two of 
them, two ministers, Mr. Speaker, and no policy.  We have lots of ministers 
and no policy and no credibility. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don't need to go through the long list of statistics 
that would describe the state of agriculture in the province; they are well 
known to all members.  Might I say though that for me, the indication of 
the depth of the farm crisis comes in the experience I have of a close 
friend, a lifelong close friend who has farmed all of his life, who has 
always found joy in farming and providing food, who has reached a point in 
his life where he questions whether he wants to continue in farming.  I 
think the depth of the crisis is indicated when we meet farm parents in 
Saskatchewan who are now saying to their children, we don't want you to 
farm.  We want you to get off the farm.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, the depth of 
the crisis, I think, is indicated in the loss of pride in farming and in 
working the land and in providing food. 
 
What used to be, Mr. Deputy Speaker, next year country is quickly becoming 
last year country.  And yet after eight years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, after 
eight years of this administration, we do not have one new, long-term 
mechanism in place that would allow one generation to assume the land from 
another.  After eight long years, not one new, long-term mechanism to 
provide for the intergenerational transfer of land.  In all of the areas 
that this government is charged to administer, you would think in this 
area, in agriculture, we would find some substantive policy after eight 
years of this administration and five years of an administration in Ottawa, 
a Tory administration in Ottawa.  We to this day do not have a long-term 
income stability program for the family farms.  I mean, it is a shame that 
here we are, again a month from seeding, and we're still in the process of 
negotiating some short-term ad hoc program. 
 
As desperately as that is needed, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as desperately as 
that program is needed in Saskatchewan today, what we need sincerely to 
address the problems are long-term, stable programs.  After eight years of 
the Tory administration here, five years in Ottawa, we still do not have 
those programs.  And when I visit in Gull Lake and Mossbank and Biggar and 
Rosthern, Bethune, it becomes a question of credibility.  Mr. Speaker, we 
get a Speech from the Throne which gives me no cause to suspect that we're 
going to have any long-term mechanisms or programs or solutions as a result 
of this session of the legislature. 
 
I'm reminded, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of Hans Christian Andersen's old tale, 
the emperor's clothes; members will remember that tale, when the word got 
out about the emperor's clothes and the child said the emperor has no 
clothes.  The word is getting out in Saskatchewan that the emperor, when it 
comes to long-term agricultural policy, that the emperor has no clothes, 
that there is no substantive policy. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, if we are going to deal with the crisis in Saskatchewan 
agriculture, we are going to need a group of men and women who have a 



 

 

vision and a commitment to that vision; a vision that says that this 
God-given land was meant for the many and not just the few; a vision and a 
commitment to that vision that says that this land of ours, this province 
of ours was meant for the family farm and not the corporate farm. 
 
We're going to have to have a group of men and women with the vision and 
the commitment to that vision that can provide a long-term mechanism for 
intergenerational transfer, and a long-term mechanism to provide income 
stability, and a long-term commitment to the health of this land for 
generations yet unborn.  The word in Saskatchewan is that the emperor, the 
current emperor, has no clothes.  He's exposed for the lack of long-term, 
significant agricultural policy.  We've had too much of agricultural 
politics and too little of substantive agricultural policy.  And, Mr. 
Speaker, this throne speech does nothing, in my view, to change that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(2015) 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to also in this debate say a few 
words about the Saskatchewan home, the Saskatchewan household, the 
Saskatchewan family.  And again, is there any wonder that this government 
has so lost its credibility?  This is the government that likes to surround 
itself with the mantle, the cloak, as the defender of the family and the 
defender of the home and the Saskatchewan household. 
 
Remember, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this was the Premier that came to office 
saying, we'll bring the young people home.  Do you remember him saying 
that?  We'll bring the young people home.  Today in debate this afternoon 
we listened to the member of Moose Jaw North describe the tragic figures of 
the 23,000-plus -- more who have left this province last year than who came 
to this province -- 23,000 net out-migration and more than 50 per cent of 
that number between the ages of 15 and 34.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, that's a 
shame and it's a disgrace.   But what it is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when it 
comes beyond the numbers on a piece of paper, when it comes to real life, 
what it is are families being torn apart, parents watching their children, 
grandparents watching their grandchildren being forced to leave this 
province; families being torn apart because the children and the 
grandchildren cannot find a future in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, you recall that when this group of men and women came 
to power they promised a good life for Saskatchewan people.  Well the 
tragic reality is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that Saskatchewan now, in all of 
Canada, outside of Newfoundland, has the highest rate of family poverty in 
this nation.  It is the sad truth that only blocks from the marble steps of 
this legislature, only blocks from the marble steps of this legislature, it 
is the sad truth that children in this city go to school hungry.  And 
that's a disgrace. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is well known in this House and across the province 
that the growth industry in Saskatchewan in this decade has been the food 
banks.  This from the government who purports to be the defender of the 
family, the defender of the household. 



 

 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in my view the family, the household, the home, whether 
we live as singles or as single parents or as married couples, married 
couples with children, seniors living together, or seniors living alone, in 
my view the home, the household, is still the fundamental building block of 
our society.  Mr. Speaker, it is home from where we all come, and at the 
end of the day it is home to where we go. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government that purports to be the defender of the 
household, the defender of the home, this is the government that has cut 
the food subsidies in northern Saskatchewan.  They didn't cut the subsidy 
to booze going to northern Saskatchewan.  So the sad reality is, it is a 
subsidy on every bottle of whisky going to northern Saskatchewan, but the 
subsidy on the quart of milk is gone. 
 
This is the government in defence of the home and the household of 
Saskatchewan cut the prescription drug plan, decimated our prescription 
drug plan which is particularly of concern to senior households.  This is a 
government that destroyed the school-based dental plan, took it away from 
the children of Saskatchewan.  This is the government that has put quotas 
on our universities, cut back our technical schools.  This is the 
government that will not, refuses to deal with the question of store hours, 
and this is the government that will not take on what I describe as the 
real scourge of family life in this province, the scourge of part-time 
work. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, if this government really wanted to defend the family, 
if they really wanted to help the Saskatchewan household, they'd be about 
the business of creating jobs for Saskatchewan young people; they'd be 
about the business of providing the services that Saskatchewan families and 
households need.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, if this government was sincere and 
wanting to assist the Saskatchewan households, the Premier of this province 
would tomorrow fire four or five of those cabinet ministers, take the money 
and put it into a school lunch program . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, if this government were sincere in wanting to 
help the households and the homes and the families of Saskatchewan, then I 
say it would get its hand out of the hip-pocket, the wallets, the purses, 
and the bank accounts of Saskatchewan people.  I believe to be absolutely 
accurate in saying this, that no government in the history of Saskatchewan 
has had its hand so deep into the pocket-books of Saskatchewan people, 
Saskatchewan families, Saskatchewan households. 
 
Now they came to power saying, well we're going to eliminate the sales tax; 
we're going to eliminate the gas tax; we're going to cut the income tax.  
I'll tell you what they eliminated.  They eliminated the property 
improvement grant that came to every household in the province; they raised 
the sales tax; they raised the income tax.  They gave us the flat tax -- 
one-half a per cent, then one, then one and a half, then 2 per cent. 
 
They gave us a whole new array of taxes we'd never heard of before, used 



 

 

car taxes, bingo taxes, lottery taxes.  They forced up our property taxes 
at home with cut-backs to the municipalities.  And now we have a gas tax 
with a vengeance.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, if they really wanted to help the 
households of Saskatchewan, they would get their hands out of the 
pocket-books of those households. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it's time in this province, it's time that there was a 
change.  And all across Saskatchewan, Saskatchewan families are saying, can 
we stand another four years of Tory administration.  The answer is no.  
They're saying, can we stand another four years of that Premier and his 
administration.  The answer is no.  And so I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it's 
time to defeat that government and to put a government in place that again 
puts people first and the Saskatchewan family ahead of the corporate 
families of America. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Before I conclude, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do want to say a 
few words about a group of 6,000 Saskatchewan people, 6,000 people who did 
not merit mention in the throne speech, a group of people who are mainly 
seniors and for the most part are, or have been, working people, farming 
people, small-business people, a group of 6,000 or thereabouts in our 
province who didn't merit mention in the throne speech, who some years ago 
invested their money in Principal Trust, trusting that their money was 
secure because they put their trust in this government to regulate the 
investment contract companies in this province.  I want to mention them 
specifically in my throne speech remarks because they were not mentioned in 
the throne speech, but even worse, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they were not 
mentioned yesterday in his remarks by the minister who is responsible for 
their welfare.  Not once in an hour and a half or an hour and 
three-quarters of speaking time did the minister responsible for Consumer 
Affairs mention the investors in Principal Trust, the one significant, 
major issue that he must deal with as minister. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, since last we sat in this Assembly, the people of 
Saskatchewan, the province of Saskatchewan, the Government of Saskatchewan 
was delivered from its Ombudsman a scathing attack that outlined and 
described the negligence of this government in caring for the interests of 
those investors. 
 
Since last we sat in this Assembly, the Government of Alberta has acted to 
assist its people in this regard; the Government of British Columbia has 
acted to assist its people in this regard; the Government of Nova Scotia 
has made the commitment to assist its people in this regard.  The 
Government of Saskatchewan has stonewalled the investors, has turned them 
away from their offices, and has said nothing. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to use this opportunity in this throne speech 
debate to serve notice on the government and on the minister that the 
interests of these 6,000 Saskatchewan investors who have seen substantial 
portions of their life savings lost, their interests will be raised in this 
session of the legislature.  The minister may not want to talk about it, 
but he will talk about it before this session is complete. 



 

 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to provide ample time for others to 
enter into this debate and so let me conclude with what I believe is my 
central point.  My central point is that we have a crisis of confidence in 
the province of Saskatchewan, that we have a government that has been 
stripped of its credibility, a government that has no longer the confidence 
of the people, a government that no longer seems to have a vision or a 
clear direction; in short, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe, a government that 
has lost the capacity to govern. 
 
And in an democracy -- I repeat -- in any democracy or in any nation, in 
any nation when a government has lost the confidence of its people, when a 
government is stripped of its credibility, when a government has no vision, 
then it is time to defeat that government and give another group of men and 
women the opportunity to govern. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don't say this with a great deal of 
joy because there is an Old Testament proverb that says -- and I believe it 
to be true -- a proverb that says, without vision the people perish.  We 
need, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in this province again a government with a 
vision, a government that can restore the confidence in government and to 
restore the confidence of our people.  It will not be easy, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, for any group of men and women to take over from this government.  
The inheritance is not going to be a happy one, the problems will be 
immense, and there are no magic wands to fix the solution.  But I do not 
lose heart; members of the New Democratic party do not lose heart; members 
of this caucus do not lose heart.  And our hope and our confidence in the 
future I believe is based on a quote or is reflected in a quote from one 
Nellie McClung who said in 1916, Mr. Deputy Speaker, she said this: 
 

 Democracy has its faults.  The people may run the country to the dogs, but 
the people will run it back again. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I firmly believe that the people will speak and the 
people will make it right again.  Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the 
amendment moved by my colleague from Saskatoon Eastview.  If that amendment 
should fail, then I will vote against the main motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Normally one stands in 
ones place and says it is a great pleasure to have the opportunity to take 
part in whatever particular debate is under way at the moment.  This is the 
second time in my short-lived eight year career in the House that I've 
stood in my place, and I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I had not intended to 
take part in this debate, but the former Clerk of the Legislative Assembly 
told me that that is one of the best known phrases he heard in his twenty 
years in this Assembly.  And I believe that to be true. 
 



 

 

I am rising in my place on very short notice this evening just prior to the 
last speaker taking his place, but naturally I am happy to have the 
opportunity to stand in my place and speak about my riding, the throne 
speech, and not taking any issue whatsoever with the previous speaker, but 
some idea of a vision of what Saskatchewan is all about and where I think 
this government wants to go in the future. 
 
(2030) 
 
I am happy to follow the previous speaker because I had the pleasure of 
having the member from Moose Jaw South as my critic since 1986 in the 
Assembly, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I refuse to take any issue with his comments 
or try and pick holes in his arguments.  I think he made, actually, a 
fairly succinct argument on behalf of his side of the House for their 
position.  He clearly identified, I think, for all of us here this evening, 
the basic differences between us -- the philosophical differences and the 
differences we have in particular political tenets as they apply to our 
current situation in Saskatchewan. 
 
I also want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that at the time when he was my 
critic, I thought he was a gentleman.  I thought his questions were always 
fair.  There was never anything below the belt and he played by the Marquis 
of Queensbury's rules.  And I enjoyed the association we had and I look 
forward to you asking me other questions in the future, and I'm sure you 
will.  I just hope you keep them on the same level they have been in 
previous years. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, having said that I hadn't intended to get into 
the debate, I did succumb to the exuberant exhortations of my colleagues to 
rise tonight and join in the throne speech.  In other words, I succumbed to 
the threat that if I did not rise tonight and join in the throne speech, I 
might be moved one or two notches the other direction.  So I took that 
advisement, for what it was worth, and decided I wanted to join in. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, before I go into any remarks germane to the throne 
speech, I would like to offer my congratulations to the mover and seconder 
of the throne speech who did an admirable job.  I would also offer my 
congratulations to Her Honour, the Lieutenant Governor, who went through a 
fairly long speech and did it in admirable fashion.  I feel this speech 
itself contains no small degree of substance in terms of where this 
province is at and where the province wants to be in the 1990s. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we all know that the government is currently 
experiencing difficulties.  The opposition have done a good job of pointing 
this out, I think, in this Assembly, that there have been some difficulties 
with the government, perhaps not so much with substance of government as 
with style of government.  And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if that is the case, 
then this can be corrected. 
 
Let's speak a moment about substance, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  You know, we're 
going through some very difficult economic times.  We all recognize this -- 
the opposition, the government, and the people of Saskatchewan.  I don't 
believe that the people of Saskatchewan are blaming the government for 



 

 

difficult economic times so much as we are criticized, occasionally, for 
the way we handle those particular set of circumstances. 
 
It's not easy to govern at a time when agricultural prices are at an all 
time low, when our resource prices are at an all time low, when we've gone 
through a period of prolonged drought.  It's not easy times in which to 
govern, but probably there are no easy times, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in which 
to govern. 
 
And I'm sure the members opposite would reflect, and some of them served as 
ministers and others as private members in a previous government, and I'm 
sure they would attest to the fact that it's never easy to be in 
government.  It's a solemn trust that's reposed in us by the people of 
Saskatchewan.  When they give us that trust, they do so feeling that they 
have placed a trust in people who will do their utmost, who will do their 
best, to live up not just to their expectations, their exhortations, but, 
yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to their dreams.  And that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
extremely difficult. 
 
And I know there are members over on the other side of the House who 
governed in times that economically were perhaps more favourable.  But none 
the less, they governed through times that were not without their own 
difficulties.  And I think some of those members would be the first to 
acknowledge that. 
 
But it is difficult, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to fulfil the dreams of a 
population.  Therein, I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, lies much of the 
difficulty, not just of this provincial government, but provincial 
governments and indeed the federal government in this country. 
 
I think in the throne speech, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you saw some attempts to 
cope with current difficulties, to offer some solutions to problems that 
we're facing communally around this province.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 
believe that there is nothing wrong with this province that could not be 
fixed with a six-inch rain this spring and two to $3 a bushel increase in 
the world grain price. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, I come from a rural riding, the 
riding of Turtleford, as you well know and other members know.  It's an 
agrarian society in that constituency.  We sit on the forest fringe.  We 
have some forest activity, but primarily, primarily it's an agrarian 
society.  As goes agriculture, so go our small communities. 
 
The largest community in my constituency is the town of Spiritwood.  It's a 
town I lived in formerly; it's a town I still return to on weekends, a town 
I still maintain a residence in that I rent out there.  I had the great 
honour of being mayor of the town of Spiritwood for two terms, so I think I 
have some empathy for the way the people of Spiritwood feel. 
 
I know they're nervous, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and rightly so.  They're 
nervous because they're very worried about the agricultural situation in 



 

 

our province and our country.  They're worried about continual subsidies to 
agriculture in other parts of this world.  They're worried about drought 
across the grain belt in the South; they're worried about drought across 
the commercial forests in the North; and yes, they're very concerned about 
interest rates over which we have no control. 
 
We do not have the luxury, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of setting interest rates in 
this province.  It's a national policy.  Unfortunately, and as one who is 
sometimes, usually I may say, loath to criticize other levels of 
government, I must say that I'm disappointed that we have an interest rate 
policy that's being set for the benefit of one or two provinces at the 
expense of all the others.  I don't like to criticize, because I don't feel 
that we accomplish anything in this House and in this province by being 
negative.  There's no point in throwing darts and arrows at each other or 
blaming other levels of government for whatever difficulties we may find 
ourselves in currently. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, interest rates are an ongoing concern, not just to 
the agricultural community of Saskatchewan but to home owners and business 
people and indeed students in this society.  And I speak with some 
knowledge of that because I have two children currently attending 
university, one in Regina and one in Laval in Quebec, where she's working 
on French for the last year and a half.  She'll be back this spring and 
will finish her degree in Regina.  And I know that their friends and others 
are experiencing difficulty completing education because they have to 
borrow money to do so, and the interest rates are giving them all kinds of 
difficulties. 
 
Now I don't like to dwell on these negatives, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I 
would like to set some type of tone and framework for the rest of my 
remarks.  I want to put it in context.  I don't want to be critical of the 
federal government; I'm certainly not critical of Her Majesty's Loyal 
Opposition.  Their job is to criticize and they do it daily and they do it 
fairly effectively.  I acknowledge this.  That's their role in life.  But I 
do want to set the stage, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the current difficulties 
which this government experiences, we did not create.  We certainly didn't 
go looking for them. 
 
When I came in here in 1982, I came in here with a spirit of optimism.  I 
wanted to make changes; I wanted to make the province a better place for 
the residents; I wanted to make it a better place for the students.  I came 
from a high school system; I was a school principal in Spiritwood.  I 
wanted this province to flourish.  And I rode in here on a wave of 
optimism, as did all of my colleagues, thinking that we were at the 
beginning of some kind of a nirvana that we could achieve through our hard 
work and our efforts. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, world events and weather overtook us.  We didn't 
plan on a collapse in grain price and subsidy wars.  We didn't plan on 
having a drought.  We didn't plan on high interest rates.  We didn't plan 
on the grasshoppers that afflicted the southern half of the province.  No, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we didn't contemplate those things when we came in 
here.  But we learned the hard way and we learned that we were elected to 



 

 

cope, and we've attempted to do that. 
 
In coping, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have not always been popular, and I 
freely admit this, as do my colleagues.  We've had difficult decisions to 
take.  We've had some difficult measures to implement in this province, not 
the least of which was our Premier appearing on television across this 
province a few weeks ago to say that some popular programs we had 
instituted had to be cancelled. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the interests of fiscal responsibility, those 
measures had to be taken.  We didn't want to do it, but we believe we had 
no choice.  And sometimes, sometimes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to govern on 
behalf of all the residents of the province, one has to take unpopular 
decisions in the short term.  Hopefully, the wisdom of those decisions will 
be recognized in the fullness of time. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I'd like to spend a moment saying a few words about my 
riding.  In company with most of the ministers on this side of the House, 
and indeed I know from speaking with colleagues on the other side of the 
House who had been ministers in the previous administration, I don't have 
the luxury of spending as much time in my riding as I would like.  I've 
been averaging three speaking engagements a weekend since New Year, and 
that has precluded the opportunities I have to go back to the town of 
Spiritwood and to travel across the constituency of Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it doesn't mean I've forgotten about the people there.  
And if any of them are watching tonight or listening or read this 
transcript, they will know this.  Every call is returned that comes to my 
office, be it in Regina or my constituency office in Spiritwood.  Everyone 
who requests help, receives help.  I can't always solve all of the 
problems, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I should be condemned if I do not try.  
And I can honestly stand here and say, I gave it my best shot to try.  It's 
a good riding, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  It's an agrarian riding, as I mentioned 
earlier.  It's about 150 miles wide and about 90 miles long, which makes it 
a really sprawling rural riding. It has some very pretty countryside, and 
it certainly has some very fine people, some of the friendliest people 
you'd find anywhere in Saskatchewan.  And I would encourage all members of 
the Legislative Assembly, if they ever have the opportunity, to visit the 
towns in the constituency of Turtleford and the resorts, experience some of 
the fine hunting, some of the fine fishing, and just some of the fine 
hospitality that exists there.  And I know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you'd be 
aware of this because your riding is right next door to mine. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I'd like to turn to a couple of other issues for a 
moment if I may.  I'd like to deal with some of the things that have been 
happening in my own department.  In October of this last year, subsequent 
to the cabinet shuffle, the department I now have the honour to lead is 
called Culture, Multiculturalism and Recreation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- I'll only spend a moment or two on each of those 
areas, but let's start with the sports side, recreation.  If ever there was 



 

 

an example of trying to realize the ultimate in human potential, it has 
come, I believe, with this department. 
 
(2045) 
 
Now don't get me wrong, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I'm not trying to take the 
credit for all of this, by no means.  There have been some fine people who 
preceded me in this department, and it's gone through some various name 
changes and organizational changes and structural changes over the years.  
There've been some very fine ministers who led this department, and I 
acknowledge this, not only from this side of the House, and one of them is 
sitting over there this evening -- one I know of, the member from Regina 
Centre -- and we've been at a few functions together, and there have been 
others. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a good department.  I've learned by contact 
with this department that there are some consummate professionals who work 
in it, who have the best interests of the Saskatchewan people at heart.  
And they've developed some fine programs over the years.  I'd like to touch 
on a couple of the things we've been doing. 
 
We work in conjunction very closely as a department with what are called 
the umbrella groups in Saskatchewan of which there are three: Sask Sport, 
Saskatchewan Council of Cultural Organizations, and Saskatchewan Parks and 
Recreation Association, three very fine groups who receive funding through 
the lottery system, who receive other financial assistance and technical 
help from officials within my department. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, those organizations do their good work through the 
auspices of the volunteers who serve them.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
Saskatchewan has the highest rate of volunteerism in Canada per capita.  
Fully 30 per cent of our population volunteer their time, their skills, 
their efforts, and their knowledge, their acumen to helping others in this 
province.  That is something, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of which we can all be 
proud. 
 
Volunteerism has been the backbone of our communities -- the Lions clubs, 
the Kinsmen's clubs, the Optimists, the Elks -- all of those kinds of 
service communities, the church communities.  Those kinds of groups, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, have made this a great province in which to live.  They 
have constructed facilities, they have done amazing things for our youth, 
wonderful things for our senior citizens.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, they have 
contributed in no small measure to the quality of life which we all enjoy 
in this province. 
 
I'd like to speak a wee bit about sport and recreation, and last night I 
had the great privilege of attending a volleyball tournament here in Regina 
at the University of Regina.  Regina is the home, it is the headquarters of 
the Canadian women's national volleyball team, and last night was a 
culmination, the final game of a tournament which involved Team Cuba, Team 
U.S.A., Team China, and Team Canada.  Unfortunately Team Canada lost in the 
final, but they put up a magnificent show.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, I and all 
others -- and that gymnasium was packed -- all others, enjoyed the 



 

 

performance those young women put on.  They made us all proud to be 
Canadians.  And I really don't care what the cost is to put Team Canada 
into Regina, into Saskatchewan, because they, by their pursuit of 
excellence, make us all feel good about being from Saskatchewan and being 
from Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Those young women brought glory, not just to 
themselves, they brought glory to this country. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on that note, this past summer Saskatoon, 
Saskatchewan, hosted Jeux Canada Games, 1988 Canada Games, Saskatoon, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker; the best games ever in the history of those games since 
they were instituted in 1967 in Quebec City; the best games ever, and the 
best performance ever by a Saskatchewan team.  In 1988, Team Saskatchewan 
finished fourth overall.  In the previous games, some three years, some 
scant three years earlier, we finished eighth.  In that period of time, Mr. 
Speaker, we went from eighth to fourth. 
 
And you know, people talk about the legacy of the games and they talk about 
the construction of facilities and they talk about the community will be 
enhanced because the provincial and the federal governments spent a lot of 
money on those communities.  Mr. Speaker, to my mind that isn't the true 
legacy of the games -- certainly it helps.  It's great for the city of 
Saskatoon and the surrounding community and the sport governing bodies of 
the 19 sports who are involved in those games who ended up with good 
equipment and good facilities. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, that was not the legacy.  The legacy of the games was the 
spirit of the games that was engendered by the competitors who took part, 
by those young people who were there doing their very best on behalf of 
their respective provinces.  For two weeks, Mr. Speaker, that city came to 
life.  And I would submit to you, it came to life in a way that had never 
happened before in Saskatoon.  In conjunction with the cultural festival, 
the sporting festival that went on, that city just brimmed with vim and 
vinegar for two solid weeks. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Mr. Speaker, when those young people and the coaches 
and the officials and all the others who descended upon Saskatoon, and all 
the tourists who came just to enjoy the benefits of being in that lovely 
city, when they had gone home to their respective provinces, they took the 
spirit of the games with them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we talk about unity in this country -- and I for one 
stood in this House in that seat there behind me and talked about Meech 
Lake, and I spoke in French on the subject of Meech Lake, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 
Speaker, when we talk about unity in this country, those athletes, those 
competitors, those coaches, those officials, those tourists, those 
spectators did more for national unity in this country with the spirit of 
the games they took home than all of the politicians in the country with 



 

 

all of the speeches they could possibly make. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- I know, Mr. Speaker, that we tend to live vicariously 
through the achievements of others.  We get pride when Team Canada wins a 
major hockey tournament.  We have great pride when Team Saskatchewan does 
well at the Canada Games, and I think this is justifiably so.  I believe 
that to be the case.  But we also get great pride in watching the 
achievements of young people from right across this great country of ours.  
And I believe that does more for the unity of this country than anything 
else possibly could. 
 
On a smaller scale, I'd like to speak about the winter games in 
Saskatchewan.  They were held in Melville this last month -- an outstanding 
success, Mr. Speaker.  The smallest community to host the games, and you 
know, Mr. Speaker, they turned a profit.  I won't name the figure tonight, 
but they turned a fairly handsome profit at those games. 
 
And I know people said that hey, this is a small community.  How can they 
possibly host a game of this magnitude with some 2,000 people descending on 
a city of 5,000?  They said it's going to be terribly difficult.  Yes, it 
was difficult.  But my goodness, Mr. Speaker, they delivered.  Over 2,000 
volunteers from a population of 5,000 made those games work. 
 
I submit to you, sir, and to others, the size of the community made the 
games the success they were because everybody in the community was 
involved.  They showed us what we can do with tourism and what we can do 
with hospitality in this province.  They put on a magnificent show.  
Everybody felt welcome and you left feeling good about the city of 
Melville. 
 
In the same vein, I'd just like to mention the cultural and recreational 
facility grant which was announced last year, and it appeared as a comment 
in the throne speech and then in the budget as a line item.  It's a grant 
of some $32 million over six years, Mr. Speaker.  When applications closed 
we had 494 applications.  The uptake has been phenomenal.  Mr. Speaker, if 
ever we see communities saying, hey, this is a way we can stabilize, this 
is a way we can make sure that we can be viable, this program has proved 
it. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, coming from a rural community yourself, sir, that 
those small communities see their arena and their curling rink and their 
museum as being the hub in their society.  In winter, people congregate in 
the curling rink, they congregate in the arena, and they've found uses for 
them year round now, which is great.  It's to their credit, whether it be 
roller-skating or other activities, they're using them year round. 
 
They know that if those facilities are allowed to dilapidate, if they're 
allowed to crumble, if they're allowed to close, their residents are going 
to go to other communities close by.  They're going to take their kids for 
figure skating and for hockey down the highway a few miles, and maybe when 
they do this they're going to do their shopping there, and then they're 



 

 

going to use the library there, and they're going to use the amenities and 
the facilities in those other communities, and quickly they see their 
community diminishing. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, part of the intent of this program -- and for a 
Conservative government I freely admit it, is a social program -- we want 
to see those communities stabilized and we want to ensure their viability.  
There are high expectations in our small towns.  We've tried to meet them. 
 
In this program we haven't neglected our cities, and the cities also 
receive what I would submit to you, sir, is a fairly generous allowance to 
continue with their recreational, leisure, and cultural activities.  And on 
that note I may say we have some excellent activities occurring in our 
major cities, and I say the four major cities as well as the smaller 
cities. 
 
You know, I came to this province, as you would know, sir, and others, in 
1966.  I'm an immigrant.  I came from Scotland.  Initially I came here for 
two years, just to look around, something different to do.  I didn't apply 
for one teaching job in Scotland and that was my first degree, physical 
education -- I was a phys-ed teacher.   Didn't apply for a job in Scotland.  
I applied for jobs all over the world because I wanted to get out and just 
look around for a couple of years with the intent, after two years of 
wandering, travelling, and whatever it was in my system getting it out, 
going back and settling down and living in Scotland.  Well, I came to 
Saskatchewan.  I chose Saskatchewan.  I had other options, and this is the 
one I liked best . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And somebody said 
Preeceville, and you're absolutely right, sir.  The member from Saskatoon 
Westmount is correct.  I started my teaching career in Preeceville, a 
wonderful, friendly little community in the constituency of Canora. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I came here for that first two years -- and obviously I 
loved it and stayed, my children are all born here -- you know I was told 
that Saskatchewan was a cultural wilderness.  Yes, sir, I've been told 
that.  They said, there is no cultural life in Saskatchewan; it's way out 
west. 
 
I met a customs officer in Halifax where I cleared customs.  He said, where 
are you going?  I said, I'm going to Saskatchewan.  He said, why?  I said, 
because I got a job there and it looks good and I want to go there and give 
it a try.  He said, you won't like it.  There's no culture in Saskatchewan.  
You won't like it.  Why don't you stay here in Nova Scotia, lots of 
Scottish people.  I said, I lived with Scottish people all my life; I want 
to try something else. 
 
So I got to Toronto and I had to stay overnight in Toronto.  And I got a 
taxi the next morning and the taxi-driver was taking me back to the airport 
and he said, where are you going?  I said, Saskatchewan.  He said, why?  I 
said, because I've got a job there that I like to do it.  I want to go.  
That's where I want to be.  He says, there's nothing there, just farmers.  
I said, just farmers?  I said, I thought agriculture was the mainstay of 
the economy out there.  He said, it is, but you won't like it; there's no 
culture. 



 

 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I have been more than pleasantly surprised in my years 
in Saskatchewan.  Certainly there's problems with cultural activity in a 
province that finds itself kind of separated from the major cultural 
centres east and west of us: Vancouver, Toronto, Montreal, less or no, 
perhaps Quebec City.  Certainly there's some problems.  Certainly we have 
problems attracting professional artists to come to Saskatchewan and live 
here and work here.  Sure, there's been funding problems over the years.  
That's not new.  That's right across the country.  But we've tried hard.  I 
know that the cultural community would say, if they were us, they have more 
money today than they've ever had before, because it's important to us.  
Mr. Speaker, we're talking about quality of life here. 
 
(2100) 
 
We could talk about economics as well, and perhaps I should.  Perhaps I 
should mention economics.  You know, Mr. Speaker, two, three, four years 
ago there was an oil find off Newfoundland in the ocean.  Newfoundland 
government of the day said, hey, this is going to be great for us, there's 
going to be a boom.  St. John's, Newfoundland is going to grow, and there's 
going to be all these people moving in here.  They're going to live here.  
It's going to be great for Newfoundland. 
 
Well some good things happened and subsequently they've had some bad things 
with the fisheries problems with which we all sympathize.  But you know, 
that boom they anticipated from the oil find off the coast of Newfoundland 
never happened.  And do you know why, Mr. Speaker?  Because the oil 
companies who came in there and they looked at St. John's, said, well just 
a minute, we're not sure they have the quality of life we want.  Do they 
have a symphony?  Do they have a ballet?  Do they have professional 
theatre?  Those questions were asked.  Unfortunately, and I don't say with 
justification by any means, but unfortunately those companies who came in 
and looked at Newfoundland and looked at St. John's said, well you know, 
there's a little better quality of life with all of those professional 
cultural outlets we want in Halifax, Nova Scotia, and do you know what they 
did, Mr. Speaker?  They located in Halifax and they commuted backwards and 
forwards, and it was all based on cultural activity. 
 
So we should never ever downplay: one, the quality of life that accrues to 
a community that pursues cultural activity; or two, the economic benefits 
and spin-offs that happen. 
 
You know, in Saskatchewan we're cognizant of this.  My goodness, Mr. 
Speaker, I wish we had more money to pursue all of the opportunities that 
exist.  We recognize we live in tough economic times.  I've been through 
that already.  I've outlined the problems with agriculture and the problems 
with our resource industries.  We don't have the luxury of the money to 
invest -- and I don't say spend, I say invest -- that we would like to 
invest in our cultural community.  But within the constraints we find 
ourselves in currently, we've tried very hard. 
 
In fact we've started work in the last two years on building an indigenous 
film industry in this province.  It hadn't been done before, and that is 



 

 

not a criticism of the opposition.  It was something that just . . . Its 
time had not come for Saskatchewan.  In the last few years, its time has 
come.  So we established a film development office to market what we have 
in our province and to promote the film industry, and also a film fund, a 
development fund, Mr. Speaker, to try and encourage film making in this 
province.  And in the months ahead I hope I'm . . . well I'm sure I'm going 
to be in the position of announcing that we're going to do just a little 
bit more than that.  We're going to try to bring in, in conjunction with 
the National Film Board and some of our other partners with whom we've been 
negotiating, an inventory of locations within this province.  Some other 
provinces have this. 
 
We missed out on the opportunity to shoot a major film in the province 
because the company from Los Angeles chose Calgary.  And do you what they 
wanted, Mr. Speaker?  They wanted some flat ground; they looked for some 
flat ground.  And they dug in their computer and pressed a button and -- my 
goodness, everybody knows I'm no technical whiz -- but they pressed some 
buttons and it spat out some information, and it said Calgary, Alberta; 
it's flat around Calgary.  And they went there and they shot a major film.  
When it comes to flat, Mr. Speaker, do I need to say we lead the world in 
flat in some geographic locations here.  Our topography cannot be competed 
with in terms of flat across some of our southern sections.  So we lost 
that opportunity because we were not in their computer.  We didn't have an 
inventory that said are you looking for a historic church like Stanley 
Mission in the North?  Are you looking for a spectacular park like Cypress 
Hills, which is the highest land mass between the Rockies . . . the 
foothills of the Rockies and the Laurentians.  The highest land mass 
between those points is right here in Saskatchewan.  How many of us know 
that?  Far less, film makers in Los Angeles.  Do they know about our 15 
million acres of commercial forest?  Do they know about our lakes? 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have to get together on this.  We have to identify all of 
these exciting locations and what we have to offer.  We have to put an 
inventory together and we've got to plug it into those computers in Los 
Angeles so that they know what we have to offer in this province.  And we 
intend to do it. 
 
We've already completed one production -- The Great Electrical Revolution.  
Sixty people were employed and trained on that project.  The Hotel 
Saskatchewan was used as the hotel . . . the major hotel for all of the 
people who were working on the project.  You know what?  They said they did 
their best quarter in history, because of that film and the people who 
stayed there.  There are tremendous economic spin-offs for us, 
notwithstanding the cultural spin-offs for us in being in a film industry.  
And, Mr. Speaker, we really intend to pursue that, and vigorously. 
 
I would like to touch on something else.  As you would know, 
multiculturalism is now in the title of my new portfolio.  It's there with 
a design.  And when the Premier called me, he said that is going to be the 
title of the portfolio, and that is in recognition of the diversity of our 
province.  You know, if you examine the history of the province, Mr. 
Speaker -- and it's a very young province -- if you examine it, other than 
our aboriginal peoples, we, our ancestors, parents, grandparents all came 



 

 

from some place else.  Obviously I'm an example of that, I guess. 
 
We all came from some place else.  Hopefully we all brought with us some 
strengths from our former countries.  German is the second largest ethnic 
population in this province.  We all know how proud the Ukrainians are of 
their culture and their heritage, and they're not slow to proclaim it, and 
rightly so. 
 
And we have so many other diverse populations, other parts of the world 
who've come here and made Saskatchewan what it is.  And I think that's 
terrific.  Of course we can all be Canadian.  My children were born here.  
The oldest is 22 years old, and she'll stand up and proudly say, I am a 
Canadian.  I stick my chest out and say, I am a Canadian.  And by the way, 
Mr. Speaker, I refuse to be any part of some kind of collective inferiority 
complex that seems to run across the country.  And it says well, if you're 
Canadian, you're second class.  We are not second class; we are first 
class.  We are world class, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Well let's say we all came from some place else.  We 
had our roots some place else.  It doesn't mean we're not Canadian.  Of 
course we are, and proud of it. 
 
I look at my colleagues and I see people who've come from all kinds of 
different ethnic backgrounds.  I look across the way and I see people over 
here who've come from different ethnic backgrounds.  It doesn't mean 
they're any less Canadian because on occasion they proclaim that heritage.  
They may even like to speak the language of their forefathers.  Is that so 
terrible?  Is that so wrong they want to keep that alive?  They may want to 
wear ethnic dress.  Is that so terrible?  Is that so bad that they want to 
wear ethnic dress? 
 
Mr. Speaker -- and you've seen me -- I wear a kilt on occasion.  I don't 
paint myself blue in woad as some of my ancestors did, but I wear a kilt.  
I like to wear Highland dress for formal occasions.  I know others in the 
Assembly who have worn ethnic dress of one type or another on occasion, 
too.  There's nothing wrong with this, Mr. Speaker.  It doesn't mean we're 
any less Canadian because we remember our origins and our roots; it just 
means we have pride in expressing them. 
 
You know March 21 -- I want to refer to something here that some people 
will edge around in their seats in and get a little fidgety, but I'm not 
going to duck it.  March 21, International Day for Elimination of Racial 
Discrimination, Mr. Speaker, March 21.  I proclaimed that in the province 
of Saskatchewan as Minister of Multiculturalism.  Too bad, Mr. Speaker, 
that was a day on which a memo with some fake letterhead -- and that has 
been substantiated subsequently -- appeared from one of our departments 
that was totally racial in its tone, in its context.  I won't bore the 
Assembly with the details; I think we're all familiar with it.  But none of 
us in this Assembly felt good about that -- on all days, International Day 
for Elimination of Racial Discrimination. 
 



 

 

Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- You know, it did reinforce, however, it did reinforce 
how this government felt about not only that situation but any others of 
racial discrimination that arise within this province. 
 
Now that was a day -- and I'd planned this consciously -- my department 
thought we should have a news conference and announce some grants, 
multicultural grants that we'd had in the works for some time.  And I said, 
no, there is an event that evening the Regina Multicultural Council is 
sponsoring, and I knew there wouldn't be media but I said that's the forum; 
these are the people to whom I want to talk and I want to announce those 
particular grants, and we forewent the opportunity to have a formal news 
conference on this.  But given the events of that day, given that memo that 
was somehow circulated to some media outlets around this province, I do 
want to point out that this government has been trying to take some small 
steps towards the elimination of racial discrimination.  We announced that 
day $50,000 worth of programming to the Multicultural Council of 
Saskatchewan, the Regina Multicultural Council, and the Saskatchewan 
History & Folklore Society.  They are educational programs they are 
developing.  Two are in the form of film, and they're aimed at 
cross-cultural training, Mr. Speaker, to show our children of this province 
that they are growing up in a multicultural society where we might not all 
look the same, and heaven knows, we don't all sound the same.  And I'm an 
example of that.  I stand here with an ethnic accent, proud of my accent, 
but proud to be Canadian. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it's good for these children to realize that they're 
going to grow up in a society where we don't all look the same.  Mr. 
Speaker, would it not be sad if we had a little melting pot and we took 
everybody and threw them in the melting pot at one end and they all came 
out the other end looking exactly the same: the same height, the same 
colour, the same colour of eyes, and the same hair.  I submit to you, sir, 
that would be a sad day. 
 
I went to see Harry Belafonte in town a few weeks ago, and my goodness, 
does he ever have a multicultural group of artists backing him up!  And do 
you know what he said on stage, Mr. Speaker?  He said, these people -- and 
he introduced them all one at a time, and they came from all different 
parts of the world -- he said, we have found in each other our differences 
and decided that's why we're attracted to each other, because we're all 
different.  And that's why they liked each other and that's why they've 
played together for many years. And they get along extremely well. 
 
I'd like to think, Mr. Speaker, that our society could be that way, that we 
respect each other despite our differences.  And we can respect each other 
despite political differences.  I know we carp at each other and we even 
whine at each other on occasion.  I know this happens too.  But, Mr. 
Speaker, there is not a reason in the world that we should not respect each 
other despite our differences, be they racial, be they colour, ethnic, 
political or religious.  We must have that common dignity, that common 
respect for all human beings within this province, and I believe we've got 
to strive for this.  As a government we have to achieve this. 



 

 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- You know, Mr. Speaker, there have been some 
cataclysmic events around the world in the last year, not the least of 
which have been happening in eastern Europe.  And the Premier announced 
that we would like to extend a friendly hand to the people of eastern 
Europe.  We know they're going through difficult times.  And the Premier 
has said that he'd like to establish a volunteer program whereby residents 
of Saskatchewan, with some facilitating help from the government, could go 
on missions to eastern Europe to help the people, whether it be to 
establish municipal government, to help with agriculture, or business 
acumen, whatever. 
 
(2115) 
 
He would like to see us extend this humanitarian help to people who are now 
struggling and coping with their new found democracy.  My department and I, 
in particular, have been charged with that responsibility.  It is one I 
certainly do not take lightly.  In fact, it's one I relish. 
 
Indeed -- and this also has been announced -- my department has been 
charged with an additional responsibility, and that is the provincial 
responsibility for immigration.  I don't want to raise false expectations, 
Mr. Speaker.  I wouldn't like the public to think that if we have a 
department or a branch or a directorate or a few people working on 
immigration, that somehow people living in Saskatchewan will be able to 
bring their relatives and their friends from around the world to live with 
them in this province -- very difficult thing to do. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we do believe that getting less than 2 per cent of all 
the immigrants to Canada into Saskatchewan, when we have 4 per cent of the 
population, isn't a fair situation; it isn't equitable.  Currently we 
receive in our less than 2 per cent, about 1.7 per cent refugees and senior 
citizens who come to live with their children have been fortunate enough to 
settle in this province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I hasten to emphasize, in no way will we ever shirk our 
responsibility to those particular groups.  In no way would we deny access 
to this province to refugees who are sent our way by federal authorities.  
In no way would we deny access to senior citizens who want to come here and 
live out their lives with their children. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we would like to facilitate, somehow, immigration into 
this province of people from around the world who would like to settle 
here: artisans, craftspeople, business people, people who would like -- as 
I did in 1966  
_- to make a fresh start and to come to a province that carries for them 
promise and hope for the future, and indeed a better way of life. 
 
Ninety-five per cent of all immigration into Canada goes -- over 90 per 
cent, 93, 94, 95, in that range -- goes to four provinces: British 
Columbia, Alberta, Quebec and Ontario.  Quebec have their own immigration 



 

 

department.  They duplicate everything the federal government does.  We 
don't want to do that, Mr. Speaker.  All we want to do is have just a 
little bigger say in immigration matters.  And it's not a question of 
out-migration; you don't solve out-migration by saying, we're going to have 
an immigration program.  You solve out-migration by having six inches of 
rain this spring and $2 a bushel on the world price of grain.  That's how 
you solve out-migration. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- But we do see economic opportunities in the province.  
We see diversification.  Again we see opportunities for people to come here 
and to find a tolerant society, one in which we can live side by side, and 
recognize the strengths that people from other countries can bring here, 
perhaps to join their relatives, certainly to join their friends. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we see this as an opportunity for our province.  We see 
this as a chance for us to extend that friendly hand of which I spoke 
earlier to others less fortunate than we are who live in this province. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, this province is a terrific place in which to live.  
There are people who denigrate this province.  There are people who should 
know better, who speak poorly of this province.  Mr. Speaker, they should 
try living some place else for a while.  They should try living in other 
parts of this globe and they'd be glad.  They would be proud to say they 
are from Saskatchewan, notwithstanding the current economic difficulties we 
are facing as a government, and not just as a government, as a population, 
as a people as a whole.  We do face some difficulties, but we are coping 
with those difficulties, we are fighting those difficulties, and we don't 
intend to give up. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I'm proud to support this throne speech because this is 
the best province in the greatest country in the world.  Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm glad to be able to take part in this 
debate, and I do want to, at some point, talk about the throne speech, but 
I want to say before that that the minister who just took his seat, resumed 
his seat, the member for Turtleford, had my rapt attention during his 
entire speech because quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, that was the best speech 
I've heard from that side of the House this year, last year, and the year 
before. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- Now lest I damage the political credibility of the 
member for Turtleford, I want to say that had I not known better, I would 
suggest that he's thinking of retiring because that was a statesmanlike 
speech that I have never heard before from that side of the House.  I have 
one small quibble, one small quibble -- and it relates not to the member 
from Turtleford but to the Premier of this province and his former Finance 
minister, the now Minister of Justice -- because the minister who took his 



 

 

seat talked glowingly about the cultural and sports activity in the 
province of Saskatchewan, and he spoke well.  But the one thing that he 
could not mention and did not mention is something that I can mention and 
will mention, and it relates to the Premier and the former minister of 
Finance with that crazy scheme that they came up with on lottery tax last 
year has had its repercussions.  It's had its repercussions in 
Saskatchewan.  And this year the budget of Sask Sport is cut 20 per cent 
directly as a result of the Premier and the former minister of Finance's 
activities on lottery tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another consequence of the action of the Premier and the 
former minister of Finance, who heard his new lottery tax described in the 
media as a devilishly clever scheme -- and the minister of Finance at that 
time revelled in that; he had created a devilishly clever scheme to get 
more money out of the people of Saskatchewan -- the direct consequences are 
a cut of 20 per cent in the Sask Sport budget this year, and 1,200 students 
that go to the summer school of the arts have had their program cut -- cut 
-- a program which has been in effect in Saskatchewan for about 20 years.  
I do not lay any blame on the member for Turtleford -- well, in view of the 
fact that he was a cabinet minister -- but I lay the prime blame on the 
Premier of this province and his former minister of the Finance who has 
given us drastically poor advice in Finance ever since he had been Finance 
minister and has now been moved out of the position. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to say a few words about the 
constituency of Saskatoon Westmount, which I represent in this Chamber.  
Over a period of 25 years, give or take a few months, I have had the 
pleasure of representing all or part of that area which is now called 
Saskatoon Westmount either in this Chamber as a representative for 
Saskatoon Westmount, or the representative for Saskatoon Mayfair, or the 
representative for Saskatoon City -- all of which I've occupied at one time 
or another, or as the alderman for ward four, which occupied most of 
Saskatoon Westmount constituency. 
 
And I want to say to the people of Saskatoon Westmount that I consider that 
to be an honour and a privilege to have represented them for that period of 
time either here in this Chamber, in large part, or in city council in 
Saskatoon.  In all modesty I say that the people of Saskatoon Westmount are 
not people with a lot of financial means, material collections of any kind.  
It's a lower income area, but they are people of uncommon good political 
sense, Mr. Speaker, uncommon good political sense, and I thank them for 
that, for the many years that they've supported me in this Legislative 
Chamber. 
 
I want to say a few words, Mr. Speaker, about Ottawa.  The complications 
created by the PC government at Ottawa, led by the Prime Minister, Brian 
Mulroney, are indeed serious and costly for Saskatchewan people.  Meech 
Lake and GST (goods and services tax) are exceeded only by the negative 
implications of the Mulroney free trade deal and the Saskatchewan farm 
crisis.  As if that weren't enough, Saskatchewan people are bedevilled by 
their Bouchard MP twins, Lucien and Benoi pît, the terrible Tory twins from 



 

 

Ottawa. 
 
One has perpetrated the great VIA Rail train robbery.  Saskatchewan people 
have yet to feel the full impact of the loss of VIA passenger service on 
the province of Saskatchewan; on the full impact of increased unemployment 
figures for Saskatchewan; the full impact of increased personal travel 
costs for the people of Saskatchewan; the full impact of increased 
provincial highway costs on the people of Saskatchewan as a result of that 
decision, and the full impact of the inconvenience to the travelling 
public, especially for seniors and people on lower income. 
 
We should all remember, Mr. Speaker, how Conservative members of 
parliament, when they were in opposition, squealed like a fast-braking 
train when the Liberal government reduced passenger service in 1981.  They 
squealed like a train coming to a halt on a track.  At that time the 
opposition Conservative MPs set up their own task force to register their 
indignant protests about the Liberal government's action of that day in 
1981.  That protest took the form of a report of a task force on passenger 
rail service.  I have a copy of the recommendations of that task force 
here, Mr. Speaker.  That task force was headed up by none other than Hon. 
Don Mazankowski, Privy Counsellor, MP, chairman of the committee.  The 
other committee members were Sinclair Stevens, Member of Parliament; 
Senator Guy Charbonneau; Fred McCain, Member of Parliament; Tom Sidden, 
Member of Parliament, now cabinet minister; David Kilgour, MP, secretary to 
this Progressive Conservative task force on passenger rail service.  The 
recommendations section of this, the last spike -- pardon me, spike is 
struck off the title, and it reads, The Last Straw.  There's an irony 
there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The recommendations of this particular report are very revealing about the 
Conservative Party in Ottawa in 1981.  The recommendations in point two 
have this to say: 
 

 The task force believes the federal government has a responsibility to 
ensure that rail passenger service in Canada be retained, modernized, and 
expanded as part of our national transportation system. 

 
That's the second recommendation of the . . . 
 
(2130) 
 
The Speaker: -- The Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly read 
as follows: rule 13(3) states: 
 

 That on the fifth day of the said days, if any amendment be under 
consideration at thirty minutes before the ordinary time of daily 
adjournment, the Speaker shall forthwith put the question on any amendment 
or amendments then before the Assembly. 

 
It is my duty therefore to now put the question on the amendment as moved 
by the member for Saskatchewan Eastview and seconded by the member for 
Regina Centre. 
 



 

 

The division bells rang from 9:31 p.m. until 9:35 p.m. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas 
 
 Prebble Atkinson t 
 Rolfes Anguish t 
 Shillington Goulet t 
 Lingenfelter Hagel t 
 Thompson Pringle t 
 Brockelbank Lyons t 
 Mitchell Calvert t 
 Upshall Trew t 
 Simard Van Mulligen t 
 Kowalsky Koenker t 
 Solomon t 
-- 21 R 

Nays 
 
 Devine Berntson t 
 Muller Pickering t 
 McLeod Sauder t 
 Hodgins Toth t 
 Smith Duncan t 
 Lane Petersen t 
 Hepworth Wolfe t 
 Maxwell McLaren t 
 Kopelchuk Baker t 
 Martens Swan t 
 Meiklejohn Muirhead t 
 Martin Johnson t 
 Hopfner Gleim t 
 Swenson Britton t 
 Neudorf Gardner t 
 Gerich Saxinger t 
 Klein t 
-- 33 R 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:37 p.m. 
 


