





























































Hansard: May 15, 1990


 

 

May 15/90 
 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: -- According to order, I have examined the following petition, and 
find it to be in order: of certain residents of the province of 
Saskatchewan, praying that the Legislative Assembly may be pleased to urge 
the provincial government to reverse its decision to relocate the 
Saskatchewan liquor board store from its present location in the Market 
Mall to a new location on 8th Street, Saskatoon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure 
today to introduce 14 adults from SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology) who are sitting in your gallery. 
 
The material does not indicate this to me, but I believe this group is an 
English as a second language -- these people are learning English.  Most of 
these people, Mr. Speaker, have come to this country, have made some 
incredible treks, motivated by the desire to live as free men and women in 
a free society.  To some extent then, this legislature's what the journey 
has been all about.  I hope they enjoy their visit today, and I look 
forward to meeting with them. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce 
to you, and through you to the rest of the Assembly, some very good friends 
of mine from British Columbia.  They're sitting in your gallery by my 
lovely wife.  I would like to say to you that the last Assembly that they 
attended was in Australia.  They travel around quite a bit, and they're in 
Saskatchewan; they're going to be in our province for a little while. 
 
I would like to ask all people to, all members to welcome them: Mr. and 
Mrs. John Smith. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure this afternoon to 
introduce to you and through you to members of this Assembly, on behalf of 
my colleague, the member from Regina Elphinstone, seven adults who are from 
the Cancer Patient Lodge, sitting in your gallery, Mr. Speaker.  They are 
accompanied by Shirley Murry.  I'd like to ask all members to join with me 
in welcoming them this afternoon.  Thank you. 
 



 

 

Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Privatization of Health Care 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  In the absence of the 
Minister of Health, I want to direct my question today to the Associate 
Minister of Health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have in front of me a newspaper report of a session at 
yesterday's privatization congress in Saskatoon, where advocates of 
privatization tried to make out the case for privatizing health care, 
something which this government has already done with the children's 
school-based dental program. 
 
Now in this article, Mr. Speaker, these health care privateers attacked 
health care as a government monopoly, were the words used, and urged that 
instead we watch and look at health care as an industry, or if you will, a 
business.  And it should be treated as such. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, to the Associate Minister of Health is this: 
given your government's very strong attachment to the principles of 
privatization and your recent actions in privatizing the children's 
school-based dental program, isn't it correct that these speakers yesterday 
really affect your philosophical approach with respect to the future of 
health care in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Mr. Speaker, I gladly respond to the question of the 
Leader of the Opposition, especially in light of the fact that the roving 
reporter, the opposition health critic, is absent today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition talks about health care.  Health 
care is a responsibility, Mr. Speaker.  It is an enormous responsibility to 
each and everyone of us.  Health care is a responsibility that we all share 
in.  We're looking to the future; the commission has been out for over two 
years; the commission has reported; it's presented a plan, a plan for the 
future.  We've asked all parties interested to take a look at that plan, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question for the Associate 
Minister of Health and, Mr. Speaker, I draw to your attention and to all 
the members of the House that at no point in answering my question did the 
minister ever say that the philosophical approach of the speaker that I 
referred to was not the philosophical approach of his government.  At no 
time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

Mr. Romanow: -- Now, Mr. Speaker, still from this privatization conference 
a Dallas-based economist by the name of John Goodman welcomed the trend 
where increasing numbers of the population are being forced out of the 
public health care schemes, according to the newspaper report, and on to 
private medical insurance schemes.  And he doesn't care how much this has 
achieved or how it's achieved as long as in the words of Mr. Goodman, "They 
have the advantages that can be brought about by a freely competitive 
medical market-place." 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister is as follows: given the fact that 
your government has such a strong attachment, such a strong adherence to 
the principles of privatization, was this the real reason behind 
privatizing the children's dental plan mainly so that these children and 
their families and parents, to use the words of this American privateer, 
"could have the advantage of a competitive medical market-place"?  Wasn't 
that the real reason?  And if so, what other areas of health care have been 
earmarked by you and your government as future candidates for privatization 
. . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Thank you.  Mr. Speaker, the member opposite, the Leader 
of the Opposition, asks about health care; he asks about the dental plan.  
And I want to say to you and all the members, and everyone, that the dental 
plan and the changes to the dental plan were made to improve services, Mr. 
Speaker, to improve services to the people of rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Professionals, Mr. Speaker, now deliver dental services to children across 
this province.  And those professional services, Mr. Speaker, are available 
to 37 communities -- 37 communities, Mr. Speaker.  Ten clinics have been 
set up and 27 satellite clinics have been set up, Mr. Speaker, across this 
province.  And families, Mr. Speaker, not just the children, are served by 
the dental program as it is now.  People -- adults, seniors -- are provided 
with professional services in their own communities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question for the Associate 
Minister of Health.  And I note for your attention, Mr. Minister, and for 
the members of the House and the public that for the second time, in a 
second answer, the minister has (a) defended the privatization of the 
children's dental plan, and (b) not denied that the speakers at the 
privatization congress represent the philosophical approach of the 
government opposite.  I note that . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- So, Mr. Speaker, I have a new question, and my question, 
Mr. Speaker, is this.  In the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix on May 12, 1990, it is 
stated and widely reported -- I have a copy of that in front of me here, 
Mr. Speaker -- that the government opposite has a number of proposed 
privatization projects under consideration that "number in the hundreds."  
This is the headline, a proposed number of privatization projects which 



 

 

"number in the hundreds." 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister is as follows:  In view of the 
fact that the people of the province of Saskatchewan so strongly oppose 
privatization and oppose privatization in the health care area, will you 
table in the legislature today, later today if necessary, that list of the 
hundreds of privatization projects which are still under consideration by 
the Premier and your government, including those possible privatization 
topics of health care, so that the public can really judge the depth of 
your intentions? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition stands up and 
tries to grandstand -- again, fearmongering, mediscare examples again and 
again.  Talk about a plan, talk about a plan for the future. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I'd like to ask the hon. members to allow 
the minister to answer the question -- difficult to do so when you're being 
interrupted -- and show him the courtesy of allowing him to answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The Leader of the Opposition 
talks about things again and again, and we all know about what occurred in 
the federal election and mediscare, and we all know what happened in 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg and mediscare, and what can the Leader of the 
Opposition do today?  Mediscare. 
 
Why doesn't he talk about the Murray commission?  Why doesn't he talk about 
the health critic Mr. Speaker?  You know, he's been all over the place with 
regard to the Murray commission. 
 
The Murray commission has reported, and we've given people across this 
province an opportunity to speak, and we're going to give them an 
opportunity to speak again, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question for the Associate 
Minister of Health, and I draw to your attention again, Mr. Speaker, that 
for the third time in a row this minister has not denied that the 
philosophical intentions of this government are similar to the speakers of 
which I base the questions. 
 
Now my new question, Mr. Speaker, therefore, to the Associate Minister of 
Health, is on this grounds.  Based on the fact that his answers are 
evasive.  That he refuses to deny that this government's possible future 
agenda on the list of hundreds of items to be privatized involve, among 
other things, health care programs. 
 
Why doesn't the minister simply come clean and tell it like it is?  Why 
don't you really tell the public what this government has up its sleeve; 
that you don't intend to privatize health care matters or privatize other 
matters before the election, but that after the election you're going to do 



 

 

it with vengeance.  You're going to finish what you started.  Isn't that 
the game plan really for health care? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Thank you.  Mr. Speaker, the member opposite can only 
try to scare the people.  He can't talk about the future.  He can't talk 
about where we should be going.  He can't speak about the Murray 
commission, Mr. Speaker.  All he can do is play politics, Mr. Speaker -- 
politics, politics, more politics.  No policy, no direction for the future.  
No opportunity, no opportunity to consult with the public.  Scare tactics, 
Mr. Speaker, scare tactics -- scare tactics alone. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have another new question to the Associate 
Minister of Health who, now for the fourth time, refuses to deny that this 
government has or might have plans to privatize, among other things, health 
care matters. 
 
My question is very simple.  Will the minister opposite table later today, 
if he hasn't got the list with him, exactly those items which he intends to 
privatize in the area of health care?  Because I want to tell you, Mr. 
Speaker, the people of the province of Saskatchewan don't trust this 
government when it comes to health care and privatization. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Mr. Speaker, the member of the opposition talks about 
trust.  And I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that we know who the people trust 
and we know who the people don't trust.  We know who the people don't 
trust, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We don't have any plans, Mr. Speaker.  The Murray commission has toured 
this province for two years, Mr. Speaker -- two years.  And we have said, 
Mr. Speaker, that that report is available to the public, and we've asked 
the public to respond, Mr. Speaker; we've asked the public to respond, and 
once they've responded, we'll respond.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Cost of SIAST Corporate Offices 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 
Minister of Education. 
 
Mr. Minister, as you know, SIAST is once again running a deficit and is 
using many ways to try and balance that deficit.  Yet, Mr. Minister, 
according to the cabinet document that I have here, your government 
authorized the expenditure of almost $700,000 last year to move SIAST head 
office, the corporate offices, from the two campuses to offices in those 
two cities; $700,000: $336,400 for rent and $356,250 for renovations and 
new furniture. 



 

 

 
Mr. Minister, my question to you is this.  How do you justify, in these 
tough economic times according to your words, for this elaborate 
expenditure on head offices when you're putting pressure on students and 
others to make up the balance of your deficit? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, considering the fact that this 
was a major move and that it was involving two particular centres, I don't 
think that the amount of money, $300,000, is out of question. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- 700. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well they say 700,000, Mr. Speaker.  Let's keep in 
mind that the money there was also for salaries; the money was for 
salaries.  He started out talking about renovations, and let's be fair in 
this.  We're talking about some $300,000 that was used for renovation. 
 
This was a decision that was made by SIAST.  They are an independent body 
that's involved with the overall administration of the SIAST campuses.  In 
the same way that the University of Regina and the University of 
Saskatchewan run their own operations, the SIAST board of governors and the 
administration run that operation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- New question to the minister.  Mr. Minister, I want to 
remind you that the cabinet document says $700,000 for new fancy offices 
for SIAST here in Regina and Saskatoon.  Let me remind you, the document 
also indicates that you spent 215,000 less than a year ago in refurbishing 
the offices here in Regina, and now you are vacating those offices. 
 
Can you explain to the people of Saskatchewan . . . will you explain to the 
people of Saskatchewan why you spend $700,000 on Cadillac offices for your 
head office people and yet you're asking the students to take a 10 per cent 
increase, you are cutting staff, and you are reducing programs at SIAST.  
How can you explain that to the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, in the first place I am not 
increasing tuition fees. I am not cutting staff.  These are decisions that 
are being made by the board and by the administration. 
 
I don't think that when we consider the fact that students at SIAST campus 
are paying some $720, about 5 per cent . . . 5 per cent of the total cost 
of their whole year is what they're paying in tuition.  So I don't think 
that that's out of line, and is comparable to the other provinces and 
certainly western Canada. 
 
With regard to the movement of the corporate facilities from Regina to 
Saskatoon, I don't think that there's anyone would disagree with the idea 



 

 

that we only need one corporate office.  I think that many people have 
asked the question why there were two in the first place.  This is a 
decision that has been made, I think, with good reason and looking at cost 
savings over the long haul, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, I want to remind you . . . a new question, Mr. 
Speaker.  Mr. Minister, I want to remind you that according to the Act, you 
appoint the board members, you appoint the chairman of the board, you make 
most of the decisions indirectly or directly that the board makes.  You are 
responsible as the Minister of Education. 
 
When you privatized many of the programs at SIAST, Mr. Minister, I want to 
remind you that you eliminated 19 programs and turned many of them over to 
the private vocational schools.  You eliminated about 1,100 student spaces 
which were turned over to the private vocational schools.  And, Mr. 
Minister, you cut 140 instructor positions. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to ask you once again: how do you justify making 
Cadillac offices for your appointed staff and then cut the instructors, cut 
programs, and ask students once again to bear 10 per cent student increases 
to offset the debt that has been created by the people that you have 
appointed?  Where are your priorities? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I find it interesting that the 
member goes on and on about the 10 per cent increase in tuition fees.  I 
believe that this was the percentage that was suggested by the students.  
So for him to stand up and do a little bit of grandstanding is a little bit 
hard for me to understand. 
 
The fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, that it was this government that 
built the new campus at Prince Albert, opened up many new seats, many new 
programs which serve the northern part of this province.  It's also this 
government that has developed the regional college system to what it is 
today and are looking at a lot of expansion over the next few years, making 
many more opportunities available to students. 
 
It's also this government, Mr. Speaker, that is building the new College of 
Agriculture building on the University of Saskatchewan campus -- something 
that was asked for from that group over there for some 25 years.  They 
never did one thing about it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Speaker, I too have a question for the Minister of 
Education.  Mr. Minister, let me quote from this cabinet document.  And I 
quote: 
 

 An appropriate corporate office milieu is essential to the image of a 
world class educational institution. 



 

 

 
Well let's review that image.  What we have seen since 1987 is 1,100 
student spaces cut, over 142 instructors cut, over 19 programs eliminated, 
and we've seen major privatization of vocational education in this 
province. 
 
Now the Saskatchewan people are looking at world class education, Mr. 
Minister, not world class corporate headquarters.  So I want to know, Mr. 
Minister, if you want SIAST to be world class, why not try spending the 
money on students and instructors and not plush corporate offices in 
Saskatoon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, we've seen another good example 
of the overexaggeration of members on the other side of the House when they 
start playing around with figures and talking about elaborate offices.  I 
don't think, Mr. Speaker, that if one were to take a look at the offices, 
that they are any more grandiose than any other types of offices that you 
would find in a large corporation like SIAST. 
 
When the member opposite talks about spaces within the SIAST campuses, I 
would point out to you and to the media and to others that there are more 
spaces today in SIAST than there were when that government was in power, 
and that's certainly to the benefit of the people of this province, and 
that's to the response of more and more programs that the people want. 
 
She talks about some of the cuts.  If we consider some of the cuts that 
were made by SIAST, I think that you will find that they were programs that 
were no longer in step with the 1990s and in moving towards the 21st 
century.  And, Mr. Speaker, I would commend the administration and the 
board of SIAST in continuing to look ahead into the 21st century and not 
back into the 1960s like that group does over there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Speaker, new question to the Minister of Education.  
Mr. Minister, SIAST now has a $1.9 million debt. 
 
Corporate headquarters used to be located at Wascana Institute, a public 
institution, and Kelsey Institute, a public institution.  And what they've 
done, Mr. Speaker, is move these facilities into the private sector at a 
cost of $700,000. 
 
Now students have seen their tuition fee increased by 10 per cent.  Why 
does your government insist on passing on your mismanagement onto the backs 
of students in this province?  Where are your priorities, Education 
minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, our priority is the students and 
ensuring that they have programs, ensuring that they have programs that are 
in line with the 21st century, and the fact that we want to ensure that 
they are going to be ready to face the new challenges that are out there.  



 

 

We are going to continue to look at new programs; we are not going to look 
at programs that have been in this province and on the SIAST campuses for 
the last 20 or 25 years that are now becoming outdated.  We have to 
continue to look forward. 
 
In so far as I've already pointed out that the 10 per cent increase in the 
tuition fees was what the students had recommended was fair; they also want 
to bear part of the responsibility for the cost of their education.  And, 
Mr. Speaker, when you look at what they're paying on the SIAST campuses, 
that that compares very favourably with the rest of western Canada, and we 
will continue to move ahead into the 21st century and we will support those 
students with new programs. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Minister of Education.  
Mr. Minister, this cabinet document indicates that SIAST will be relocated 
to a new lease space at Saskatchewan Place in Regina at a cost of $281,000 
a year.  The expiry date of the lease is May 1, 1991. 
 
Now this office is being moved to Saskatoon, Mr. Minister.  The annual 
lease is $281,000 a year.  I want you to explain that sort of mismanagement 
and incompetence to the people of Saskatchewan.  What a waste of money, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well again, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite likes 
to play fast and loose with figures and with information. 
 
Let me point out, Mr. Speaker, that the move of the corporate office will 
not be . . . some of it will probably take place early this summer; other 
will not take place probably until fall.  And as I understand it, the 
possibilities and potential are there that there will be another tenant 
that will be ready to move into that facility very quickly.  So there will 
not or should not be any loss of revenue or any loss of money in so far as 
the taxpayers of Saskatchewan are concerned. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Commission on Directions in Health Care 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I direct my question to the 
Associate Minister of Health.  Mr. Minister, there are portions of the 
Murray commission report which this side of the House does support. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Name two. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Just hold your horses there.  One of those is the 
recommendation that as a method of healthy living, fresh food be made 
cheaper for the residents of northern Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 



 

 

 
Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, given that you are 
the government which in 1985 cut the northern fresh food transportation 
subsidy, and has since refused to reinstate it, would you tell this House 
whether or not you are prepared to support that recommendation within the 
Murray report? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Mr. Speaker, I am really pleased that some of the 
members opposite have taken time to read the report, and taken adequate 
time before they responded to it. 
 
We've said time and time again that the report is made available to the 
public, and we're giving the public adequate time to respond.  We're 
concerned about health care in the North and provisions for health care, 
Mr. Speaker.  We're very concerned about it, and we will take time once the 
people in the North have spoken to us. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- New question, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, that subsidy 
amounted to about $250,000.  That's not a lot of money.  It's actually 
pocket change for individuals such as Chuck Childers. 
 
But that money is a major hurdle standing between residents of northern 
Saskatchewan and a healthy life-style.  For five years we have been calling 
on you to reinstate the subsidy; now your own health care commission notes 
just how necessary it is. 
 
Mr. Minister, what's holding you back from carrying out your duty to 
northern Saskatchewan residents, and why can you not reinstate that fresh 
food subsidy? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Mr. Speaker, as I've said, we are concerned about 
provision of health care across the province and especially in the North.  
The North is a difficult area to serve because it's a vast area, Mr. 
Speaker, a vast area.  And the complications of delivering health care and 
providing professionals to the North is a concern that we all share. 
 
I'd just like to say to the House and to the members opposite that I'm 
pleased that at least some of the members opposite, other than the 
opposition Health critic who is absent, has taken time to study the report 
and make comments. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- I'd like to remind the hon. member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg that referring to members absent or present in the 
House is not acceptable. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would ask for leave to 
introduce international guests that are seated in your gallery. 



 

 

 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- I thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to introduce 
to you, seated in the front row in your gallery, some international guests 
and one of our important local citizens.  First of all, one of our 
important local citizens is Mr. Bill Donison, president of the Romanian 
Canadian Cultural Club, who is a guest today attending with our 
international guests from Romania. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Our international guests today, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Romania.  We have with us Mr. Adrian Severin, who is the state secretary 
for privatization and the minister of the national economy from Bucharest, 
Romania.  He is in Saskatchewan attending a congress with respect to 
privatization.  He is looking for ways of bringing his economy up to the 
level of the western economies. 
 
He is a young lawyer and a law professor who has recently taken part in the 
change of government in Romania.  He is with us today, and he is so devoted 
to his task, Mr. Speaker, I might say that he faces the national electorate 
in Romania for the first time in 50 years next Tuesday, but he is still 
here today to participate and learn from us in our democratic traditions.  
And I want the members here to welcome the minister from Romania, please. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Speaker, I would also like to introduce to you a 
man accompanying the minister, and it is Dr. Emilean Rodean, the ambassador 
of Romania to Canada who is resident in Ottawa.  And he is accompanying his 
minister today and has accompanied him in Saskatoon at the congress.  And 
he is here today representing his country, and I would ask the members 
present to welcome the ambassador from Romania. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Referral of Electoral Boundaries Issue to the Court of Appeal 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Mr. Speaker, I announce today that the Government of 
Saskatchewan is referring the electoral boundaries issue to the Court of 
Appeal for Saskatchewan.  Cabinet has the authority to initiate a reference 
which sends a legal issue directly to the Court of Appeal for a ruling. 
 
My colleagues and I have made the decision to initiate a reference asking 
the Court of Appeal to rule on the constitutionality of the electoral 
boundaries that were established by legislation in 1989.  A ruling by the 
Court of Appeal will put to rest concerns that have been raised that the 
electoral map over-represents rural Saskatchewan.  Such concerns continue 



 

 

to be raised even though the urban-rural distribution of seats very closely 
approximates the breakdown of voter population between those areas. 
 
The electoral boundaries were established in 1989 based on the 
recommendations contained in the report of the Electoral Boundaries 
Commission.  This commission was chaired by the Hon. E.M. Culliton, retired 
chief justice of Saskatchewan.  The other commission members were His 
Honour Judge Harvie Allan, judge of the provincial court, and Mr. Keith 
Lampard, Chief Electoral Officer for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Under the legislation to be reviewed by the Court of Appeal, there are 66 
constituencies consisting of 35 rural seats, 29 urban seats, and two 
northern seats.  Of the total seats, 53 per cent are rural, representing 
the 50.36 per cent of voters who live in rural constituencies; 44 per cent 
of the seats are urban, representing the 47.62 per cent of voters who 
reside in urban areas; and 3 per cent of seats are northern, representing 
the 2.02 per cent of the voters who live in the North. 
 
The number of voters in each constituency is allowed to vary by plus or 
minus 25 per cent from the number obtained by dividing the total number of 
voter population by the total number of constituencies.  The allowable 
variation in the North is greater to accommodate geographic concerns, 
community of interest, and similar matters. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our country has a long-standing tradition of weighing 
considerations other than population when drawing electoral maps.  This is 
indicated by the Canadian legislation which allows a plus or minus 25 per 
cent variation in population among electoral districts, a practice which 
the majority of provinces follow as well.  A recent British Columbia 
Supreme Court ruling indicated that the charter did not overturn this 
tradition. 
 
It is in the best interests of the entire province to have the validity of 
our electoral boundaries confirmed as authoritatively and expeditiously as 
possible, and a reference to the Court of Appeal will accomplish this end. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I just want to say that this does 
not come out of the goodness of the heart of the Minister of Justice. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, where this comes from.  A group 
of citizens in Saskatchewan are in fact initiating an action in respect to 
the constitutionality of the gerrymander of this government. 
 
An action had to be started by a group of citizens in Saskatchewan, and 
every right-wing government across this country has used the gerrymander to 
try to maintain office.  It's evident in British Columbia where they've 
been challenged and their electoral boundaries have been thrown out, and 
also here in Saskatchewan. 
 



 

 

I want to say, first of all what they do is to gerrymander the seats to 
attempt to buy another election.  Now what he is doing is trying to refer 
it at this late date into the Court of Appeal, hoping that there will be no 
decision prior to the next election is called. 
 
This is the mechanism that is used.  There is no honour in the Minister of 
Justice.  There is nothing but dishonour in the initial Bill in respect to 
the gerrymander. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Resolution No. 6 -- Population Loss in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise to speak to this motion before us which 
deals with an increasingly alarming phenomenon going on in Saskatchewan 
today, and for which this PC government with which we are bound for the 
moment, Mr. Speaker, can certainly claim some of the blame. 
 
At the conclusion of my remarks, Mr. Speaker, I will be moving the 
following motion: 
 

 That this Assembly condemns the Government of Saskatchewan's mismanagement 
of the provincial economy which has resulted in the record out-migration 
of more than 65,000 people in the last five years. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I recognize in introducing this motion for consideration of 
the Assembly today, that this topic is one which has the potential to be 
highly emotional and therefore to engage in extreme rhetoric, as is often 
the case in this Assembly. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, I would like to very much today take a hard, cold 
look at the facts around the matter, at the phenomenon that is facing 
people of Saskatchewan and that is inflicting on the people of Saskatchewan 
a situation that can be described as nothing other than a human tragedy, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now we've heard the rhetoric on both sides of the Assembly.  We've heard 
the rhetoric from the opposition accusing this government of inflicting on 
the people of our province the consequences of its ideological 
privatization agenda.  We've heard the rhetoric of the ministers opposite 
who have said somehow -- that I must admit is a little difficult for me to 
understand -- that what we're doing is facing a phenomenon today for which 
the New Democrat government, which left office in 1982, is somehow 
responsible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will address both of those issues in my address today, but I 
want to take a cold, hard look in a way that perhaps has not been done in 



 

 

this Assembly before about the history of population loss and the impact 
that it's had on the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I also want to take a look, Mr. Speaker, at the current realities facing 
those who are working; and more seriously, those who are looking for work 
in Saskatchewan today.  And I also, Mr. Speaker, want to include in my 
remarks some reflections on the incidence of poverty with which we're faced 
in Saskatchewan today. 
 
It seems to me when we look at the record of any government, we can have 
our philosophical or ideological differences about the best way to approach 
managing one's economy, providing leadership from the Legislative Assembly 
in the offices of government.  But more than anything else, Mr. Speaker, 
after all is said and done, we must look at two things. 
 
We must look at the impact of the leadership of government on the most 
important commodity we have in Saskatchewan today, and that's our people.  
There's clearly nothing more important in Saskatchewan than our people, and 
it is in terms of the effect on our people that we must measure the 
effectiveness of government policy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in that context I'd like to begin to take a look at the 
outflow of people, the population out-migration as it's been termed, and to 
put it into a bit of an historical context, as I begin my remarks here 
today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I said earlier that it has been the habit of members of 
government, cabinet and others, to draw what I would say are very immature 
and short-sighted conclusions about population records.  And I recall just 
a week ago today in private members' day, some of the remarks made by the 
member from Yorkton.  And I'd like to refer, Mr. Speaker, to exactly the 
same document that that member from Yorkton was referring to when he 
brought his remarks to this Assembly.  But, Mr. Speaker, about this 
document I would like to tell the truth. 
 
I would like to describe what has been happening in Saskatchewan over the 
past 50 years in terms of population trends and then, Mr. Speaker, to draw 
a conclusion as to what I think it says to the people of Saskatchewan, and 
in terms of the overall approaches of government to managing the affairs of 
the people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'd like to go back and begin in the year of 1938, during 
which time, Mr. Speaker, in this province we had a Liberal government.  And 
from 1938 to 1943, Mr. Speaker, what was occurring in those six years prior 
to the election of the first Co-operative Commonwealth Federation 
government, the forerunner of the New Democratic Party, what we saw in 
those six years, Mr. Speaker, was a phenomenon that history destined was 
going to repeat itself as governments changed.  Mr. Speaker, in those last 
six years of the Liberal government we saw the population of Saskatchewan 
drop from 922 million to 838 million, and to drop each year in a distinct 
pattern. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, in 1944 there was a government change and Premier Tommy 



 

 

Douglas took the premier's seat for the first time, heading up a new 
Co-operative Commonwealth Federation government.  And not surprisingly, Mr. 
Speaker, for the first three years of the CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth 
Federation) government the population continued to fall.  And I say "not 
surprisingly" because it will be the impact of each government as it comes 
and goes that the economic approaches, the effects of their influence of 
the economy of the province will cause trends to continue beyond that exact 
day at which the government changed. 
 
(1445) 
 
And so when we look at this realistically, Mr. Speaker, I think we have to 
accept that reality tells us that when one government leaves, the impact 
that it has on the economy will continue for some time -- positive or 
negative. 
 
And concurrently, when a new government comes to place in Saskatchewan, it 
will take some time for its economic policies to impact and to take place 
and to begin to shape the trends of our province.  That's only reasonable, 
Mr. Speaker, and so it's not surprising to me that the CCF government, 
after inheriting six straight years of population decline, saw that trend 
continue for the next three years, from 1944 to 1946, during which time the 
population dropped another six million people. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, then from 1947 to '51 the population stayed stable.  As 
there were new approaches to the economy and the management of the economy 
that were taking place in Saskatchewan that had never been tried in this 
province before, and during that time the population dropped 1 million, 
from 832.7 to 831.7 million. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as I look back through history, I would say that it took 
the CCF government some eight years of influence, bringing to this province 
a significantly different approach in management of the economy to stop the 
decline, to lend some stability. 
 
And then what we found, Mr. Speaker, is that from 1951 straight through to 
1964, we had population growth year after year after year for 13 
consecutive years, Mr. Speaker, during which time, because of the economic 
leadership provided by the CCF government of the day, the population 
increased from 832 million to 942 million, an increase of 90 million people 
over that period of time. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Thousand. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Sorry, 90,000. Thank you to the member from Regina South who 
I know is paying me a great deal of attention here and will appreciate the 
significance of these trends, as well as my colleague from Saskatoon 
University. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we saw that increase of 90,000 people over that period of 
time.  In 1964 what this province saw, Mr. Speaker, then was a change in 
government. And the CCF government of the day, under the premiership at 
that time of Woodrow Lloyd, was rejected by the people of Saskatchewan in 



 

 

an election, and the Liberal government of Ross Thatcher came into power. 
 
And again not surprisingly, Mr. Speaker, the trend that had been in place 
and established, continued.  And from 1965 to 1968, the first four years of 
that Liberal term of office, Mr. Speaker, the population continued to 
increase from 942,000 to 960,000.  But then, not surprisingly as well, Mr. 
Speaker, as the economic policies of the Liberal government, the right-wing 
Liberal government, began to take place, what happened to the population of 
Saskatchewan is it started to head the other way. 
 
And so for the last three years of the Liberal government, from '69 to '71, 
we saw the population of Saskatchewan drop drastically, Mr. Speaker, from 
960,000 to 926,000 people: a loss of some 34,000 people. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, history continues to unfold in a very predictable kind 
of way as the Allan Blakeney government of the New Democratic Party came to 
office in 1971.  And, Mr. Speaker, for the first three years it also bore 
the brunt of the right wing economic policies and the population of 
Saskatchewan continued to decline, as the Premier often does point out, but 
conveniently forgetting to talk about the whole fact.  And I quite freely 
admit, Mr. Speaker, that it declined to the population in 1974 of some 
899.7 or 900,000 people. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, predictably again as we saw introduced in Saskatchewan a 
mixed economy approach to government, a government that recognized the 
realities of Saskatchewan and the fact that we have a low population, a 
large geography and a harsh climate and that in Saskatchewan we have to do 
things somewhat differently in order to make our economy flourish.  As a 
result of the policies of the Blakeney government, Mr. Speaker, from 1975 
to 1981, for seven straight years, the population of Saskatchewan again 
turned to an increase, and increased in that period of time from nine 
hundred up to 968,000 people. 
 
And that was the point at which we were, Mr. Speaker, when the current 
administration led by the member from Estevan came to power in 1982, at 
which point the population in 1982 continued to increase right through to 
1987, up to 1,015,000, Mr. Speaker, as the PC government inherited the 
structures that the Blakeney government had worked hard to put into place 
through their term of office. 
 
But predictably again, as we've seen throughout history over the last 50 
years, Mr. Speaker, when the right wing ideological administration is in 
office, it's inherited an upswing in population and then after introducing 
its own economic policies, has brought to the people of Saskatchewan a 
decline and a reduction and moving in the wrong direction.  And 
unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, that is the case again. 
 
And the most recent statistic that we find reported then is from Statistics 
Canada as of January 1 of this year when the population of Saskatchewan has 
now dropped from its previous high of one million fifteen point eight 
thousand, to a report from Statistics Canada in January 1, of 1,001,600. 
 
And what we've seen, Mr. Speaker, again, and we're experiencing now, is 



 

 

nothing more than a predictable phenomenon that has been going on in this 
province for a half a century.  The right-wing governments have introduced 
their economic policies, caused the population to drop after they've had a 
chance to make their impact.  The left-of-centre governments, the 
Co-operative Commonwealth Federation and New Democratic Party have 
inherited that negative impact, turned it around, increased the population, 
and passed that on to a right-wing government which has taken it and then 
turned it around and dropped it again. 
 
And so the population of Saskatchewan has been a history of peaks and 
valleys.  Peaks compliments of the Co-operative Commonwealth Federation and 
New Democratic Party governments, and valleys compliments of the Liberal 
and PC governments, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, just to introduce one more fact as well, because I'll be 
turning my attention in a moment to the out-migration, the actual loss of 
people who have chosen to move.  And clearly, Mr. Speaker, that has been a 
tragedy over the past five years since the privatization agenda of the PC 
government has become a major phenomenon in this province. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, in looking at total population of course, there's one 
other factor that has to be considered, and we have to add into that the 
deaths and births which take place in this province.  And recent trends, 
Mr. Speaker, will indicate that the births in Saskatchewan will be larger 
than deaths in our province by some 10,000 per year or an average of 850 
per month. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, when we look at these population trends we have to 
consider out-migration, we have to consider deaths, we have to consider 
births of our people, and all of those are factors we have to take into 
consideration. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister of piratization, the member from Melville, 
stood in his place last month.  And I'd like to now turn to a quote which I 
read from an article in the April 12th, Leader-Post, entitled "Exodus said 
NDP's fault," with a picture of the minister and the word "Schmidt" under 
it on page A4, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well, what does the article say that the minister says, Mr. Speaker?  This 
is out of the mouth of the minister responsible for employment and the 
economy in the province of Saskatchewan.  What is his in-depth analysis 
when I put a question to him in this House about the plans of this 
government to deal with the tragic loss of people from province of 
Saskatchewan?  And as reported, it says and I quote, Mr. Speaker: 
 

 "People are leaving because a 'negative attitude' has taken hold," he 
charged during question period. 

 
And he goes on to say, and I quote: 
 

 "The social experiments of the members opposite, inflicted upon the people 
of Saskatchewan for a period of 40 years, have generated a negative 
attitude in this province," he said.  And that attitude has hampered the 



 

 

government's efforts to improve the economy, he added. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, let's just reflect on this for a moment.  The minister 
responsible for employment and development of the economy of Saskatchewan 
has said that somehow, because the CCF and the NDP were in government some 
40 years ago and at the latest count, Mr. Speaker, over eight years ago, 
that somehow the CCF and the NDP, who historically have brought about the 
peaks in population in this province, not the Liberals and the 
Conservatives who have historically brought about the valleys, but somehow 
the CCF and the NDP have instilled in the people of this province a 
negative attitude which is only taking a grip now.  Now, Mr. Speaker, is 
that one of the more ridiculous statements you've ever heard or what, I 
ask? 
 
And then he says, Mr. Speaker, then he goes on to say: 
 

 "We have to build opportunity in this province and we can't do it dragging 
an anchor like the people in the Opposition," Schmidt said. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, all I can say in response to that is if the opposition 
are dragging an anchor, then it's an anchor attached to the sky, Mr. 
Speaker, and it gives new meaning to the word "sky hook" because the only 
direction that the New Democratic Party and its forerunner the CCF have 
ever taken this province is to increase the economic activity and the 
opportunity for the people of Saskatchewan and therefore our population. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, we are engaged today in a human tragedy in 
which I don't think there is a single family in our entire province has not 
been touched.  Since 1985, since the beginning of the privatization 
ideology, there has been a human tragedy that has taken place by the sounds 
of people crossing the borders of our province. 
 
I find it interesting, Mr. Speaker, that we have a minister, we have a 
minister in the government today, the Minister of Human Resources, Labour 
and Employment who has, as a stated mandate of the department, a stated 
mandate of the department to establish an environment which will attract 
people to Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he has been accomplishing results in reverse.  Mr. Speaker, 
since 1985 . . . And 1985 is significant because that is the time, three 
years after which this PC government inherited office and began to attack, 
with a diligence that we've never seen before, an ideologically motivated 
agenda called privatization -- called piratization by others of us.  And, 
Mr. Speaker, one has to ask, once this government got a grip and began to 
put its own stamp on the economy, what's the phenomenon? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, let me report the phenomenon. 
 
In 1985, and these are figures taken from  Statistics Canada.  Only the 
most recent are from Saskatchewan Health, where Statistics Canada figures 
are not available.  And Statistics Canada, Mr. Speaker, tells us that in 



 

 

1985 the province of Saskatchewan experienced a net loss of 5,014 people, 
over 400 a month.  Now, Mr. Speaker, Statistics Canada did not say 5,000 
people left Saskatchewan in 1985.  They report that 5,000 more left 
Saskatchewan than came in. 
 
In 1986, as privatization became the more significant phenomenon for this 
government, what happened in Saskatchewan?  Did we lose 5,000?  No, in 
1986, Mr. Speaker, we had a net loss of 7,020 people. 
 
In 1987, as privatization marched boldly into the future we were told by 
this PC government, Saskatchewan experienced a net loss of 10,200 people. 
 
And in 1988, as we were told privatization was going to reverse this trend 
of loss of people -- and this was the great hope for the future -- in 1988 
Saskatchewan saw 16,140 net loss of our people. 
 
And then in 1989, that year in which the Premier announced before the 
beginning of the spring session that we were going to see the Alamo for the 
NDP -- the death of the NDP because privatization was the world trend, the 
world trend that can't even get more than 500 people into an international 
congress in Saskatoon for a meeting they'd planned for 2,000 --  Mr. 
Speaker, as the Premier announced that this new world trend, this new 
revolution that was going to save the economy of Saskatchewan was going to 
come full force, in 1989, Mr. Speaker, we lost 23,705 more people than 
moved into our province. 
 
 DAnd, Mr. Speaker, the trend has not changed, the trend has not changed.  
I expect tomorrow or the day after to get the updated statistics for April.  
They're not in yet.  But in 1990 from January to March, what's happened?  
Mr. Speaker, what we've had is an additional loss.  5,436 more people have 
left Saskatchewan than came in so far in the first three months of this 
year. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, when I factor into that the average of 850 more births 
than deaths per year in Saskatchewan as a recent trend, and consider that 
in 1990 we will have had somewhere in the neighbourhood of 2,550 more 
births than deaths, one can only conclude using the numbers -- the cold, 
hard numbers -- that the population of Saskatchewan has dropped some 3,000 
so far this year, taking us down to 998,500 as our current population.  And 
I think that's an extremely defensible and accurate indication of our 
population in Saskatchewan and an indictment of the PC government. 
 
(1500) 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we see people, quite understandably and I encourage 
them, looking for some hope that maybe the worst has happened and maybe the 
worst is behind us.  Maybe we've bottomed out.  Maybe it can get nothing 
but better and therefore it will.  And I think it's that kind of desire to 
see some change in spite of the PC government, Mr. Speaker, that inspired a 
headline in the Star-Phoenix of March 10 entitled, "Exodus from 
Saskatchewan Seen Slowing Down."  And, my God, Mr. Speaker, how I only wish 
that that were true. 
 



 

 

It starts out and I quote: "The exodus from Saskatchewan continues, but 
some moving and truck rental companies say they see the light at the end of 
the tunnel."  However, Mr. Speaker, it then again goes on to quote when 
they started to talk to trucking company people.  One Rosette, Ron Rosette 
who runs Budget Moving, and quotes him as saying: 
 

 . . . he thinks "things are going to get even worse, because the economy's 
so bad.  We just sent a full trailer load out to Vancouver; this time last 
year, we never even sent a full one." 

 
Mr. Speaker, I take a look at some of the clippings around Saskatchewan and 
I find one in the Prince Albert Daily Herald of February 23 of this year 
with a title that I think, Mr. Speaker, speaks volumes and summarizes in 
just a few words what this whole phenomenon is all about and how it impacts 
on people in our province.  The article is entitled "For many, leaving 
Saskatchewan, the end of a broken dream." 
 
And that's the sadness of it, Mr. Speaker, that's the sadness of it is that 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And the Minister of Finance laughs.  
The Minister of Finance has the gall to laugh while we debate in this 
House, while we debate in this House a human tragedy which has touched 
every household in this province, I believe, and I suggest, sir, even 
yours.  I suggest, sir, that you are not in a position to say that you do 
not have a best friend, a next door neighbour, a son or a daughter or a 
sister or a brother, a close relative, who in the last five years has not 
packed up and left Saskatchewan, because for them, they see no future; for 
them there is a broken dream. 
 
And I say to the Minister of Finance, this is no laughing matter.  I say to 
you, shame for that response in dealing with this human tragedy as we 
debate it in this Legislative Assembly today. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I'd just like to read from this article the description 
in the beginning and the summary which says: 
 

 The population of Saskatchewan is dropping by 5,000 a year as people leave 
for other provinces with stronger economies. 

 
And that's really the fact of the matter, Mr. Speaker. 
 

 For many residents, (it goes on to say) the decision to leave is the end 
of a broken dream. 

 
This is an article by Bob Cox. 
 
He goes on, Mr. Speaker, to point out a cryptic fact, and I quote again 
from the article: 
 

 The province reached a population of one million late in 1983.  With TV 
cameras recording the scene, a young couple were feted and flattered for 
having pushed the province past that milestone. 

 
And the next sentence of this article, Mr. Speaker, and I quote: "The 



 

 

couple have since moved to Manitoba." 
 
How symbolically accurate.  How symbolically accurate.  Oh we had a great 
celebration as the supposed one millionth person of Saskatchewan arrived, 
and since that time that couple has left the province; since that time our 
population has now dropped to 998,500 and not a single word of recognition 
by this government for their failed economic policies and their 
mismanagement, which has led to this tragic phenomenon in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh the member from 
Saltcoats, he has a great deal of insight and we will look forward to his 
entering into this debate because, I'm sure, not having been inflicted with 
the oppressive thoughts of his cabinet colleagues, he will have the great 
objective insight to be able to report on behalf of his constituents what 
the problem is and, more importantly, Mr. Speaker, what the solution to the 
problem is.  And I will look forward, Mr. Member from Saltcoats, seeing 
your intervention into this debate.  That would be a rare treat indeed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the article goes on to say, and I quote again: 
 

 The departure of residents has pushed down Saskatchewan's unemployment 
rate, even as more jobs are lost. 

 
And then, Mr. Speaker, it lists a couple of very significant statistics 
which unfortunately are true for Saskatchewan.  About 9,000 jobs 
disappeared last year but the work-force shrank, the work-force shrank by 
14,000 people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the reality is this, is that in 1989 in all of Canada there 
was only one province, only one province which experienced a shrinking 
labour force.  It was not a province in the Maritimes or that perennial 
poor sister of confederation, Newfoundland.  That one province, Mr. 
Speaker, that had a shrinking labour force in 1989 was right here -- 
Saskatchewan.  And the labour force, as a matter of fact, did shrink, as 
Mr. Cox reports, by 14,000. 
 
And then I make my last reference to this article, Mr. Speaker, and I quote 
again Doug Elliott, editor of an economic newsletter in Regina, who says, 
and I quote: 
 

 Most people leaving the province are under the age of 30, people in 
families.  These people are the only ones we rely on to create economic 
activity, set up households, make purchases, send their kids to school. 

 
The unfortunate reality, Mr. Speaker, is that of those 67,515 people who 
have left Saskatchewan, net loss since 1985, of those 67,000-plus, over 
half of them, Mr. Speaker, are between the ages of 15 and 34.  The best and 
the brightest and the most industrious and the most energetic and creative 
of our citizens -- those are who are leaving Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to make reference as well, because the phenomenon 
of the loss of population and the outflow of our people is so significant, 
it's not surprising that there are a number of articles that make reference 



 

 

to it. 
 
I'd like to make reference to an article of April 11 in the Leader-Post, 
Mr. Speaker, because sometimes members of a government will stand in their 
place and refer to the fact that Saskatchewan is not doing all that bad 
when it comes to unemployment percentages.  And the fact of the matter is 
that's true, Mr. Speaker.  By national comparison, we're not doing all that 
bad. 
 
Unfortunately, the reason that we're not doing all that badly is that we 
are losing our labour force.  And so the measurement of those who are 
looking for work, Mr. Speaker, is reduced by the fact that a large 
percentage of those who are looking for work have literally given up on 
Saskatchewan and have gone elsewhere to seek it.  And therefore we have the 
good fortune -- and I suppose this is the only silver lining in the cloud, 
Mr. Speaker -- we have the good fortune of having by national standards a 
slightly better than average, although it's been both sides of the average 
line, record of unemployment. 
 
But I'd like to quote from an article entitled: "Jobless numbers 
deceiving."  Mr. Speaker, it begins this way: 
 

 The drop in Saskatchewan's unemployment rate last month is little to cheer 
about, according to the acting manager of the Canada Employment Centre in 
Regina. 

 
And it goes on to say: 
 

 But the decrease isn't the result of a booming economy and more jobs, said 
Mary Lou Deck.  One area that would have caused a drop in the unemployment 
rate is the out-migration of Saskatchewan workers finding jobs elsewhere. 

 
It goes on to quote Ms. Deck as saying: 
 

 Many of our skilled laborers and trades people in the construction 
industry have left the province to find work in Alberta, British Columbia, 
and Ontario and are no longer registered with our offices. 

 
And it concludes, Mr. Speaker, with these words: 
 

 "We certainly don't see the drop in unemployment as an indicator of a 
buoyant economy.  The figures are definitely misleading because a lot of 
people either have left the province to find jobs elsewhere or have given 
up searching for work altogether," she said. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is not the opposition rhetoric.  Mr. Speaker, these are 
the words of the acting manager of the Canada Employment Centre in Regina, 
as quoted on April 11. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move to the, just very briefly, to make 
some reference to the phenomenon of poverty which is one of the saddest, 
most tragic characteristics of the impact of government mismanagement and 
the direction of the economic leadership or, maybe more accurately, lack 



 

 

thereof by the PC government in Saskatchewan today. 
 
And I'd like to make reference, Mr. Speaker, to some information provided 
by Statistics Canada on April 23 of this year in which it described, Mr. 
Speaker, that in 1988 Saskatchewan and Quebec were tied for having the 
highest proportion of people in poverty.  In 1988 we and Quebec, Quebec and 
Saskatchewan, the highest proportion of people in poverty in the nation. 
 
It points out as well, Mr. Speaker, in this April 23 report from 
StatsCanada that in 1982 the per cent of Saskatchewan children living in 
poverty was at the national average.  I say that with some sadness, Mr. 
Speaker, that in 1982 that we were as bad as average in our province. 
 
However, every year since 1982 Saskatchewan has been above the national 
average.  And by 1988 Saskatchewan had the highest proportion of children 
living in poverty of all provinces in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, by the most recent figures published by the National Council 
on Welfare, in Saskatchewan today we have 64,000 children growing up and 
living in poverty. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I must admit to this Assembly that I was extremely disturbed.  
I saw earlier this day a sight that caused me to feel more anger than I 
have felt for some time when the member from Athabasca was standing to ask 
what this government was going to do to deal with the supplement to assist 
with the purchase of affordable food in northern Saskatchewan -- northern 
Saskatchewan which is rampant with poverty and which thousands upon 
thousands of children are growing up living in poverty without the hopes 
and the aspirations and the dreams that so many of us in this province 
consider to be normal and to take for granted.  As the member for Athabasca 
raised the question, I looked across and saw not only one, not two, but 
three members of the front bench laughing. 
 
And I won't name them, Mr. Speaker, I won't name them.  But every one of 
the three -- and I would say, Mr. Speaker, most people would be of the view 
that they are the three most powerful men in the province of Saskatchewan 
-- sat in their seats and laughed when the member from Athabasca asked 
about subsidies for getting healthy food to kids in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
What an indictment of ethical behaviour and responsible management of 
government in the interest of the people of Saskatchewan.  Is there any 
group of people for whom we in this Assembly have greater responsibility to 
lend our attention than to those who are most vulnerable in our society?  
If that's not what we're here for, Mr. Speaker, then I don't know what it 
is that calls us to this Assembly.  And I say again, I found that act 
simply repulsive, that that should be the response of the three most 
powerful men in the province of Saskatchewan while this government is being 
put a question about getting healthy food to hungry kids in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I suppose I've digressed slightly from the motion before 
us, and I'd like to move back to make some further observations about 
privatization, this government's ideologically motivated economic agenda.  



 

 

And I'd like to quote in some detail, Mr. Speaker, from an article in the 
May 11 -- that would have been last Friday I believe, Mr. Speaker -- 
Star-Phoenix, entitled, "Privatization unpopular when fruits are known."  
It's written by a gentleman, Mr. Speaker, by the name of Larry Haiven who 
is an associate professor of industrial relations and organizational 
behaviour in the College of Commerce at the University of Saskatchewan.  
Now Mr. Haiven had lived for three years in Great Britain at the height of 
the privatization fever and knows from a first-hand basis, Mr. Speaker, the 
impact of privatization which is being paraded and applauded by the PC 
government in Saskatoon this very day as we stand here in their 
privatization congress. 
 
What does Mr. Haiven, who again I point out is involved in industrial 
relations and organizational behaviour at the College of Commerce, the 
College of Commerce at the University of Saskatchewan, have to say?  He 
begins his article by saying, and I quote: 
 

 As privatization gurus from around the world gather in Saskatoon May 
13-16, they may well be champions of an idea whose time has already 
passed. 

 
That's the conclusion, Mr. Speaker, of an association professor from the 
College of Commerce at the University of Saskatchewan who lived in Great 
Britain at the height of the privatization fever. 
 
And Mr. Haiven goes on to say, Mr. Speaker, and again I quote -- I 
apologize for the length of this, but this is just an excellent article 
which I think states the point much more briefly than I could, and 
therefore is in the interest of the House to receive it that way, Mr. 
Speaker.  Mr. Haiven says and I quote: 
 

 Premier Grant Devine is no less committed than ever to privatizing most 
government enterprises.  If only Saskatchewan people could see how well 
privatization works, he insists, they would lose their irrational fear and 
support it whole-heartedly. 

 
 Though the privatization frenzy in most parts of the world is still new, 

there is one country where we can begin to see results.  And public 
opinion doesn't look good for the privatizers. 

 
 Margaret Thatcher's Britain has had the most dramatic change from public 

to private enterprise of any country and has been at it longer than 
anybody else. 

 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it was yesterday that from her country, from Great 
Britain, we had one of the privatizers here in Saskatoon telling the folks 
at that congress how to privatize health services here in Saskatchewan, the 
home of medicare. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the article goes on to say: 
 



 

 

 In her 11 years in power, Thatcher has sold off government holdings, 
contracted out many of the services government used to provide and forced 
local governments and the health service to do the same. 

 
And then it continues, Mr. Speaker, by saying: 
 

 But Thatcher's personal popularity and that of her party are lower than 
ever in the history of British polling.  A more selective poll taken last 
September for the Guardian newspaper shows graphically that Thatcher may 
have captured voters' stomachs for a while, but she has failed to win 
their hearts and minds (and that includes many Tory voters). 

 
And then later, Mr. Speaker, it continues: 
 

 Given publicity campaigns of more than $1 billion, accompanying the 
privatization initiative, it is hard to dismiss these results as due to 
public ignorance.  Britons have simply not accepted the brave new world of 
freedom from state intervention. 

 
They've not accepted that brave new world, and those words may ring true 
here in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, as well.  The article 
continues, Mr. Speaker, and again I quote: "Indeed, most of Britain's 
successful rivals . . ."  And let us take note of this, Mr. Speaker, 
because I think there is some food for thought here for Saskatchewan. 
 
There is also here an explanation as to just why it is that the history of 
our province over the last half century or more, while we have experienced 
CCF and NDP governments, while the history of our province has seen that 
the peaks in population; those trends have been established by CCF and NDP 
governments, and the valleys in our population; those trends have been 
established by the right-wing Liberal and Conservative governments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that's not just pure coincidence.  It is because of a 
management of the economy in a way that works and that is being recognized 
around the world, Mr. Speaker.  I suggest one of the trends that is going 
on, that the Premier likes to point to as the great endorsation of 
privatization when he refers to democratization and some private enterprise 
in communist countries, Mr. Speaker, is not a trend to privatization.  It 
is described by those people, Mr. Speaker, as desirable because it is a 
direction, it is a movement towards social democracy and the mixed economy.  
And therein lies the key, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In Saskatchewan traditionally, as well as around the world today, it is 
being recognized that those economies which are most buoyant, which 
function most effectively, which offer the greatest opportunity for 
employment, are those mixed economies in environments in which there are 
social democratic governments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me then quote this article which says: 
 

 Indeed, most of Britain's successful rivals, like West Germany, France, 
Japan and Sweden, have robust programs of indicative planning and/or state 
intervention. 



 

 

 
That's the lesson of the world, Mr. Speaker.  And then this article 
concludes by saying, again I quote: 
 

 Perhaps the privatizers have already learned a cynical lesson from all 
this: The biggest problem in the polls is not before the public knows how 
privatization works, but afterwards.  The trick is to get as much as 
possible of it done before you become so unpopular you lose an election. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those are the words of advice and wisdom and insight by Mr. 
Haiven from the College of Commerce at the University of Saskatchewan, who 
has lived in Saskatchewan during the height of the privatization fever in 
Great Britain . . . sorry, lived in Great Britain for three years at the 
height of the privatization fever. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I conclude my remarks on this motion by bringing to the 
attention of this Assembly that it is my view that there is one 
responsibility that outweighs all others.  And I know I've made this remark 
in the Assembly many times before and I'm sure I'll make it many times 
again.  It is my view that as we come to this Assembly and for those who 
are provided the honour of serving in government, that there has to be a 
laying out of priorities.  Clearly no government at any time, good times or 
bad, can have everything as its number one priority.  Clearly that's not 
realistic and it's not a workable suggestion. 
 
It would be my view, Mr. Speaker, and I think supported by history, that 
when the Government of Saskatchewan decides what its most important 
responsibility is that it must address for the people, that that number one 
priority has to be employment.  It being the responsibility of the 
Government of Saskatchewan not to create all that employment.  Clearly 
there is no one in this Assembly who makes the suggestion that that is the 
solution, but that it is the responsibility of the Government of 
Saskatchewan to create an environment, an environment in which employment 
is stimulated and created, and most importantly, enjoyed by the people of 
our province.  That's the number one responsibility. 
 
If government is successful in meeting that responsibility, Mr. Speaker, so 
many of the other responsibilities and problems with which we address 
ourselves in this Assembly, by and large, take care of themselves.  It's no 
magic; people who are working pay income tax instead of drawing from 
support system.  It's no magic, Mr. Speaker, people who are making a living 
and can afford good food and recreation and healthy life-styles, are less 
of a drain on the costs of our health care systems than those who live in 
poverty.  That's not magic.  It's no magic, Mr. Speaker, when people are 
working, they're less inclined to do things that they would otherwise not 
do to live outside the law and become involved in our human justice system 
and our corrections system, which is extremely expensive in dollars and 
cents and in the human spirit. 
 
It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that the measure of effective government 
ultimately has to come down to the effectiveness with which it addresses 
its responsibility to create an environment to stimulate employment for our 
citizens. 



 

 

 
And it seems to me that the time has come to take a new direction to bring 
together those interests who are involved in the economy of the province of 
Saskatchewan, a large number of whom are what we would call the private 
sector -- some of whom are large; the large majority of whom are what we 
would call family business -- to bring together those common interests, 
along with the co-operative sector. 
 
The co-operative sector, Mr. Speaker, in this province has played a very, 
very significant role in assisting to provide economic security and some 
employment opportunity as well.  And we've seen it demonstrated through 
credit unions and the wheat pool and housing co-ops and co-operative retail 
ventures as well, and on and on. 
 
And we need to bring together the co-operators, those who see themselves as 
involved in the economy as employers, but also as financiers.  The 
co-operators and the private sector along, Mr. Speaker, as well with that 
very important sector, the public sector. 
 
And perhaps what is really the bottom line in all of this is that 
somebody's got to show the leadership.  Somebody has to say, we've suffered 
enough in this province.  We've got to quit beating ourselves. 
 
We know we don't have a lot of natural advantages.  We know that we've got 
a small population in a large province in a harsh climate -- we accept 
that.  We know that we also have some beautiful things going for us: we 
have one of the most sensitive, most caring societies, not just in Canada, 
Mr. Speaker, but I would suggest in all of North America.  We have people 
whose history includes a willingness to work together. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that it is time for a government of 
Saskatchewan to seize the responsibility to provide some leadership.  Not 
smoke and mirrors kind of leadership in this fuzzy thing called Consensus 
Saskatchewan -- I won't get onto that -- that's not what we need, Mr. 
Speaker.  What we need is some economic leadership, some leadership with 
ideas for the creation of employment that would truly lead, truly lead to 
the diversification of our economy, using our natural strengths and 
agricultural products -- production of agricultural products -- and our 
natural resources. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the phenomenon of Saskatchewan people -- in which we 
truly do have people who are hard-working, salt of the earth individuals, 
many of whom have grown up in rural Saskatchewan -- and that in itself, Mr. 
Speaker, makes rural Saskatchewan worth saving because of the kind of 
attitude and approach and the hard-working diligence that is characteristic 
of Saskatchewan people. 
 
We've got all of these things going for us and what we need is some 
leadership.  We need a government that is willing to provide some 
leadership and to be the facilitator to bring those actors around the same 
table and to point out that we all have a common vested interest that if 
the economy of Saskatchewan improves, that's good for the private sector, 
large corporations as well as family business on Main Street, Saskatchewan.  



 

 

If the economy improves, that improves the opportunities for the 
co-operative sector and the ability of people in small communities to band 
together to do the things they want to get done. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we recognize that historically in our province we've 
needed, in order to project that confidence in the economy and that sense 
of leadership, the public sector as well.  And sometimes that's through 
Crown corporations and sometimes through the Government of Saskatchewan 
itself, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That's the direction that we need to move.  That's what the people of 
Saskatchewan need by way of leadership from its government, Mr. Speaker.  
What I'm talking about is nothing more than the mixed economy, the model 
that has proved so successful for the past over half a century, and has 
proved successful when implemented by CCF and NDP governments.  That when 
you take an honest look at the population trends, at the whole picture, you 
recognize that the peaks in our population were brought to us through the 
leadership of CCF and NDP governments, and the valleys through the 
leadership of Liberal and Conservative governments, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That's all that we're calling for, Mr. Speaker.  And to the mixed economy, 
I conclude by saying yes; and to privatization, I conclude by saying no. 
 
Mr. Speaker, having said that and brought these remarks to the Assembly 
which I hope have not been overly inflammatory and do reflect a sincere 
look at the facts of the history of Saskatchewan; and having considered 
that, Mr. Speaker, I therefore move, seconded by the member for Saskatoon 
Eastview: 
 

 That this Assembly condemns the Government of Saskatchewan's mismanagement 
of the provincial economy which has resulted in the record out-migration 
of more than 65,000 people in the last five years. 

 
I so move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1530) 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I am 
pleased to second the motion of my colleague from Moose Jaw North, 
condemning this government, the Government of Saskatchewan, for so 
mismanaging the economy that 65,000 more people left this province during 
the last five years than entered, Mr. Speaker.  I know that you will have 
trouble imagining that, Mr. Speaker, that the numbers are so staggering.  
But they are true, Mr. Speaker.  They are true. 
 
At the outset, I would like to commend my colleague from Moose Jaw North, 
because this out-migration trend is very serious and deserves to be brought 
to the attention of the public, Mr. Speaker.  And it is a sign of very 
serious economic problems in this province, Mr. Speaker, very serious 
economic problems. 
 



 

 

And it's a matter of importance to all the people of Saskatchewan that 
people are leaving in record numbers at the very time, Mr. Speaker, when 
we've got a privatization conference going on in Saskatoon.  And we've 
become aware recently that this government has apparently hundreds of more 
privatization schemes that they're about to embark on, and given the 
incredible failure of privatization in the province, Mr. Speaker, I commend 
my colleague from Moose Jaw North for his very thoughtful comments on this 
topic. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as my colleague has indicated, the official record clearly 
shows a clear pattern of high out-migration during Tory and Liberal or 
right-wing regimes, and a period of growth and prosperity and population 
stabilization, on balance during the period of CCF and NDP rules in this 
province.  So, Mr. Speaker, this is not just a normal trend as the minister 
of Trade and Diversification would like us to believe. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the provincial statistics show a net out-migration of 
65,000 people in five short years, or is equivalent to the loss I would say 
of 65 towns the size of Carnduff, which just simply disappear off the face 
of Saskatchewan.  And I use Carnduff because that happens to be my home 
town, and that community has a thousand people and is very important to me, 
Mr. Speaker; it's very important to the people of that area.  And when we 
think of 65 Carnduffs just disappearing, I find that very difficult to 
believe, Mr. Speaker. And that's kind of a way of presenting the magnitude 
of the problem that we've been facing over the last five years. 
 
Or, Mr. Speaker, when 24 Carnduffs leave in 1989 alone, Mr. Speaker, I can 
hardly believe that, and I know that neither can you, Mr. Speaker.  But the 
fact is that it has happened, Mr. Speaker, and I found it very disturbing 
that the Minister of Finance, who is charged with the responsibility of 
resolving this incredible outflow of people, many of them being young, that 
the Minister of Finance began this debate by chuckling and laughing and 
down-playing this as an important matter and was quite rightfully taken to 
task by my colleague from Moose Jaw North.  This is not a laughing matter, 
nor was it a laughing matter in question period when the member from 
Athabasca was asking questions about whether or not food subsidies in the 
North were going to be re-established, which he never got an answer to, Mr. 
Speaker.  Or I assume the answer is no, because he never got an answer to 
it.  These are not funny matters, Mr. Speaker, and I know you agree with 
that.  These are very serious issues. 
 
When we discovered that of these 65,000 people, as my colleague has pointed 
out, some 60 per cent plus of these people leaving the province are young 
people under the age of 34, it is apparent that this has very serious 
implications for the province of Saskatchewan, especially given our already 
small population and given the ageing population in Saskatchewan. 
 
This government likes to talk about valuing families, valuing young people, 
and about community building.  Mr. Speaker, they like to talk about it but 
their record in fact is quite different and we all know the lines that they 
use.  They've even gone so far, Mr. Speaker, as to set up a ministry of the 
Family, who in seven months has still not made any meaningful contribution 
in the province to dealing with the real issues that face Saskatchewan 



 

 

people, which by and large are the impact of this government's policies on 
families.  This minister is supposed to reassess those. 
 
It's very clear by all the economic and financial indicators that many, 
many people in Saskatchewan are suffering.  The Minister of Family has been 
basically a cheer-leader promoting and supporting the initiatives of this 
government up to this point. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the citizens of Saskatchewan well remember this Premier's 
slogan in 1982, where he said, let's bring the children home. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the actions don't match this slogan, the actions of the 
last eight years.  The policies of this Premier have had the opposite 
impact to bringing children home.  And it's a matter of public record, Mr. 
Speaker, that in fact 65,000 people have left the province, net 
out-migration over the last five years.  It's a matter of public record and 
as we saw from 1989, the situation is getting worse.  Surely that's an 
indication that the economic direction that this government has pursued for 
the last eight years is not working, otherwise the situation would be 
beginning to turn around. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it's also a matter of public record, some indicators about the 
economy and the finances that I would just like to briefly allude to 
because I think they very much relate to the fact that people have to leave 
Saskatchewan to get employment and educational opportunities elsewhere. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as my colleague from Moose Jaw North pointed out, we have the 
poorest job creation record of any province in Canada.  As he correctly 
pointed out as well, we are the only province whose labour force shrunk in 
1989, Mr. Speaker.  Surely that's an indication that we're on the wrong 
path. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many other indicators about this record.  Again 
these are StatsCanada records; they're public records in terms of our 
performance here.  Since 1982, for a Premier who wanted to bring the 
children home, our youth labour force has dropped by 20 per cent -- by 
20,000 people, pardon me.  By 20,000 people, the labour force has dropped 
for young people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Our youth unemployment rate is over 17 per cent, Mr. Speaker.  In the 
North, our youth unemployment rate is over 85 per cent.  We are losing some 
1,000 families off the farms every year, Mr. Speaker, who are having to 
come to the city or in fact leave the province for other opportunities. 
 
In fact over the last eight years we have only created 3,700 jobs per year.  
When you consider that the previous 10 years had a job creation record of 
three times that amount, Mr. Speaker, you have some way to compare just how 
dismal the job creation record has been of this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is that young people and young families 
have had no choice but to leave Saskatchewan.  That's the sad part of it -- 
they're being forced, they've been forced to leave. 
 



 

 

Mr. Speaker, another objective indicator is that we've had nine straight 
deficit budgets by this government.  This government has been out $1.9 
billion just in their projections about the deficit, Mr. Speaker.  Half the 
deficit is an error.  And, Mr. Speaker, there are those who would suggest 
that a lot of this error has been by convenience.  As we know, during the 
1986-87 election, the Finance minister was some $800 million out, and not 
even that Finance minister could have been out that far, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But there are many more indicators that show the state of affairs in the 
province today, which directly impact on people having to leave the 
province, Mr. Speaker.  We've got the highest per capita debt of any 
province in Canada.  This government inherited the lowest per capita debt 
of any province in Canada.  So there's no money for jobs, no money for job 
creation, and there's no money for support to small business and real 
economic diversification, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have the highest per capita taxes of any province in 
Canada.  Again this government inherited the lowest per capita taxes of any 
province in Canada.  We've got the highest per capita debt even when you 
remove and ignore and set aside some of the tax schemes they've had, like 
the used car tax and the lottery tax and the others that just slip my mind 
at the moment.  Even with the current taxes, it's the highest in all of 
Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it makes it very tough for small-business people, in the face 
of high debt of the province, to expand and to hire additional young 
people, and indeed as we saw yesterday from the people who came down from 
Saskatoon Eastview, to even survive, Mr. Speaker, in the face of these 
obstacles. 
 
There are many more examples, Mr. Speaker.  We pay over $1.3 million per 
day just on interest on that debt.  Mr. Speaker, 500 million per year of 
our revenue comes from equalization from the federal government, Mr. 
Speaker.  Essentially what has happened is in eight years this province has 
become bankrupt, and essentially, Mr. Speaker, we're on welfare.  That's 
the state of the nation in Saskatchewan today. 
 
We have record level small-business bankruptcies and personal bankruptcies.  
The last three years in a row we have established records in those areas, 
and in 1989 we're setting another record pace, Mr. Speaker.  Now if you 
accept, if you accept the premise, as we do on this side of the House, that 
small-business people are the backbone of our economy and then you see 
three years of record level debts for small-business people, heading for a 
fourth year, then, Mr. Speaker, you can see that we're clearly going in a 
wrong direction, and it's a clear sign that small-business people are not 
being supported in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our universities are in a crisis.  We've got quotas imposed by 
this government who say they value young people.  We've got overcrowding.  
We've got antiquated libraries, ranking almost the lowest of any university 
in Canada.  We've got computer equipment that doesn't work.  And again, Mr. 
Speaker, I found it very disturbing to have the front benches laughing 
about that in question period today.  That's a serious matter for people in 



 

 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, not one to be taken lightly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the assets of this province that took many years to build up 
were owned by the public of Saskatchewan, have been given away by this 
Premier and his government at fire sale bargains.  Yet we still have record 
level debts, Mr. Speaker.  We've lost over $2.1 billion in oil revenues 
alone since 1982, Mr. Speaker, because of the tax holidays that these 
people have given. 
 
Most of the economic development money has gone into expensive megaprojects 
that create very few jobs, when people of Saskatchewan take all the risks 
at the expense of the small-business sector, Mr. Speaker, and at the 
expense of the co-operative sector in this province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, you know, that's not just the New Democratic Party 
talking.  The Federation of Independent Business is concerned about the 
amount of money put into big megaprojects by this government and the risk 
that they put the people of Saskatchewan to, as is the chamber of commerce, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, this government continues to take the view that we know 
best.  That's a view that we've seen every day in this House during this 
session. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the recent throne speech and budget speeches offered no 
solutions to these indicators that I've indicated are public record, a 
matter of public record.  And the indicators are all going in a negative 
direction. 
 
(1545) 
 
What we saw in both the throne speech and the budget speeches were more 
problems for Saskatchewan families and Saskatchewan young people.  That's 
going to be the net effect of the budget; more debt to Saskatchewan 
taxpayers; higher taxes, although they're saying there are no tax 
increases. It's another deception, Mr. Speaker.  There have been many ways 
in which taxes are going to have to increase and have been announced 
already, as they've shifted the burden to lower levels of government, 
although they said they wouldn't do that, like the feds did to the 
provinces. They've done the same thing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they've made cuts.  If you can imagine this, given the fact 
that 17 per cent of our young people are unemployed, they made a million 
dollars in cuts to employment opportunities programs.  Since 1986-87, Mr. 
Speaker, this government has made $7.5 million cuts to youth employment 
programs.  So they raise tuition fees for students, force our universities 
to raise tuition fees and say, well they're not really doing it.  Then they 
make cuts to summer employment programs that give students no ability to 
have summer employment so they can go back to university.  But $7.5 million 
they've cut during this term of office, Mr. Speaker, in summer employment 
program. 
 
Cut back student loans, Mr. Speaker.  Putting money into student loans they 



 

 

say, but that's another deception.  It's not new student loans.  They in 
fact have been cutting off, cutting down student loans, cutting back on 
bursary programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the face of some 85 per cent unemployment for young native 
people in the North, we saw a 7.1 per cent decrease in native training 
programs in this budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it's a budget that's going to inflict more poverty on 
Saskatchewan people, a freeze in the family income plan benefits, a freeze 
again in the child care subsidy.  They have not increased that subsidy in 
eight years, Mr. Speaker.  And, Mr. Speaker, they continue as of today, 
refuse to subsidize food going to northern Saskatchewan, but they subsidize 
alcohol, Mr. Speaker.  That's their priority, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, all of these things -- this budget, the throne speech -- 
are going to do nothing but contribute to more young people leaving the 
province.  And I know we're going to see the results, the statistics any 
day now on April, and, Mr. Speaker, I'll be very surprised if there's any 
change in the loss of people to the province and the trend. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this is the current situation.  These are the indicators 
which are a matter of public record that we see in Saskatchewan today.  
And, Mr. Speaker, I would submit that young people have no choice but to 
leave.  One's need to survive and to work is very strong, Mr. Speaker, and 
people simply have to leave to get those opportunities. 
 
Now this government has taken the position, well it's not our fault.  
They've blamed the Europeans and they've blamed the Americans and now 
they're starting to blame the federal government, which is interesting when 
the Premier's been on the bandwagon and a cheer-leader of all the federal 
initiatives.  But they blamed the drought and the grasshoppers. 
 
They say they're down on family violence, as my colleague says, at a time 
when they cut back on transition houses.  But they blame unemployed people.  
They blame poor people.  They won't meet with farmers when they come into 
the legislature, Mr. Speaker.  They wouldn't meet with small-business 
people yesterday until we had to shame them into it.  Mr. Speaker, they 
blame the opposition. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, they've reached new heights.  The new super-minister from 
Melville, the member who created a situation in Saskatchewan which allowed 
food banks to thrive, the member who created a situation in Saskatchewan 
that allowed us to now have the highest rate of poverty in all of Canada at 
almost 18 per cent, Mr. Speaker, he is blaming the public of Saskatchewan 
for being so far behind the rest of the world. 
 
And I would like to quote, just if I can, the comments that . . . this is a 
direct quote that he made on May 11 regarding . . . I guess leading up to 
the privatization conference and regarding the poll that was released last 
Friday, the privatization poll.  And he said, I quote: 
 

 If the thinking of people of Saskatchewan is behind the world, should we 



 

 

go to the level of the people of Saskatchewan or should we go to the level 
of the world?  That's the question.  I would be more inclined to lead the 
people of Saskatchewan into the world, to the level of the rest of the 
world, rather than hide here and be 10 or 15 years behind the world as has 
been the case for so long. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that's what the new super-minister who's charged with 
diversification and job creation has said about the people of Saskatchewan.  
Mr. Speaker, I don't think the people of Saskatchewan have ever seen that 
kind of arrogance by any minister of any government, Mr. Speaker.  That's a 
profound disrespect, Mr. Speaker -- that's a direct quote -- it's a 
profound disrespect for the 1 million citizens who have managed very well 
in this province over the years. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this minister who offends the public of Saskatchewan by 
saying they're 10, 15 years behind the world, has forgotten that he is 
accountable to the people of Saskatchewan; they're not accountable to him. 
And he had better remember that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the public of Saskatchewan is tired of that kind of arrogance.  
The public is tired of the view that we know best for you, that this 
government exhibits.  They're tired of that approach, especially in the 
face, Mr. Speaker, in the face of all the economic and financial and social 
indicators which are going in a negative direction.  And the public, Mr. 
Speaker, I might add, is tired of the mismanagement and of the scandals of 
this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on a personal and on a family level, what happens when 65,000 
people, when there's a net out-migration of 65,000 people in such a short 
time as five years?  What does it really mean when 65 communities the size 
of my home town of Carnduff just disappear off the face of Saskatchewan? 
 
Well it's no mystery, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to you, being from rural 
Saskatchewan.  Towns get smaller as young people can't afford to take over 
the family farm, they can't afford to take over small business in rural 
communities, they can't afford to work in the post office because the post 
offices are closing, and they can't afford to work in the lumber yard 
because the lumber yards are closing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These young people won't return, Mr. Speaker.  Once they leave small town 
Saskatchewan, they won't return, leaving an older population in these 
towns.  And the consequence, Mr. Speaker, is a slow death to the towns like 
Carnduff, which is my home town and which is so important to me. 
 
Taking that a bit further, Mr. Speaker, what happens when all of these 
young people leave small towns is that the tax base goes down.  The tax 
base goes down, and especially since this government is shifting the tax 
load to the local level, as you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Taxes at the 
local level have to go up, and that creates more pressure, puts more 
pressure on rural communities, Mr. Speaker.  Therefore, it becomes a 
vicious circle, and that's the problem we find ourselves in today. 
 
When we have a net out-migration of 65,000 people and they leave 



 

 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, you know this and I know this, families are torn 
apart.  There are fewer supports to families, fewer supports at a time when 
in fact most of our families need more supports, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We lose our bright minds and we lose our energy to other provinces because 
of quotas on universities, because of long lines, increased lines at our 
technical schools, Mr. Speaker.  And because, Mr. Speaker, given our high 
unemployment rate, given the privatization agenda which has not generated 
new employment but in fact has given us the worst job creation record in 
all of Canada, our young people simply have to leave. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has always viewed education for ordinary 
Saskatchewan citizens as an unnecessary expense.  I think an indication of 
that is that we spend the least percentage of our budget on education than 
any other province, and we spend the least per capita on education than any 
other province, Mr. Speaker.  That's an indication that this province does 
not value education as an investment in our young people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other thing that has happened in this province, those who 
have become educated have taken their knowledge and their skills and their 
experience to other provinces.  Mr. Speaker, they are only seeking 
opportunities that they have a right to expect. 
 
The bottom line, Mr. Speaker, is that we are exporting our future.  That's 
what happens when 65,000 people net, leave in a period of five short years 
with no indication that that trend is going to be reversed.  Well, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I know that you agree that this trend has got to be 
stopped.  This trend has got to be reversed. 
 
For eight years this government has been selling assets owned by the people 
of the province and have been privatizing.  The Associate Minister of 
Economic Development and Trade or Diversification or whatever his title is, 
because it keeps changing, said yesterday, the associate deputy, that in 
1982, this government received a mandate to privatize. 
 
I suspect, Mr. Speaker, that he got his fingers slapped last night because 
clearly this is not the case.  This government did not get a mandate to 
privatize in 1982.  In fact, in 1986 prior to the election, they said they 
wouldn't privatize.  What did they do as soon as the election was over?  
They began privatizing with a vengeance, Mr. Speaker. 
 
At any rate, Mr. Speaker, the Premier's privatization initiatives have been 
vast.  They've cut deep into Saskatchewan.  The bottom line is have they 
worked?  I mean that's the true test.  Have the privatization initiatives 
worked? 
 
Well in the face of record-level unemployment, in the face of the poorest 
job creation record last year in all of Canada, in the face of three years 
of record-level business bankruptcies and personal bankruptcies -- with 
1989 going to set a new trend, a new record -- in the face of record-level 
taxes and record-level debt and record-level poverty, and record-level 
out-migration, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the answer as to whether or not 
privatization is working is a clear and unequivocal no. 



 

 

 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that's not the way this Premier reads the 
situation.  That's not the way that this government reads it.  We find out 
that the new super-deputy minister in this new department says that 
hundreds of new privatization projects are either under study or are being 
specifically planned. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government's agenda is clear.  Even in the 
face of record level out-migration which we've seen, they will continue to 
privatize, and they'll call it whatever they need to do in order to 
privatize. 
 
They supported free trade.  They've promoted deregulation.  They've 
promoted erosion of the wheat board.  They've placed pressure on family 
farms by legal actions and foreclosures.  They supported VIA Rail cuts; the 
Premier called those . . . it's a rationalization of a rail system.  They 
have not opposed post office closures.  All of these things, Mr. Speaker, 
with privatization, has had the consequence that the public of Saskatchewan 
knew was predictable, and that is record level out-migration, Mr. Speaker, 
as one of the symptoms, one of the indicators. 
 
This Premier will continue to privatize, while telling the public that he 
isn't doing it.  Well, Mr. Speaker, the public of Saskatchewan wants this 
Premier and his government to be privatized, and the sooner the better. 
 
This government, Mr. Speaker, is so arrogant, they're so deceptive, they 
are so deceiving, Mr. Speaker, and they are so self-serving that they will 
continue to privatize in the face of the fact that 70 per cent of the 
public of Saskatchewan opposes their actions.  Mr. Speaker, young families 
and young people will continue to leave Saskatchewan in record numbers 
because they are given no choice, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the incompetence of this government has been bad enough, but 
their broken public trust is another matter.  Saskatchewan citizens are 
honest, they're hard-working, and, Mr. Speaker, they're forgiving.  But 
they do expect, Mr. Speaker, from their governments, integrity.  They 
expect straight answers.  They expect competence, fairness, and they expect 
to be treated with respect, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
This government is not providing any of these qualities, which is an 
indication of their low standing in the polls, which is an indication that 
the GST (goods and services tax) is even more popular than this government, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, given that all the indicators that I've outlined are 
going in a negative direction, many people in the province have concluded 
that under this Tory administration in Saskatchewan and under the Tory 
administration in Ottawa, this province is going down the tubes. 
 
The Red Cross study, which is a very extensive study, one that I'm sure 
that you have looked at, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one that I hope the Minister 
of the Family has looked at and studied as he's reflected on the impact of 
this government's policies on the people of Saskatchewan, concluded, Mr. 



 

 

Speaker, that the spirit of Saskatchewan citizens is almost broken.  And in 
a very nice way, they pretty well lay the responsibility for that at the 
feet of this government. 
 
(1600) 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we've had eight years of Tory government in Saskatchewan; 
we've had five years of Tory government in Ottawa.  If the Tory philosophy 
and if the Tory policies were going to work, five full years of overlapping 
-- provincial and federal Tories overlapping -- should have had the 
indicators going in a positive direction.  But this is not the case, Mr. 
Speaker.  Members opposite cannot tell me one indicator that's going in a 
positive direction.  And the fact of the matter is young people and 
families are leaving the province in record numbers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I urge this government to make a commitment to full 
employment.  That's all it will take.  To make a commitment to supporting 
young people and families and pledge their support to full employment, 
pledge their support, make that clear in their policies, their support to 
provide meaningful educational and employment opportunities for our youth, 
pledge their support to investing appropriately in the education of our 
young people. 
 
 DTo put the interests of the average citizens ahead of the Cargills, Mr. 
Speaker, to provide supports, the same supports, just a fair treatment to 
small-business people that they're providing to the Cargills of the world.  
That's all small-business people are asking for.  They're not asking for 
any special considerations; they're asking for fair treatment to the 
Weyerhaeusers and the Pocklingtons and the Cargills. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those are the only ways, by making a commitment to full 
employment, by making a commitment, as my colleague explained from Moose 
Jaw North, to the mixed economy, that is the only way that real economic 
diversification will occur in Saskatchewan, because that's been the only 
way it has occurred in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  And the record of 
privatization is showing very clearly that it just simply is not working, 
and it is not working anywhere despite the rhetoric of members opposite, 
despite the rhetoric we see going on in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people are always right.  They will judge this 
government on its performance and they will not forget their brothers or 
sisters or cousins or family members who reside now in some other province.  
They will not forget that in five short years 65 communities the size of 
Carnduff, Saskatchewan have disappeared off the face of the Saskatchewan 
map. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, in closing I join my colleague from Moose Jaw North 
in condemning the Government of Saskatchewan for this incredibly poor 
record which has driven our young people and our young families to other 
provinces, and I support this motion which says: 
 

 That this Assembly condemns the Government of Saskatchewan's mismanagement 
of the provincial economy which has resulted in the record out-migration 



 

 

of more than 65,000 people in the last five years. 
 

Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it's with some pride 
that I stand in my place here and take part in this debate.  And basically 
it's for the purpose and the reason which I will be later initiating an 
amendment to this particular motion here in this Assembly. 
 
But I want to indicate to you, sir, that the words I am about to give you, 
are not my words but they are words of the Investment Dealers Association 
of Canada, an organization away from government and independent of all 
political bodies. 
 
And I want to indicate to you, sir, that the particular suggestion the 
members opposite were saying . . . were giving this Assembly for condemning 
the government, I want to turn that around in my conversation I have here 
with you today, and through you to members of the opposition, in this 
particular debate. 
 
I want to turn those and indicate to the members opposite that if they care 
to listen, they may cheer up a bit.  If I had to listen to that kind of 
rhetoric day in and day out, sir, I would tend to think that negativeness 
that has been appearing in this Assembly from members of the opposition, 
that I would find it very hard to even live with myself, let alone with 
anyone else.  And I tend to think that I'd try to cheer them up and tell 
them that things are just not so bad here in the province of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to indicate to you, sir, that through the Investment Dealers 
Association of Canada, I want to point out to you a few of the major points 
that they have demonstrated through their media release last week.  And 
this was the "Economic Outlook (for) Saskatchewan" was the headline of 
their booklet that they had published for public viewing.  And I want to 
say to you, Mr. Speaker, that this is their words, not mine, but here is . 
. . I'm going to give you some of the five major points, and this is it: 
 

 Following two years of negative real growth, (in the province and that's 
due to) the provincial economy staged a strong recovery last year.  Real 
GDP expanded by 6.4 per cent in 1989.  This robust rate of growth is 
attributed to improved conditions in the agricultural sector.  Real growth 
will moderate to approximately 4.5 per cent in 1990, but this is well 
above the national growth rate. 

 
Now I want to indicate to you that that is totally opposite to what the NDP 
have been saying to us this afternoon. 
 
It goes on for a point number two, that: 
 

 Total farm cash receipts advanced by almost 4 per cent in 1989, reflecting 
higher crops and livestock cash receipts. 



 

 

 
Well the outlook for wheat production this year is favourable, given 
improved soil moisture conditions.  And, Mr. Speaker, as we see it's 
raining again out there today, and I call that a kind of a million-dollar 
rain.  We can only thank God for the sending of the moisture.  And just to 
kind of expand on the fact that politicians can't do those kinds of things, 
we have to rely on the guy up above to handle that part of it. 
 
It realized net farm income: 
 

 However, realized net farm income will decline, due to an increase in 
operating costs and a sharp cut in government assistance to farmers this 
year. 

 
Well, I'm going to get to that a little later.  And I'm going to tell you 
where that government funding has to come from.  And that was because we 
had a main motion, here in this Assembly, by members of the opposition as 
well as government, where we joined together in telling the federal 
government and sending that very strong motion to the federal government 
that it is their duty to assist the farming sector in this province. 
 
I want to continue on, sir, and tell the members opposite that the: 
 

 Business capital investment declined by 11.1 per cent in real terms last 
year.  Weakness in business investment was particularly evident in the 
non-residental construction and manufacturing sectors.  This year, a surge 
in manufacturing investment spending is expected, reflecting the ongoing 
diversification of the provincial economy.  In fact, we expect business 
investment to increase by 23 per cent in real terms, the highest rate of 
growth amongst all the provinces in Canada. 

 
 Modest employment growth is expected in 1990, following two years of 

declining employment levels.  However, employment gains this year will 
enable the rate of unemployment to fall to (approximately) 7.1 percent 
from 7.4 percent in 1989. 

 
 The government made significant . . ." 
 

And this is the Investment Dealers Association of Canada's words as well: 
 

 The government made significant progress in deficit reduction in the past 
three fiscal years.  The budget deficit, measured as a share of GDP, is 
expected to fall to 1.7 percent in 1990-91 from 2 percent in 1989-90.  The 
province's sound fiscal management has strengthened business investment. 

 
That's not the government's word, sir.  That is not the government's word.  
That is not any political rhetoric.  That is Investment Dealers Association 
of Canada.  And I challenge any one of the members of the opposition to 
stand in their places and deny that this is not fact.  To take on the 
investment dealers' organization across this country, the members opposite 
know would be total chaos, and they know that they would be stomped into 
the ground with any kind of political wrangling from their negative points 
of view. 



 

 

 
Mr. Speaker, population loss has been, and is, a very real and pressing 
concern.  It is in any province.  It is in this province.  It is in 
Alberta.  It is in British Columbia and it's Ontario, and indeed every 
province, in every country, in all parts of the world, wherever there is a 
population loss. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what I would like to tend to bring to the Assembly's 
attention are, not dwell on the negatives, not dwell on the negatives at 
all, but let's reach for the optimistic views and the optimistic ideas and 
trends that can take place to turn this particular situation. 
 
It's no secret, and we've said this in this Assembly time and time again, 
that it's been no secret that Saskatchewan has fell upon some very 
difficult times.  And members of the opposition say, well the Tory times 
had been the difficult times.  Well I'm going to explain to you sir, that I 
would believe that the people in the province of Saskatchewan thank God 
that there is Tories in tough times, because it was us that did not turn 
our backs on the agricultural community here in the province of 
Saskatchewan, or home owners, as had the NDP back in 1981 when interest 
rates skyrocketed to 24 per cent interest. 
 
Difficult economic times for any government are difficult times for any 
administration -- they're difficult.  But you have to be prepared to 
challenge those difficulties and look forward, look well into the future 
and look at what can be done to eliminate certain pressures. 
 
This province has suffered droughts not unlike those of the dirty thirties.  
We are facing the effects of high interest rates, inflation, inflated land 
prices, federal cut-backs, international subsidy wars, and increasing debt.  
We are facing the harsh reality that many farmers are caught with heavy 
debt loads and with no production options to fall back on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, agriculture is this province's number one industry, and 
members of the opposition best listen.  It is what makes this province 
tick.  For the past few years our farm families have been taking a beating.  
And we all know, Mr. Speaker, when farmers suffer, we all suffer. 
 
(1615) 
 
The effects of the farm crisis in this province are far-reaching.  It is 
threatening to our farms; it is threatening small business, and it is 
threatening our towns and communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is only natural that when times are tough, people look for 
greener pastures.  And that's not to say that we haven't addressed the 
economic crisis here in Saskatchewan.  This government has done more to 
ease the hardships felt by our farming sectors.  We have got more out of 
Ottawa than any other administration before us.  And members opposite know 
fair well that that's the truth and that's fact. 
 
This government has delivered hundreds of millions of dollars, billions of 
dollars, and provided low interest protection.  Mr. Speaker, we have done 



 

 

much to protect Saskatchewan farmers from the ravaging effects of drought, 
low prices, high interest rates.  We have done much and we must continue to 
do a lot more.  We have vowed to stand behind the farmer in these tough 
times, and we have vowed to do what it takes to find both immediate and 
long-term solutions to the farm crisis in Saskatchewan. 
 
And just to mention a few examples of our commitment, we created the 
Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan, and we introduced the 
guaranteed vendor mortgage program, and we established the farm security 
Act -- all important programs to help protect farmers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have helped farm families consolidate loans and manage their debt 
problems.  We argued in Geneva for changes to the General Agreement on 
Tariffs and Trade, to eliminate unfair advantages for small grain producing 
countries.  More recently, Mr. Speaker, we provided farmers with $525 
million in the form of short-term operating loans to plant this year's 
crop.  And we are still pressing the government, as I'd mentioned earlier, 
to honour their commitment to the farmers of this province. 
 
And we have embarked on the greatest diversification effort in the history 
of Saskatchewan -- diversification, Mr. Speaker, which means jobs.  We are 
getting away from having all our eggs in one basket so that when one 
industry is experiencing a recession, the whole province won't be 
devastated. 
 
We have built our own paper mill in Prince Albert.  We have built a cable 
factory in Moose Jaw.  We have built a bacon plant in North Battleford, an 
upgrader in Regina, and now one is under construction in Lloydminster.  A 
pharmaceutical company in Wolseley, a recreation vehicle company, a tractor 
manufacturer, a turbine plant, an entire computer industry in Saskatoon, a 
huge natural gas exploration and development industry.  And soon yes, Mr. 
Speaker, we will have our own fertilizer plant at Belle Plaine. 
 
Our diversification efforts are not only creating jobs, sir.  By processing 
more of our resources at home, we are preserving for this province the 
benefits of those resources.  And on top of that, we have built hospitals 
and medical facilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is no moratorium in Saskatchewan.  We have built schools 
and added and renovated dozens of others.  We have expanded and enhanced 
our educational system.  We have built nursing homes, constructed community 
rinks, museums, galleries.  And the list goes on and on and on. 
 
We have accomplished all of this, Mr. Speaker, in the face of great 
difficulty.  We have diversified; we have created jobs, and even though we 
have seen a drop in our population, we are still holding our own here in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have in front of me some figures from Statistics Canada, and 
I think they're useful to this discussion.  When the members opposite were 
in power, and I'm sure the member that is going to be seconding the 
amendment, he will be dwelling on it a little bit longer. 
 



 

 

But when the members, the NDP opposition, were in power in what they were 
known as "the good times" in the 70s, they had a net population loss in 
1971, 1972, '73, '74, '78, '79, and yes, 1980.  When the NDP were in power, 
there was a net population loss totalling some 60,000 people -- 60,000 
people, Mr. Speaker, in times of stable growing conditions and in times of 
record prices for grain and oil.  The NDP lost 60,000 people when the 
economy was booming, when the sun shone and the rain fell. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1982, the year that this government was elected, people 
came to this province in droves.  In fact, up until 1987, this government 
had a net population gain in this province.  And in 1984 Saskatchewan's 
population exceeded one million people for the very first time, the very 
first time.  And our population today continues to grow, even during years 
of drought and international subsidy wars.  I think it's also worth noting 
that under the NDP the maximum population in this province amounted to only 
968,000. 
 
It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that under this government, under this Tory 
government, we have managed to outdo the NDP by tens of thousands of 
people.  Again, I am not trying to minimize the population loss we have 
experienced over the past couple of years.  Not at all.  But, Mr. Speaker, 
it is worth asking what our population figures would look like if we 
weren't diversifying, if we weren't helping the farmers, and if we had the 
policies of the 1970s, the NDP policies. 
 
I think that it would be accurate to say that it is the NDP lost 60,000 
people during years of good weather and high commodity prices, that our net 
migration figures would be much more alarming in the members opposite . . . 
if the members of the NDP were in power today.  If you can lose 60,000 when 
times are good, imagine what the NDP could lose today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to you again that they're not my words; 
they're the words of the investment dealers of Canada, the people that 
invest and create jobs right across this nation. 
 
I want to indicate to you, sir, that the member that moved this motion 
comes from Moose Jaw.  And I want to indicate to this Assembly and to the 
people that may be watching this debate that it's that member that here in 
this Assembly is against all diversification that takes place in this 
province, until he puts on a different hat when he gets home. 
 
That same member has indicated that he has nothing against the fertilizer 
plant in Belle Plaine when he's at home.  But when he comes to Regina and 
he's not talking to his folks, he's opposed to the fertilizer plant.  He 
joins with the rest of his colleagues in opposing diversification in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, they've opposed the paper mill, they've opposed the 
computer industry here in the province, they've opposed the natural gas 
exploration and development industry here in the province, they've opposed 
the turbine plant, they've opposed the tractor manufacturer, they've 
opposed the recreation vehicle company, they've opposed the pharmaceutical 
company in Wolseley, they've opposed the upgrader in Regina, and they've 



 

 

opposed the upgrader in Lloydminster, they've opposed the bacon plant in 
North Battleford, they've opposed the cable factory in Moose Jaw. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we've heard here today was a bunch of emptiness.  They're 
pleading with the people of Saskatchewan because that's the only thing they 
can do is plead by trying to gain somebody's ear by speaking of negatives.  
Mr. Speaker, people don't want to hear negatives.  They want to hear about 
what government can do to lead and to carry the province into the 21st 
century. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with the negative attitude of the NDP, I would hate to say, I 
would even hate to dream of what Saskatchewan might be under an NDP 
administration.  If they're negative today, they definitely would be a 
whole lot more negativeness tomorrow if those people ever had anything to 
do with creating any kinds of policies here in the province. 
 
And talk about the policies of the NDP, Mr. Speaker.  I want to talk to you 
about the policies of the NDP.  And that's just it -- the word "policy."  
They talk about all this tremendous governing that they would do in this 
province if they ever formed the government, but not once, Mr. Speaker, 
have the NDP come forward to lay out to the people in the province of 
Saskatchewan any of the particular policies that they may have in regards 
to agriculture, in regards to diversifying, in regards to nationalization, 
in regards to -- well, anything. 
 
They don't have policy, Mr. Speaker, or any kind of policy that they wish 
to share with the public of Saskatchewan.  I want to indicate to you, sir, 
that we've had a good indication of what the next election's going to be 
like; it's going to be the mediscare tactic again of the NDP.  They're 
going to try to use privatization as an election platform versus 
nationalization. 
 
I guess, Mr. Speaker, when you look at it and the way they talk of 
privatization, and this administration, what have they done to create jobs 
through the willingness to invest along with corporations to bring jobs and 
industry to this province, is that instead of doing it through the 
privatized sector, they'd wish to do it with government alone funding.  
And, Mr. Speaker, we've all known where that led us prior to the 1980s, 
during the good times and the loss of sixties of thousands of numbers in 
populations. 
 
They talk about the young people.  That's what it's about, sir.  It's about 
the young people.  It's not about you and I.  It's not about the members 
opposite.  We've had our day in the courts, as far as the job situations 
are concerned and stuff.  It's about the young people, the people that are 
coming through the schools.  It's about the ones that haven't even started 
through the education system yet, jobs that haven't even been invented for 
these people, these young people. 
 
(1630) 
 
And those aren't my words.  Those are the words of educators that the 
pre-kindergartens -- young people today, the ones that would be just 



 

 

starting tomorrow or this fall.  The jobs for them by the time they 
graduate haven't even been identified.  That's how quickly this world is 
changing.  And that's how quickly governments and educators and industries 
and everything that makes the world go round must react.  That's how 
quickly you have to react. 
 
And through that, sir, we need positive leadership.  We do not need 
negatives.  We have to join together with all the resources we can muster, 
join together and help protect the environment and build a strong economic 
environment here in the province of Saskatchewan.  I predict to you, sir, 
that by December of this year in the city of Lloydminster where they had a 
48 per cent vacancy rate, I predict that it'll be next to zero vacancy in 
the city of Lloydminster.  I will predict that by Christmas of this year 
you will not be able to rent a facility, a home or apartment in the city of 
Lloydminster.  And I predict that because I'm an optimist. 
 
And I know, as members opposite will have other people still believe that 
the upgrader is not going to be built, well I invite them into my riding.  
The upgrader is being built; it's in the skyline today.  If you drive by 
the Yellowhead on 16, you'll see the upgrader site and you'll see that 
construction is well under way. 
 
There'll be thousands of people in my riding.  Yes, some that are coming 
home to Saskatchewan.  Some young people will be able to come home to 
Saskatchewan and take their rightful place back in their home province. 
 
But I welcome the other people from other provinces as well, be it from 
Nova Scotia, Newfoundland, Ontario, Alberta, British Columbia, Manitoba.  
It doesn't matter, we're all in this together.  We're Canadians and it 
takes all of us to get along in this province and to work and expand and 
diversify, and I welcome all those people. 
 
And I say to you, sir, that instead of talking about things that aren't of 
fact and truth, I ask the NDP opposition to change their ways in this 
Assembly.  I ask the members of the opposition to come clean with the 
public of Saskatchewan. I ask them to put the facts before them, the true 
facts before the people instead of trying to have people in the province 
here believe the untruths just for your own personal political gains. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the resolution before us you will see 
for yourself that those are the reasons why the NDP could not basically 
carry on a debate with their own resolution in this Assembly this 
afternoon.  They said absolutely nothing but cuts in education, cuts in 
health care, scare tactics about government not spending dollars here and 
there and everywhere. 
 
And yet, Mr. Speaker, I look around, and I don't have to look beyond even 
my riding, but just within my riding, and I see those educational 
facilities expanding, I see the hospitals, the new hospitals and nursing 
homes.  I don't see moratoriums, I don't see cut-backs.  Oh yes, maybe they 
haven't got the 15 or 18 or 20 per cent necessarily that they've asked for, 
but I've never seen a decrease.  I've never seen a minus decrease.  I've 
always seen an increase in health budgets.  I've always seen an increase in 



 

 

education budgets.  I've always seen an increase in any social program that 
was definitely necessary for the well-being of the people in this province.  
I've seen increase in protections for farmers and home owners.  I haven't 
seen where our Premier has turned his back on the people in Saskatchewan. 
 
I can tell you this, and I will tell you for true because I share a border 
city between Alberta and Saskatchewan, the city of Lloydminster, that there 
are many Albertans that I talk to share this with me that, gee, wouldn't it 
be nice to have a Premier like you have. 
 
I share that with the members opposite because, I'll tell you something, 
the guy is well appreciated.  The farmers in Alberta realize what our 
Premier has done for agriculture in western Canada.  Not their Premier or 
not their minister, or what their Premier has done for what our Premier has 
done for agriculture throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
I just want to remind, before I move an amendment, Mr. Speaker, I just want 
to remind the members opposite that it's agriculture that is still number 
one in this province, and it's agriculture that will always be number one 
in this province, but it does not prevent us from trying to diversify this 
economy. 
 
And I ask members opposite, instead of all your rhetoric, to join with this 
administration to help diversify this province, to help expand and create 
the jobs so duly needed in this province, and to quit coming into this 
Assembly with ridiculous motions and condemning an administration that's 
trying to build this province and diversify, stabilize all sectors of the 
industries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that's why I'm going to be proud to move the amendment and I 
hope that this week it's in order.  I had some problem last week but I'm 
going to in all seriousness move: 
 

 That all the words after the words "that this Assembly" be deleted and the 
following be substituted therefor: 

 
 commend the Government of Saskatchewan for stimulating the growth, 

diversification, and expansion of the Saskatchewan economy to the 
promotion of new industries like paper manufacturing, oil refining, 
turbine manufacturing, fibre optics technology, tractor production, and 
others which has reversed the practice of exporting jobs out of the 
province and provided jobs and security for thousands of Saskatchewan 
families and career opportunities for our children. 

 
I am proud to move the amendment, sir, seconded by my colleague, the member 
from Yorkton.  Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLaren: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  At the end of my 
remarks, Mr. Speaker, I will be seconding the amendment brought before the 
House by my colleague, the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster, but first I 
would like to make a few comments with respect to the question of 



 

 

out-migration and particularly to the efforts the government has made to 
create jobs in Saskatchewan. 
 
I must say that I was quite disappointed to hear the motion the member from 
Moose Jaw North brought before this House this afternoon.  But given the 
record for this sort of thing, I wasn't too surprised.  After all it has 
been their habit over the past several weeks to avoid the fact that there 
are pressing issues that require attention and effort of all members of the 
Assembly. 
 
However, some accusations were made about the causes of out-migration being 
somehow linked to the government's supposed mismanagement of the provincial 
economy, because this flies in the face of several obvious successes on the 
part of this government, Mr. Speaker.  And I will gladly go over them in 
detail later in my remarks. 
 
I must take issue with these allegations and address the motion put forward 
by the member opposite. 
 
Before I go further, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say, my colleagues and I 
are concerned about people leaving the province of Saskatchewan and it is 
not something that we take lightly, and it is a trend that we are working 
to reverse through the development of the projects and efforts my colleague 
mentioned in his comments.  Yes, there's a problem but there is something 
that we should all realize.  People have always left Saskatchewan.  People 
have always gone to bigger centres in Canada to be closer to the action, to 
take advantages of opportunities that simply do not exist here.  People 
leave for many reasons, Mr. Speaker, and although the members opposite seem 
to feel that only they know what those reasons are, statistics would argue 
with them and so do I. 
 
For an hour we listened to the member from Moose Jaw North about the 
phenomenon of the human tragedy and the tears were almost flowing down his 
cheeks when he mentioned that clause five or six times during his speech. 
 
(1645) 
 
The fact of the matter, Mr. Speaker, that since 1901 people have been 
coming and going from the province of Saskatchewan.  During the CCF days, 
the so-called glorious days, the population went in the '30s, which were 
906,000 people, all the way up to 1959, with their former colleagues in 
power, we lost people.  They lost people during those times as well.  Then 
we get to 1971 and the member from Moose Jaw was mentioning this, saying it 
was because a government changes that the transition period means that we 
just can't keep up to things until we got our things humming.  And people 
leave the province.  This is what he said. 
 
Back in 1971 the population dropped by 15,000 people when they were elected 
to government, the NDP.  In 1972 another 12,000 people went elsewhere.  In 
1973 another 10,000 people went elsewhere.  In 1974 another 5,000, and my 
colleague was mentioning this.  You're trying to compare apples to oranges, 
that's what you're trying to do in talking about the 1940s and the 1950s. 
 



 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Keep going. 
 
Mr. McLaren: -- I will.  The agriculture in the province of Saskatchewan 
has changed dramatically over the years.  And I can remember back in the 
'40s, I was a young lad on the farm.  I was driving a tractor that had two 
14-inch bottom plough behind it, and you'd work all day and you almost had 
to set a stake out to see how much you had done.  And people hired people 
during those periods of time to do chores with cattle and hogs and chickens 
and turkeys and all these things on the farm.  You hired people to do those 
jobs. 
 
But let's look at the '70s and the '80s.  The same farmers could go out and 
do a quarter section of land with a 60-foot cultivator before breakfast.  
And you didn't need to have to hire people and so on.  So you're not 
comparing the same thing back of the '50s and what it is in these days. 
 
And you also were talking about this massive number of people that are 
leaving the province.  Seventy-five per cent of my family left the 
province, but not because they wanted to leave Saskatchewan, because where 
they wanted to go to take the course that they wanted.  My daughter took 
dancing.  Where the heck in Saskatchewan could she take dancing as a 
career?  My other daughter went to Manitoba and worked in a hospital there.  
She took her training there and then she got a job there.  That's why she's 
working in Manitoba.  Not because they wanted to leave Saskatchewan. 
 
You folks here, you don't tell all the facts about your things when you're 
. . . a whole hour of listening about out-migration.  And I wonder how many 
other families in the province did the same thing -- going to the States 
for music, down to student universities for their music.  You painted all 
that as a mismanagement of government.  And if it was mismanagement, then I 
guess during the '70s you were mismanaging all the way from 1971 up to 
1980.  You must have been doing that.  If we listen to your facts and your 
figures, then you must fit into the same category that you're trying to 
paint us into. 
 
Sure, in 1981 to '74 there was a climb after . . . '74, yes, we were under 
899,000 people.  Then in 1982 we get to 977,000 when we took over as 
government.  But we didn't drop back because we had to get our feet wet 
first.  It kept climbing all the way up into the millions -- 1.02 million, 
in that range. 
 
So times have been tough.  Yes.  I bet you folks are wishing that it wasn't 
raining this afternoon, so that you could keep on in your negative talks 
that we have to listen to all the time.  I'll bet you that you would have 
to do that. 
 
I would just like to remind everybody, Mr. Speaker, that those members, 
when in power, had negative net migration figures staring them in the face, 
just the same as we are today, when the economic situation in Saskatchewan 
was far better than it was today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, in answer to the charges those members have been making 
about this government being responsible for people leaving Saskatchewan, 



 

 

well in my mind, it's nothing but ridiculous.  People are getting sick and 
tired of hearing that rhetoric. 
 
How would you stop the migration, the out-migration?  We talked all 
afternoon about the out-migration.  I never heard one word of what needs to 
be done to start the migration coming the other way.  Everything that this 
government has done, like the two upgraders, like the fertilizer plant 
which they still don't want in this province . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Just in Moose Jaw. 
 
Mr. McLaren: -- No, just in Moose Jaw, that's right. 
 
And the meat plant in North Battleford, and they pooh-poohed Pocklington 
all the time.  And I said before that I wish we could've had that plant in 
Yorkton.  He wouldn't have got the dirt that he had when you got the North 
Battleford. 
 
Last week, we opened a meat packing plant in Yorkton: Harvest Meats.  A $3 
million plant operation . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- How much money did you put in?  How much money did you 
put into it? 
 
Mr. McLaren: -- Very little. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Well how much is very little? 
 
Mr. McLaren: -- Very little.  Yes, he got a loan; he's paying every penny 
of it back. 
 
But to me, Mr. Speaker, that is an example of what we are preaching and 
talking about in Saskatchewan in diversification.  It's the most perfect 
example of what we're talking about.  It's no different than all the other 
plants in the so-called megaprojects that we talked about.  That meat is 
being processed, value added, and going to be shipped all over 
Saskatchewan, Manitoba, Alberta.  And I was just there yesterday and 
they're in the process of setting up markets in Minneapolis, Minnesota, 
thanks to free trade, thanks to free trade. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLaren: -- A thousand meat stores in the city of Minneapolis and two 
point something million people as customers in that area.  And the Canadian 
little plant in Yorkton, Saskatchewan is going to compete and sell meat 
into the United States market.  They go for the opportunities that we are 
too young or too mired in the past to have created in this province. 
 
We have recently had a lot of commotion here in the Assembly over the 
compensation levels of some senior executives in Saskatchewan.  And I'm 
sure that I'm not the only one to have seen reports in the media saying 
that in comparison to other Canadian centres, and other Canadian 
corporations, the salary levels that the opposition are having such a 



 

 

problem with are really not out of line at all.  From the Leader-Post 
comment on April 24, I quote the following: 
 

 One does not need to hunt far for other CEOs with compensation comparable 
to Childers. 

 
And I can remember when we were still in the manufacturing business, we 
hired a marketing salesman from Massey-Ferguson, and we negotiated a 
contract with him which wasn't quite $500,000 but it was a heck of a salary 
for Yorkton, Saskatchewan . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I won't tell 
you. 
 
And from the same commentary, Mr. Speaker, I would like to read the 
Assembly, something very interesting indeed. 
 

 When PCS (Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan) originally was set up by the 
NDP, one rationale offered was that by placing the head office of a potash 
giant within the province, it would create competitive, well-paid, 
headquarter jobs in Saskatchewan. 

 
Now we have them sitting here and griping about it.  So go figure that one 
out, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The opposition wants us to keep people from leaving the province, but they 
oppose every effort that creates value opportunities for the future.  
Complain about the out-migration but no support for the projects and that 
that have come to this province.  Every one you've been against.  Every 
one.  So how do you create jobs when you don't back any of the projects 
that do bring jobs to our province?  I can't figure that out at all. 
 
But they leave us compelled to leave . . . or feel compelled to leave 
because they are chasing a dream, looking for a place where their hopes and 
expectations have a chance of being fulfilled.  That's why a lot of the 
children are going to other places.  We don't have the facilities here and 
the education for some of the items that they want to take.  And that is 
why the future of Saskatchewan depends on the diversification efforts that 
this government has put at the top of its list of priorities. 
 
And one of the members from Moose Jaw . . . no, from Moose Jaw was talking 
about priorities.  Maybe Saskatoon Eastview.  That we haven't had the 
opportunities or haven't set priorities.  Well I'd like to try to 
understand the priorities of the NDP back in the mid-'70s, and I think the 
member from Moose Jaw North was talking about the priorities and keeping 
the people of Saskatchewan in mind and so on.  So what do they do?  They go 
and take . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- We created jobs. 
 
Mr. McLaren: -- You never created one job when you went and spent 500 
million on potash mines -- not one job.  But not one job.  In the mining 
sectors, you never created a job. 
 
We owe it to our children to create opportunities for them to fulfil their 



 

 

hopes and dreams right here in Saskatchewan, and not to have to go to 
Toronto or Calgary or Vancouver to work for a large corporation that offers 
them a chance to develop their careers to the levels that they can achieve. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if we diversify our economy, encourage new businesses and new 
ideas, and create an environment that promotes the development of jobs 
right now and jobs for our children, we will be ensuring that Saskatchewan 
is a place where people will want to stay. 
 
Examples of this process are already in action, Mr. Speaker, and by 
encouraging and supporting the development of our high-technology sector, 
we have had Saskatchewan-developed products hit the world stage, and people 
are taking notice. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLaren: -- They are taking notice of things like our health care 
cards, which the Canadian association of pharmacists is encouraging 
provinces across the country to adopt because it is so beneficial in their 
field.  Not only is the card that was developed right here in Saskatchewan 
good enough for the rest of the country, it is good enough for the rest of 
the world, Mr. Speaker.  Belgium is considering using that same card and 
the same system. 
 
And my colleague mentioned the work Saskatchewan people have done in the 
field of fibre optics.  The work of Saskatchewan people and Saskatchewan 
technology has made us an industry leader in that field.  There is no 
reason that Saskatchewan can't be the best in the world at a lot of things 
-- no, not a reason at all, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There has been a priority placed on developing these fields that will take 
us away from a total dependence on agriculture as the only means of 
survival.  Agriculture will continue to make up the larger part of our 
economy into the foreseeable future, but I'm sure we will all agree that 
the difficulties heaped on agriculture over the past few years have given 
us cause to reconsider the wisdom of putting all our eggs into one basket. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the diversification efforts that have taken place in this 
province since we came into office, have really been quite impressive.  
There's the paper mill in Prince Albert that is making for export a product 
that starts with Saskatchewan raw materials and is finished, made into 
paper in Saskatchewan plant by Saskatchewan people, a Saskatchewan product 
start to finish, Mr. Speaker.  That project created jobs and opportunities 
for Saskatchewan people, and we need more projects like it. 
 
The fertilizer plant at Belle Plaine is another example of the potential 
Saskatchewan has to be world class in fields other than the kind we grow 
our grain on.  That facility will have Saskatchewan natural gas being 
processed and made into nitrogen fertilizer for both domestic consumption 
and for export.  The construction of the plant alone will create jobs in 
the vicinity of 1,000.  When it is operational, it will directly employ 136 
people, and that doesn't include the spin-off jobs that will crop up with 
$300 million in new economic activity that is created on an annual basis 



 

 

through the purchases of goods and services associated with the plant. 
 
And we all know, Mr. Speaker, that the members opposite are against the 
fertilizer project.  They are against any type of diversification effort 
that has ever been made in this province, and they have made that very 
clear to anybody who takes time to listen. 
 
Something should be pointed out here, Mr. Speaker.  We should all be very 
clear in what it is that those members opposite oppose.  When they say no 
to producing fertilizer here on the prairies, when they say no to building 
turbines or making paper or manufacturing bacon or building furniture or 
refining oil, or not building nursing homes or not building schools or not 
building hospitals, and the list goes on and on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have much more here that I would like to say, and I would 
now move that we adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:01 p.m. 
 
 


