





























































Hansard: May 03, 1990


 

 

May 3/90 
 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure today 
to introduce on behalf of my colleague, the minister responsible for Social 
Services, who today is mourning the loss of his brother.  I'd like to 
introduce on his behalf, a group of students from Martensville, who are 
accompanied today by their teachers, Ralph Epp, Loretta Bell, and Michelle 
Schaff; chaperons, Marg Peters, Twyla Stradecke -- is that right? -- and 
Alfred Kline.  There are 71 students in total, seated in the east gallery, 
grade 8 students.  I look forward to meeting with them at 3 p.m. 
 
Would all members of the House join me in welcoming this student group 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It gives me pleasure 
today to introduce to you and to all members of the House, a group of 13 
grade 7 and 8 students from the community of Dorintosh in my constituency, 
north of Meadow Lake.  Mr. Speaker, these students are here with their 
teacher, Brent Zapshala; with four chaperons, Ron Bannister, Don Pevach, 
Joan Zuchotzki, and Bev Campbell. 
 
I might say, Mr. Speaker, for those of you . . . and I don't think there 
would be anybody in this House who wouldn't know where Dorintosh is because 
it is the gateway community to the most beautiful provincial park in 
Saskatchewan, the Meadow Lake Provincial Park.  And I don't think there's 
anyone here will disagree with that either. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to commend the teacher and the principal of that 
school, Mr. Joe Twidale, for the foresight that they've shown in bringing 
their students the distance that they came and to come to Regina, to come 
to the legislature to see how the process here works.  And I'll be meeting 
with them in a few moments after question period for drinks, and I would 
ask all members to join with me in welcoming the group from Dorintosh. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, through you and to 
all members I would like to introduce 173 residents of Saskatchewan seated, 
sir, in your gallery and in the west gallery.  These individuals are from 
literally all across our province, sir, and they come from all walks of 
life. 
 
The one thing that brings them together, Mr. Speaker, is that three years 
ago they all saw life savings lost in the collapse of Principal Trust.  And 



 

 

these three years later they continue to look to their government to own 
its responsibility.  And so, Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to greet 
these people of Saskatchewan who have come today to the seat of government. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It gives me a great deal 
of pleasure this afternoon to introduce to you, and to other members of the 
legislature, a group from Saskatoon who are on a promotional tour to 
promote the Challenge Cup world class fastball and slow-pitch tournament 
that will be held in Saskatoon later on this year from June 28 to July 7.  
I think that Saskatoon has established a very fine tradition of the 
capability to host world-class events, and this is just another example of 
that. 
 
And I would like to introduce the individuals that are with us today.  Don 
Funk who is the chief executive for Challenge Cup -- they're seated in the 
west gallery; Bob Van Impe, past president, Softball Canada; Rob Scheller, 
national team pitcher, Team Canada; Rene Jule p√©, Pride of Saskatchewan 
team, all-star Saskatchewan team; and Michelle Padd, the torch bearer, 
Touch the Torch ball campaign. 
 
And I would point out as well, Mr. Speaker, that this world-class 
tournament is going to be hosting some 275 teams from eight nations with 
about 6,000 participants, highlighted by many international visitors 
including Eddie the Eagle, San Diego Chicken, the Hit-Men world slow pitch 
champions, The King and his Court, and an NHL celebrities team. 
 
So there's no doubt this will be another successful event in the city of 
Saskatoon, and I would hope that members of the legislature and all 
residents of Saskatchewan will take the opportunity to participate in the 
tournament.  And, Mr. Speaker, I would ask you and all members in the 
legislature to welcome this group today. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- I, too, want to join my colleague from Saskatoon River 
Heights, I believe, or Mayfair, in welcoming the delegation from Saskatoon 
that is promoting the world-class tournament for fastball.  We particularly 
want to welcome our good friend, Bob Van Impe, to the legislature.  We, on 
this side of the House, have known Bob for a good many years and we wish 
all of the delegates who are here today much success in hosting another 
fine event for the city of Saskatoon. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, it's indeed my pleasure to introduce to you, 
and through you, the students from Montreal Lake accompanied by their 
teachers, Mrs. Loretta Hall and Mr. Dennis Hall. I might add, Mr. Speaker, 
that Mrs. Loretta Hall is the first Indian woman in Canada to have her 
Master of Education in Administration. 
 
And I would like to say a few words of welcome, Mr. Speaker, in the 



 

 

language of Montreal Lake, which is Cree. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Federal Funding for Agriculture 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my question 
today is to the Premier and the Minister of Agriculture and it deals with 
what I can only describe as the latest example of political bickering 
between Regina and the Ottawa government and prime ministership of Mr. 
Mulroney over who should pay the $500 million in cash assistance that 
farmers so desperately need.  Mr. Mazankowski is quoted today saying of the 
Saskatchewan budget here, that, "It hardly shows that agriculture is at the 
top of the priority list for the province." 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier is this.  What we now have is 
bickering between Ottawa and Regina, but that obviously isn't going to put 
seed into the ground for the farmers of Saskatchewan.  How much longer do 
they have to put up with this political charade?  What is your specific 
game plan to get beyond the political bickering, to put an end to it, and 
to hammer out an agreement to get that $500 million needed cash for the 
farmers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, in conversations with the minister and 
federal officials, they have acknowledged that we have over $106 million 
just in the $525 million seeding program out there, the $20 million in 
interest rate subsidies, up to 79 million on production loan losses, and 7 
million on the CAFF (counselling and assistance for farmers program) 
guarantees, which is 106 million that is just part of the budget that we 
have out there this year on the $525 million loan program. 
 
As I said yesterday, and I've said to Mr. Mazankowski, and I said this to 
the media today, all the ministers of Agriculture all across Canada, and 
I'm sure you'll find, and the hon. member knows that the four western 
premiers will certainly be on side in saying the federal government has 
traditionally taken the lion's share of the responsibility for interest 
rates and the price of wheat in international markets -- not the local 
farmer, and not the local province. 
 
What we really need is solidarity in this legislature and outside the 
legislature to make sure the federal government knows that traditionally it 
is paid 8:1.  Even in terms of the programs we come out with recently, it's 
been 4:1 or 3:1, because the province is not a country; we don't print our 
own money.  In fact it is a federal government responsibility.  So I've 
made that point clear.  And as yesterday we had unanimous consent and a 
consensus in this House, I again ask, Mr. Speaker, we have a consensus in 
the House and nobody blink, so that in fact the federal government live up 



 

 

to its responsibility. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- I have a new question for the Premier, the Minister of 
Agriculture.  As I pointed out in my first question, Mr Mazankowski says 
that the provincial budget that the Premier engineered "hardly shows that 
agriculture is at the top of the priority list of this government," 
notwithstanding what the Premier has said there. 
 
But nevertheless, listening to the events of the last few days and the 
bickering, it's clear to many farmers that this now has degenerated into 
becoming a political ping-pong game between you and Mr. Mazankowski and Mr. 
Mulroney, since the money is set aside in Ottawa and available and there 
for farmers and, sir, I would argue, was promised by you in the Speech from 
the Throne as a commitment on March 19. 
 
So my question, Mr. Premier, is this: why don't you and Mr. Mazankowski put 
an end to what can only be described as a phoney war of words, and get that 
$500 million to the farmers in cash right now?  What's the real reason for 
the delay, Mr. Premier? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, as the hon. member knows because he's seen 
the budget here, we have in excess of $400 million out and another $500 
million, and no province on a per capita basis has been prepared to even 
come close to putting that kind of money into agriculture. 
 
Secondly, I point out to the hon. members, Mr. Speaker, and certainly to 
you, that if I don't raise the issue, then the opposition is saying, well, 
Mr. Devine or the Premier will not raise it.  Then when I do raise it, Mr. 
Speaker, they say, well for Heaven's sake, you're arguing. 
 
Well you can't have it both ways.  We've got the federal government to 
deliver $7 billion into Saskatchewan in the last four and a half years.  
We've come up with a billion dollars.  We're saying that it's their 
responsibility to carry on to make sure that they defend the farmer on 
interest rates and the price of wheat and exchange rates. 
 
And I'm going to argue for it.  Other people are supporting me across the 
country.  So all the provinces are saying what we're saying, Mr. Speaker, 
and I'm not going to blink.  I'm going to stay the course and have the 
federal government make sure it defends the farmers in Saskatchewan and 
across western Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Premier.  I'm glad to 
hear that he's not going to blink, but in the meantime, while he's not 
blinking, the farming community, of course, is suffering and suffering very 
hard. 
 



 

 

Mr. Speaker, everybody knows in the province of Saskatchewan, certainly the 
farmers do, that in 1986, in the middle of a provincial general election 
that was going not so well for you at that time, you made -- you can laugh 
-- but you made a phone call in the dead of the night to the Minister of 
Agriculture and the Prime Minister at that time in 1986.  And one phone 
call got a billion dollars.  One phone call.  In 1988, during the federal 
election campaign, the drought program was virtually announced the same 
way. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier is this.  Mr. Premier, isn't 
that the real reason behind the delay in the payment of this $500 million 
from Mr. Mazankowski and Mr. Mulroney?  Isn't that the real reason -- that 
it doesn't fit into the election timetable that you have set for this 
provincial government?  And isn't the result that the farmers of the 
province of Saskatchewan, while you're refusing to blink, are suffering to 
the tune of $500 million? 
 
Why can't you two Tory governments and ministers put aside your political 
games and get that desperately needed $500 million to the farmers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I will remind the hon. member that -- and 
he raised it so I think I can pick up on it -- that when he lost his riding 
in '82, I didn't call anybody in Ottawa, and he was calling Mr. Trudeau and 
Mr. Chre p√©tien every day and never got a dime.  Now that's the history of 
the NDP-Liberal combination.  Not a single dime. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- And he lost his riding over that and the NDP lost, Mr. 
Speaker.  I have called every year and I've campaigned every year and we've 
got $7 billion -- $7 billion, Mr. Speaker, as a result.  I can look at the 
combination of things that he did and he never got their attention. 
 
Now the farmers know that, and they won't forget that every year '82, '83, 
'84, '85, '86, '87, '88, '89, and in '90 we'll do the same, Mr. Speaker.  
We defend the farmers inside the House, outside the House, and when we call 
and when we argue and we put up a good case, Mr. Speaker, we have seen 
results.  When the hon. member had the opportunity, he got zero, Mr. 
Speaker.  He's ashamed of that.  Fair enough, that's his record.  I'll put 
my agriculture record on the line any day with yours, sir, and we'll watch 
and see what happens. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Principal Trust Collapse 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have a question for the Minister 
of Consumer and Commercial Affairs.  Mr. Minister, I have here a copy of 
the Ombudsman's report into the collapse of Principal Trust that was 
delivered to your government, sir, last fall.  In this report the Ombudsman 
concludes that your government was negligent in its duties and that your 



 

 

government has a moral responsibility to those who lost money through the 
collapse of Principal Trust.  Mr. Minister, in this same report the 
Ombudsman provided a recommendation that would have compensated 
Saskatchewan investors and not put at any risk the Saskatchewan treasury. 
 
Mr. Minister, I ask you today why you chose not to adhere to the 
recommendation of the Ombudsman put to your government, sir, and why you 
continue to betray these investors in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I believe, Mr. Speaker, that a court action has been 
commenced by at least some of the . . . I would be surprised if anybody is 
going to deny or laughing that I've made the statement that there's a court 
action because the very simple fact is there is a court action initiated 
by, Mr. Speaker, by at least some of the investors.  And that matter, I 
gather, will be resolved in the courts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, if we were to accept the minister's line of 
reasoning that we can't ask questions because something is near or before 
the courts, then we would have relatively a little field to ask questions 
on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, the chairman of committees in this House made 
a ruling that that is not an acceptable excuse for ministers of the Crown 
not to answer questions on this question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I put my question again to the minister responsible, the 
Minister of Consumer and Commercial Affairs.  Mr. Minister, in the province 
of Alberta the Ombudsman reported, the Government of Alberta acted on 
behalf of its citizens; in British Columbia the Ombudsman reported, the 
Government of British Columbia acted on behalf of its citizens; in Nova 
Scotia the Ombudsman reported and the Government of Nova Scotia pledged to 
act on behalf of its citizens.  Only in Saskatchewan, sir, only in 
Saskatchewan does the Ombudsman report and ministers of the Crown criticize 
the Ombudsman and refuse to act.  Mr. Minister, will you explain your 
refusal to act in light of the Ombudsman's report? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- I wish to remind the hon. members who are our special 
guests today, all guests are special, that we ask you not to participate in 
the House's activities. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- What I simply indicated to the hon. member, and I ask the 
hon. member from North Battleford to let me finish, that an action has been 
commenced by at least some of the investors, and I simply indicated that 
the matter would be resolved in the courts. 
 



 

 

Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Justice.  Mr. 
Minister of Justice, the matter ought to have been resolved in this court, 
sir, in this court of your government.  That's where the matter had ought 
to be resolved and it should be resolved soon. 
 
Mr. Minister, Mr. Minister of Justice, you, sir, committed to me last year, 
you, sir, committed to me that you would provide me copies of 
correspondence between your government and the Government of Alberta to 
indicate that you were indeed pressuring the Government of Alberta to 
compensate Saskatchewan investors.  The former minister from Kindersley, 
who's now gone from this House, committed that to me.  I brought the matter 
to the attention of the current Minister of Consumer and Commercial 
Affairs. 
 
Would you today, ministers -- because I've not received a shred of 
correspondence to indicate that you've been communicating with Alberta, 
ministers -- would you today provide correspondence to show that you in 
fact have been lobbying the Government of Alberta? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Well first, Mr. Speaker, if the hon. member hasn't got 
that information, I'll apologize to him and get it to him as soon as I can 
get it to him. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, supplementary question.  Mr. Minister, you 
said those very same words to me about 12 months ago.  Mr. Minister, I have 
not seen a shred of evidence. 
 
I put my question to the current Minister of Consumer and Commercial 
Affairs.  Mr. Minister, you're now in charge, you're now in charge of the 
interests of the investors in Saskatchewan.  Would you provide to this 
House, to myself, to this House and therefore to the public of 
Saskatchewan, the correspondence that indicates you are in fact lobbying 
the Government of Alberta for further support. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I said I would get it for the hon. member as soon as 
possible. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, final question, and again to the Minister of 
Consumer and Commercial Affairs and I expect him to answer.  Mr. Minister, 
there are 173 people gathered today in the gallery.  They have come to this 
legislature, to the seat of government.  Will you, sir, after question 
period, meet with these investors of the Principal collapse? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I've indicated to the hon. member that a court action has 
been commenced by at least some of the investors and the matter will be 
resolved in the courts.  What obligation in the courts the province of 
Alberta may have, may also be determined in the courts. 



 

 

 
An Hon. Member: -- Shame on you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member from Saskatoon at the back 
says shame, Mr. Speaker.  They're the same group, Mr. Speaker -- I'll tell 
you the shame. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- The shame, Mr. Speaker, that when this province believed 
it had an obligation on one particular company, Pioneer, the NDP said don't 
pay the investors a cent, Mr. Speaker.  They can play politics with the 
people here and their lives, Mr. Speaker, but, Mr. Speaker, their track 
record is totally contradictory today and most people up there know that, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question directed to the Minister 
of Consumer Affairs who refuses to answer these questions.  But it'll go to 
the Minister of Justice if he persists in bailing out the Minister of 
Consumer Affairs.  Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice knows full well 
that the circumstances on Pioneer Trust are totally different from the 
circumstances at Principal Trust where at Principal Trust the 
responsibility falls on the regulatory agency, the Securities Commission of 
Saskatchewan, which spotted this problem months before it took place, 
should have acted and prevented the collapse and the loss of savings for 
these people.  You want to stop that lawsuit, settle the claim of these 
people who legitimately and properly invested.  Why don't you do that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Mr. Speaker, it is -- and the Hon. Leader of the 
Opposition, I am surprised does not know this -- that he has put his 
interpretation on the events, Mr. Speaker.  There is a great similarity in 
the two events.  When we had the prime responsibility for Pioneer, we 
undertook our obligation as a government to pay the investors no matter 
where they resided, Mr. Speaker.  It is our view, that the same principle 
should apply in this case, that the province of Alberta should make full 
compensation to the investors in Principal, Mr. Speaker.  They were the 
prime regulator and they have that obligation and we remain strong and firm 
in that position, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a supplementary question to the 
Minister of Justice.  He says that the responsibility falls on the 
shoulders of Alberta.  I say that the Ombudsman, the very Ombudsman that 
you people appointed and this legislature also appointed, says the 
responsibility is yours.  Why don't you follow the Ombudsman's report and 
pony up, as the other provincial governments have? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Mr. Speaker, I have now said on a couple of occasions 
today that we believe that there is a fundamental difference of 
interpretation of the events and the facts, Mr. Speaker, and the courts 
will resolve that. 
 
The matter has been . . . an action has been started and the obligations . 
. . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, you can ham it up over there; you 
can ham it up and play a little dramatics for the people in the gallery, 
Mr. Speaker.  But in fact, to the Leader of the Opposition, in fact you 
should be taking the position that the province of Alberta is liable for 
this action and should make full compensation to the investors, Mr. 
Speaker.  That is the proper course of action. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Minister of Justice.  He 
says that we should be looking to Alberta for responsibility.  That's the 
pattern of this government.  When it comes to bailing out and helping the 
farmers of $500 million -- look to Ottawa, look to Edmonton, look to 
everywhere except to the people who are responsible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- You are the regulatory agency and you can solve that 
lawsuit.  These are people who are seniors, who have invested thousands of 
dollars.  It's your responsibility; please don't look to Ottawa.  How about 
facing up to your responsibilities? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Mr. Speaker, let me remind the Leader of the Opposition, 
let me remind the Leader of the Opposition that we've seen his flip-flop 
evidenced again here today -- what he says in the country and what he says 
in the city, what he says in here and what he says outside.  Because as a 
matter of fact a couple of weeks ago, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition said, stood up and wrote a letter to our . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I'm having difficulty, having difficulty. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- He said a couple of weeks ago that it was Ottawa's 
responsibility and that the province should, Mr. Speaker, ensure that it 
was Ottawa's responsibility to support and help our farmers.  Today he's 
changed his mind, Mr. Speaker.  He has flip-flopped again. 
 
Let me say when we stand behind the people of this province, all of a 
sudden now you think that there should be a lower mortgage interest 
protection.  He didn't even have it when he was minister, attorney general, 
wouldn't even support the home owners of this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to direct my 



 

 

question to the Premier.  I notice the Minister of Consumer Affairs won't 
answer, the Minister of Justice is being evasive, and the Premier is 
sitting there smiling. 
 
This is a very serious matter, Mr. Premier, and I'd like to ask you: given 
that the Provincial Ombudsman released his report just this week and he 
made it very clear that one of the things he is upset about is that your 
government, the way your government has handled the Principal Trust affair. 
 
Now, Mr. Premier, the job of the Ombudsman is to investigate the situation 
of people who feel wronged by the government or by the bureaucracy and to 
report to the legislature when he finds those complaints to be justified.  
Clearly the Ombudsman felt that way about your handling of Principal Trust, 
Mr. Minister.  And clearly you chose to dismiss and to ignore his findings.  
For my question, Mr. Premier, what good is it having an Office of the 
Ombudsman if you choose to ignore him whenever it suits your purpose? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Mr. Speaker, I believe that well over 95 per cent, and I 
believe it's closer to 98 per cent of the matters raised by the Ombudsman 
have either been resolved or whatever, that it's a very, very high 
percentage.  To say that one or two disagreements with the Ombudsman 
position means that the Ombudsman's role is irrelevant is a less than 
accurate statement.  That in fact, Mr. Speaker, we do have a difference and 
it will be resolved as the action instigated certainly challenges the 
resolution of that matter before the courts, and I believe that's where it 
will be resolved. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  A new question to the Premier, Mr. 
Speaker.  What we're talking about here is Principal Trust, Mr. Minister, 
not the general report on this particular occasion.  Mr. Premier, it is the 
job of the Ombudsman to find redress for citizens who have been aggrieved 
by government actions.  That's what he's there for and surely you would 
agree with that.  Clearly that is what he is trying to say in the Principal 
Trust case and you chose to ignore him. 
 
My question, Mr. Premier, why do you feel that Saskatchewan citizens should 
have to take your government to court to redress a grievance already 
identified by the Ombudsman? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I don't want, and I'm sure the hon. member is not leaving 
the impression -- because if he is, he is wrong -- that the New Democratic 
Party, when it was in office, agreed with everything the Ombudsman said.  
And I can recall as a matter of fact, one inquiry into corrections at that 
time, a rather significant one, and to say that one agrees in all cases . . 
. The matter and the interpretation has been put forward by those 
advocating recompense, Mr. Speaker, before the courts.  We have a different 
opinion.  It is our view that the responsibility lies, Mr. Speaker, with 
the province of Alberta, and the courts will resolve that matter.  I've 
said that, I think, rather succinctly a few times today. 



 

 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Meeting with Principal Trust Investors 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you very much.  Mr. Speaker, we have guests in our 
gallery today who have come from all parts of this province and they came 
in the hopes of having an opportunity to meet with the Minister of Consumer 
and Commercial Affairs.  He would not stand up and answer questions in the 
House today.  They don't particularly want to meet with the Minister of 
Justice, so my question is to the Premier.  Mr. Premier, will you meet with 
these people who have come from all parts of this province today after 
question period?  Would you do that, sir? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: -- Mr. Speaker, first of all, I'd like to clarify that the 
group, or whoever is their leader, has never requested to have a meeting 
with me. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, I am now requesting a . . . a question to the 
Minister of Consumer and Commercial Affairs.  Will you meet with this 
delegation and this group of people from all parts of this province?  I'm 
asking on their behalf, will you meet with them after question period? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: -- Mr. Speaker, if the proper arrangements can be made to 
have that meeting, I don't have a problem with meeting with them. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Minister, if I heard you correctly, you say you have no 
problem meeting with the delegation who are here today.  Mr. Minister, I 
have reserved room 255 of this Legislative Building for that purpose, sir.  
Will you be there shortly after question period? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: -- I'll be there shortly after question period. 
 
Ms. Smart: -- Mr. Speaker, I've listened to the responses today to these 
questions from the critic for Principal Trust and I'm really appalled.  As 
the critic for seniors' issues, I'm going to talk to the Minister of 
Consumer and Commercial Affairs. 
 
You have described this group of people who are here today, these 173 
people, as a group.  They are not an organized group in the way of having a 
leader.  These are many senior citizens from all around the province who 
have lost their money.  They are concerned. They are not taking part in 
this court action because they don't have the money for a court action.  
They are here because they're depending on you and on this government to 
see justice, and we have not seen justice here today. 
 
I'm asking you on behalf of these seniors to do what you can to restore 



 

 

their money for them and to see that justice is done.  When you meet with 
them will you guarantee that you will take the Ombudsman's report 
seriously? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I would indicate to the hon. member, Mr. Speaker, that we 
do take it seriously but we do have a difference of opinion.  We disagree 
with the recommendations and the report, and the obligation that is 
referred to in that report.  And we believe, Mr. Speaker, the action has 
now been started, that the appropriate place to resolve the difference of 
opinion is the courts as so chosen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 20 -- An Act to provide Access by the Public to Government 
Information 

 
Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I wish to 
move first reading of a Bill to provide Access by the Public to Government 
Information. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next 
sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Education 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 5 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairperson.  Mr. Minister, I had 
asked for some information regarding the grant increases to various school 
divisions across Saskatchewan, and I'm wondering if you have that 
information for me now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, I have the information.  I'll send it 
over as soon as I get someone to take it over. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, I wonder if you have either in whole or in 
part some of the information that I had asked for in public accounts.  If 
it's not all ready I can appreciate that, but whatever you do have, I would 
appreciate receiving that.  The rest we can still get tomorrow or early 
next week.  I assume we'll still be in Education estimates next week. 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, the information that the member wants 
is not all complete, but we could give it to you tomorrow if that would be 
satisfactory. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, the problem I have is that I need some of that 
information for my line of questioning that I would like to continue, and I 
could delay the estimates till next week if that is more convenient for 
you.  I've got lots of material so there's no problem in doing that.  So if 
the information isn't here, I would possibly have to go till next week. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, we'll get that together and we'll 
give it to you later this afternoon.  I understand you wanted it for this 
evening, so we'll get as much as we can. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Mr. Chairman, just a very brief question to the minister.  
Mr. Minister, earlier in the estimates I asked you a number of questions 
with respect to loan forgiveness for students in universities versus 
private vocational schools.  Can you indicate when that information will be 
available?  Could you give it to us today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, I believe that the question that the 
member asked was, what percentage of  
 Dstudents who receive loan forgiveness attend private vocational schools 
and how does this figure compare with students at technical institutes and 
universities.  And I would point out that the number of loans . . . 68.7 
per cent of all forgiveable loans go to students in public institutions and 
31.3 per cent to students in private vocational schools. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I'd asked you for much more detailed 
information than that.  You don't need to read it all into the record, but 
I'd appreciate you providing me with that written information.  I asked not 
only for percentages, I also asked for the total number of students in 
private vocational schools who were getting loan forgiveness and a 
comparison of that with the total numbers in universities and technical 
institutes.  I also asked for the dollar amounts of the forgiveness in each 
case, and I asked a number of other questions with respect to that, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Now I would be grateful if you could send that information over to us, 
please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, I have more of the information here.  
I thought some of it had been provided, but I'll be happy to send it over 
to you. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Yes, Mr. Chairperson, I'd like to direct my questions of 
course to the minister.  And these next series of questions will relate to 
Indian and Metis people in the province of Saskatchewan as it relates to 
education.  So maybe the minister's staff could get ready for this series 
of questions. 
 
Mr. Minister, there's approximately 70,000 treaty Indian people in this 
province and a large number of the students . . . a large number of the 



 

 

treaty Indian people that are of school age in this province.  And also, 
while a lot of them are taking their education in Indian Affairs schools or 
band controlled schools, approximately half of the Indian students are 
taking their education in the public school system and the separate school 
system. 
 
The vast majority of them, Mr. Minister, are in the urban areas. 
 
And also, Mr. Minister, there are approximately 50,000 Metis people in the 
province and there's a lot of Metis students, you know, throughout the 
province as well.  And therefore it's very important.  I think right now 
in, the most general sense, the estimated numbers are approximately 12 to 
15 per cent of the population, and in some cases of course, especially in 
the North, the students will comprise 95 per cent of the population and as 
low as maybe 1 or 2 per cent in some other schools throughout the province.  
So these questions will relate to the issues of curriculum, language, and 
also the issue of racism. 
 
(1445) 
 
My first general comment is that since the early '80s there has been 
hundreds of thousands of dollars worth of reports.  And I just had a look 
in relation to Indian-Metis people, and we've looked at the social studies 
task force report, of course, in '81 which dealt with the issues of 
multiculturalism and also of Indian-Metis people and the curriculum. 
 
We also looked at the Directions report, and that also dealt with 
Indian-Metis people in education.  We then had a . . . it relates 
Directions, a five-year action plan for native curriculum development in 
this province.  And there was also an Indian-Metis curriculum advisory 
committee which is now called the Indian-Metis Education Advisory Committee 
in this province. 
 
There is also an education equity report that was done by the Human Rights 
Commission which dealt not only with the issues of curriculum but also the 
issues relating to the involvement of parents.  There is also a report 
called Reaching Out which was done in 1985.  And the Reaching Out report 
also dealt with the involvement of parents, which was later done and a 
follow-up paper was done on the involvement of parents in the school 
system. 
 
We also had the inner city drop-out study in 1985 which talked about over 
90 per cent drop-out rate of Indian-Metis students.  We also had a 
multiculturalism report in September of '89 which also dealt with education 
of Indian-Metis people in this province.  And now we also have a report in 
1989, the northern education task force report.  So, Mr. Minister, there is 
definitely no lack of information as it relates to Indian-Metis people and 
education in this province. 
 
As I said, about a few hundred thousand dollars or maybe even more than a 
million dollars has been spent in reports dealing with this very important 
issue.  And one of the areas I want to start out with is the area of 
curriculum.  Of course, curriculum is basically the background information 



 

 

required for people teaching in the schools and there's always, in 
curriculum reports, basic statements of what needs to be taught in our 
school system and so on. 
 
Now I'd like to find out first of all from you exactly how many positions 
are involved in your department dealing with the issue of curriculum as it 
directly relates to Indian and Metis people.  Mr. Minister, I would like to 
know exactly how many full-time positions have you got working and how many 
people on part-time positions working specifically in the area of 
Indian-Metis people and the curriculum. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, I can understand the concern that the 
member opposite has raised with regard to the number of reports, because I 
think it seems to be normal procedure for any government that's in power to 
develop a lot of reports on various topics and then really fall down with 
regard to implementation. 
 
But I think, Mr. Chairman, that I can say that I'm very proud of what the 
department is doing.  We realize that there is still a lot that needs to be 
done in that particular area, but I think that some of the action that has 
been taken is being looked upon very, very favourably and we are moving to 
involve more and more Indian and Metis people. 
 
Now specifically, with regard to the number of people that you ask about.  
As I understand it, we have about eight in the South, and we have in the 
North, two that are full-time and two half-time.  Now you have to keep in 
mind as well that there are a lot of others that are pulled in on advisory 
committees, as you have suggested, curriculum committees.  For example, you 
mentioned about the Indian and Metis curriculum development team that's 
involved, and we've got a lot of work being done now in various subject 
areas; social studies, language arts, arts education, and science, and an 
awful lot being done with regard to teacher in-service. 
 
I think one of the areas that we are trying to address and with a good 
degree of success, I would add, is getting more and more Indian and Metis 
people through our teacher training institutions.  Because to me that is 
going to be the key in having good quality teachers within the class-rooms 
who understand the culture and in many cases can also speak the language.  
And I had the opportunity to see the success of that on my tour last fall, 
up in the north-eastern part of the province, up in your area. 
 
So I think that's an area we have to continue to address in that we have 
more and more quality teachers who can work with Indian and Metis people.  
So I'm very pleased with what's happening, and I'll address more of these 
as you raise your questions, but I know there's more that has to be done. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- I would like to know, Mr. Minister, you mentioned that it's 
very important to deal with the culture and language of Indian and Metis 
people.  As such, I would therefore like to ask you the following question.  
You said there was eight people working full-time in the South.  I would 
like to know of those eight, how many are Indian-Metis people, along with 
the two full-time positions that you have in the North.  And also . . . 
especially those two.  I'm talking about the full-time positions.  You say 



 

 

you have 10 full-time positions.  How many of them are Indian-Metis people 
that know the culture and the language of the people?  I would like to know 
exactly how many of them are doing actual work in curriculum out of those 
10 positions that you state?  I would also like, Mr. Minister, to find out 
their names and what they actually do.  Are you counting secretarial staff 
as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- As I understand it, 40 per cent of the office staff 
in the North are of native ancestry.  There's a half-time person dealing 
with Cree language and a half-time dealing with Dene language.  The other 
two: one with core curriculum -- the two full-time positions -- one with 
core curriculum, one materials development are non-native. 
 
Those eight that are in the South, there is one that is native.  And of 
those positions, two are full-time positions.  The other six are -- or 
permanent employees -- the other six are secondments. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- So what you're saying, Mr. Minister, in regards to your 
statement on the importance of Indian-Metis culture and language, that you 
have one position out of eight in regards to your staff at the department.  
And you're also stating that, you know, that two full-time positions in the 
North are not Indian or Metis, but that they are only on the Cree language 
and Dene language positions which are half-time and not full-time 
positions.  Is that not correct, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well I would point out, Mr. Chairman, that the 
Indian and Metis educational policy group has really only been in a year 
now.  And we are moving to have more native people involved in these 
positions and that would be our hope in the future.  But for the present 
time those are the only natives that we have involved, other than ones that 
are . . . there are many people that are involved with the curriculum 
committees and developing the program, and I think that that's very, very 
important. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- I guess maybe the minister doesn't realize that he had a 
report on a five-year action plan for native curriculum development in this 
province and, as a minister, he should be aware of that document; and that 
one of the key issues of course has always been the hiring of Indian and 
Metis people.  And the proof that you've put across today shows that there 
is very little Indian and Metis people in your department. 
 
I would also like to add, Mr. Minister, that as I looked at the people who 
have worked in your department, there has truly been quite a few Indian and 
Metis people that have worked in your department.  And just off the top of 
my head, I could name a few:  there was a guy by the name of Ken Carriere 
that worked there; there was Ann Dorian that worked there; there was Sherry 
Farrell-Racette that worked there; there was Kenn Whyte that worked there; 
there was Gloria Mehlman that worked there; there was Maureen Johns that 
worked there, and there was other . . . and these are all Indian and Metis 
people that have worked there and they have left the department. 
 
I also have other names of non-aboriginal people who worked there as well, 
such as Sidney Davis, Sheila Brass, Dan Russell, and Ken Horseman, and so 



 

 

on.  I guess the feeling I'm getting, Mr. Speaker, is this: that there's a 
lot of people who have worked in the department in regards to trying to 
make a better, I guess a better approach and on greater substance in 
regards to curriculum development in this province. 
 
I've noticed that a lot of them have left, you know, the department, 
basically because they said there was a lack of resources in the 
department; that there was really no strong commitment by the department, 
by the PC government in getting curriculum development in this province. 
 
While the reports were there, the implementation of curriculum was not 
there.  Mr. Minister, you can give Chuck Childers a salary of $700,000 a 
year . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- 740,000. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Well my member from Regina says it was $740,000.  You can 
give a salary like that to one person, and yet you can only hire possibly a 
$40,000 job, an Indian-Metis person in this province for the whole 
province. 
 
Why is it that in curriculum development, Mr. Minister, you will not put 
out more money so that the teachers out there can be able to work with the 
curriculum and a lot of your consultants might feel a lot better of 
handling stronger and better material as they go out in the field to do the 
implementation process as it relates to curriculum?  Would you make a 
comment on that, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I didn't realize Mr. Childers 
worked with the Department of Education, so I don't know why the member is 
even bringing it in. 
 
Let's just put things in proper perspective here.  The list of names that 
the member opposite has listed off, I know some of them personally, and 
they are certainly not Indian and Metis people.  So I don't know why you're 
including their names with the list that you put forward. 
 
I would also suggest that there has been a great deal done and is being 
done, and I would suggest as well that there is a lot more being done now 
than what was being done when your party was still in power.  So just keep 
that in mind when you look at some of the things that are being done in 
your own constituency. 
 
I would point out as well the number of community schools that we have 
going in our two major centres right now; well not just Saskatoon and 
Regina but other centres as well. 
 
And you've indicated the large number of children that we have in our 
schools, not just in the North today but also in the South, and we have to 
address the concerns of those children as well; and the fact that we have 
some $2 million going into community schools in the province, and they are 
doing, I think, a very, very good job.  I have visited some of those 
schools, talked with the students, talked with the teachers, and a lot of 



 

 

good stuff that's going on there. 
 
I would also suggest that the native survival school in Saskatoon, which 
I'm also very familiar with, $197,000 going into that.  When you consider 
NORTEP (northern teacher education program) and SUNTEP (Saskatchewan urban 
native teacher education program) and the programs that are being offered 
there, as well as Indian and Metis education development program, there are 
all kinds of things that are happening.  And this is action that has grown 
out of the concern and the commitment that this government does have to 
Indian and Metis people. 
 
Now you aren't talking much about what's happening in northern 
Saskatchewan, and you mentioned about the northern education task force 
report.  Now that, I think, is bringing about many, many positive changes 
in the North, and it's as a direct result of the input of the Indian and 
Metis people residing in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
This is the first time, I think, that there really has been an honest 
effort whereby we have gone out into all of the communities in the northern 
part of the province and have involved individuals and groups to determine 
what in actual fact they do want and what concerns they have with the 
educational system. 
 
Now when you consider that we've got several initiatives, several 
recommendations of the task force report and you, I would hope, have read 
it, there are many recommendations in that report and there are many good 
initiatives that have already been put into operation. 
 
And some of them I would suggest, such as the Ile-a-la-Crosse high school 
re-entry program.  There's a great concern in the North today about those 
students who left school and now realize that education is very, very 
important.  And many of those people have gone back to school that have 
wanted to go back to school. 
 
(1500) 
 
We also have the northern Saskatchewan student awards program.  This is 
something that is I think providing a good incentive to get more of the 
Indian and Metis young people to go back to school or to stay in school.  
And I think we all recognize the importance of education to these young 
people. 
 
The native counsellor training program.  This was another recommendation 
that was put forward in the report.  Creighton School guidance counsellor 
project.  These are all recommendations that were put forward in the report 
and have already been implemented. 
 
The science literacy project with the Missinipe broadcasting.  The 
Athabasca co-operative job re-entry pilot program.  The parental 
involvement communications officer for Northern Lights School Division; the 
local board of trustees workshop for Northern Lights School Division.  This 
is something that's ongoing. 
 



 

 

The native art curriculum development project and the curriculum support 
co-ordinator.  These are all recommendations, Mr. Chairman, from the 
northern education task force report that have already been implemented, 
and some of these are maybe of a short-term duration but others are 
ongoing, depending on the nature of the need. 
 
I would also add that there are other initiatives that are going ahead or 
planned for this coming year, for 1990-91.  Distance education initiatives 
for delivery of secondary science programs; native languages program 
developed.  This is a concern that the member opposite has raised.  
Para-professional training for teaching support staff.  School nutrition 
projects, that's another concern that you often raise.  And the northern 
Saskatchewan interscholastic enhancement program. 
 
Mr. Chairman, these are all recommendations within the northern task force 
report.  So for the member opposite to criticize the government for not 
performing any action and just doing reports, I think that what I have just 
indicated points out the opposite, that we are indeed concerned and we are 
doing a lot to help the Indian and native people, not only within the North 
but throughout all of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Just a small point to start out with.  One of the key skills 
that we teach students throughout the province is listening skills.  And it 
seems that the minister wasn't listening.  When I introduced the names of 
the  
 Dpeople, I said Innuit and Metis people who have worked in the department.  
Then I added other names and I said, non-aboriginal people.  So I'd like 
you to pay a little bit more attention in regards to the statements that I 
make. 
 
And also the other point, Mr. Minister, the recommendations made in regards 
. . . the vast number of recommendations made on the task force report have 
been made before, time and time again in the most general sense.  People 
have said right through the task force aspect, right from the Directions 
report, that we need to have changes in curriculum.  That is not new.  That 
we need to have curriculum relating to northern Saskatchewan in regards to 
the environment over there and in regards to the culture and language of 
the people over there. 
 
Those types of things have been around for ages.  And then you go off into 
saying how great things that you've done, and you mentioned native survival 
school. 
 
That strategy was started with the NDP when the NDP was in government.  
When you look at the community schools programs in this province, that was 
started by the NDP government.  When you mention SUNTEP and NORTEP, those 
were started by the NDP program.  When you imply, let's say Gabriel Dumont 
Institute and stuff, those were started during the NDP years. 
 
And here you've been in power for over eight years and all you can give me 
is another report; two reports in this past year, which would have cost you 
100,000.  For example, the cost of the report could have paid for two 
full-time positions for Dene language and Cree language in northern 



 

 

Saskatchewan.  And all you can afford is two half-time positions right now 
in regards to curriculum development in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as you do a little bit of politicking in regards to the 
great achievements of your government, you must start knowing a little bit 
more of the facts in regards to the history of education in this province, 
especially as they relate to Indian-Metis people.  Maybe you need to ask . 
. . to meet with your staff a little bit more longer to give you a better 
briefing. 
 
I thought maybe as a former superintendent in this province, you would have 
had a greater knowledge about the Indian-Metis issues, especially as you 
know them well where you were a superintendent in Saskatoon area.  You 
would have known that a lot of Indian-Metis people were in the city of 
Saskatoon, etc. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I really feel that some of the ways that you've tried to 
answer questions are simply not adequate enough as far as I can see.  And 
all you've said on the paper so far is you've hired one full-time 
curriculum position in regards to Indian-Metis person in the curriculum 
area. 
 
I would like to follow up, Mr. Minister, in regards to the materials end of 
it.  Last year I raised the point of the grade seven social studies 
textbook, and I looked at that textbook and I said at that time there was 
information of Indian people in there, but there was no information on the 
Cree from Montreal Lake or for any Cree, for that matter, in the province 
of Saskatchewan.  And there was no information there about the Assiniboine 
and also the Sioux and also the Dene and the Saulteaux. 
 
I would like to know, Mr. Minister, whether or not you've made improvements 
on that specific curriculum, that textbook.  I realize that the new edition 
was supposed to be coming out.  I would like to know, Mr. Minister, whether 
or not you have made corrections and paid due respect to the Indian-Metis 
people and the Indian-Metis history and culture of this province by making 
changes in the new edition, the new upcoming edition for the grade seven 
social studies textbook. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, the member opposite likes to ramble 
around quite a bit, but I would point out to him that I have taught Indian 
and Metis people and worked with them and with students, and I have a 
pretty good understanding, I think, of some of the concerns that they have 
as it relates more to southern Saskatchewan. 
 
I would also point out that he talks about the history of the NDP and what 
they did and all the recommendations that were made.  And I would suggest 
that yes, there have been a lot of recommendations, but there wasn't a heck 
of a lot done either, Mr. Chairman. 
 
He points out the fact that there were some programs started under the NDP, 
and yes, I would admit that he's absolutely right.  But I would suggest to 
the member opposite, Mr. Chairman, that if he looks at some of those 
programs today and see how they have been improved and how they have been 



 

 

expanded, that there is a significant difference between what those 
programs look like today in preparation for the 1990s and on into the 21st 
century. 
 
One of the things, that we of course take pride in the fact that we do 
recognize change and that programs have to change for our young people.  So 
we have done a lot, and I'll give him credit for the fact that some very 
good programs were started, but the commitment of this government is to 
continue those programs and expand them and improve them, and we will 
continue to do that. 
 
With regard to the specific social studies text that you refer to, as I 
understand it, that is now being reviewed, and there are also changes that 
are being made within the social studies program.  I know that here's where 
we do have to have a good deal of involvement with Indian and Metis people, 
and with other cultural groups as well, to ensure that the textbooks are 
meeting the needs and are in fact not being inflammatory to any of these 
other groups.  So that review is being done with the particular one you 
refer to. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Just to follow up on that review on that textbook then, Mr. 
Minister.  Are you going to be therefore directly involving the Indian 
Metis curriculum education advisory committee in the process of the review 
on the grade 7 textbook? And also there was the Reaching Out document on 
the involvement of parents in the process of education, and is there any 
plan to involve parents as well because you mentioned in your previous 
statement that you felt really good about involving parents?  I would like 
to know whether you're also going to be involving parents in that 
curriculum change process in the second edition of this social studies 
textbook then. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, I would remind the member opposite 
that all of the curriculum committees have parents involved on them and 
I've also indicated that there are many Indian and Metis people involved.  
So the plan is that that would be continued and expanded I'm sure in some 
cases.  So when I suggest that we're involving Indian and Metis, that many 
of those people are also parents. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- I would like to get a little bit more specific in the area 
of language, Mr. Minister.  On languages other than English in this 
province, how many programs are out there?  And the language that I mean is 
that there is French, there is Ukrainian, there's German, and other 
languages being taught elsewhere.  I would like to know how much money's 
being spent in the area of heritage languages in this province in the 
school system, and then as compared to how much is being spent then on 
Indian languages? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well I would point out to the member, Mr. Chairman, 
that the money that's spent by boards, the decisions are made by the 
boards.  So we couldn't really give you an accounting as to how much money 
is spent for any particular language.  We do know that in some of the 
schools in the North, for example in Cumberland House, that there's a fair 
bit being done in that particular school with regard to languages and a lot 



 

 

of the teachers speak Cree as well as English.  But as to how much money is 
being spent in that particular area, we wouldn't have that information.  
That's up to the individual board, depending on what their needs are. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Minister, do you not feel, you know, with one of your 
later reports on Indian languages that came out that you were going to be 
supporting Indian languages development, do you not feel that there should 
be increased funding therefore in the board in regards to Indian languages 
in this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well I know, Mr. Chairman, that when we visited 
some of the schools in the North that concern was pointed out that in some 
cases there is a shortage of materials that are in the native languages, 
and we had suggested that we have to work closely with other departments of 
education and other officials to ensure that we can get more of these 
materials available for our boys and girls. 
 
With regard to direct funding that is going into languages in the North, 
for this year $75,000 is being committed to language consultants, and that 
would be in Cree and Dene. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- So basically what you're telling me is for the whole 
province we have 75,000, because last year I understood that, you know, in 
regards to when we had the election in Gravelbourg there was about $16 
million that was presented to the universities of course, and there was a 
certain amount of help in from the provincial government as well on 
teaching not only French but also Japanese and German and many other 
languages of the world.  And I know that there was one short program, you 
know, for Cree language in the summer time throughout that particular 
program. 
 
I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, there's been a cut-back in the heritage 
languages at the federal level.  There have been cut-back on the heritage 
languages program at the federal level.  Relating to your goals, your new 
report on multiculturalism in Saskatchewan can now report to the minister's 
committee on multiculturalism.  There's a section in there on education. 
 
How much of the shortfall that we are getting from the federal level is 
going to be replaced by your government, Mr. Minister? 
 
(1515) 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- I think, Mr. Chairman, for the member to make 
comments about the amount of money that might be spent on second languages 
and what money is coming from the federal government, he fails to recognize 
the fact that we do have two official languages in this country and that 
there is a fair amount of money that is being spent on the delivery of 
services for French boys and girls. 
 
With regard to the heritage languages in this province and what we in the 
department are doing, in November of 1988 a full-time heritage languages 
consultant was appointed by the department.  And we also have a heritage 
languages liaison reference committee.  And the department has initiated a 



 

 

process for assuming responsibility for the delivery of all kindergarten to 
grade 12 in-school and out-of-school programs, Mr. Chairman. 
 
So we are working on the task force report on multiculturalism and trying 
to do more of this within our schools.  We have a contract with the Indian 
cultural college for $48,000 to develop an Indian languages curriculum, 
that's for grades 4 to 6.  And, we're presently advertising for a 
secondment position in Indian languages. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Minister, getting on to another area, there was of 
course the education equity report, a report on Indian native education in 
Saskatchewan by the Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission which was tabled 
on September 1985 and there was a recommended plan of action.  And 
basically what it states is that when Indian-Metis people exceed 5 per cent 
of the population, that there should be goals planned out for that 
particular board.  And at that time it said that one of the first 
statements there was a statement of the number of students of Indian 
ancestry enrolled with the board of education at the time of the 
application for approval would be made. 
 
And also number two, that a plan to hire over the next 10 years, qualified 
teachers of Indian ancestry so that at the end of the 10-year period the 
percentage of teachers of Indian ancestry employed by the board of 
education will equal the percentage of students of Indian ancestry enrolled 
in the school division, or will equal 9.6 per cent of the teaching staff or 
will equal a percentage of the teaching staff to be approved by the 
Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission. 
 
 DNow, Mr. Minister, there's been approximately, at last count I think 
there was about 19 school boards, you know, that have had recommended 
action.  There may have been another one to make 20 in the past while, and 
so on.  What is your government doing now to try and get this more fully 
implemented throughout the province in working in conjunction with the 
Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission and fulfilling, you know, the intent 
of the plan of action? 
 
What are you doing in working with the Human Rights Commission, and also 
the school board, in making sure that numbers of Indian and Metis people 
that are hired at the schools are improving? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the Department of Education 
works with the Human Rights Commission.  They're monitoring the situation 
as it is now.  I would point out that it's not the Department of Education 
that hires teachers within school divisions.  I know that many of them do 
have affirmative action committees or representatives.  And I know that 
there is a move being made to have more native people within their staffs. 
 
I would point out that within the North that approximately 25 per cent of 
the teachers are of native ancestry, and I'm sure that as we turn out more 
graduates from the programs that we have at our universities and with 
SUNTEP and NORTEP, that that number will increase.  But right now it is at 
about 25 per cent. 
 



 

 

Mr. Goulet: -- There was also another statement made on that plan of 
action.  It said that, on part three of that report, it says parents of 
Indian ancestry should: one, actively seek positions on boards of 
education; and number two, where they reside on reserves, utilize the 
provisions of The Education Act to have their reserve designated as 
subdivisions, section 27(2)(b), or have a trustee appointed to the district 
board of trustees, section 124(1). 
 
I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, has there been any request in the past few 
years, since 1985, in that regard and has there been any action taken 
throughout this province?  I'd like to know. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well I would suggest that there are several boards 
in the province.  I couldn't give you an exact number, but there are 
several school division boards that do have native representation on the 
boards.  And this I'm sure has been very, very helpful.  I know of one 
particular board that I work with now, has a representative on the board 
where a fair number of children that are attending the school. 
 
So there are several of them in the province, but I couldn't give you an 
exact number.  I'm sure that more and more boards are encouraged to do 
this.  I mean I'm talking about the South.  If you go to the North, I would 
think that you'd probably find that the majority of the representatives on 
those boards are native people. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- How many would you say, Mr. Speaker?  You said that there 
was Indian and Metis people throughout the province.  Approximately how 
many do you think on those boards and who have the same status as other 
elected board members in those boards?  I'm not talking about advisory 
committees; I'm talking about actual board members in elected board 
positions, or designated at the same level as other board members who are 
elected. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- We don't monitor the number of boards that would 
have native representatives on them.  I simply am suggesting to you that I 
know of a few that do have native representatives on there, but I couldn't 
give you a number. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- I'm just wondering in regards to the intent of the education 
equity report and the affirmative action strategy throughout the province 
in regards to school boards.  Do you yourself, Mr. Minister, have an 
affirmative action strategy within your branch and also in the northern 
branch?  Do you have a specifically registered affirmative action plan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, I point out for the member that we 
don't have a formal affirmative action group as such in the North.  The 
goal there, as I understand it, is 50 per cent of the staff.  We're now at 
40 per cent.  And there is also a move being made right now within the 
department here in Regina to also move in that direction. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Minister, I'm very disappointed that you don't have an 
affirmative action strategy at the present time.  I certainly hope to see 
that in this coming year, and hopefully that will be implemented.  Because 



 

 

one of the basics of racism in this province is also always economic 
racism, and having actual people in positions of let's say exercising 
development in curriculum, for example, is extremely important as we look 
forward into the future on development of curriculum. 
 
I might add, also, Mr. Speaker, just a comment on common essential 
learnings and also in regards to the issue of racism.  I think racism is 
probably one of the leading topics these days as we deal with a 
multiculturalism report and as we deal with the situation right across 
Canada. 
 
And right now as we deal with the racism situation, of course most people 
are saying we have to deal with racism directly in the curriculum and not 
only deal with it in a vague way through multiculturalism.  Now anti-racism 
has to be part of education.  And I think that's a very important position 
that's now being taken by many educators throughout the world. 
 
I would like to add also, Mr. Minister, that the common essential learnings 
add a very important aspect to the individualization of instruction.  One 
of the major shortcomings of course on the common essential learnings was 
the area of group activity and group work where students and teachers had 
actually worked together in a group format. 
 
And one of the aspects of looking at that as we deal with racism and as we 
deal with sexism, handicapism, ageism, that we need to be able to work with 
each other in a group activity in the class-room so that we can be able to 
deal with these issues as we move forward into the future. 
 
Of course, that's not clearly stated, although in social studies you see a 
lot of group work and the social development of groups being talked about 
in education and so on, but never really a firm position in regards to 
having a strategy on group processes and group action in the class-room.  I 
would like to hear a comment, you know, on that from you as we look forward 
. . . So I would like to hear you make a statement on that, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, I would suggest that, you know, if 
there are examples of racism in any of our class-rooms, I think it's indeed 
regrettable.  I think that what we have to be very conscious about, and we 
are within the department, is looking at materials that may in any way put 
down any particular group.  So I would suggest to the member opposite that 
we do have a policy within the department to eliminate that.  Materials are 
vetted very, very carefully by many groups to ensure that we do not have 
these materials in our class-rooms.  So we have to be very careful with 
that. 
 
I think as well, if you look at some of the things that are happening on 
SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) campuses, 
that they have also put forward a policy, and I believe that that's before 
the Human Rights Commission right now, and it's something that could maybe 
be used as a model for some other institutions.  But we have to all, I 
think, continue to work towards eliminating any examples of this because it 
is indeed unfortunate. 
 



 

 

Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Minister, I'd like to make a general comment throughout 
the different questions I've thrown out, whether it's curriculum or Indian 
languages and so on.  I think overall a lot of the educators that I've met 
up with are very, very concerned that an insufficient amount of resources 
are available for the teachers, whether in the implementation of existing 
policies and also the curriculum materials development end of it.  They 
want important material, whether it's to fight against racism or to deal 
with the culture and language of Indian and Metis people in the province.  
That's been well stated, you know, for many, many years. 
 
I would like to say that as a member from across here and I see your 
government . . . and I will reiterate the point.  It may not be in this 
department where we pay Chuck Childers $740,000, but it's your government 
and you are a member of that government that gives that money away to that 
much. 
 
There is also a fact, Mr. Minister, that you are also part of the 
government that cut back the royalty payments on mining last year to the 
tune of $7 million for the big corporations in northern Saskatchewan.  
Seven million dollars would have gone a long ways in dealing with 
curriculum development and also in dealing with anti-racist education and 
dealing with languages development in the North. 
 
And also when I look at it, we have given . . . down south here we're 
giving $65 million up front to another giant corporation in this area and 
we're guaranteeing them $370 million.  So you have a lot of money out there 
that you're providing for big corporations who don't really need the money.  
And at the same time you talk about free enterprise and yet you provide a 
support system for these people.  But you will have only one position for 
languages development.  You have only one Indian-Metis people in the 
curriculum division at the present time, and you can pay these tremendous 
salaries to big corporate executives and the corporations themselves, but 
you don't have the funds to be able to deal effectively with the issue of 
education. 
 
(1530) 
 
Many people and many parents, and many parents and many teachers that sit 
in this province say, look, we don't like the high drop-out rate.  There's 
80, 90 per cent of our children, Indian-Metis children in this province 
that are dropping out of the school system.  They're being forced out of 
the school system because school is not such an exciting place in many 
situations.  And a lot of that is, let's say the impetus is on individual 
teachers to make it exciting, basically because they don't have the proper 
tools to be able to effectively deal with the situation. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, in regards to our few questions into Indian-Metis people, 
I wish as you look forward into the future, you as a minister who has been 
involved in the field of education, as you say, who says that you are very 
concerned about the culture and language of Indian-Metis people in this 
province, I hope you play a stronger role in the executive committee of 
your government to say look, we have to put more resources in these areas.  
One or two positions is simply not enough to make an impact on the life and 



 

 

activities of Indian-Metis children in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well you can talk about moneys not being available, 
for one thing.  Maybe some time you should also talk a little bit about the 
money that was squandered by DNS (department of northern Saskatchewan) in 
the North and money that wasn't going to meaningful programs like some of 
the ones I've talked about here today. 
 
Now you mentioned about the student drop-out problem, and I think that 
we've got some good things going in northern Saskatchewan and more that 
we're looking at in southern Saskatchewan as well, because this is a 
concern.  We have far too many students that are dropping out of school 
before they finish high school. 
 
But let me talk a little bit about the North and some of the initiatives 
that we've started.  We've got a program there that's going on now.  It's 
about a million dollars that have been allocated for this program, and 
again this is in response to the northern education task report.  And this 
is going to have, I think, a very positive effect on the student retention.  
And a further $500,000 has been allocated specifically to develop programs 
to assist northern youth to complete their secondary education. 
 
Now we know as well of the many excellent programs that are being provided 
through the Northlands College to meet the needs of these students, once 
they leave high school, and to prepare them for jobs out there in the work 
place, and programs that are designed by Northerners to meet the needs of 
Northerners. 
 
So I think that when you look at the programs that are there, and I'm sure 
you have looked at programs at Northlands and some of the good things that 
are happening in that part of the province, that they are designed to help 
the young people go out into the industries that are there.  And I would 
suggest that Northlands College is one of the excellent examples that we 
have of how we can meet particular needs in specific regions of the 
province by designing programs by the local people, who are designed for 
the local people. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I would like to 
spend some time asking you a few questions with respect to the Teachers' 
Superannuation Fund and how your government has interpreted this fund and, 
in so doing, has betrayed the trust of the people and that of the teachers 
in Saskatchewan, and in so doing is going further than that, not only 
betraying the trust of the teachers who have put their money into this 
pension fund, but is also a threat to every employee in Saskatchewan who is 
having their pension fund administered by this government. 
 
And I speak very specifically, Mr. Minister, about the concerns that have 
been expressed to you through the teachers' organization, the STF 
(Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation), about $175 million plus accrued 
interest, which come close to $250 million, which your government has taken 
from the Teachers' Superannuation Fund since 1985.  And I speak of course 



 

 

as well, Mr. Minister, in addition to that, the $10.4 million which you 
took directly out of the fund to pay out to allowances in the past year. 
 
In order to address this directly, Mr. Minister, and specifically to point 
out to you what the difficulties are here, I want to ask you first of all 
the question about the fund itself and your feeling about the fund itself.  
When you look at the Teachers' Superannuation Fund, Mr. Minister, when you 
look at the fund and you look at the annual reports which relate to the 
fund, and I have in my hand the '88-89 report, and you look at the amount 
that's in the fund -- right now the amount that's in the fund, according to 
this, 1989, is $733 million.  And on a later page this annual report refers 
to, as did previous annual reports, to the amount that is actually 
outstanding in terms of unfunded liability.  And the unfunded liability as 
of June 30, 1986 was $1.278 billion. 
 
My question to you with respect to this fund, Mr. Minister, is: is it the 
view of your government that this fund is sufficiently endowed to meet all 
liabilities?  Or do you instead concur with the position put by the 
Teachers' Superannuation Commission that there is a large underfunded 
liability?  And the amount that they state here is $1.278 billion. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I think it's interesting that 
the member opposite should raise this.  And he seems to have a different 
opinion about the $10.4 million, I believe, that he suggested that it went 
. . . was taken and it went to pay teachers' pensions, because it's not too 
long ago that I heard his leader suggesting that this money had been taken 
and put into the Consolidated Fund.  So there doesn't seem to be any 
agreement on where this money has gone. 
 
And I get a little bit concerned with the amount of misinformation that is 
flying around with regard to the teachers' pension fund, and I would 
suggest to the member opposite that there is no danger of anybody who is on 
pension or will be on pension in the future, that the money is not going to 
be there to meet the commitments. 
 
Now some of the information that you're putting forward here is really 
quite interesting, because when you talk about an unfunded liability, I 
would ask the member opposite, where was your government when you were in 
power that you weren't addressing that unfunded liability?  You were simply 
allowing it to build up each and every year, eleven years that you were in 
power.  You didn't do anything at all about the unfunded liability, to the 
point where it's now, I think, in the neighbourhood of $1.6 billion, part 
of which can be attributed to your government when you were in power.  And 
part of the reason was, Mr. Chairman, that during the 11 years that you 
were in, you never put one nickel into that teachers' superannuation fund.  
The only money that was going in there was what the teachers were 
contributing.  You never put in one nickel and you allowed this thing to 
build up and build up and now you try and suggest that this government 
should be doing something to bail it out.  Well we have done something to 
try and improve on this situation. 
 
Today, if you stop and consider what this government has been doing as far 
as the Teachers' Superannuation Fund, we are following the same practice 



 

 

that your government did, after the change in 1980, where the government 
was matching the teachers' portion of 6.5 per cent; 6.5 per cent is what 
the government was putting in as well. 
 
And the same thing has been true, Mr. Chairman, with regard to any interest 
over and above the 7 per cent which was taken by your government as well 
and put into the general fund.  It was not left.  So for you to sit there 
or stand there in your place and suggest that we are taking money that we 
should not have been taking, the information that we have or that the 
Minister of Finance had that there is nothing wrong with what has been 
done. 
 
I would also point out that this government was making overpayments for the 
majority of years since they have been in power since 1982 -- overpayments.  
And what happened in October of 1987 with the crash in the stock-market?  
The Teachers' Superannuation Fund lost something in the neighbourhood of 
$19 million, and who made that up?  Who made that up?  It was made up by 
this government.  Now we were making overpayments during that period of 
time.  You talk about a $10.4 million shortfall.  I don't think . . . since 
you're a former educator and you have the report there, you should 
understand then that the end of the teachers' superannuation year is June 
30, and we're not there yet.  And it will be at that time, and once the 
audit has been completed, that we will know how much money has been short 
for 1989-90. 
 
Now it's estimated that it could be in the neighbourhood of $10 million, 
but you don't know that and neither do I.   
 DThe fact of the matter is that the government put in $52 million for this 
present year and that the pensions probably amounted to, maybe 62.  Neither 
one of us knows that. 
 
But the fact is that the money that went to pay those pensions out, came 
out of the overpayment. It's not teachers' money.  And we've got 
representatives in the teachers' federation suggesting it's teachers' 
money. It's not teachers' money.  That overpayment wasn't teachers' money, 
it was taxpayers' money. 
 
So the $10 million came from there and it went to pay for teachers' 
pensions.  There was not one nickel that went for anything else.  And yet 
we know full well that some of the members of your party have not been 
saying that.  They've been trying to suggest to people and scare people 
that the money is being taken out of there and being used for other things 
and that some of them are in danger of losing their pensions.  And I think, 
Mr. Chairman, that's indeed unfortunate for those people who have worked 
long and hard in the educational system and then to have those kinds of 
stories floating around, that they may be in danger of losing their 
pensions. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Mr. Chairman, I want to tell you, Mr. Minister, that with 
one exception, one exception, that is that you told me that the unfunded 
liability is 1.6 billion, I don't believe a word of anything else you said.  
And I know that there isn't a teacher in Saskatchewan that believes a word 
of what you said, because you have completely falsified the situation, Mr. 



 

 

Minister, completely falsified it. 
 
Starting with 1980, Mr. Minister, starting with 1980, there was a new 
agreement.  And I say to you, prior to 1980, yes, there was a different 
agreement between the teachers of Saskatchewan and the Government of 
Saskatchewan, a completely different agreement, completely different 
agreement as far as pension goes.  That is, there was no concern about 
funding a pension fund at that time, and that is correct.  That is it.  
There was no concern at that time. 
 
The NDP government at that time moved to set up a funded plan, moved to set 
up a funded plan.  There was no Tory government in place in 1980.  It 
wasn't any Tory government that started setting up a funded plan.  So get 
that straight. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, since that time, since 1980, the teachers' allowance, 
the money that's being paid out to teachers that have superannuated after 
that time is still being paid in the agreements.  The old agreement still 
has to be upheld.  The money still has to be paid out of the provincial 
treasury. 
 
And when I talk about the money that you . . . the 10.4 million that was 
taken and paid for pensions, it doesn't matter whether you say it went 
through the Consolidated Fund and then to teachers' pensions or directly.  
Obviously it has to be paid through the fund.  But it's one and the same 
bundle of money, so don't play with words with me on that pile of money. 
 
What happened is, it had to go out to be paid for teachers' allowances 
because there wasn't enough budgeted for it and the pay-outs were greater 
than what was necessary. 
 
Let's get back to the issue at hand though, that I'm trying to address 
here, Mr. Minister, and the issue here is this money over and above 7 per 
cent.  Now I charge you with taking money which is an equivalent of $175 
million plus interest over and above the 7 per cent, starting in 1985.  And 
I challenge you to give me any documentation, any documentation that shows 
that there was money taken prior to that time, over above 7 per cent, 
particularly when the NDP were in power.  I challenge you to do that.  You 
stood up and you said that there was money taken.  You're trying to leave 
that impression.  I challenge you to produce the figures and to show where 
that happened. 
 
Mr. Minister, when you look at the report of the Provincial Auditor, 1986, 
this is where it was first brought to the attention of your government, 
1986, this report.  That was where it all started.  Now you don't tell me 
that the Ombudsman would have missed something like that in the years 
prior.  He wouldn't have missed that. 
 
And that was when we brought it to your attention, to the minister's 
attention at that time, in 1987, that you guys were taking money from the 
teachers' pension fund and using that money for government purposes, 
whether that purpose was for paying the other teachers' pensions or anybody 
else's pension or any other government expense.  But you were taking money 



 

 

over and above 7 per cent.  That's what you were doing. 
 
Now would you confirm, Mr. Minister, that in this auditor's report, on page 
68, that it says right here in 11.16: "I reported these matters to the 
Minister of Education in a memorandum of May 20, 1986." 
 
(1545) 
 
And what is it that he referred to?  The matters referred to earlier: 
 

 The accumulated amount of moneys in excess of the minimum fund balance 
that is required to be maintained pursuant to subsection 14(1) on behalf 
of teachers who have not retired, is not taken into account in the 
calculation of the additional amount to be paid. 

 
So there you go, Mr. Minister, there you go.  Now are you going to take the 
Ombudsman to court for saying that or are you going to come up with figures 
or are you going to admit that you made a mistake? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the member opposite asked for 
some specifics.  And I'm just very happy to give them to him because I 
would point out that in 1981-82 that the investment income in excess of 7 
per cent on the money that was in the Teachers' Superannuation Fund was 
$15.481 million.  So just so you can get it down, I'll go over it again -- 
$15.481 million. 
 
Now the amount of money that was contributed to the surplus was $9,473,000.  
So maybe the member opposite could explain to this House and to me, where 
did the balance of that money go, if it didn't go into your general 
coffers?  Just one example of what happened there. 
 
I would also point out too that when you talk about the auditor, let's not 
twist around what the intent of that report was and what his comments were.  
The comments were more, and the question was more in line with whether or 
not the government was acting in accordance with the law when they allowed 
a surplus or an overpayment to go in there.  That was the question that he 
was asking. 
 
And the fact of the matter is that the government felt that they were 
acting in good faith by putting in those overpayments to try and address 
part of the unfunded liability that you people left behind. 
 
So those were the two specifics, I believe, that you asked for; and a clear 
indication that your government, when you were in power, were in fact 
taking moneys over and above the 7 per cent interest that was accumulating 
on the teachers' payments. 
 
So don't just start to tell us that this was happening after 1985.  It was 
happening when you people were in power, and that money has been left in 
there.  As you know, there are some $123 million dollars, I believe, that 
was there in an overpayment, and part of that to try and address that 



 

 

problem. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Would the minister table that documentation, please?  I 
want to know exactly where he got those numbers from, where the audit is 
from.  I want to know where those numbers were arrived at. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, what we will do for the member is get 
a copy of the annual report from where the information was taken.  It has 
been tabled in this House, but we will find a copy of that report for the 
member. 
 
I would also suggest, Mr. Chairman, that the process that is being done and 
followed today in calculating the requirements, the amount of money to go 
into the pension fund is the same process that was followed when the NDP 
were in power.  So there hasn't been any change there.  The officials with 
the Teachers' Superannuation Commission are following the same process that 
has been followed ever since 1980, when the new plan came into being. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- What annual report are you referring to? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- That will be the annual report ending June 30, 
1982. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- The annual report of what? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- The Teachers' Superannuation Commission. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Mr. Minister, when it comes to the pay-outs over and above 
the 7 per cent, I want you to take a look at the authorization for that.  
And I ask you, Mr. Minister, whether or not you agree that the 
authorization comes from The Teachers' Superannuation Act, section 18(1)(a) 
which states that: 
 

 The Minister of Finance shall cause to be paid into: 
 

First of all, it says sufficient money to: 
 

 the Teachers' Superannuation Fund: 
 
 sufficient money, as may be required from time to time, to make it 

possible at all times to pay the allowances granted under this Act or 
under a former Act. 

 
That you would interpret that as the amount of money that has to go to pay 
for existing pensions; that is anybody that may have gone onto pension 
prior to 1980 from the old fund.  And that that's according to the old 
agreement.  And further down, that: 
 

 18(1)  The Minister of Finance shall cause to be paid into: 
 
 (a)(iii)  any amounts that are necessary to maintain the Teachers' 

Superannuation Fund at the level provided for by subsection 14(1); 
 



 

 

So I'm asking you to confirm that.  Is your interpretation the same as mine 
that the first amount it refers to, keeping the existing pensions, paying 
the existing pensions, and the last one that it referred to, where he talks 
about building up the fund as of 1980 and onward. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, the question asked with regard to the 
amount in the fund and what the commitment of the government is and what 
the commitment is by law. There has to be a minimum amount of money in the 
fund, and that amount of money has to be enough to ensure paying out all of 
those who are on the formula pension plan.  So the government is keeping an 
adequate amount of money in that fund.  No one has to be concerned about 
the end of the month rolling around and they're not getting their pension 
cheque.  The government has to keep that money in there. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Well, Mr. Minister, we're trying to do here is establish a 
little more specifically about the future of the fund and not . . . I hope 
your government would at least be able to meet next month's payment. 
 
Clearly what I'm after here, Mr. Minister, is the establishment of the fund 
and the sustainability of the fund into the distant future so that the 
teachers who are putting money into it now are sure that the money's going 
to be there into their year 10, year 20 of retirement, into the 1900s, 
1920s, 1930s. 
 
So let's just pursue this a little further, Mr. Minister, just so that you 
can understand.  Under section 18(1)(3) it says that you're supposed to put 
the money into the Teachers' Superannuation Fund according to section 
14(1).  Then when you take a look at section 14(1), it specifies a little 
more specifically just how this money shall be put in, and it says there 
that under section 14(1) of The Teachers' Superannuation Act: "the fund 
shall at all times at least equal the sum of."  Okay, "at least equal the 
sum of." 
 
Now what does it say: "contributions made by or on behalf of teachers who 
have not retired together with the interest thereon".  At least all of the 
contributions made on behalf of the fund; that is, on behalf of the 
teacher, I would assume that would be the employer through the government 
together with the interest thereon. 
 
And then later on it says: "contributions made to the fund by the Minister 
of Finance." Fine.  And then the third item says: "and also the teachers' 
voluntary contributions together with the interest thereon." So in each 
case it specifies quite clearly that the amount in the fund should at all 
times be at least equal the sum of the contributions on behalf of the 
teacher and by the teacher, along with the interest thereon. 
 
The argument that your predecessor put when I asked him the same question 
as to what authorization do you feel you really have to take the money away 
over and above 7 per cent, he said, well you take a look at another section 
of the Act.  And he referred me at that time to a section of the Act -- I 
believe it was section 55(1), which has in it mentioned the rate of 
pay-outs to teachers.  It talks about teacher pay-outs. 
 



 

 

Clearly it talks about teacher pay-outs.  I could quote it for you word for 
word.  And it tells you about what rate a teacher who ceases teaching 
should be paid if he withdraws his pension funds.  Has absolutely nothing, 
no reference whatsoever to the amount of money that . . . to the previous 
section, to section 14(1) or to the build-up of the fund.  It talks about 
an individual teacher and the pay-out. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, you can see clearly why the teachers of Saskatchewan are, 
to say the least, somewhat upset when they see that year after year after 
year this money has been taken out to the cumulative total of $175 million, 
add the interest rate to it, and the close estimate is $250 million. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, my question to you then is: is there any other reasoning 
that you could use or any other authority that you have -- that you as the 
government has -- that you can say that you have the right to take this 
money, when clearly it says in here, "the interest thereon shall go into 
the fund."? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, let me give a couple of figures 
to the member opposite.  There is no question about the fact that there is 
an adequate amount of money in there to meet any of the demands by the 
pensions. 
 
And I would point out that the minimum fund balance that would be required 
to meet all of the commitments for pensions, the people that are out there 
eligible for this, is in the neighbourhood of $610 million.  Now the actual 
amount of money in the fund is in excess of $733 million.  And the reason 
that that figure is considerably higher is because of the overpayments that 
were made during the 1980s into the fund. 
 
And that was part, I think, of the question that the auditor was asking, 
too, was whether or not that should be going on. 
 
Now the other comment I would make to the member opposite is this.  That 
there is a court case now that is going to go ahead, and we know that the 
teachers' federation disagrees with the practice that has been followed 
during the last 10 years.  It goes back to 1980, in fact, it goes back to 
when that party was in power as well. 
 
So that case is going to the court to indeed establish whether or not what 
the governments of the day have been doing, including the NDP and the PC 
government, have been doing since 1980.  So we obviously disagree. But 
right now it's going to be up to the court to make that determination as to 
whether or not what's been going on is legal or not. 
 
The opinion that was given before is that it's all right to do this, but 
I'm sure that they had the same understanding when they were in power.  But 
we will have to wait now until this goes to court and the determination 
will be made there. 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Mr. Minister, with the difficulties and the frustrations 



 

 

that the teachers feel over what's happened to their pension fund and as 
I've been talking about over the last few minutes, has been referred 
specifically to that money that's been taken over and above the 7 per cent. 
 
Now in addition to that, there's one other issue here that needs to be 
dealt with, and that is the issue of funding for existing . . . for those 
teachers, or the pay-outs to those teachers who are right now receiving 
their pensions.  And every year the government has budgeted a certain 
amount of money.  Usually it's been through either the Department of 
Finance or Department of Education, and that money has been used to pay the 
teachers' pensions. 
 
And it's been a long-standing practice. It's been the way it's been handled 
at least since oh, probably . . . the books that I've looked through just 
said '79, but I know it's been several years before that.  But every year 
there's money being paid out to teachers' pensions and cost of living 
bonuses. 
 
Now from time to time, the amount of money that was paid out to the 
Teachers' Superannuation Commission, I assume from the government, was at 
variance with the amount actually paid out to the teachers.  In some years 
it was somewhat more, in which case the Teachers' Superannuation Commission 
added the money, I assume added the money to the Teachers' Pension Fund.  
In some cases, the amount of money forwarded from the Department of Finance 
was less, in which case the superannuation commission would ask for a 
special warrant or supplementary allowances, in which case the money was 
added. 
 
Last year there was money asked for and received under special warrant of 
18 . . . pardon me, this is for the '88-89 year.  According to Public 
Accounts, under special warrants they received an additional $18.7 million 
due to the shortfall, because there simply wasn't enough money there to pay 
out the existing pensions as per agreement. 
 
I'm advised, Mr. Minister, that this year under the same conditions, 
similar conditions, that when the Teachers' Superannuation Commission 
applied for additional funds, the warrant was refused by your government -- 
clearly a break in precedence, clearly a break in precedence.  And the 
money that had to be paid out for this for the teachers had to be used . . 
. the Teachers' Superannuation Commission had to go to the Teachers' 
Superannuation Fund that we were referring to before, the one that we're 
trying to build up over the years so it could be completely funded and 
independent, and over time perhaps it would be if all the money that was 
rightly belonging to it was put into it. 
 
So in addition to taking off the 7 per cent, you actually refused the 
warrant, forcing them to go back to that fund for another $10.4 million.  
Would you confirm that, Mr. Minister, and would you give me the authority 
under which you had to do that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the feeling is on the part of 
the Department of Finance that the minister has in fact . . . or the 
government has met all of its commitments with regard to the amount of 



 

 

money that was put into the fund -- the minimum balance that is being 
maintained, the fact that also the 7 per cent interest which has been 
allowed in there, and the fact that the minimum requirement that's needed 
to meet all of the commitments is in the neighbourhood of $610 million, and 
that there are over $733 million in there.  This was up to the end of 1989.  
So I mean that's changed for this current year as well. 
 
The feeling was, because the commitment had been made and the law had been 
followed, that there was no problem with removing or taking the $10 million 
to pay those pensions, and that coming out of the overpayment. 
 
Now as I've suggested to the member, that this is the matter that's now 
before the courts, whether or not the government was doing something that 
was illegal or not.  The feeling was, when this was done, that all of the 
commitments had been met, the minimum amount had been maintained, the 
interest was allowed for, and that the money could come out of the 
overpayment, which as I said earlier, was taxpayers' money, not teachers' 
money.  But right now then, Mr. Chairman, what we will have to do is wait 
for the court ruling on that as to whether or not what was done was not 
proper. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Could you advise me, Mr. Minister, the authority that you 
used to refuse this special warrant, clearly it was a break in precedence, 
clearly it was a completely out of . . . not following any precedent that 
has been followed over the last few years.  You had to have some authority.  
You had to have made some kind of a decision on it some place.  You 
couldn't have just had . . . No official would just all of a sudden snap 
his fingers and say, well I think we won't do it this way.  You had to have 
made that decision there somewhere. 
 
What authority have you got?  And do you not agree, Mr. Minister, that The 
Education Act requires that any amendments to The Teachers' Superannuation 
Act -- and I guess it would apply also to any applications of funding or  
funding changes to The Teachers' Superannuation Act -- should be as a 
result only of collective bargaining? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, the authority of course certainly was 
. . . I think felt that since the minimum requirements or the requirements 
of the Act had been met, that there was indeed no problem with turning down 
the request for the special warrant and continuing to pay the pensions from 
the overpayment that had been built up.  Now that of course is the question 
that's before the courts.  At this point in time the STF says that this was 
not proper.  The government took the stand that it was proper, so it's 
going to have to be resolved in the courts. 
 
But I would point out as well, Mr. Chairman, that in the auditor's report 
for the year ended June 30, 1985, that one of his comments was that total 
funds available during the year, including invested funds, were more than 
sufficient to pay allowances granted, and as a result additional payments 
received from the Minister of Finance under this subclause totalling 
$19,476,698 were not required to fund the payment of allowances. 
 
So I think in actual fact what he is questioning here whether or not the 



 

 

government was right in making an overpayment of in excess of $19 million.  
So I think that there are some other questions that have to be resolved as 
well here within the Teachers' Superannuation Fund. 
 
So we look forward to the decision of the court and getting some of this 
sorted out. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairperson.  Mr. Minister, I 
want to talk about the Saskatchewan school drop-out rate.  As you may be 
aware, last year in the legislative session we raised with the former 
minister of Education the problems identified in Dr. Randhawa's study which 
indicated that there was an extreme increase of dropping out among students 
in grade 8 to 12 in Saskatchewan schools since his last study which was 
done in 1980-81, I understand. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, the drop-out rate, as identified by Dr. Randhawa, 
indicate that there has been a dramatic increase in drop-outs in the 
province of Saskatchewan since your government came to power. 
 
Mr. Minister, the former minister of Education indicated that there was 
going to be some ongoing work done in this area; that the study, according 
to him, might have had some problems.  And I'm wondering what undertaking 
has been initiated by your department to study whether in fact school 
drop-out rates in the province of Saskatchewan have increased. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I certainly can share the 
member opposite's concern about the high number of students that we do have 
in dropping out of our schools today, but I think for her to try and blame 
that on the government is really a little bit unfair. 
 
I think that we have to consider the fact that we've got a lot of different 
things happening in our society today that weren't there five years ago or 
10 years ago.  And she being an educator who was involved with special 
needs students, is fully aware of many of the problems that some of our 
young people are going through today. 
 
So it is a problem that all of us have to continue to address.  But I would 
point out that we are concerned about the drop-out rate, and we have taken 
some steps, taken some steps to try and alleviate the problem.  And we have 
to work with all of the school systems in the province, and we have to work 
with the teachers' federation as well as LEADS (League of Educational 
Administrators, Directors and Superintendents) and the trustees' 
association to try and overcome the problem. 
 
One of the things that we did in the fall of 1989 was to hire a consultant 
to work with schools to try and counter the problem a little bit.  The 
development of more appropriate programming in some cases, I'm sure she'll 
well understand, is the answer because in many cases students get turned 
off of the programs that are being offered, and as a result drop out of 
school.  We're also taking a look at an international research effort 
that's being done by the Organization for Economic Co-operation and 
Development in looking at at-risk students, and some of the steps that are 
being taken in other parts of the world to try and counter this problem. 



 

 

 
We have talked earlier today about some of the initiatives that we're 
taking in northern Saskatchewan, direct response to recommendations put 
forward in the northern education task force report.  And I would refer 
specifically to the program at Ile-a-la-Crosse where we have a re-entry 
program that will assist adult students to obtain a grade 12 standing. 
 
We've also looked at scholarship program award systems to try and motivate 
some young people into staying in school a little bit longer.  So there are 
things being done, Mr. Chairman, but we've all got lots to do if we're 
going to address this very, very serious problem. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, while it appears to me that you 
recognize that there is a growing problem in the province of Saskatchewan, 
all I can see that you've done is implement more study, Mr. Minister. 
 
If you look at the grants that were sent to school divisions in the 
province of Saskatchewan as a result of your past budget, you will note 
that the increase, the average increase amounts to 3 per cent, which is 
less than the rate of inflation. 
 
You will know, Mr. Minister, that the school is having to take on more and 
more functions as the result of some of the very serious problems that the 
people in our province are facing.  And consequently, when parents are 
facing those problems, their children are. 
 
Now it seems to me, Mr. Minister, that your answer or your response to my 
question simply is not good enough.  We have seen a dramatic increase in 
the female drop-out rate in the province of Saskatchewan.  In fact, Mr. 
Minister, according to Dr. Randhawa's study, there has been a 58.8 per cent 
increase in the number of young women that are dropping out of school. 
 
And I wonder, Mr. Minister, what sort of strategy your department is 
looking at in terms of new initiatives in education to help retain females 
in the grade 8 to 12 school system.  Because as you very well know, Mr. 
Minister, a majority of the poor people in this province are females.  And 
why are they poor, Mr. Minister?  They're poor because they lack an 
education.  They're poor because the school system for some reason has 
failed them. 
 
(1615) 
 
And I want to know, Mr. Minister, specifically what strategies is your 
government adopting to ensure that young women in the province of 
Saskatchewan are staying in school, getting their grade 12, and then going 
on to further education? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I'm pleased to have 
the opportunity to talk about that a little bit more, and I would point out 
to the member opposite that there has been additional money in the 
neighbourhood of $7 million that have gone towards special projects related 
to drop-out prevention. 
 



 

 

She mentions the concern about more and more females that have dropped out 
of school or are dropping out of school, and I was very pleased to be 
involved with the group that got the Mount Royal infant care centre going 
which I'm sure she's familiar with and I'm sure she's visited that centre, 
and a very successful, very worthwhile project. 
 
And we need to consider, I think, more of these types of projects within 
the province.  Because there we have young women who have children, young 
single women who want to stay in school and finish their high school.  And 
through the introduction of that program at Mount Royal, I think it's had a 
very positive impact on the school.  It certainly has had a very positive 
impact on the young women that are involved in the program, in that they 
are staying in school for the most part. 
 
The success ratio has been very, very high.  Attendance is very, very high.  
I would think as well from the information I have, that the marks of these 
young people are better than average in most cases.  And these are people 
who are committed to staying in school and going on to further 
post-secondary education.  But without a program like that, I'm sure that 
these young women would not still be in school.  So that's a very positive 
program that has been implemented to try and address that problem. 
 
I think as well, when you consider the fact that when we look at the 
after-care program that's going to be initiated at Marion Graham Collegiate 
in Saskatoon, that young people who've become involved with drugs and 
alcohol and end up in treatment centres, that there's a fair amount of 
support that they need after receiving treatment when they go back to their 
schools.  And the project at Marion Graham is going to, I think, go a long 
ways to helping some of these young people integrate back into the regular 
school program. 
 
So we have to consider that this is a pilot program and we have to monitor 
that and watch the success of it.  But again, she will understand, I'm 
sure, some of the students that she's worked with in the past, that support 
programs of this nature are really, really important. 
 
I think as well when you consider the additional moneys that we've put into 
the student loan program to assist, again, young people -- and you indicate 
about females, that there are a lot of young single moms -- and those who 
want to go on and continue with their education are getting a great deal of 
help through some of the programs that we have initiated. 
 
So I think that there is a lot happening.  She's made special mention of 
the Randhawa study as to the number of students that are dropping out of 
school.  And I would point out to her that the Saskatchewan School Trustees 
Association questions some of the figures that Dr. Randhawa has come up 
with and feels that there needs to be further research done in that area.  
So I think we have to take that into consideration as well. 
 
One other thing that we're doing is the changes with the student record 
system in that we are setting up a much better system to register students 
and to monitor what their movement are, where they're going throughout the 
province, and we can track them a lot better.  And I think that this will 



 

 

help to meet some of the concerns that are raised by the member opposite. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, what a lame-duck answer to a very 
serious problem that has occurred in the province of Saskatchewan.  One 
day-care program in the city of Saskatoon . . . and as you probably know, 
Mr. Minister, once those children start walking, they can no longer go into 
that day-care program.  There are young women in that school who have their 
babies in grade 10 and by the time they get to grade 11 their children are 
no longer eligible for care in that program, Mr. Minister.  And so what do 
those young women do?  They are then faced with the problems of day care 
and finding appropriate day care for their children.  One program is not 
going to deal with the serious problems that are affecting young women in 
this province when it comes to high school drop-out rates.  So one 
program's simply not good enough, Mr. Minister.  There is a need for many 
more programs in the province of Saskatchewan in terms of day care in 
schools or around schools. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you say that young people need support programs, support 
services, and I'd like you to pay attention, Mr. Minister.  Young people 
need support programs, but with a measly 3 per cent increase in your 
budget, school boards aren't able to deliver the kinds of support programs 
that these young people need in order to stay in school. 
 
The other day when the teachers were in the legislature, one of the 
questions I asked you was what were you going to do in order to put support 
programs into schools to assist teachers to do what they've been 
historically trained to do and that's teach.  Mr. Minister, teachers are 
becoming social workers and counsellors and food banks and clothing 
distributors.  And they are having to take on more and more functions as a 
result of a lack of support programs for young people. 
 
And so, Mr. Minister, tell me some more.  One day-care program's not good 
enough.  What else are you going to do to support young people to stay in 
school in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well I always get a kick out of the member 
opposite, Mr. Chairman.  I am sure we could have day-care programs in every 
high school in this province and I am sure that she would still get up and 
say we're not doing enough.  But she puts on a pretty act and I commend her 
for that. 
 
I indicated the Mount Royal program, Mr. Chairman, because I was directly 
involved in that program and it's the one that I am the most familiar with, 
but I know of other programs that exist in the province as well.  I am also 
fully aware of the concern that they have that now when the children are 
toddlers that there has to be some other way of providing services for them 
and meeting their needs.  So we've got to continue to work on that. 
 
But I would also point out the expansion and the improvement and services 
that we have within our community schools within the province.  We've 
increased the numbers of them and I think that they're meeting a very, very 
special need, particularly in our inner-city community areas in the 
province.  So that's addressing another type of a problem. 



 

 

 
We've got programs here in the city of Regina as well, that are involved 
with meeting needs of young people who otherwise would be leaving school.  
We've also got a federal initiative right now, a stay-in-school initiative 
that's being put forward by the federal government.  We are working very 
closely with them.  We know as well, the day-care component that is being 
discussed and there are a lot more services that are needed. 
 
And as I indicated, times are changing.  The fact that you mentioned about 
teachers are expected to wear so many more hats today is very, very true.  
They have to provide a lot of the support for children today that in most 
cases in the past would have been provided by the homes, but in some cases 
today in our society, some of our old traditional values and strengths are 
breaking down and the teachers get left with having to provide those 
services. 
 
So we have to look at projects such as we are with Social Services in how 
we can better meet the needs of some of these kids . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- You need to do something now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- And we are doing things now; it's just that the 
member from Regina Centre is not paying attention to what's going on around 
him, because he's got some excellent facilities as a matter of fact, Mr. 
Chairman, right in his own riding that I think are going a long way to 
address specific concerns that his colleague is raising. 
 
So there's lots happening, but we've got to keep working on it. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Minister, you say there's lots  
 Dhappening but you haven't given me any specifics in terms of what is 
happening.  What is happening?  Do we have more social workers that are 
going into the community?  Do we have more counsellors that are going into 
the community?  Do we have more psychologists that are going into the 
community?  Do we have any drug and alcohol addiction counsellors that are 
going into schools?  Which new day-care initiatives are you taking in high 
schools in the province of Saskatchewan?  Are you conducting a study to see 
whether or not Dr. Randhawa's information was correct or incorrect? 
 
I keep hearing that his information in terms of the school drop-out rate is 
incorrect, but I've never seen any evidence on the part of the provincial 
government to dispute that, any real research, Mr. Minister.  All of the 
literature in North America indicates that high school drop-out rates are 
increasing dramatically in North America.  All the literature indicates 
that all the high school drop-out rates for young females is increasing 
dramatically. 
 
And so, Mr. Minister, I want you to be more specific.  You can be bombastic 
and say, oh, there's all kinds of initiatives, but I want you to be 
specific and tell us exactly what those initiatives are, so that we can 
determine whether in fact your government is doing anything to address the 
problem of high school drop-out rates increasing in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well I've given some pretty good specifics, Mr. 
Chairman, but the member opposite isn't listening. 
 
I would also point out, it's interesting that she should be asking if we're 
doing another study to see what is happening out there if we don't agree 
with the Randhawa study.  I said that the members of the school trustees 
association did not agree with the study. 
 
We know the problem exists out there.  We don't need to do any more studies 
on it.  We are doing many things in so far as helping some of these people.  
And I'd point out what's happening with shared services, the extra support 
services that are being provided in our school systems, whether we're 
talking about social workers in some cases, speech therapists, 
psychologists and others who supply support to families. 
 
We know as well that there's additional money in the special education area 
this year in our budget to address problems that haven't been taken care of 
before -- speech and language problems.  We know as well of the joint 
venture with Social Services to put social workers into the two larger 
urban centres to address some of these problems, and working with school 
systems and trying to identify some of the problems that do exist there and 
how they can better be addressed.  So we can point out specific programs 
that are happening in the larger centres. 
 
We can also look at rural Saskatchewan and the delivery of programs within 
school divisions and money that is being provided through special education 
grants -- a grant that has been increased this year -- and a change in some 
of the criteria so that it does encompass a larger number of students that 
have special needs. 
 
So we know that there may be a need for many more social workers, 
psychologists, people who can provide support for families.  And we can 
only do so much in Education, Mr. Chairman.  We have to work along with the 
department of families and also the Department of Social Services to 
address some of these concerns. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you've just generalized -- all these 
generalities in terms of what services are available, but you haven't been 
specific at all. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you tell me specifically who in your department is 
responsible for policy initiatives in terms of high school retention rates?  
Who is it in your department is dealing with this issue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- The gentleman sitting behind the deputy, Mr. Ivan 
Yackel is the one who is responsible for looking at those programs. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Can you tell me what Mr. Ivan Yackel has done in the last 
year in terms of developing policy initiatives, broad policy initiatives in 
the province of Saskatchewan to deal with the horrendous increase in the 
high school drop-out rate in this province? 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, the official has been very involved 
with the working with school divisions at the grass roots level to identify 
more of the specific problems, and working with them to see how they can 
best be dealt with because all areas are different.  Problems are 
different; areas are different. 
 
Also a consultant has been hired within the department to work with 
teachers.  We've also got a student retention council that is being set up 
made up of representatives from the SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees 
Association), the STF, and LEADS, and looking at the areas where students 
are dropping out, what grade levels mainly are involved, the reasons for 
their dropping out, and seeing how we can more specifically then address 
the problem with specific types of programs. 
 
So I think that he's been very, very busy.  This is only one of his duties 
of course in working with student retention, but I think that we've got a 
lot of good things going and we look forward to the problems being 
addressed in a more positive way, I would suggest, in the months ahead. 
 
(1630) 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Minister, is Mr. Yackel the director of social 
sciences and resource centre services?  Is that his position?  What is his 
position? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- He is the executive director of field support 
services. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Minister, can you send me a new listing of your 
departmental officials and what their titles are in the Department of 
Education?  Can you do that today?  Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, I'm surprised that it's taken you over a year to set up a 
retention advisory committee, and can you tell me when you plan to have 
this committee in place and who you plan to appoint to this committee? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the committee will be in place 
by the latter part of June.  The representatives on the committee will be 
from the usual groups involved with education: STF, LEADS, SSTA, as well as 
students on the committee.  And those groups will be putting forward the 
names that they want on the committee, but there will also be other 
interest groups as well as students.  And I think that's very, very 
important that we have students putting forward suggestions as to how the 
problem can be dealt with. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Minister, can you tell me what interest groups are 
going to be represented on this committee?  And can you tell me whether the 
students that you're going to be appointing to this committee are students 
that perhaps have dropped out of school for various reasons, or are we 
talking about students that are presently in school? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Two examples, Mr. Chairman, would be home and 
school, Indian and Metis.  And also when you ask about the students, they 



 

 

would in fact be students who have dropped out of school. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Minister, I have here a report on curriculum 
development.  It was a supplement to the STF bulletin, April 14, 1989.  
This is the latest information I have in terms of special initiatives on 
the part of your Department of Education, and one of the special 
initiatives that they refer to is student retention.  And they say that 
many of the efforts that have taken place have been supported by the 
Educational Development Fund. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you specifically tell me what initiatives have taken 
place by your government through the Educational Development Fund that deal 
with student retention?  If you have that specifically written down, Mr. 
Minister, I'd appreciate receiving a copy of all of these initiatives that 
you say have taken place. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- The money would be given to school boards and they 
would be the ones that are providing the programs.  So I can't give you a 
specific list of them today, but we will get that for you because there are 
several in the province. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Minister, can you tell me . . . what I am specifically 
interested in knowing is: all of the initiatives that have been undertaken 
by your government, through EDF (educational development fund) or through 
any other funding, in terms of getting services into school divisions to 
help students stay in school.  So I want a list of, say, of all of the 
initiatives since Dr. Randhawa's study, which would have been done in 
1986-87.  Can you get that for me, and can you get that for me by tomorrow? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, it's going to take a little bit more 
time than to get it tomorrow, because I'm sure, as the member realizes, the 
grants that go out are unconditional.  And what we will have to look at is 
scan through the information that has come back from school boards 
indicating where they are spending this money.  So it will take the 
officials a little while to get hold of that, but we would hope to have it 
for you early next week.  Soon as we can get it. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Minister, are you saying that EDF funding is 
unconditional?  Because my understanding is that in order to obtain EDF 
funding you have to put forward a proposal to the Department of Education, 
and then the Department of Education determines whether or not it's 
appropriate. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, in terms of this magazine article that I have that 
appeared in the Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation bulletin, it said that, 
and I quote: 
 

 The government, educators, parents, and the community must work together 
to help all children succeed in completing school.  Towards this end the 
department is planning a province-wide effort to focus attention and 
resources on drop-out prevention and some of the contributing factors. 

 
Mr. Minister, it's one year later.  I want to know what your province-wide 



 

 

effort is in terms of policy initiatives that have been undertaken by your 
department to prevent the drop-out rate in the province of Saskatchewan 
from sky-rocketing even more. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, one of the major changes that is 
taking place and the major initiative that is taking place is the 
development of the core curriculum.  And we recognize that all of the 
students are going to be involved in the core curriculum and all areas of 
it.  But one of the major concerns that we have and that's to do with the 
adaptive dimension.  So that we ensure that children, regardless of what 
their ability level is or what types of learning problems they might have, 
that the programs are going to be adapted in such a way that they can 
benefit from them. 
 
So now over the last year, it goes back longer than a year now, Dr. Gladene 
Robertson has been involved in working with the curriculum committees and 
on this particular aspect of them.  So there is a fair bit happening.  We 
have to keep in mind that all areas of the curriculum should be open for 
all students.  But we recognize that some of them have difficulty; some of 
them of course have additional ability, and we have to try and meet the 
specific needs of all children.  So there is a lot of work being done in 
that particular area and that's been going on for over a year.  And that 
will continue. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, we have a supplement to the April 14, 
1989, Saskatchewan Bulletin which is the Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation 
monthly newspaper.  Last year in early April, I believe, I raised in this 
legislature the results of Dr. Randhawa's study that showed there had been 
a tremendous increase in the high school drop-out rate in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now while there may be some people who dispute Dr. Randhawa's study, 
personally, Mr. Minister, I do not.  I believe there has been a tremendous 
increase in the number of young people in the province of Saskatchewan that 
are dropping out of school. 
 
Now you have undertaken a bit of a public relations exercise, Mr. Minister.  
There is an article -- your words, not my words -- saying that you are 
going to engage in a province-wide effort to focus attention and resources 
on drop 
_out prevention. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, it's one year later and nothing has happened, Mr. 
Minister.  Absolutely nothing.  Young people in this province continue to 
drop out of school.  All you have to do is go into downtown Saskatoon or 
downtown Regina or downtown anywhere and you will find that there are young 
people that simply aren't in schools.  Our system, Mr. Minister, for 
whatever reason, is failing them -- our economic system, our social system, 
our political system. 
 
And it appears to me, Mr. Minister, that there is no will on the part of 
the provincial government to address this issue.  This is a major issue, 
Mr. Minister.  Your predecessor talked about getting us into the 21st 



 

 

century.  We cannot get ourselves into the 21st century, Mr. Minister, if 
45 per cent of the young people in this province are leaving school early. 
 
I want to know, Mr. Minister, what is your province-wide strategy to deal 
with this tremendous problem of young people leaving school early? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, there have been a lot of changes, as 
I indicated, in the core curriculum program that are designed to address 
some of the problems the member is raising.  And in particular I would 
point out probably the most critical area in our schools, and that's at the 
grades 7, 8, and 9 levels, because we find that in many cases probably this 
is where a lot of our young people will drop out for one reason or another. 
 
I would point out the major change there is to do with the curriculum and 
health and guidance and the types of programs that are being developed to 
deal with a lot of social problems, to also deal with family life and to 
try and keep more of these young people in school. 
 
So we've got to look at the general programs that are being changed, but we 
also have to look at the specific types of supports that are being provided 
in our schools.  Sometimes we know that things are not moving along as 
quickly as we might have liked, but at the same time let's keep in mind 
that students haven't just started dropping out of school in the last year 
or two years or 10 years.  We've always had some children that have dropped 
out of school for one reason or another, whether there were problems in 
their home, whether there were problems within the school, whether there 
were problems with getting along with the teacher, whether there were 
problems that they couldn't handle the program, whatever the case might be.  
There's any number of reasons, and that's been going on for a long time.  
But we have to continue to address those problems and we are attempting to 
do that just as quickly as we can, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Well you know, once again we have the minister talking 
about core curriculum.  I understand, Mr. Chairperson, that core curriculum 
is going to take years to implement.  This problem is of such a dramatic 
nature, Mr. Minister, that we don't have years to start addressing this 
problem.  You say in this paper that there is a province-wide effort, a 
province-wide effort to focus attention and resources.  I don't see the 
effort; I don't see the resources, Mr. Minister.  I see absolutely no 
leadership on the part of the provincial government -- you, Mr. Minister, 
as the Minister of Education, to do anything about this problem of 44.59 
per cent of the young people in this province dropping out of school.  And 
that has increased, Mr. Minister, from 31.33 per cent in 1980-81.  So 
nothing's occurred. 
 
Now you also say that what we have to do is look at children in grades 7 
and 8 and 9 and 10, I believe you said, in terms of the curriculum.  That 
leads me into my next set of questions, Mr. Minister. 
 
Tell me, where is core curriculum at in this province?  How many of those 
subjects in those particular grades have now been implemented?  How many 
pilot projects are there, Mr. Minister, and where are these pilot projects? 
 



 

 

(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, I would like to point out to the 
member opposite -- and I'd be happy to send a copy of this booklet over -- 
that this is one of the initiatives of the department that has been 
designed to help students in going into post-secondary education.  And I 
think we have to keep in mind we're not just talking people dropping out of 
K to 12, but we also want to encourage those that are going to go on to 
other areas. 
 
And this booklet, Design Your Future, I think can be very, very beneficial.  
We've had a lot of very positive comments on it.  And that students then 
become aware of programs that they need to take if they are going to go on 
to post-secondary education, and the fact that there are certain subject 
areas that they may have to take if they want to go on to technical school 
or whether they're going on into university.  And I guess we have to keep 
in mind that students that are dropping out of school today. In many cases 
there's a wide range of ability levels.  So we have to ensure that we're 
working with them and make them aware of opportunities that exist beyond 
high school and the importance of remaining in school. 
 
With regard to the core curriculum and how far along we are with that, we 
are now moving into the second year of implementation of it -- a part of a 
10-year project -- and a tremendous amount of work being done by teachers 
throughout the province.  At the present time, or for 1990-91, we'll have 
some 556 teachers involved in pilot projects in the province. 
 
So a lot of work that's being done in that particular area.  Science, K to 
6, will be into full implementation this fall.  We have many teachers who 
are involved with different subject areas in writing curriculum. We've a 
lot of people that are seconded as curriculum writers, and I know that we 
were advertising not long ago for more of them. 
 
But there is a lot happening in the core curriculum.  One of the bigger 
problems right now is in-service for the teachers, and particularly in the 
common essential learnings. 
 
So although we may at times feel that it's moving quite slowly, we can't 
move too quickly before teachers are ready to move into these new areas.  
And again it's a matter of changing in some cases the concerns that 
teachers have that we're now just expecting them to do much, much more, and 
the fact that we are looking at doing things differently.  Not only the 
subject matter is going to be different but also the methods in which that 
material is going to be delivered. 
 
So there are some subject areas that are already into implementation, 
others that are just in the process of being written.  But as I understand 
it, everything is pretty well on track and we would hope that within the 
next eight years that the whole program will have been implemented into our 
school systems. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Minister, are you prepared to send me the information 
in terms of where core is exactly at?  I'd like to know which subjects have 



 

 

been implemented, which subjects are being piloted, and when the other 
subjects are scheduled to be implemented or piloted.  Can you forward that 
information to me in the course of the next day? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, we'd be happy to provide that 
information.  We'll do it after supper. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you confirm that the funding for core curriculum has not 
increased this year over last?  Can you tell me what the funding was for 
core curriculum in the year 1989-90, and what your projected funding is for 
core curriculum in the year 1990-91?  And can you tell me what that money 
that is going towards core is going to be used for?  Are we talking about 
teacher in-service or curriculum development?  What exactly is the funding 
that your government has budgeted for core curriculum going to be used for 
in this coming year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, the amount for curriculum and special 
ed this year is in excess of $10 million, and that's an increase, I 
believe, of over a million dollars from last year.  But there have also 
been some changes within there as to the types of programs that are being 
funded.  So there is more money in there than last year, as I understand 
it. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Minister, can you confirm that the funding for core 
curriculum last year was $9.469 million, that funding for core curriculum 
this year is $9.469 million? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, I would confirm that last year the 
amount of money was $9,485,800, but this year it is -- and this includes 
the Directions initiatives -- is over $10 million. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Minister, if that's the case, then how much money is 
being budgeted for special education? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- The special needs grant for the coming year, Mr. 
Chairman, is $25 million and there's also another $677,000 that's for the 
special ed branch and special education technologies project.  They are the 
special ed clearing house. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Minister, I'd like you to refer specifically to item 4 
under Education estimates for 1990-91.  Your budget for curriculum and 
special education is $10,046,100.  I'm asking you specifically, how much of 
that money is being used for curriculum development and how much of that 
money is being used for special education?  And I want you to tell me how 
much of that money, how much money was spent on curriculum development last 
year and how much was spent on special education?  That's what I'm talking 
about, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, the total amount that I'll give you 



 

 

is a little bit over $9.4 million.  That was for 1989-90.  And this year 
you have curriculum and special ed rolled in together, that's in the 
department, it's 10.046 million.  So there's an increase there I would 
suggest of -- what is it? -- maybe not quite $600,000 in that area. 
 
Now I would also point out when you're talking about special education, 
that keep in mind the special needs program grant.  There's a significant 
increase in that particular area. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Minister, as I understand the situation, you have not 
increased funding for core curriculum or curriculum by 1 cent.  Now what 
you have done, Mr. Minister, is you have changed the way you budget things 
here.  Last year it was called curriculum and evaluation; special education 
wasn't in there.  This year it's curriculum and special ed.  As I 
understand it, you spent $9.469 million last year on curriculum, and this 
year you're spending $9.469 million on curriculum.  The $577,100 which is 
the difference, is money that you're spending on special education. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, how much are you spending on curriculum this year?  Not 
curriculum and special education, how much are you spending on curriculum 
and, Mr. Minister, alternatively how much are you spending on special 
education? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I'm not sure now when she's 
talking special ed what she wants.  We've got two figures here.  The one is 
the special needs program grant which has increased nearly $3 million this 
year.  And otherwise within the department, it was $677,000 last year.  
That is part of the $10 million that I gave to you a little bit earlier. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, the point I'm trying to make here is 
that you haven't increased money for curriculum at all -- not at all.  I'm 
not talking about curriculum in special education, I'm talking about 
curriculum.  And yet, Mr. Minister, in your Minister of Finance's budget 
speech it says: 
 

 This is what the Core Curriculum agenda is all about -- an agenda for a 
changing world.  That is why this Budget will provide almost $10 million 
for the funding of Core Curriculum initiatives in 1990-91. 

 
Where do we find this almost $10 million, Mr. Minister?  Is it in this item 
called curriculum and special education?  If it is, Mr. Minister, exactly 
how much are you spending on core curriculum? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I can't give her a specific 
number right now, other than to say that in excess of $10 million is going 
into that whole area.  Now to separate out the core curriculum from some of 
the other changes that are taking place in curriculum, we can do that for 
you.  We can have that for you after supper.  We'll give you the exact 
figure, but it is still going to be somewhere in the neighbourhood of $10 
million that is going into curriculum, which also includes the Directions 
initiatives.  So other than the special education which I know is specific 
there, and I indicated to you the 677,000, the rest of the money we could 
say is going for curriculum and the Directions initiatives. 



 

 

 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order, order.  Being near 5 o'clock the committee is 
recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


