





























































Hansard: May 07, 1990


 

 

May 7/90 
 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's a privilege for me to 
introduce today His Excellency the Ambassador to Canada from Tunisia.  His 
Excellency and his wife are seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, and it's a 
pleasure for me to introduce them.  I think it's a double pleasure because 
I talked to him about some interesting things that Tunisia does and things 
that we could trade with them on.  They import a lot of grain, and wheat is 
one of those things, and they export phosphates and those are things that 
we could probably use in Canada and I know that we do. 
 
They also, Mr. Speaker, have an 8 million population and they have 4 
million tourists every year, which I thought was extremely interesting.  
And I think that it would be on our part a positive gesture if we welcome 
them in a normal fashion here today, and I want to welcome you to 
Saskatchewan, sir. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to introduce to you, 
and through you to this Assembly, 14 grade 12 students from the Qu'Appelle 
Indian Residential School in Lebret, Saskatchewan, which is in the 
Qu'Appelle Valley in my constituency.  They are seated directly in front of 
you in your gallery, Mr. Speaker.  They are attended by Mr. Alan Kakakway, 
their bus driver.  I will be meeting with them at 2:30 for pictures and 
drinks.  And I want the members to welcome these students and I wish them 
an interesting and educational stay here today. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Funding for University of Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  My question today is to 
the Minister of Education.  Mr. Speaker, the president of the University of 
Saskatchewan, Dr. George Ivany, addressed the University of Saskatchewan 
senate on Friday, a few days ago, and he said that the university is going 
to have to in all likelihood cut programs because of the underfunding of 
this government in the budget.  The president stated, "I consider nothing 
to be sacred in this process," referring to the process of budget cutting 
at the university. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that's bad news for anyone concerned with education in the 
province.  And my question to the Minister of Education is this:  how could 
you allow education funding to deteriorate to this state of affairs such 



 

 

that your government's underfunding at the university has left people like 
Dr. Ivany in a position where he had to say that there is nothing which is 
sacred, nothing that can be protected? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Speaker, let me say at the outset that we have 
increased the budget at the University of Saskatchewan a substantial amount 
again this year.  The Leader of the Opposition can talk about underfunding 
for education all that he wants, but we have been increasing our 
expenditures in that area. 
 
I think that when we consider $888 million in total that's going to be 
spent for the current year, that's a pretty substantial amount of money, 20 
per cent of our total budget going to education. 
 
We give a very substantial grant to the University of Saskatchewan for 
their operating grant and also moneys in the enhancement fund, and it's up 
the administration of the university to determine how that money's going to 
be spent. 
 
When we talk about underfunding, I'm sure that there are other areas where 
there's been a substantial amount of underfunding.  I think farmers have 
probably been underfunded.  I think that probably many business people in 
the business community also would say that there's been underfunding. 
 
But we're doing the best that we can, Mr. Speaker, and whether or not 
education is deteriorating, I would disagree with the member opposite on 
that.  I think that our educational programs in this province are among the 
best that you'll find any place in Canada, and in fact in many areas 
outside of the country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the Minister of 
Education.  And I would remind the minister that when he says the Leader of 
the Opposition says this, that I'm saying it, but what I'm doing is 
referring to the statements made by the president of the University of 
Saskatchewan, Dr. Ivany.  The headline in the Star-Phoenix says:  "Programs 
to be cut, Ivany warns." 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the president in the same story that I referred to says 
that there's likely to be a shortfall of $6 million on the projected costs 
to maintain the university services -- $6 million shortfall.  And as a 
result Dr. Ivany says, in this newspaper story, the following: 
 

 I'm interpreting that budget message (referring to the government's budget 
message, albeit unstated), is that our university must reduce its array of 
activities. 

 
Must reduce its array of activities.  Mr. Speaker, what do you suggest that 
the president of the University of Saskatchewan do?  Should he increase the 
professor-student ratios?  Should he increase the tuition instead of by 10 



 

 

per cent to 20 per cent or 40 per cent or higher?  What courses or colleges 
should he eliminate?  What precisely do you think Dr. Ivany should do in 
order to pick up the funding shortfall due to your budget decisions a few 
weeks ago? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Speaker, it's going to be up to Dr. Ivany and 
the administration at the university to determine what changes are going to 
be necessary.  I would point out that we have a lot of other things 
happening in the province which will be facilitating the provision of 
programs for post-secondary students, and we saw just this past Thursday 
where we had the official kick-off of the Saskatchewan Communications 
Network which is going to work with the university and with SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) in providing 
more programming off-campus. 
 
But I think that there are areas on the university campus where there can 
be some changes.  Dr. Ivany and I discuss these changes from time to time, 
and I'm sure that they will give every college a very close examination to 
see in fact where they can come up with more funds during the coming year.  
But I'm sure, Mr. Speaker, that when we look at the programs at the 
University of Saskatchewan, that they will be quality programs this coming 
year in the same way that they have been in the past, in spite of the fact 
that right now there may be some shortage of funds. 
 
But the government of the province of Saskatchewan has made a very 
substantial contribution.  We're very committed to the University of 
Saskatchewan, when one considers the new college of agricultural building 
that is being constructed at the present time and will be completed, I 
believe, some time later this fall, and the faculty will be starting to 
move into that early in the next year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have a new question to the 
Minister of Education.  Mr. Speaker, I think every one of us in this House 
understands that these cut-backs to higher learning university education by 
the government opposite are not only an attack on education and the 
opportunities of our youth for tomorrow, but it's really an attack on one 
of the largest economic engines in our economy in Saskatchewan. 
 
Aside from anything else, the University of Saskatchewan is a $60 million 
research facility -- a year, $60 million.  Mr. Speaker, my question to the 
minister is this: in the light of these budget cuts which have forced the 
University of Saskatchewan to set up a committee to look at ways to cut its 
own activities, to cut back on its own research activities, do you not, 
sir, see the irreparable harm that you're doing to universities, to 
Saskatchewan, to education, and to the young students of this province.  Do 
you not see this irreparable harm?  And if you do, will you undertake today 
to ask the Minister of Finance and the Premier to undertake today a review 
of the budget with respect to university expenditures in order to make the 
funding level at least come up to the basic minimum requirements of the 



 

 

president and the university. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Speaker, it might be a good idea for the Leader 
of the Opposition at some point to take a dictionary and look up the 
meaning of the word reality.  Because reality . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- The reality is in this province, Mr. Speaker, that 
we are in severe economic times, with the agricultural prices being down, 
with the price of potash and uranium being down, Mr. Speaker.  We never 
ever hear any suggestions from the other side as to where any additional 
money could come from. 
 
I think when we consider that the University of Saskatchewan is getting 
nearly a 4 per cent increase this year, a budget, an operating grant, which 
amounts to probably some 110 to 115 millions of dollars, when we look at 
the construction of the new College of Agriculture building, Mr. Speaker, 
that they were asking for for 25 years, what did that party do when they 
were in power in the 1970s, when times were good?  They did absolutely 
nothing. 
 
We recognize the fact that the University of Saskatchewan is a very 
important institution as far as research is concerned.  When there is more 
money available, Mr. Speaker, we will be very happy to provide more money 
for the University of Saskatchewan plus all the other educational 
institutions in the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the Minister of 
Education, and the Minister of Education said that I should look up the 
dictionary meaning of the word reality.  I would recommend that to the 
Minister of Education because the reality is permanent quotas, cut-backs, 
young people leaving the province of Saskatchewan, thanks to your 
budgetary.  The reality is, on the other hand, your spending priorities of 
GigaText and Cargill and salaries for Chuck Childers. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, of the minister therefore is, will you look up 
the dictionary meaning of realities and start to get back to priorities and 
realities for young people and for education? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Speaker, it's really interesting when we listen 
to the Leader of the Opposition with his doom and gloom.  Let's take a good 
look at the amount of money that this government has given to the 
university over the years -- an increase in the budget every year since 
this party has been in power.  I sat on the board of governors, was on the 
Finance Committee; I know of the substantial amount of money that was going 
into that university.  We never hear them talk about some of the blunders 



 

 

they had, like Nabu, $5 or $7 millions.  Why didn't you put that into 
education?  Why didn't you do something back in the 1970s when there was 
lots of money, supposedly, and you were in power, about building more 
facilities on that campus? 
 
He talks about quotas today, Mr. Speaker.  Part of the reason that we need 
quotas up there today because there isn't space for the students.  They did 
their own studies.  They did their studies back in the 1970s and did 
absolutely nothing about building more facilities on that campus, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of Education.  
Mr. Minister, it seems that you've forgotten your government's record with 
respect to university spending.  I remind you, in 1987 you provided the 
University of Saskatchewan with a zero per cent increase.  In 1988, Mr. 
Minister, you provided the University of Saskatchewan with only a 1.9 per 
cent increase in the face of 6 per cent inflation. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you are clearly implying in this budget that the 
University of Saskatchewan must abandon its historic mandate of providing a 
full range of training to professionals in professional colleges on the 
campus.  And my question to you is this: in light of President Ivany's 
statement on Friday at the senate meeting that there is a $6 million 
shortfall and that colleges like law, even if they were eliminated would 
not make up for that shortfall, will you give us your commitment here today 
that you will provide the university with the financial resources to ensure 
that the elimination or reduction of professional colleges on the campus 
will not be required and that the quality of education at the university 
can be returned to what it was in 1982? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm really surprised with the member's 
question when he talks about quality of education on the university campus.  
In my view, Mr. Speaker, quality is determined by the professors, by the 
instructors that are on that campus.  And I'm sure, Mr. Speaker, that we 
will find top quality instructors and professors on that campus the same as 
you will any place else. 
 
When you stop and take a look at the increase in the number of students 
that we have had on that campus since 1982, when you look at the amount of 
support that this government has given for student loans since 1982, we 
have done many things, Mr. Speaker, since 1982, that that government failed 
to do all the time that they were in power when supposedly we had very much 
better economic times. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Minister of Education.  
Mr. Minister, another element in determining quality is ensuring adequate 
resources on the university campus. And in the College of Arts and Science, 



 

 

Mr. Minister, there hasn't been the additional funding to hire any new 
permanent faculty members for the last five years as a result of your 
government's budget. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, the university this year at the senate meeting, the 
senate decided on Friday that quotas on the College of Arts and Science at 
the U of S would have to be extended indefinitely as a result of the 
funding shortfall that you have provided.  And my question to you is, sir, 
how can you justify this in light of the fact that you are forcing hundreds 
of young people by way of these quotas to leave Saskatchewan in search of 
education elsewhere.  You are forcing hundreds of others to return to grade 
12, to repeat their grade 12 courses. 
 
Mr. Minister, why don't you instead put the dollars into lifting that quota 
at the University of Saskatchewan instead of requiring our young people to 
unnecessarily return to repeat grade 12? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, in the first place, it is not 
this government that's forcing young people out of the province.  Young 
people are leaving the province in many cases to get jobs in the same way 
that they did back in the '60s or '70s when other governments were in 
power. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you consider the increases that we are making this year 
as far as funding for regional colleges, we are going to open up access to 
first and second year university courses for more students in rural areas.  
There are many students in rural areas, because of the tough farm 
situation, that cannot go to university in Saskatoon or Regina because of 
the additional living costs that go along with that.  With the increase to 
regional colleges, they will be able to offer more of these courses and 
more and more students will have access to them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We feel that that's very important at this time when the economy is down in 
rural Saskatchewan.  Those people have a right to education in the same way 
that people in the urban centres do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, I have 
a final question for you, and it relates to your government's earlier 
announcement that it would pick up much of the cost of installing a 
slowpoke nuclear reactor at the University of Saskatchewan campus. 
 
Mr. Minister, in light of the financial constraints that your budget has 
imposed on the University of Saskatchewan, would you give the Assembly your 
commitment today that you will abandon the concept of financing a slowpoke 
nuclear reactor at the university campus and instead put those dollars into 
badly needed operating funds for the University of Saskatchewan which would 
allow it to lift quotas at the U of S and which would allow it to ensure 
that professional colleges will not have to be eliminated on the campus.  
Will you give us your commitment on that today, Mr. Minister? 



 

 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, we finally know why all of the 
questions have been asked by that particular member.  He finally let up to 
what the real concern is.  The whole party over there has absolutely 
nothing to do with the students; it has absolutely nothing to do with the 
quality of education in the University of Saskatchewan campus.  It's back 
to the fact that the people on the other side of this House are opposed to 
uranium development in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They're also opposed to any type of development of the type of research 
that would go into the nuclear reactors, the type of thing that we're 
talking about here with the slowpoke.  They've already got a slowpoke in 
Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker.  We've got a few of them over there.  But we've 
also got another one. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- We also have one that is being used by the 
Saskatchewan Research Council and it has been there by a good number of 
years and there hasn't been any danger from that, Mr. Speaker.  It's just 
the fact that the people on that side of this House are opposed to any type 
of uranium development and any type of nuclear energy within this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Recommendation on Election of Boards 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of Health.  Mr. 
Minister, this question has to do with the recommendation which states very 
clearly that the super-boards from the South are going to be elected and 
the boards from up North are going to be appointed.  People see this as not 
only condescending but colonial and discriminatory.  Can you tell this 
House whether or not you support this discriminatory position? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, as I've said to the member's colleagues on 
a couple of occasions, Mr. Speaker, and to others in the province, the 
various recommendations of the commission on directions in health care are 
being and should be looked at over some period of time. 
 
But I will say this about the specific recommendation the member raises, 
and that is that the three regions as visualized by the commission in the 
northern part of the province, and they're saying they should be appointed, 
and in the South, in the rural they're visualizing 10 regions and they're 
saying they should be elected. 
 
I believe it's the case that the northern mayors or a group of northern 
elected people made that recommendation to them when they were travelling 
in the North, that they be appointed.  Now I don't know if that's the case 
for sure, but it is my impression. 



 

 

 
Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, a new question.  Of course the minister said 
something about the mayors.  I want to know, Mr. Minister, the next 
question.  A lot of the . . . Dr. Murray himself said that the North is a 
place that resembles third-world medicine.  And your government has also 
slashed important programs such as the community health workers.  Now 
you're adding insult to injury by endorsing such a recommendation. 
 
Mr. Minister, what is your basis for saying northern people are not 
competent enough to elect a health care board? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, let's be very clear.  I did not say . . . 
I mean when the member in his second question which was prepared along with 
the first question before he heard the answer to the first question . . .  
That's what we just heard here. 
 
I did not say . . . I did not say that I endorse the recommendation of 
appointed boards in the North.  I said that recommendation . . .  I have 
the impression and I have been told that that recommendation was made by 
elected people in the North.  I'm not saying whether I agreed with it or 
didn't agree with it, Mr. Speaker.  And the members come to this question 
and just puts words in my mouth.  Mr. Speaker, it's not legitimate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, another question.  Mr. Minister, you choose not 
to answer the last question, and that's the same type of colonial attitude 
-- every time a question is raised from the North, you never answer it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, this question to the minister.  People are sick 
and tired of advisory boards that your government never ever listens to, 
and appointed boards.  I would like to know clearly from you, Mr. Minister, 
whether you yourself support this recommendation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, the member, as I say . . . as I said 
in my second answer, the member attributes these recommendations to me.  I 
don't take them, Mr. Speaker.  The commission on directions in health care 
made those recommendations.  I believe they made the recommendations based 
on suggestions by elected councillors and elected boards in the North, 
people who are elected in the North now.  And the position, as I understand 
it, is what they're suggesting. 
 
What the commission is suggesting is that the boards be appointed by 
elected people in the North, not as they would be appointed by the Minister 
of Health with some, what you would call colonial attitude.  It's nothing 
to do with . . . They're not recommending that Saskatchewan Health or the 
Government of Saskatchewan, whoever that is, is who would appoint the 



 

 

boards. 
 
For the member to stand in his place and talk to me or to the government 
about colonial attitude, as it relates to the development in northern 
Saskatchewan or the administration of anything in northern Saskatchewan, 
when he is a member, I believe even an employee of that former fiasco 
called DNS (department of northern Saskatchewan), Mr. Speaker, it's a real 
joke to hear it. 
 
It is not fair for him to say there's a colonial attitude when the colonial 
attitude that was raised by that member who's taken his training in 
Nicaragua, or wherever else he's been. 
 
 DMr. Speaker, the facts are, the facts are that the colonial attitude of 
the DNS under the former administration was far more serious than anything 
that's recommended by this reasonable commission on health care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- A final question now, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, will you 
stand up in the House and tell us straightforward: do you support that 
recommendation or not?  Quit blaming the people who are elected in northern 
Saskatchewan.  You are elected in this legislature to make decisions.  What 
is your decision, and what is your own opinion in relation to this 
particular recommendation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, the recommendations for those three 
boards, if they in fact come about, if the regional system even comes 
about, and if the regional system comes about in the North, the 
recommendations that are put forward by the commission will be treated in 
for those three northern regions, as they will be treated for the southern 
regions.  And that is, we'll hear what the people in the North have to say 
about it.  We will. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I make no apology, I make no apology for not going from 
one page of the commission report to another page of the report, and giving 
my impressions of what should happen at this stage.  I make no apologies 
for that, Mr. Speaker.  There will be implementation of many of the 
recommendations but those will not be done in isolation by the government, 
nor should they, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Use of Polls 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my question is 
for the Minister responsible for the Crown Investments Corporation.  Mr. 
Minister, two weeks ago your colleague, the Minister of Economic 
Diversification and Trade, told the House that when you were next here that 
you would be more than happy to explain why it was that the Crown 
investments corporation spent $42,000 of taxpayers' dollars to do a 



 

 

post-budget telephone poll in the summer of '87.  Now that being the case, 
I know that you're only too delighted to stand up today to explain that 
expenditure. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, relative to the specific item the 
honourable member raises, I can't provide any particular details over and 
above what would be self-evident, Mr. Speaker.  But I can say that from 
time to time -- whether it be the Crown sector or government -- political 
parties, governments, officials do use tools such as polling to help in 
delivering the public to help guide in our decision making, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I have a new question for the 
minister.  And I would agree with him that it's certainly important for 
governments to understand what it is that the public wants, as it is for 
political parties to understand the political implications of political 
undertakings.  And if the minister is saying that this particular poll is 
in the interest of the public as opposed to the interest of the PC party of 
Saskatchewan, then I know that he will waste no time in tabling the details 
of this particular poll with the Legislative Assembly. 
 
So my question is, Mr. Minister: when will you table the details of this 
poll and all the documents related thereto in this Assembly, given the fact 
that the Saskatchewan taxpayers have shelled out $42,000 for this poll, not 
the PC party of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, information contained in polls, as has 
been the practice for many administrations, at least to my knowledge, isn't 
something that has been tabled in the legislature, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Certainly from time to time I think it's fair to say that players involved 
in the process -- certainly I can speak from my time in Education where 
joint efforts were under way with trustees, administrators, the teachers, 
where that data was shared because it was mutual interest to us all.  But 
certainly past practice hasn't been, I don't think, to table them, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
Bill No. 22 -- An Act to establish the Saskatchewan Communications Network 
Corporation 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm pleased to rise today to 
move second reading of The Communications Network Corporation Act.  The 



 

 

proposed new legislation is the province's most recent initiative to 
maintain Saskatchewan's reputation as a world leader in both education and 
telecommunications technology. 
 
SCN (Saskatchewan Communications Network) will be the most advanced 
educational informational network in Canada.  Its technology will include 
satellite-to-cable transmission, fibre optics, and microwave technology.  
This combination of technologies will extend SCN's reach into rural and 
northern areas of the province which currently cannot fully benefit from 
educational and informational programming.  The end result will be that the 
educational opportunities currently enjoyed by urban residents will soon be 
available in a wide variety of locales in the province. 
 
SCN will deliver programming over two interrelated networks: a public 
information network which will provide a range of educational and 
informational programming over existing cable television systems. This 
system will provide a range of quality alternative programming directed to 
the needs of Saskatchewan residents. 
 
A narrowcast network which will use electronically equipped class-rooms for 
the delivery of high school, university, and technical institute 
programming as well as offer specialized programming from a variety of 
organizations wishing to offer training, upgrading, or education 
programming. 
 
The SCN network will provide a very important resource that will facilitate 
the upgrading of the skills and training of Saskatchewan residents in all 
walks of life. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, SCN's activities will serve to stimulate 
Saskatchewan's film and video industry.  As SCN begins to commission 
programming materials targeted for Saskatchewan needs, local producers will 
have an opportunity to learn new skills and to market their expertise both 
nationally and internationally. 
 
The SCN Corporation will provide the basis for Saskatchewan to become world 
leaders in distance education.  To ensure the continuity of this effort in 
place in distance learning for Saskatchewan, the SCN Act will provide the 
corporation with the ability to collect the distance education development 
fee from current cable television subscribers.  Should the corporation opt 
to implement this fee, revenues will go directly to the corporation, 
allowing it to build upon its educational services for Saskatchewan 
residents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SCN will begin the process of equalizing the availability of 
educational and cultural programming to our residents in the rural and 
remote areas of the province.  It will stimulate and showcase the products 
of our provincial high-tech industries and it will provide, above all, new 
opportunities for local production industries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of an Act to establish The Saskatchewan 
Communications Network. 
 



 

 

Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  This Bill is nothing if it's not an 
example of how the government has made what should have been a non-partisan 
Bill partisan.  It made what should have been non-partisan partisan.  The 
Bill was first introduced last year and then it was dropped by this very 
same government, and I can only conclude in some jest that the reason it 
never got through last year was we didn't sit long enough.  As you know, 
Mr. Speaker, we sat all through the summer till the very last days of 
August.  And yet now we see the same Bill coming before us again. 
 
And what has happened since then to make this SCN Bill partisan -- because 
I think that's very important that we understand some of the things that 
the Conservative government has done since then -- SCN has operated, 
according to its annual report, by an order in council since January 8, 
1989.  In other words, cabinet set it up; it didn't come before the 
Legislative Assembly as it should have.  Cabinet set it up and it has been 
up and running for some 16 months, one day shy of 16 months.  But I don't 
think very many people will call me a liar for one day over 16 months. 
 
Sixteen months operated by order in council, cabinet control totally, and 
it is only now that the opposition gets a chance to see what SCN is about, 
the details of the Bill.  The board, according to the Bill, is allowed to 
have up to 11 people.  Again we have a concern in that these 11 board 
members are all appointed by the Lieutenant Governor; in other words, 
they're all named by the cabinet. 
 
There is potential for SCN to do distance education and we welcome that 
potential; we think that it has some exciting potential, but it also has 
some not-so-exciting potential, particularly in the hands of the government 
opposite.  Because we see the potential for this to be a propaganda arm, if 
you like, of the government. 
 
And what has happened with the board, we see in the annual report that they 
have named five board members, again appointed by order in council.  The 
people of Saskatchewan, I think, would expect this board to be somewhat 
non-partisan and representative, but what do we have?  We have in the 
annual report these five members, consisting of one . . . Mr. Speaker, I'm 
asking you for a ruling.  Can I name the names from this annual report?  
Can I read the names? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Go ahead. 
 
Mr. Trew: -- I will do so.  The founding board is, first of all, one J. 
Gary Lane, as chairman; one Eric Berntson, the member for 
Souris-Cannington; Ray Meiklejohn, the member for Saskatoon Mayfair -- 
that's three MLAs, all Tory; fourth is one Lorne Hepworth, MLA for Weyburn; 
fifth, the fifth appointed board member is one Neal Hardy, the member for 
Hudson Bay. 
 
Now here we are, the people of Saskatchewan hoping for a non-partisan 
representative board, and what do we get?  Five . . . 
 



 

 

An Hon. Member: -- No politics. 
 
Mr. Trew: -- No politics there, as my colleagues say. 
 
And why I bring that up, Mr. Speaker, is why . . . I have a question.  Why 
is it that we would have these five cabinet members appointed to the board?  
Is it perhaps that . . . oh, so the selection of sites for the SCN distance 
education sites can be made in a totally political manner?  Could that be 
the motivation, Mr. Speaker?  Could it be so that the sites would be 
specific where it might be best for these five board members in their 
re-election bids and in their narrow partisan views?  I think it just might 
be. 
 
And I say that, Mr. Speaker, because I've had a representation from a town 
that should have been considered and they never got half-way to first base.  
Why did they not get half-way to first base?  They didn't know who the 
members of the board were.  And I want to report to you, sir, that one of 
the members of the board that I named happens to be the MLA for that 
constituency. 
 
And those people are some upset because they tried repeatedly to get an 
appointment with their MLA to find out who they should talk to to find out 
what is the process, what are the hoops that the government opposite wanted 
them to go through.  They made a very good presentation. 
 
I listened to it, as did one of my colleagues and a researcher from the New 
Democratic Party side.  I can tell you, sir, it was a very well prepared, 
well documented application, if you like, for that town, rather, to become 
a site for an SCN operation. 
 
But I can also tell you that they did not get their MLA to even talk to 
them.  And I think that's a discredit to the government; it's a discredit 
to the board.  The minister responsible for this SCN may say that well, you 
know, it's up to the board, that these people were trying to get to one of 
the five members of the board who also happens to be their MLA.  None.  But 
not political, as my colleague, the member for Elphinstone, says. 
 
And wonder why we say that the government has taken what should have been a 
non-partisan distance education proposal and made it very, very partisan.  
I wonder if the reason that there are five cabinet ministers as the board 
members for SCN might have something to do with one of the sections of this 
Bill 22 that says that the hiring of staff for SCN does not have to go 
through any, well, it's order in council. 
 
In other words, the cabinet appoints it.  There's no hiring process.  I 
cannot, at this stage of the debate, get specific to certain sections of 
the Bill so I cannot read it but I can tell you, sir, it is there.  I have 
perused this Bill 22 and I really have to wonder if this isn't just an 
opportunity for the government members opposite to be true to their track 
record and fill SCN full of nothing but their political hacks.  I wonder if 
that's what the motivation is. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 



 

 

 
Mr. Trew: -- Or, Mr. Speaker, is the reason for this political board . . . 
I'm going to start referring to the five cabinet ministers who make up the 
board as political -- the group of five.  Is this group of five set up to 
make it easy to set the fees charged to every cable TV subscriber in the 
province?  It's mandatory; they simply have to pay it.  The fee, as I 
understand it according to today's paper, is suggested to be a dollar a 
month or $12 a year.  It's mandatory; these subscribers, these TV 
subscribers have no choice.  They simply have to take that; they have to 
pay that $12 a year.  Whether they use this SCN network or not, they have 
to pay. 
 
And is this political group of five set up so they can set that rate and 
then increase it whenever they want?  Because that too is in this Bill, 
very clearly set, OC, order in council -- total power by the five who take 
their proposals to cabinet.  But these five are all cabinet ministers. 
 
So we wonder why it is that cable TV subscribers should get real excited 
and enthusiastic about paying an additional $12 a year for a service that 
many of them do not want, and can't get. 
 
Some of them will want it; I have no dispute of that.  The point I'm 
making, Mr. Speaker, is, it is absolutely mandatory.  Every cable TV 
subscriber will pay this dollar a month, and that dollar a month is only 
the starting fee.  It is much like the 7 per cent rate for the goods and 
services tax, or the grab and steal tax.  That's just the jumping-off 
point.  Next year it can be increased and the year after that it can be 
increased ad nauseam. 
 
(1445) 
 
So we have a number of concerns.  We're wondering, Mr. Speaker, what is the 
cost per student of this SCN operation.  How much is it going to cost per 
student?  And is there an opportunity for effective feedback, two-way 
dialogue, between the student and the educator?  I understand that in the 
early going there was not that provision, not even a telephone line where a 
student, who could view the presentation made by the educator, could call 
and ask or discuss the presentation.  That wasn't there.  And as you can 
appreciate, if you watch a three-quarter hour presentation you're going to 
have a few questions.  And education is always a situation where the 
educator can be challenged by the students.  And I mean challenged in a 
very honest and open manner, in a learning capacity, so that the students 
can learn and understand the subject matter much better.  And yet that's 
not there. 
 
We had earlier today some questions about education, university education, 
Mr. Speaker, and we see cut-backs to university funding.  We see university 
education becoming unreachable by many of the working poor people in this 
province  
_- unattainable because tuition fees rise higher and higher at record rates 
to the point where our two universities in Saskatchewan have the highest 
and second highest tuition fees in all of western Canada.  And that's a 
shame; that's a crime. 



 

 

 
So we're wondering what the cost is per student here, and I'm even a bit 
suspicious, sir, that on some of this you could send out an educator and 
give them one-to-one tuition and perhaps it might be as cost-effective.  It 
wouldn't cost anything more.  Because I hear some grumblings about the SCN 
network costing many, many millions of dollars.  I know of a $3.3 million 
OC amount, $3.375 million to assist in the funding of the technical 
infrastructure of SCAN (Saskatchewan Communications Advanced Network), and 
that was done in 1989.  And I understand the federal government is kicking 
in money as well, and I believe that the provincial government kicked in an 
additional amount beyond what I've just read in. 
 
So I'm wondering how many students can potentially use this.  How many are 
using it, and just how cost-effective is it?  Is there in some instances a 
better way of getting a better quality education to these people? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I've outlined some of the concerns of the New Democratic Party 
with this SCN proposal.  I will have some further comments as we look 
deeper into this Bill.  So with that, I beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Education 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 5 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd like to address a couple of areas of 
questions to the minister, both having to do with post-secondary education.  
First of all, Mr. Minister, having to do with changes that have been 
recently made in the apprenticeship branch of the department.  And I am 
aware, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, that in recent months the 
apprenticeship branch was disbanded and then there were complaints that 
were brought to your attention and to the deputy minister's attention from 
the apprenticeship board, and a large number of trades areas around the 
province who were concerned about that.  And now changes have been made to 
in effect put it back the way it was, as I understand it. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, in light of your Premier's recently announced 
commitment to be consulting, doing more listening and more consulting and 
not acting without the people's approval, Mr. Minister, if you can explain 
to me and to the Assembly what the rationale was in making the initial 
decision to take the apprenticeship division, to spread those 
responsibilities throughout the department.  And then after having done 
that without having had prior consultation with the apprenticeship board, 
and then getting feedback, restructuring again very similarly to your 
original structure, Mr. Minister, if you could describe to me just why it 
was done this way and what your view is as to how this is better for 
apprenticeship services in Saskatchewan now than before. 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, the earlier changes that were made 
back in 1989 -- I'm not just sure of the month -- were internal changes, 
reorganization with the bureaucracy with the idea to improve client 
service.  There probably was not consultation at that particular time 
because, as I say, it was an internal organization. 
 
Since that time, of course, and since last October, I know that I had an 
early meeting with the apprenticeship board, with representatives from it.  
I know that the deputy minister has had several meetings with the board.  
And in looking at the overall picture of apprenticeship training in the 
province, the decision was made, I guess not too long ago, but again, an 
internal decision in consultation with the board that we would again make 
some changes.  And as you've indicated, it may look somewhat like it was 
prior to that, but it was an internal decision before. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I'd hoped you'd be a little more complete 
and forthcoming in your response.  Maybe we can just break this down into 
parts then and ask you individually. 
 
Why was the decision made when restructuring, doing an internal 
restructure, Mr. Minister, why was the decision made to do that without 
consulting with the apprenticeship board? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- The situation, as we see it today, would be we feel 
better, or the department officials feel is better than what we had before, 
in that we do have more people involved through an apprenticeship council, 
greater representation.  And as you pointed out about consultation, as I've 
indicated, there have been several meetings since last October, and the new 
look, if you will, now has the blessing of the apprenticeship board and all 
of those who are involved with apprenticeship training programs within the 
province.  So even though there has been some change, again it's been 
basically internal.  Now we feel that it is much better than it was before. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Minister, I fully support the concept of consulting with 
the apprenticeship board, and I'm pleased to recognize that that is 
happening now. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, when your department was doing the restructuring of the 
apprenticeship branch without consultation with the apprenticeship board, 
it was almost bang on, exactly at the same time, Mr. Minister, that your 
Premier was calling a news conference -- for the first time in the western 
world that we had a political leader call a news conference to say that now 
the elected members were going to start listening, we're going to do 
radically different things like return phone calls and answer letters, and 
that they were going to start consulting with people and wouldn't act 
without the approval of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now I would appreciate a frank response, Mr. Minister, given that your 
Premier was making that announcement to the people of Saskatchewan that 
this was a new characteristic of your government -- the new look as he 
referred to it.  Will you tell me why that restructuring was done within 
your department without having had a single consultation with the 
apprenticeship board? 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I would hope that the member 
opposite doesn't think that there's going to be a consultation any time 
there's an internal reorganization of administration.  That wasn't done 
when that party was in power; it's not done when any government's in power.  
I mean you can do reorganization of your administration within a department 
without the consultation. 
 
The fact of the matter here, Mr. Chairman, is that there wasn't any change 
as far as client services during that period of time.  That was not the 
intent here at all.  The client services had to remain in place, and you 
can do that with a reorganization within a department, and within a 
particular branch in this case, without it affecting the client services. 
 
The fact is that today now there is much greater consultation because of 
the new organization.  But at the same time, any changes within the 
structure of the department, you're not going to be going out and getting 
consultation.  It has nothing to do with policy; it has nothing to do with 
services.  The services were maintained all along from the time that the 
changes were made by the previous department head. 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Minister, you will know better than I that trades and 
industry were of the view when you did your internal restructuring without 
having consulted the apprenticeship board.  You will know better than I 
that they had a large number of concerns as to whether services were going 
to continue to be offered to the same level, whether their access to your 
department was going to be to the level that it was previously. 
 
And I am pleased to note, and thank you very much, I would add, to those 
tradespeople and industry people who raised those concerns and brought them 
to the department's attention, that another restructuring has occurred, 
internal restructuring has occurred, and that there is improved 
communication now, and I applaud that.  I agree with the conclusion that 
you bring to me. 
 
But I ask you again, Mr. Minister, because you fail to answer this question 
for me.  When you, when your Premier, at the same time that your Premier is 
announcing this new era of consultation, you are making internal 
restructurings of apprenticeship services without even having had a single 
consultation with the apprenticeship board. What I want to know, Mr. 
Minister, is why that occurred, and specifically I would like to know that 
so that I'm in a position, and more importantly that the apprenticeship 
board is in a position to know whether there will be further possibilities 
of restructuring without consultation, be that apprenticeship board or 
others who interface with the Department of Education. 
 
Is it the position of your department, Mr. Minister, that internal 
reorganizations will be done without consultation with those parties and 
those interests in Saskatchewan that are affected by them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the reason that we employ 



 

 

administrators within departments is to look after the day-to-day affairs 
of the department.  I mean, to talk about the Premier being out making 
announcements with regard to consultation has nothing to do with what we're 
talking about.  It has nothing to do with the Minister of Education.  We 
are talking about an internal reorganization within a branch of the 
department, and this goes on all the time within probably every department 
of government.  You do not go out necessarily and consult with groups of 
people, whether you're going to change this person around or you're going 
to change something over there.  That's an internal reorganization, and 
that is done on a day-to-day basis. 
 
Now you talk about the fact here that there were concerns by the Provincial 
Apprenticeship Board.  Obviously they felt that there were some problems 
with the restructuring that was done last year, brought this to my 
attention, brought it to the attention of the deputy minister.  So in 
consultation with them then we have gone about having a series of meetings 
in ensuring that we include more people in there, but these are all types 
of things that are done without the advice of the Premier or without his 
knowledge of the whole thing that's taking place.  Many of these things of 
course were all done by the deputy minister.  It has nothing to do with the 
consultation that you talk about for an internal reorganization. 
 
So these things are a matter of course, but at the same time there was no 
service affected as far as the clients were concerned.  They were reporting 
to different people than before.  This was a reorganization that was done 
by the associate deputy minister of the day and changes that were felt to 
be making the whole thing much more efficient. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Minister, did the reorganization occur within your 
department without your knowledge? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well I wasn't the minister at that time, Mr. 
Chairman, so I couldn't say whether the minister was aware of it. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Minister, did the reorganization occur within your 
department without the knowledge of the minister of the day? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, the information that I have, that 
this was considered to be a minor change within the department.  And there 
is that possibility the minister may not have been aware of the fact that 
it was taking place.  It was a minor change. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I'm surprised by that because it was no 
minor change from the point of view of trades and industry that are 
affected by services from the apprenticeship branch, and you will know that 
as well as I. 
 
Well at any rate, Mr. Minister, I simply conclude this little dissertation 
by encouraging you and your department to continue to consult; to do what 
as a matter of fact you say you're going to do.  I am pleased that there is 
an improved communication at the current time between the department and 
the apprenticeship board, and I would encourage that that continue. 
 



 

 

Mr. Minister, I understand that at this point in time, although there had 
previously been a director of apprenticeship, that there currently is not, 
and I would ask, Mr. Minister, for you to tell me what the intentions are 
regarding the position of director of apprenticeship? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, the competition, as I understand it, 
has just closed and this particular position will have a much broader area 
of responsibility than before.  As well as being the director, there will 
also be a lot of co-ordinating activities going on with the post-secondary 
branches. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Minister, when will the director position be filled? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, that will depend on the 
process, as I'm sure the member understands.  Interviews will have to be 
held and then it will be determined by the time of availability for the 
successful candidate. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- And the latest date that the director of apprenticeship will 
be filled with the appointee?  What's the latest date that that will occur, 
Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well it's hard to say the latest date.  We want to 
fill it as soon as possible.  So as I've indicated, as soon as the 
interviews have been conducted and a successful candidate has been named, 
it will depend then how soon that person can be available.  But as soon as 
possible.  In the meantime, others are filling in and taking on that 
responsibility. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Would it be a reasonable assumption, Mr. Minister, to assume 
that it'll be filled by August 1? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Yes, I would say that's reasonable.  We would hope 
to have someone in place by then. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister, I appreciate that.  I would like to 
ask you what the department anticipates regarding the federal transfer 
payments for updating and upgrading of apprenticeship, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, negotiations are still going on with 
regard to Unemployment Insurance Commission funding, but it's anticipated 
that payments this year will be the same as last. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Minister, does your department consider that to be 
satisfactory? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- The simple answer would be, Mr. Chairman, we would 
always like to get more.  But in view of the cut-backs that the federal 
government has been making in many cases, we're probably fortunate if we 
can get the same amount as last year and not take a cut.  So yes, we could 
always use more but we'll have to be happy, I guess, with what we got last 
year. 
 



 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Minister, does your department have any plans to attempt 
to increase the amount of funding from the federal government to 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- With regard to the federal funds, we will be 
attempting to get as much as we can through the Unemployment Insurance 
Commission, but in so far as the other programs that we're going to be 
providing, we will probably assist in the same way provincially that we 
have in the past through SIAST.  And there were no requests denied at all 
last year, so I would hope that we can maintain that this year. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Just one final question regarding apprenticeship, Mr. 
Minister.  You referred before to new responsibilities related to the 
director and a reorganization of the reorganization of apprenticeship, Mr. 
Minister.  Would you describe for me how your reorganization of the 
reorganization is different from the organization that you had before you 
started the reorganization without consultation, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, some of the changes that have taken 
place, the curriculum has been now moved into another area, and some of the 
federal funding, the Canadian Jobs Strategy, for example, is now within 
another branch as well. 
 
The main changes, as well as taking over the overall administration with 
regard to the apprenticeship, is going to be expanding into the 
post-secondary institutions, in particular, I suppose, regional colleges 
and also SIAST in providing apprenticeship more as viable programs within 
other post-secondary institutions, namely the regional colleges. 
 
I think that there's probably much more that can be done in the regional 
colleges, and this person is going to be involved on a much wider basis, I 
suppose then, than the previous individual was. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- So with that one position difference then, Mr. Minister, the 
reorganization of the reorganization will be the same as before you 
started? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- That's not what I said at all.  I said that the new 
position is going to involve a lot more co-ordination with SIAST and with 
the regional colleges in looking at apprenticeship training that can be 
taken, particularly in the regional colleges.  This is something that 
wasn't happening before.  So it's going to be a much more expanded role 
than we had before. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Minister, I'd like to move to a new area and that has to 
do with the offering of programs through SIAST.  Could you please outline, 
Mr. Minister, the anticipated program offerings which you anticipate 
changing within the four institutes located in Regina, Saskatoon, Moose 
Jaw, and Prince Albert, in the fall session, Mr. Minister. 
 
(1515) 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, the department is not involved with 



 

 

the program review of SIAST.  This is done internally by the 
administration.  And as I understand it, the review is still going on at 
this time.  I think that they expect to be making some announcements before 
very long as to any changes that are going to be in place for this fall.  
But that's being done by the administration. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Minister, do you have someone with you, an official with 
you today, from SIAST? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- No, we don't, Mr. Chairman.  SIAST operates as an 
independent board in the same way the universities do.  We don't include 
administration from the universities when we're doing our estimates either. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Minister, are you telling me then that there will be some 
program . . . Let me rephrase this, Mr. Minister.  Are you telling me that 
there will be some changes in divisions currently being offered at any of 
the four institutes?  In other words, are there any divisions in any of 
those four institutes that, come this fall, will be present in some 
institutes that are not there now?  Or conversely, do any of the four 
institutes have divisions that will not be there, offering courses within . 
. . come the fall, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, as I indicated, the review is 
going on at the present time and we don't know if there are going to be any 
programs that will be deleted or what changes are going to be taking place.  
I assume that as soon as the review is completed that we will be informed, 
and I'm sure at that point all of the information will become public.  So 
you may very well know just as soon as we do. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Minister, what's under review? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, times are changing.  I mean we 
don't . . . This was of course part of the reason why there was a 
reorganization three years ago, because you had programs that were still in 
place that had been there when SIAST, or the technical institutes as we 
knew them, were first formed. 
 
So I mean 20 or 25 years later one can hardly expect that you would still 
have the same demands that you would need today.  And the member will be 
well aware that when we consider that maybe as many of 50 per cent of the 
jobs that are going to be in existence 10 or 15 years from now don't exist 
today.  So we have to be always planning to meet the particular need that's 
going to be out there, and that need is not going to be filled by positions 
where people were being trained on programs that were set up 20 or 25 years 
ago. 
 
So what changes are going to be taking place?  I assume that SIAST is doing 
a study as to what the demands are today and meeting with industry so that 
those particular needs can be met as the time comes. 
 
So there are changes.  There will be changes needed every year as the 
demand for different types of training develop over the years.  So what's 
to be reviewed?  I think they have to be reviewed every year. 



 

 

 
Mr. Hagel: -- Precisely, Mr. Minister.  I don't know what your 25 year 
gobbledegook is all about; I'm talking three and a half months. 
 
Mr. Minister, in September there will be programs starting at the campuses 
around Saskatchewan.  Are you trying to tell us in this House here today 
that SIAST is reviewing the location of divisions within the four campuses?  
And there will be classes that will be starting, there will be 
registrations that have to be taken now; that process has already been 
occurring. 
 
There will be instructors, class-rooms, facilities, students walking into 
class-rooms in September, and you're saying to me that you expect me to 
believe that somehow these divisions are being reviewed and SIAST has not 
yet made up its mind as to what it's going to offer where, three and a half 
months from now?  Is that what you're asking me to believe, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well you asked the question about the review and 
what's happening at SIAST and I indicated to you that, as I understand it, 
the review is not complete but it will be very, very shortly, at which time 
they will be making some announcements.  So whether that's tomorrow or the 
first part of next week, I can't tell you.  SIAST is an independent body 
that makes these decisions on their own; we don't make those decisions. 
 
So I would hope certainly, for the reasons that you have pointed out, that 
these decisions will be made very, very quickly and that the appropriate 
announcements can be made.  Because I think that you'll find, for the most 
part, that students are looking at this point in time as to what 
opportunities there are for them this fall.  So I would agree with you -- I 
hope that that decision is made soon and the announcement made very, very 
soon. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Minister, what programs or divisions are under review at 
Wascana Campus in Regina? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, that's a question that you would have 
to ask the administration at SIAST. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Minister, I'm asking you.  You're the Minister of 
Education; you're responsible for the post-secondary education system, and 
here you appoint the board from SIAST that gets its funding from you.  Mr. 
Minister, at Wascana Campus in Regina what's under review? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, we also give money to the University 
of Saskatchewan and the University of Regina.  And questions with regard to 
programs that are going to be offered on those two campuses this fall would 
be directed normally to the administration.  I'm suggesting to the member 
that that is the same thing with regard to SIAST.  Those questions should 
be directed to the administration at SIAST.  They look after the programs, 
not the Department of Education. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Minister, have you ever thought that you might be 
interested in knowing what is under review at the Wascana Campus in Regina, 



 

 

and have you directed that question to the board or any proper official 
within SIAST? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- I'm interested in knowing what's going on in all 
the campuses, Mr. Chairman, but I cannot tell the member opposite which 
programs are being reviewed.  Maybe they're all being reviewed. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Minister, what programs and divisions are under review at 
the Kelsey Campus in Saskatoon? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm interested in what's happening on 
all the campuses: Woodland, Palliser, Kelsey, and Wascana. 
 
The review is going on right across the province, Mr. Chairman, at all four 
campuses.  I cannot give you any specifics as to what changes they're 
anticipating there.  I know that they are looking at efficiencies.  I think 
there were some announcements made today or in the last couple of days on 
Woodland Campus in Prince Albert with regard to some changes in 
administration.  But I haven't heard to this point what changes there are 
taking place as far as the programs are concerned.  But I expect to have 
that information very soon and I'm sure you will have it the same time I 
will. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Minister, let's go through these one at a time.  What 
divisions and programs are under review at Woodland Campus in Prince 
Albert? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the only change that I'm aware 
of at Woodland Campus, and that's what I just indicated to the member, and 
that's a change in administration.  There is a change with regard to 
academic and business divisions.  There's been one of the deans has been 
released or will have an opportunity, as I understand it, to move into 
another position on staff. 
 
They have also amalgamated the learning support service into student 
services and they've also reduced that staff.   
 DThe dean's position is now gone, and that person will as well have an 
opportunity to move in on some other position; and the manager of 
administration position was abolished.  But in so far as programs, this is 
nothing to do with programs.  This is administration.  I have no indication 
at this point as to what changes there will be in programs on Woodland's 
campus. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- What changes may be considered by way of divisions or 
programs at Palliser Campus in Moose Jaw, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well the same answer would apply, Mr. Chairman.  I 
will probably know at the same time the member opposite knows. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Minister, is there consideration being given to removing 
the business division from Palliser Campus in Moose Jaw, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well I think, Mr. Chairman, we could save a lot of 



 

 

time if the member opposite would just take a minute to listen.  As I've 
indicated, these are decisions that are made by the administration of 
SIAST, not by the Department of Education, and I do not have that 
information for any of the campuses. 
 
I would hope to have it fairly soon because of the fact that it is now 
getting on in towards the middle of May.  So I do not have any idea what 
changes are being anticipated in business administration or any other 
program on Palliser or Woodland or Kelsey or Wascana, but I would hope to 
have that information fairly soon. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- So would I, Mr. Minister.  I wouldn't mind it right now.  Mr. 
Minister, is there consideration being given to removing the motor vehicle 
maintenance repair (MVMR) program from the Palliser Campus in Moose Jaw? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, I don't have any information that 
there's going to be any change in that program this year at Palliser 
Campus. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- If I understand you correctly, Mr. Minister, what you're 
telling me is that to the absolute best of your knowledge, as the Minister 
of Education on May 7, that you are not aware of any consideration given to 
removing the MVMR (motor vehicle mechanical repair) program from the 
Palliser Campus.  Did I understand that correctly, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I would assume that all 
programs, as well as motor vehicle repair, are being considered; looking at 
efficiencies and whether or not this is a program that needs to be offered 
at every campus.  But whether or not there are changes there we'll wait and 
see when the report comes down from SIAST, but all programs are being 
reviewed. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Minister -- and I ask you to listen very carefully to the 
question and to respond honestly -- then do I now hear you saying that the 
motor vehicle maintenance and repair program is being considered for 
removal from the Palliser Campus in Moose Jaw?  Is that what you're saying, 
Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, I didn't say it was being considered 
for removal.  It may well be.  I said that I presumed that it is being 
reviewed in the same as all other programs are being reviewed.  Whether or 
not there is going to be a change there, I can't tell the member at this 
point.  That's a question that you would have to check with the 
administration, see what SIAST is doing with it.  But they're reviewing it, 
I'm sure, as they are with every other program. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Minister, I'd asked you to listen, carefully.  In the 
spirit of this new approach of your government with your newer, more, and 
bigger ears.  I asked you, and I express my question again, Mr, Minister, 
to the best of your knowledge, are you saying that there is no 
consideration currently being given to removal of the motor vehicle 
maintenance and repair program from Palliser Campus? 
 



 

 

(1530) 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, I have no indication that any program 
is going to be removed from Palliser Campus, motor vehicle repair or any 
other.  But as soon as I have any information with regard to changes in 
programs, I'll be happy to share it with the member opposite. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- So, Mr. Minister, then your official position is that you 
know nothing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, as I've indicated on several 
occasions now, I'm sure that all programs are under review, but whether 
there's going to be any change in motor vehicle repair, whether that 
program is going to be moved off Palliser Campus, that's not my decision.  
I don't know whether it's going to be changed, whether they're going to 
increase, decrease, or what they're going to be doing.  But the review is 
going on right now, and these questions are ones that the administration 
are looking at right across the province, and they're going to make those 
decisions as to what programs will be changed.  So I can't give you the 
information if I don't have it. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- And let me get this clear as well, Mr. Minister.  Then what 
you're also saying is that you have absolutely no knowledge as to whether 
consideration is -- and I use the word consideration; I'm not talking about 
decision yet -- whether consideration is being given to remove the business 
division from Palliser Campus. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, SIAST has a responsibility as a large 
organization to review all of its programs and make a determination which 
ones should be deleted, which ones should be maybe transferred to another 
campus, which ones should be expanded.  That's the type of review that's 
going on right now, and I would presume that probably consideration is 
being given to every program.  Which ones in the end-analysis will have any 
changes to them will be determined by the SIAST administration. 
 
And once that determination is made, I would assume that they will be 
contacting me and letting me know for information purposes only.  We have 
nothing to do with those decisions; that's their decision.  They will let 
us know so that we'll have the information if people are inquiring with us. 
But other than that, I would assume every program is under consideration.  
It's being reviewed.  Whether there will be any changes in Palliser, I 
cannot say at this time because I don't know. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- One final question, then, Mr. Minister.  I ask these 
questions regarding Palliser because there are a large number of people in 
the city of Moose Jaw, Mr. Minister, who have some very serious concerns 
about these very two programs, divisions, continuing to be offered at 
Palliser Campus in Moose Jaw. 
 
Let me conclude then, Mr. Minister, by asking you whether -- and I make it 
very clear that the answer that people in Moose Jaw are looking for, a 
large of number of people are looking for, the answer that they're looking 
for is yes. 



 

 

 
And I ask you: is there any reason not to believe, Mr. Minister, that come 
this fall when programs start up at Palliser Campus in Moose Jaw, that the 
school will be any . . . Let me rephrase that; let's not complicate it with 
a question.  Is there any reason that people in Moose Jaw have to believe, 
Mr. Minister, that come this fall there will be fewer program offerings or 
fewer divisions or fewer number of student spaces, full-time spaces, at 
Palliser Campus in Moose Jaw?  To that question, very clearly a large 
number of interests in Moose Jaw would like to see a no, assured by you, 
Mr. Minister.  And I ask you: do they have reason to be anxious, or is 
there a possibility that they may find a down-sized Palliser Campus come 
September? 
 
And, Mr. Minister, you may also want to add then whether you see a 
continued . . . If the answer is yes, that there may be down-sized Palliser 
Campus, whether in your view, Mr. Minister, whether in your view, Moose Jaw 
can anticipate a shrinking Palliser Campus in the future and the 
possibility even of it disappearing some day? 
 
Mr. Minister, I ask you to give assurance to the people of Moose Jaw that 
the campus will not be down-sized, that there will an equivalent number of 
programs and student seats, and that the future of the campus in the city 
of Moose Jaw is strong and assured for many years to come.  Mr. Minister, 
will you provide that assurance to the people of Moose Jaw? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I don't have any problem 
suggesting to the people of Moose Jaw that Palliser Campus is strong and 
I'm sure it will be there for many, many years to come.  As I've indicated 
on several occasions, programs are now being reviewed by the SIAST 
administration.  And what I would suggest to the people of Moose Jaw, that 
if they are interested in finding out what changes in fact are going to 
take place for this fall, that they contact the principal at Palliser 
Campus, because we don't determine what programs are going to be changed.  
So we can't say whether there will be fewer spaces, more spaces, fewer 
programs, more programs or status quo. 
 
But I think it would be a very simple matter for them to contact the 
principal at Palliser Campus and find out direct, because that's where the 
decisions are going to be made. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- So, Mr. Minister, you're telling me then that if there's a 
decision to down-size it'll be made at Palliser Campus in Moose Jaw.  
That's where it'll be made.  I heard you say that and I appreciate that 
explanation. 
 
Final question, Mr. Minister, regarding the Palliser Campus.  Does your 
department intend to provide funding for a swimming pool located at, or 
close to, with access to the Palliser Campus, perhaps in conjunction with 
the city of Moose Jaw, Mr. Minister.  What is the intention of your 
department in that regard? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, no one here is aware of any 
plans for a swimming pool at the Palliser, or near the Palliser Campus in 



 

 

Moose Jaw.  So certainly there's not going to be any funding here.  We 
haven't had any request for it, and I'm not sure whether there's a pool 
being built there or what's happening.  We haven't heard about it. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I just want to 
ask you a few questions concerning the SIAST deficit.  You'll know that the 
annual report that they tabled showed that the institute lost $1.7 million 
for the year ending June 30, 1989. 
 
I wonder if you might provide the Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan 
with a brief explanation as to the reason for that $1.7 million deficit?  
And if you can give us any run-down on which of the divisions of SIAST 
might have been more responsible for that $1.7 million deficit than other 
divisions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, with regard to the member's question, 
it was a $1.9 million deficit for all of SIAST -- I can't tell you what 
specific that I think you had said for Wascana -- but $1.9 million.  Now I 
point out that this is due to the accrual accounting method that is used 
dealing with an anticipated expenditure, and it was anticipated that the 
collective agreement would have been completed during that year.  So this 
was an expenditure then that showed up in that particular annual report.  
As you know, the agreement was not completed until the following year.  So 
it's because of the accrual accounting method that's being used. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Well, Mr. Minister, the information we have suggests a 
$1.7 million deficit and I guess there would have been an approximately 
$200,000 deficit from the previous year to arrive at a $1.9 million figure. 
 
Mr. Minister, I asked you -- I think that what you say with respect to 
salaries might have been part of the explanation -- but I also wonder if 
there's been any deficits, that is to say, expenditures above and beyond 
what might have been anticipated or budgeted within the SIAST, whether 
there was any extensive overruns in any one division as opposed to another?  
I wonder if you can tell us that. 
 
(1545) 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, I can indicate to the member it's 
anticipated that there will be an overrun in a division, but we don't know 
what that will be of course until the audit has been completed, which will 
be later this summer I presume.  So we're anticipating there will be a 
deficit in one division, and that's what you've asked. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Can you tell us what division that might be, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well I think, Mr. Chairman, I've indicated that 
there is one division that it is anticipated that there could be a larger 
deficit.  We would also suggest that there could be others.  But I don't 
think at this point that I could be more specific than that.  We know that 
the audit will not be done until after the end of June, and at that time we 
should wait and have the official position on it. 



 

 

 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Mr. Minister, I think you can be more specific than 
that.  You've told me twice now that at least one of the divisions is 
anticipated to incur a deficit; that's what you have told me twice.  And 
then you say that you can't tell me which division that is.  Obviously you 
have information to suggest that it's going to be one division, that you 
know what division that is, and that you can tell this House.  And I ask 
you to do that now. 
 
I also ask you to table with the House the documents that you've been 
referring to that have been passed to you by your officials, to table those 
documents with the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, we're getting into internal 
financial operations of SIAST and I don't think that it's incumbent upon me 
to be becoming specific with that sort of internal documentation.  And I am 
not about to table anything, Mr. Chairman, other than I would table any of 
the other working papers that I am using here.  So I mean for the member to 
ask me to table a particular document, I do not have documents here that I 
am going to be tabling other than I have tabled the annual report.  I've 
also forwarded information over to members opposite, but this is a working 
paper the same as all of the other ones are. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you again want to hide behind some 
screen of . . . Sure you say it's none of your business; it's internal 
affairs of SIAST and therefore it's not your job to comment on what they 
may or may not be doing. 
 
Yet on the other hand, you seem to be aware of details in that a particular 
division will be incurring a deficit.  We all know that provincial 
legislation allows you, or suggests that you had the opportunity to review 
the finances of SIAST, in so far as deficits are concerned, and gives you 
the authority to tell SIAST that, yes, they can or cannot incur a deficit.  
And it seems to me that, unless you're horribly incompetent, that you 
wouldn't allow them to incur a deficit without first asking some questions 
such as why is there a deficit, where is the deficit, and what plan you 
have to get rid of that deficit. 
 
I again want to ask you: can you tell us which division it is, based on the 
information that you're getting from your officials now, which division it 
is that's going to be . . . that is to say, which division relative to 
other divisions is going to be greatly over budget and will be incurring a 
large deficit this year in SIAST's operations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I'm concerned about SIAST as a 
total entity, but here we are, May 7, the year end isn't until the end of 
June, at which time an annual report will be developed after the audit has 
been done.  We can certainly discuss information that's provided in the 
1988-89 financial or final report of SIAST, but we can't get into any 
detail in so far as the current year of operation.  We look at the total 
operation of SIAST.  That's the information we're provided with. 
 
We do not know at this point whether they're going to have a deficit or a 



 

 

surplus in any particular division, although it's estimated or suggested 
that there could be one division -- I've already told you that a couple of 
times -- but I'm not going to be divulging internal information.  If you 
want to check with SIAST, maybe they'll tell you that.  Any more than the 
same thing would apply with the university campuses.  These are independent 
bodies that are responsible for looking after their own organization and 
the four campuses. 
 
And so following the year end, when the annual report comes out, then we 
can take a look at what their overall picture is. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm going to ask you to rule on this.  
We've asked the minister.  He's indicated that he's aware that certain 
divisions of SIAST, or a division of SIAST, is going to be incurring a 
healthy deficit this year.  We want to know some details on this so that we 
might better be able to pass judgement as to whether or not the estimates 
for SIAST, as outlined in the blue book, are going to be adequate. 
 
The minister knows which division it is, refuses to give the information.  
I suggest to you, sir, that it's his job to provide the information if he 
knows the information, as opposed to saying to members of the Legislative 
Assembly, you can go elsewhere to get that information.  It's his job to 
give us the information if he has the information.  I'm asking you, sir, to 
tell him to give that information to the House. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- It's not the responsibility of the Chair to say what the 
minister can answer or cannot answer or will answer or won't answer.  It's 
up to the minister. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Now let me put a 
straightforward question to the minister.  Mr. Minister, can you confirm 
that Wayne Hanna, the dean of the agricultural division of SIAST, has been 
. . . his employment was terminated last week, I believe, or the week 
before, and that this resulted from a 1.3 projected, $1.3 million projected 
deficit in the agricultural division of SIAST.  Can you confirm that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I'm aware that Mr. Hanna is no 
longer an employee of SIAST but the reasons for his leaving certainly are 
between Mr. Hanna and his employer, which is SIAST. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Can the minister confirm that the agricultural 
division incurred a $1.3 million deficit during its current year of 
operations so far? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, we're only a little bit more 
than three-quarters of the way through the current year.  And I can't say 
whether or not there's going to be a $1.3 million deficit in agriculture or 
what the final tally will be at the end of June.  We're going to have to 
wait until year end when the audit is done, and then we can see what is 
actually happening in that particular division. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Has the minister and his officials, have they 
expressed any concern to officials of SIAST?  And I quote from a memorandum 



 

 

here, Mr. Minister, dated March 29 from the same Mr. Hanna, the dean of the 
agricultural division to Richard Bonokoski, the principal of the Wascana 
Campus.  And in this memo Mr. Hanna states in part that horticultural 
programs in the United States are scheduled to begin in early April. 
 
Can the minister confirm -- and I assume that the minister and his 
officials have privy to this kind of information; our concern because it is 
your job, notwithstanding what you say about not having any responsibility, 
but it is your job to be aware of the reasons for deficits at SIAST -- can 
the minister confirm that you have given instructions to SIAST officials to 
cease and desist from offering things such as horticultural programs in the 
United States, so that Saskatchewan taxpayers are not paying for people in 
Montana or North Dakota to learn how to grow tomatoes?  Have you done that, 
Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, why would we restrict SIAST 
from offering programs in the U.S. any more than we would restrict them 
from offering programs in some 18 or 19 other countries in the world?  I 
mean part of the reason-for-being of SIAST and the reorganization is that 
they can expand their operations. 
 
And they are providing programming, I believe, in 19 countries around the 
world.  Now this of course generates a fair bit of revenue.  I don't know 
why the member opposite would think that this has to be a cost to the 
taxpayers of this province.  Does he not think that there's the possibility 
that they would be doing this to provide revenue in the same way that they 
are providing programs in these other countries around the world? 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I certainly understand why SIAST, 
the Saskatchewan government, the Canadian government might be involved in 
countries such as Namibia, the Philippines, Zimbabwe to assist the 
educational authorities in those countries with programs in those 
developing countries.  But the last I heard, Montana and North Dakota did 
not qualify as developing countries, and that those countries had their own 
expertise to be able to develop their own programs. 
 
The fact of the matter is Saskatchewan taxpayers' dollars are being 
expended to provide horticultural programs south of the border, and the 
minister is aware of this and is trying to justify it.  I can't accept 
that, Mr. Chairman.  And it's little wonder that Saskatchewan, 
Saskatchewan's finances are in such a sorry state when we have a minister 
who seems to be aware of problems but refuses to familiarize himself with 
the problems as they exist, and refuses to deal with huge deficits as 
they're incurred by an organization over which he has some ongoing 
responsibility. 
 
And again, Mr. Minister, I want to ask you: can you confirm that in fact 
it's the agricultural division that is in large part responsible for the 
deficit this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, a comment first on the program that 
the member has raised that's going on south of the border.  It's my 
understanding that this is done on a fee-for-service basis.  It's a 



 

 

cost-recovery program.  It's not costing the taxpayers of Saskatchewan any 
money. 
 
With regard to the second point that he raises with regard to the 
agricultural division, we look at the overall budget of SIAST.  We don't 
know at this point the significance of any particular division.  We have to 
look at whether or not there's a deficit for the whole operation.  He's 
aware of the fact that if there is to be a deficit, that permission has to 
be received from the Department of Education, from the minister.  And that 
would be for an overall deficit.  It isn't going to be for any particular 
division. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Mr. Chairman, I want to turn my attention now to the 
University of Regina and the question of capital funding.  The minister, 
and certainly the people of Saskatchewan, will be aware that on April 30, 
1986, the provincial government announced with some great fanfare that it 
would pay half the cost of the proposed $4.4 million student union centre 
at the University of Regina.  In fact I quote from an article from the 
Leader-Post at that time which says that, and I quote: 
 

 Premier Grant Devine announced a government contribution towards the new 
centre with much fanfare during a 100-guest reception at the university 
last April. 

 
The remaining dollar . . . or the remaining contribution for that building 
was to have been paid for by the students themselves out of a fund set up 
by the student union over the years.  It's my understanding that students 
would contribute $10 per year from their student union fees towards a 
building fund. 
 
(1600) 
 
At that time the provincial government also promised an additional $400,000 
to convert the existing student union building into a day-care facility.  
On April 9, 1987, the minister of Education at the time, the member from 
Weyburn, announced that the provincial government's contribution had been 
put on hold due to severe economic restraints. 
 
Now I don't need to remind anyone that exactly six months prior to that 
announcement the provincial election occurred and that the announcement of 
the provincial government commitment made by the Premier with great fanfare 
was made six months prior to the provincial election in October of 1986. 
That those series of announcements and the intervening election -- the 
announcement that yes, there would be money prior to the election; the 
subsequent announcement by the Minister of Education that the money would 
not be forthcoming -- has to rank, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chairman, as one of 
the great betrayals in Saskatchewan history. 
 
A great betrayal because everyone saw your actions for what it was, and 
that it was a cynical and calculated manipulation of the hopes and dreams 
of many young people at the University of Regina to further your particular 
political interest.  That is you, at a time that you were touting some 
partnership for progress program, you said that there would be money to 



 

 

participate with the university students to build this building prior to 
the election, and after the election you said the money wasn't there. 
 
I want to ask you at this time, Mr. Minister, as to the details of any 
discussions you may now be holding with the University of Regina students 
and the university administration as to any discussions that you may be 
having on this particular project.  Can you advise us, are there 
discussions with the university as to resuscitating your commitment towards 
this building project, and if so, what is the status of those discussions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I have not had a meeting with 
the students for a little while now, from the University of Regina, but I 
have had several meetings with them.  I've also had several meetings with 
representatives from the administration and the board of governors from the 
U of R, but I haven't had any in the last few weeks. 
 
I am certainly aware of the fact that they are very anxious to get their 
new students' union building, and I would hope that . . . I had hoped that 
of course we could have moved ahead with that this year.  And at the same 
time they are in . . . I'm sure, as the member opposite knows, they are in 
need of a new fine arts building that they're working very hard to get off 
the drawing board.  And I certainly support that. 
 
We do find of course, though, that in spite of the fact that these two 
projects are not going ahead, that for this past year of 1989-90 that some 
6.3 millions of dollars have been provided to the U of R for capital 
projects, and another $4 million is committed for 1990-91. 
 
But I think at the same we are committed to these projects, but when the 
economy is a little bit better than it has been.  We know that the 
universities would like more money for operating as well, but we find that 
at this particular time that it wasn't possible to move ahead with those 
two projects. 
 
So until our economy gets a little bit better, in spite of the fact the 
students have done an excellent job of raising funds over there . . . We 
support those projects, but when it comes down to priorities as to where 
the money is going to go, whether you're going to provide more money in the 
form of operating grants or whether you're going to provide it for the 
construction of student union building, that there's no question as to 
where the priority lies.  So as soon as it's possible to move ahead with 
those projects, we want to do that, but it certainly was not possible this 
year. 
 
I would also point out to the member opposite that this government has 
spent more in the last two years than the NDP administration did in the 
last five years that they were in power.  And the economy was much better 
at that time.  And I don't have any doubt but what building was probably a 
little bit cheaper at that time.  But I think if you take a look back at 
what was done by the NDP when they were in power, as far as the University 
of Regina, there was very little construction during those good times in 
the latter part of the 1970s. 
 



 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Well, Mr. Minister, we don't have an NDP government 
right now, we have a PC government.  The people of Saskatchewan have had a 
lot to say in the last number of years about which political party forms 
the government, and you're the government now, Mr. Minister.  So you can 
answer for your particular government and we'll let the people of 
Saskatchewan judge the NDP government as they seem to have done in some 
previous elections. 
 
Now let's hear your explanations as to the actions of the PC government.  
Let's hear your explanation as to how it is that given this great betrayal 
of young people in the province of Saskatchewan, you can stand here now and 
say that you have not had specific discussions with the student union on 
that particular project and on that building. 
 
How is it possible that you can stand in your place in this House and say 
that you're committed?  Well how is it that you can be committed but not 
have 1 cent?  That doesn't show any commitment.  I mean those are weasel 
words, Mr. Minister, weasel words, to say that you're committed to a 
project but you don't have 1 cent for the project.  That's some kind of 
weasel language that you're developing to say that yes, we're committed for 
the project; unfortunately, we don't have a cent available. 
 
You're developing a whole new vocabulary or giving whole new meanings to 
words such as committed, Mr. Minister.  You're saying that it's possible 
that you may move on this project if the economy gets better. 
 
Mr. Minister, all I can hope is that you don't believe that lightning can 
strike in the same place twice, and that you're going to try it out six 
months prior to the next provincial election, a commitment and a promise to 
fund the student union centre.  In fact I hope you do because you know 
what's going to happen?  You people will get laughed out of the election 
campaign if you try and restore that one; if you try and come back to them 
again to say, forget what we've done in the past, but we're just going to 
try that again. 
 
Mr. Minister, you talk about priorities, you talk about priorities, that 
the priorities of your government are such that you can't find the money to 
honour a commitment that you have made previously; that you can't find the 
money to move ahead with this project, to cost-share this particular 
building with the students at the University of Regina.  Your priorities 
are such that you can't find the money.  I ask you, Mr. Minister, if you 
can't find the  
 Dmoney to carry on with this commitment that you made, how is it that you 
could find $5.5 million to blow on GigaText?  How is that possible, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, how much did the NDP blow on 
Nabu?  That was probably $7 million.  You could have built the whole 
student union building without the students having to put in much at all.  
So where were you then? 
 
Let's talk about commitment, Mr. Chairman.  This government has spent no 
less than $243 million on capital projects on our two campuses since 1982.  



 

 

Now to me, Mr. Chairman, I think that any of the taxpayers and any of the 
students at the University of Regina would recognize that as being a pretty 
substantial commitment to the people of this province -- $243 million in 
capital projects. 
 
Maybe it would be a good idea for the member opposite to go over and visit 
the campus and take a look at some of the construction that has taken place 
over there during the last eight years, because there has been a 
substantial amount.  These other projects will be up there just as soon as 
there is money available to do them. 
 
As far as the member to say, well now we're going to be out and promising 
this six months before the last election, I thought the election was going 
to be this June.  I mean that's what some of them on the other side have 
been saying.  So I haven't heard any promises yet; I haven't made any 
promises that we're going to be making to the students this year.  And I 
have talked to the students.  I'll be talking to them again before very 
long.  But it was not possible to move ahead with those particular projects 
this year, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Mr. Chairman, six months prior to the last election, 
your government undertook to cost share a building project with the student 
union at the University of Regina -- six months prior to the last election.  
Six months after that election, you said you didn't have the money.  Now 
either: (a) you are horribly incompetent; that is to say, you can't see one 
year ahead of time to know what your finances are going to be, that you 
can, that you would, your government would make those kind of commitments 
without seeing down the road as to what your finances are going to be; or 
(b) you're absolutely dishonest in your dealings with Saskatchewan people, 
that is in a cynical, calculated way trying to garner electoral support 
come election time, and then back away from your commitments. 
 
So either: (a) you're horribly incompetent; or (b) you're horribly 
dishonest.  Either option, Mr. Chairman, is not much comfort to the people 
of Saskatchewan.  And I predict that because of your incompetence, because 
of your dishonesty, your government won't get past the next election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the member opposite can get up 
and say all kinds of interesting things, but the fact of the matter is he 
doesn't know what the economy is going to do this year.  He doesn't know 
what the crops are going to be like; he doesn't know what the price of oil 
is going to do or potash or anything else.  And they were never able to do 
that. 
 
And certainly we would hope that our economy is going to be much better, 
Mr.Chairman, and as soon as that is the case we will want to move ahead, 
not only with the students union building but many other buildings on both 
campuses, Mr. Chairman, that the NDP failed to take a look at and to do 
anything about when they were in power back in the '70s. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Minister, you will recall that there was some 



 

 

information released about some plagiarism that had occurred at the 
Woodland Campus.  At that time you said that you would be implementing a 
committee that would ensure that there were no longer plagiarism in terms 
of the Department of Education or SIAST.  And I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, 
who the members of that committee are and how often has that committee met? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, with regard to the question raised by 
the member opposite, there was a committee established, as I understand it, 
within Woodland Campus staff.  This is where the incident occurred.  But as 
I understand it, now the policy that has been developed is something that 
is right across the piece for all SIAST campuses. 
 
What has happened there, Mr. Chairman, is that all of the materials have 
been reviewed and copyright permission has been sought.  They have also 
instituted a policy to ensure that all course material in the future is 
going to be reviewed and if copyright is required or permission is 
required, that this of course will be the case. 
 
So they have developed a policy then which, as I say, is being applied to 
all of the SIAST campuses.  That's the understanding I have. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Minister, you have not told me who is on the 
committee, and how often has this committee met? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, we can request this 
information.  We don't have the names here.  These are SIAST employees.  
These are SIAST employees on Woodlands Campus.  We can get that information 
for you.  But it's not a department committee.  This is a committee within 
the staff at Woodlands Campus. 
 
(1615) 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Minister, did you not tell the press that this was 
going to be a committee that you were going to appoint?  And, Mr. Minister, 
were you not going to ensure that there was no further plagiarism occurring 
in education in this province? 
 
This is not the first time we've had plagiarism in education under your 
government.  And I want to know: who is on this committee, how often has 
this committee met, and did you not assure the people of Saskatchewan that 
this would be a committee responsible to you, Mr. Minister, to ensure that 
there was no plagiarism occurring in education in this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I don't recall that it was a 
committee that I was going to set up.  It was a committee that was being 
set up within SIAST.  This was being done on the Woodlands Campus.  They 
have now developed a policy, as I've indicated, that is being applied right 
across all of the campuses within SIAST. 
 
You make mention of other cases of plagiarism, and I mean that can be 
questioned as well.  But in this particular case, whether it was . . . I 
don't recall saying it was my committee, but the information I had was the 
committee was going to be set up within SIAST and this was at Woodlands 



 

 

Campus. 
 
Now if you want a list of the names of the people who were on that 
committee and how many meetings they've had, we can try and get that for 
you. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Minister, it was not Merv Houghton that responded to 
this press article about plagiarism at Woodlands Campus; it was the 
Minister of Education, yourself, that responded to plagiarism at the 
Woodland Campus.  It was you, Mr. Minister, that said that a committee 
would be appointed.  Now as I understand it, Mr. Minister, it was a 
committee to be appointed by you.  It was a committee that was going to 
deal with plagiarism in education in this province. 
 
Now I want to know, Mr. Minister, surely you, as Minister of Education, 
should be concerned about plagiarism in this province, particularly in 
education.  I want to know who is this committee and why aren't they 
reporting to you, Mr. Minister?  And why aren't they developing policies, 
not just for Woodlands or SIAST in the province of Saskatchewan, but for 
the Department of Education?  Because as you know, there is some core 
curriculum that's being developed in this province. 
 
What assurances do we have that plagiarism isn't going to occur any longer?  
Because your record, Mr. Minister, is quite disgraceful.  There have been 
too many examples of plagiarism in education and I want to know why didn't 
you appoint the committee, Mr. Minister, and why isn't this committee 
reporting to you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well let's separate the two issues here, Mr. 
Chairman, if we're talking about the post-secondary and the SIAST incident 
or whether we're talking about the K to 12 area in so far as the core 
curriculum is concerned.  Certainly we are all concerned about plagiarism 
in education, as we should be in every area. 
 
But I pointed out to the member opposite, this was not my committee that 
was being set up; this was a committee within SIAST.  And the committee 
that was set up at the Woodland Campus, if you want me to get the names of 
those people I will try to do that and I will also find out how many 
meetings they had.  But as a result of those meetings, they have developed 
a policy which, as I understand it, SIAST has now accepted and has put into 
place all across the campuses in the province. 
 
Now with regard to the core curriculum, the officials are very, very 
conscious of all the new materials that are being utilized and every effort 
is being made to ensure that permission is sought on any new material that 
is being used.  And we expect that that policy should be adhered to.  So 
when we talk about some examples that you maybe have raised and whether or 
not they're authentic or not, that's always the question that we have to 
ask.  But we are concerned about plagiarism and we will continue to be. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Minister, can you tell me why you responded to the 
allegation and, I guess, substantiation of plagiarism?  Why was it the 
Minister of Education, yourself, that responded and not SIAST that 



 

 

responded? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well the plain and simple answer, Mr. Chairman, 
would be that the media had contacted me and wanted my response.  I gave my 
response and that's what it was, that a committee would be set up -- this 
was after consultation with SIAST -- that a committee was going to be set 
up and that was done.  And as I say, the results, I think, were pretty 
valuable, because they are now being implemented across the province. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- You see what I find so interesting, Mr. Chairperson, is 
that my colleagues in this House have been talking about SIAST for the last 
several days.  What I find so interesting is when the minister wants to 
respond to issues at SIAST, the minister can respond, and he does respond. 
 
The minister created this committee.  But when my colleagues ask very 
specific questions about SIAST and what's happening at SIAST in terms of 
the economics, the financial picture, management, programs, the minister 
can't respond.  He says go to management. 
 
So the minister seems to be able to pick and choose when he responds to 
questions raised about SIAST.  In this case, the minister could respond to 
plagiarism, but in other cases, when we want to know about salaries and 
severance packages and programming and finances, the minister has no 
knowledge.  Well, Mr. Minister, you've got to stop picking and choosing.  
You are responsible for education in this province, including SIAST, Mr. 
Minister.  And your answer in terms of plagiarism is totally unacceptable. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, while you're getting the names of this committee, and 
what we're talking about here, Mr. Chairperson, is a committee, an internal 
committee that looks at itself.  We're not talking about a Department of 
Education committee that looks at education in the province of Saskatchewan 
in terms of plagiarism. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, when you're getting this information, I want to know 
specifically what policies will now be in place to ensure that plagiarism 
no longer occurs at SIAST or any other department . . . or division of the 
Department of Education. 
 
What assurances do the public have in this province that we won't continue 
to have plagiarism when it comes to curriculum?  What assurances, Mr. 
Minister, do we have that core curriculum won't have any evidence of 
plagiarism down the road?  What assurances do we have that curriculum 
wherever it's being developed, or policy wherever it's being developed, or 
reports wherever they're being developed, aren't going to some day down the 
road come back to haunt us in terms of examples of plagiarism? 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I think that you have not taken your responsibilities in 
a serious way.  There was evidence of plagiarism at the Woodland Campus; 
you promised to appoint a committee to look into it.  The minister can't 
tell us who these people are; it obviously is an internal committee to 
SIAST, it's not a committee of the Department of Education.  The minister 
can't tell us what specifically the policies are, and I look forward, Mr. 
Minister, to getting specifically the names of the people on this committee 



 

 

as well as the policy initiatives that they've developed for all of the 
SIAST campuses in the province of Saskatchewan, and I'd appreciate having 
that by tonight. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, we'll get it as soon as we can, 
but whether it's by tonight or the next time we sit, we'll see about that. 
 
I would point out again, the member gets up and puts on quite a show; this 
is not my committee.  The media had contacted me about a specific incident, 
and I followed up with SIAST in that particular case because I have 
concerns about plagiarism.  I think anyone who's in education has concerns 
about education, but at the same time this was a committee that was set up 
within the Woodland Campus where the incident occurred, and it was set up 
because the administration and the faculty there, I'm sure, were very 
concerned about the fact that the incident had been raised and this in fact 
was going on.  So they were very, very anxious, I'm sure, to establish 
credibility with the public that this in fact was something that they did 
not condone and that they wanted to get it rectified. 
 
When you talk about K to 12, though, that there are a lot of concerns that 
we have there whenever you've got a lot of new materials coming in, and 
there is in fact a policy in place that forbids any type of plagiarism with 
any of these new materials.  So there's a very rigid evaluation that takes 
place, and we work on this idea of following all copyright regulations.  So 
there have to be constant checks being made but particularly now because we 
are into the development of a new curriculum. 
 
And we know very well that often times that you don't always reinvent the 
wheel -- that there is information and ideas that can be used that are put 
forward by others -- but it's very important, very important that 
permission is granted from the individuals who have developed it. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Minister, I realize there's some very good information 
around, but the important thing to do then, is to source it: you indicate 
the source of the information that you're using.  Now, Mr. Minister, I will 
wait for you to come forward with the names of the people on the committee 
as well as the policy, and then we'll pursue this matter a little further, 
either tonight or on Wednesday. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I've now had the chance to go through some of the 
information that you provided me the other day, in terms of percentage 
increases in provincial funding to school divisions in the province of 
Saskatchewan.  And as a result of going through this information, Mr. 
Minister, I can tell you that there were a good number of school divisions 
in this province that did not receive the rate of inflation when it comes 
to percentage increases to their school grants. 
 
Mr. Minister, as a matter of fact, in rural Saskatchewan, only 17 school 
divisions -- and we're talking about rural school divisions -- only 17 
school divisions out of 72 received a grant increase in excess of 4 per 
cent.  Now, Mr. Minister, as you know, 4.6 per cent is the inflation rate 
in the province of Saskatchewan, but of these school divisions, only 17 
received an increase in excess of 4 per cent. 



 

 

 
Mr. Minister, as you will also know, in the province of Saskatchewan out of 
101 school boards that we have information on -- we meaning myself -- 
they've had to increase the average mill rate in excess of 5.17 per cent. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want you to explain to the people of Saskatchewan how it is 
that a school board that does not receive a percentage increase that at 
least meets the rate of inflation can continue to provide the kind of 
quality education that they have historically done so, when your government 
continues to underfund education and in many, many instances has failed to 
even meet the inflation rate in the province of Saskatchewan.  How can they 
continue to provide the kinds of programs and the quality of education that 
they have done so up until now, when your government can't even meet the 
inflation rate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, maybe the member opposite could 
explain why it was that the mill rates increased at a much faster rate back 
in the 1970s when the NDP were in power.  Why was that?  I'd be interested 
in knowing that. 
 
But again in the calculation of the grants, Mr. Chairman, we follow the 
same policy that was followed by the NDP when they were in power and 
probably by the Liberals prior to that.  It's the same formula that's being 
used, and that's the idea of trying to maintain a 50-50 split across the 
province with the property tax versus the provincial grant. 
 
Now the member opposite knows full well that from time to time the 
enrolments go down, which has a bearing on the grants that they get, and 
also the fact that assessments change. 
 
Now with the city of Saskatoon we know that the public school system this 
year, that their assessment this year went up by some 7 millions of 
dollars.  Well wouldn't it stand to reason then that that would have an 
impact on the operating grant that they would get from the provincial 
government?  So we have to consider those factors. 
 
We also have to consider that the amount of money that school divisions are 
getting from the provincial government varies across the province from 
about 31 per cent to somewhere in the neighbourhood of 80 per cent, 
depending on their assessment. 
 
So we have to look at each school division individually, see what amount of 
money they get.  We know that in all cases it doesn't meet the cost of 
inflation but we have to consider the other factors -- whether enrolment 
has gone down, whether assessment has gone up, and take into consideration 
that we are trying to be equal and fair right across the province so that 
school boards will have an adequate amount of money to operate for the 
coming year. 
 
So you've got to take all of these into consideration.  You can't just 
isolate and pick out one or two things. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Minister, when a school division has to cut teachers, 



 

 

can they still maintain the same quality of education as they had the 
previous year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well if enrolment goes down, I think it's normal 
that boards will cut teachers.  But I don't know at this point, Mr. 
Chairman, of many school divisions that have cut teachers.  And you have to 
again look at the total operation.  It's not necessarily a fact of the 
grant going down.  What's happening to enrolment?  I've been in school 
divisions where there've been cut-backs in teachers because enrolments have 
dropped off and there's been more consolidation, some smaller schools 
closed.  So let's take all of those things into consideration as well. 
 
So whether or not there are teachers being cut or whether we've got 
programs that are being cut, that's hard to say at this point. 
 
I think if you look . . . it's an interesting fact to note, Mr. Chairman, 
that this past year the number of students in the province declined by some 
2,260 students but the number of teachers went up by 79.  So there may be 
an increase in teachers this year.  Who knows? 
 
(1630) 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Chairman, all of these students that have left 
Saskatchewan didn't all move out of one jurisdiction.  They have left a 
variety of locations in the province of Saskatchewan and those school 
divisions still have to provide a quality of education.  Now, Mr. Minister, 
if you have a school decrease, population decrease of 59 students but 
they're scattered from around the school division, you still have to 
provide a band program perhaps, French immersion, a phys. ed. program, 
social studies, core subjects, Mr. Minister. 
 
Now you didn't answer my question.  If a school division has to cut 
teachers, if they have to cut a band teacher or a phys. ed. teacher or 
maybe a French immersion teacher -- some of the so-called frills, Mr. 
Minister -- do those students still have the same quality of education as 
they had the year before? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well I think, Mr. Chairman, if you check back on 
the record, most of the band programs in this province disappeared when the 
NDP were in power so maybe that was because of underfunding. 
 
The fact is that we still have the third lowest pupil-teacher ratio in this 
country, when you look at some 16.2 is the average across this province; 
and that's third lowest in Canada.  So I don't think we've done all that 
badly. 
 
But as far as the quality of education, I would suggest to the member 
opposite, she can go out into rural Saskatchewan and find that the quality 
of education is just as high or higher today than it's ever been.  And the 
fact is that we do have children moving out of some of our schools and it 
does affect, in some cases, the number of students that are in class-rooms.  
We, in some cases, see that there are multi-graded class-rooms. 
 



 

 

But at the same time I don't think that the education of those children, 
for the most part, is suffering.  We would hope that the movement of 
children out of some of our rural areas will not continue.  We would hope 
that this year we'll have good crops, that more farmers will be staying on 
the land, and more of our young people will be staying within the rural 
area. 
 
So with regard to some of those changes, it can create some difficulties, 
but in most cases you would find that the enrolment maybe has gone down 
somewhat, but in most cases I would think you'd find that the number of 
teachers is going to remain the same. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Minister, if school divisions are put in a position 
where they have to increase the number of students in a class-room or have 
to implement multi-graded class-rooms, do those students still have the 
same quality of education as they may have had the year before? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- I would suggest that the quality of education that 
those children are going to get, whether it's in a multi-graded class-room 
or it's in a single-graded class-room, is for the most part going to depend 
on the teacher that they have in the front of the class-room. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Minister, if school boards have to consolidate schools 
because of your government's underfunding and children have to travel more 
kilometres, Mr. Minister, are those children getting the same kind of 
quality of education that they would have gotten had your government not 
underfunded education and had that school in a particular community 
remained open and they had smaller student-teacher ratios, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, I think that we have to keep in mind, 
again, that we do aim for equity and fairness across the province when we 
look at school grants.  And I don't know whether the member opposite is 
suggesting that we shouldn't be doing that or not.  We know that we have to 
take a look at new ways of funding education and we're going to be doing 
that. 
 
I would suggest that the formula that's been used and the funding that has 
been provided to school systems right across the province has not varied to 
any great extent in the last, probably the last 25 or 30 years.  And I 
would be very happy to table this document if you want to take a look at it 
and just make comparisons as to what was happening, what portion of the 
operating grants to school boards was being provided by the provincial 
government  
 Dand what portion was being provided by the local tax base.  Whether it 
was in the '60s or the '70s when you were in power or in the 1980s, if you 
really care to look at it, it's all in here; I'd be happy to table that. 
 
But at the same time, I do have a concern about young children that are 
required to spend a lot of time on buses travelling great distance.  I know 
I can go back into the 1970s when the NDP were in power and I can tell you 
that there were young children at that time in kindergarten that were 
probably getting on the bus at 7:30 or quarter to 8 in the morning and they 
weren't getting off until 5 o'clock at night.  Now I could question the 



 

 

member opposite as to whether those children were getting quality education 
at that time or how much of an impact it was having on them.  So this isn't 
a new phenomenon that's occurring in the 1990s. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- You know, Mr. Minister, all I can say to you is that 
surely in 20 years we can make some progress whether it's an NDP 
government, a Liberal government, or a Tory government.  Surely we should 
be able to make some educational progress in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now I continue to hear this Minister of Education talk about the NDP 
government 20 years ago.  We are now in 1990.  We are now on our way into 
the 21st century, Mr. Minister.  Parents have expectations.  They would 
like to see their children in rural Saskatchewan have access to a band 
program, have access to core French, have access to physical education. 
 
What I'm trying to get at, Mr. Minister, is this.  When your government 
decides to underfund education -- they seem to have money for the Cargill 
Grains of the world and their business friends, but when they decide to 
underfund education, that has a direct impact on the community, and school 
boards have to make decisions.  Do we increase mill rates, is one of the 
decisions.  Do we increase mill rates, dip into our reserves or cut back on 
services? 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, what I want to know is if a school division has to make 
a decision to cut a phys. ed. teacher at a school, does that have an impact 
on the quality of education?  If a school division makes a decision that, 
gee we really can't have a certified French teacher teaching French, we'll 
get someone else to teach French, is that good quality of education, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
I'm trying to get at what you really believe is quality of education in the 
province of Saskatchewan come the 1990s.  Our high student-teacher ratios, 
is that good education?  Multilevel class-rooms, is that good education?  
No phys. ed. teacher, no core French teacher.  What is good education in 
the 1990s, Mr. Minister, and where does your commitment in terms of funding 
fit into that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- I don't have any question about the quality of 
education that we have in this province today, nor do I have any question 
about the commitment that this government has had.  When you consider the 
amount of money that is being expended in K to 12 today, compared to what 
it was back in 1982, we've gone from some $310 million up to $443 million, 
Mr. Chairman.  We have indeed a very strong commitment to education. 
 
When you look at the changes that are being made today with the 
introduction of the core curriculum, these are very significant changes -- 
changes that were long overdue, changes that had not been made since back 
in 1963, I believe, was the last significant change to our curriculums. 
 
When we look at the Educational Development Fund and the additional money 
that has been put into school divisions over the last eight years -- which 
are not actually the eight years, the last five years -- there's been a 
tremendous change and a tremendous improvement in the quality of education, 



 

 

where children throughout the province, whether they've been in rural 
Saskatchewan or urban Saskatchewan, now have access to computer programs 
that they didn't have before; up 
_to-date computer labs, Mr. Chairman, which are going to do a lot to 
prepare our young people for the 21st century. 
 
When you look at the resources that we have in our libraries today that are 
partly there as a result of the Educational Development Fund, Mr. Chairman, 
we have made many changes and we are making many changes in our schools.  
We, I think, find that the quality of education, whether you look at the 
smaller centres in rural Saskatchewan or whether you look at the larger 
urban centres in Saskatchewan, quality of education is improving all the 
time.  We've got better prepared teachers, we've got higher qualified 
teachers, and we've got more equipment, more materials than ever before. 
 
So I feel very strongly that we have done a lot and will continue to do a 
lot to improve on the quality of education in this province. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Minister, when the inflation rate in this province is 
running at 4.6 per cent and when your government only decides to increase 
educational spending on average by 3 per cent, Mr. Minister, that has an 
impact upon the quality of programs that school divisions in this province 
can deliver to the young people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now as I said, Mr. Minister, 17 out of 72 rural school divisions saw an 
increase in their operating grant in excess of 4 per cent.  The remainder, 
Mr. Minister, did not.  Consequently what has happened in the province of 
Saskatchewan is that out of 101 school boards that I have information on, 
they have had to increase their mill rate on average, by 5.7 per cent.  The 
highest mill rate increase, Mr. Minister, is at Big Butte, and that amounts 
to 14.17 per cent.  Over 61 per cent of school divisions have had to raise 
their mill rates by over the 4.6 per cent inflation rate. 
 
At the same time, Mr. Minister, school boards are dipping into reserves.  
School boards have indicated that they're going to cut back on teachers.  
They've indicated that they're going to cut back on support services like 
teacher aides that assist learning disabled and behaviour disordered young 
people.  They've said that they're going to cut back on programs, Mr. 
Minister, subjects, teachers to teach those subjects, Mr. Minister. 
 
And I'm trying to indicate to you, Mr. Minister, that when school boards 
have to cut back on personnel like teachers and support services, that has 
an impact on the quality of education in the province of Saskatchewan 
because those young people aren't getting the same kind of services as they 
got the year before, the same kind of expertise as they got the year 
before. 
 
Now as the Minister of Education, how do you justify that?  How can you 
stand in your place and say the quality of education will be the same in 
September of 1990 as it was the year before in September of 1989?  Because 
it simply can't be possible, Mr. Minister, when you have to cut teachers, 
when you have to increase school routes, when you have to close schools, 
when you have to implement higher student-teacher ratios, when you have to 



 

 

go to multilevel grades, Mr. Minister, or class-rooms, you cannot have the 
same quality of education. 
 
As you know, Mr. Minister, about 80 per cent of the money that school 
boards get goes to salaries, to hire people to deliver programs and 
services to the young people of Saskatchewan.  And when those people are 
cut back, that has an impact upon the quality of education in the province 
of Saskatchewan.  And I say to you, Mr. Minister, you and your government's 
spending priorities are having a direct impact upon the young people of 
this province and the quality of education in this province. 
 
And I want you to indicate how you could stand in your place as the 
Minister of Education and justify a decrease in the quality of education in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I'm not prepared to buy the 
arguments that the member opposite's putting forward because they're not 
backed up by any facts. 
 
And you talk about dipping into reserves and this sort of thing.  Well the 
evidence does not support that at all.  If you just want to take a little 
bit of time -- but you're not one that wants to look at facts -- in 1986 we 
look at the total surplus that had been built up by school boards in the 
province was over $57 million.  We find that two years later it was over 
$56 million.  So, Mr. Chairman, that doesn't point out to me that there's 
any substantial dipping into the reserve funds. 
 
Now I would ask the member opposite, Mr. Chairman, if she in fact is 
questioning the equalization formula that has been used in this province 
for many, many years and well accepted by school boards.  So is she 
questioning that equalization formula, Mr. Chairman?  I would suggest that 
she is. 
 
And again we find her getting into her scare tactics, and she's pretty good 
at that as well, when she starts talking about the fact that young children 
with special needs are going to be going in some cases without teacher 
aides and additional support staff.  That is not true, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Let me point out for this year that the amount of money that's going into 
the special needs funding is being increased by nearly $3 million, and 
that's money that's going to special needs children to help out with 
support staff, whether it's teacher aides or whatever the case might be.  
So for her to stand in her place and suggest that some of these young 
children are going to be going without support staff, there's no basis for 
that kind of an argument at all.  The money is going to be going out to 
these school boards.  They should be utilizing that money as it's intended, 
and that's to provide the support for children that have special needs. 
 
So I'm not prepared for one minute to buy the arguments or some of the 
figures that she's putting out here today, because we have no indication at 
this point as to whether or not there are going to be cut-backs as far as 
staff are concerned in the province, or whether in fact there are going to 
be any cut-backs in this province as a result of the grant that the school 



 

 

boards are getting from the provincial government. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Minister, when you cut teachers and support services 
it impacts upon students, Mr. Minister.  They do not have the same quality 
of education as they would have had, had they not had those teacher cuts or 
those support services cut.  Now any minister of Education should be able 
to understand that, Mr. Minister.  Any minister of Education should be able 
to understand that, particularly yourself, particularly you, because you 
have been in education. 
 
And you know full well, Mr. Minister, that if you have a young person that 
requires a teacher aide because they have some learning difficulties, Mr. 
Minister, that that teacher aide assists that young person in making 
progress and that adds to that young person's quality of education.  If, 
because of budget constraints, that teacher aide is no longer available to 
that young person, that young person's quality of education has been 
decreased, it's been changed, Mr. Minister. 
 
When you have a class-room of 20 grade 5 students and because of 
underfunding . . . and those 20 grade 5 students have their own teacher, 
but because of underfunding you put 10 grade 5 students and 15 grade 6 
students into a class-room, and some of those other grade 5 students into a 
class-room with grade 4, you do not have the same quality of education, Mr. 
Minister.  In my view you do not have the same quality of education.  And 
that is what's beginning to happen in this province because of your 
government's consistent underfunding of education. 
 
Now I also happen to hear the Minister of Education for the Nova Scotia 
government on CBC radio this morning.  And, Mr. Minister, they are 
undergoing some of the very same pressures in Nova Scotia as they are in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
(1645) 
 
And that Minister of Education used his funding formula as justification, 
but he also recognized, Mr. Minister, that it's true there has been rural 
depopulation in Nova Scotia.  And as a result of that, those school boards 
are being underfunded, and those school boards are having to make decisions 
in terms of property tax increases and school closures and service cuts. 
 
Now what that Minister of Education did was not defend the formula, Mr. 
Minister, and say, well the formula had been put in place by the previous 
Liberal government.  What that Minister of Education said was that he was 
going to be going to some of those school divisions and trying to get 
further, or more money into those school divisions, Mr. Minister. 
 
And I'm wanting to know, given the fact that there are now problems that 
have come about as a result of the formula because of rural depopulation, 
are you, Minister, prepared to go to some of these school divisions and say 
that there will be some enhanced funding for those school divisions in 
order that teachers don't have to be cut, schools don't have to be closed, 
teacher-pupil ratios increased, bus routes increased in terms of 
kilometres?  Are you prepared to go to some of these individual school 



 

 

boards in the province of Saskatchewan to ensure that they have good 
quality education in those rural communities? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, it's become quite obvious now 
that the member opposite is challenging the equalization formula that has 
been in place for some time.  And I guess that my question to her would be, 
has she been in touch with the SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees 
Association)?  Because I'm sure that the SSTA would be horrified to hear 
the very things that she's saying in here today, because they have 
supported the equalization formula for many, many years and still do.  I 
know that they want to move to looking at a 60-40, but that's not what 
we're talking about here.  We're talking about the very basis for 
educational funding in this province.  And I don't think that she's done 
any checking as far as what their concerns are at this point in time. 
 
As far as the quality of education, as I pointed out earlier, we do not 
know at this point whether or not there will be any loss of teachers, any 
changes in programs.  We recognize that the funding of education in this 
province is a joint effort between the local taxpayers and the provincial 
government.  And the amount of money that's going into education, as into 
any other program, is dependent on the ability of the taxpayer to pay. 
 
So whether or not they feel that there are other enhancements or other 
grants that can be going in here, they have their operating grant; they 
know what it's going to be for the coming year.  We know that the 
educational development is also going to be putting in, I think, around 
another $14 million into the coffers of the school boards across the 
province, and that's money that they're going to be putting to very good 
use.  So we've got some very serious problems when we stop and think of 
what some of the things that the member is saying this afternoon, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Minister, you yourself have said that there are some 
difficulties with the funding of education in this province.  You said this 
the first day we stood in this House and started talking about Education 
estimates.  You yourself have said that you are going to be reviewing how 
we fund education, the K to 12 system in the province of Saskatchewan.  And 
when I asked you what are we looking at, you said you wanted to talk to 
various stakeholders in education.  Mr. Minister, even you have said, 
Minister, that there are some difficulties. 
 
What I'm trying to get at is, given the fact that there has been a 
tremendous increase in rural depopulation in the province of Saskatchewan, 
and as a result of that rural depopulation school boards have lost funding 
based on the formula; given the fact that school boards are having to cut 
teachers, look at school closures, Mr. Minister, implement multi-graded 
class-rooms, Mr. Minister, increase student teacher ratios, Mr. Minister; 
what I'm asking you is, are you going to provide in the interim some 
measures to assist these school boards so that we don't have to have school 
closure and we don't have to have teacher lay-offs or teacher cuts or 
program cuts, Minister. 



 

 

 
Don't put any words in my mouth.  I'm quite capable of doing that for 
myself.  What I'm trying to get at, Mr. Minister, is what is your position?  
Are you prepared to go and enhance funding for some of these rural school 
boards or are you not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the fact of the matter that we 
are following an equalization formula and when we have to look at what's 
happening to . . . when we are looking at assessment and when we are 
looking at the number of students and what's happening to enrolment, we do 
have built-in features right now. 
 
And one of those is to do with the small schools factor and the other one 
is the sparsity factor, where in fact, school boards do get additional 
money to address some of those problems.  So when the member is wondering 
how we're going to address the problems, we are doing that right now.  
These types of grant possibilities are there already to address the very 
problems that she's raising. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, that leads me to my next question.  
You talk about the small school factor.  I want to know why it is that you 
changed the small school factor this year, particularly as it impacts upon 
high schools.  And there are some school divisions in this province, or 
some school trustees, I will say to you, that believe that they are being 
told to consolidate schools because you've changed how you arrive at the 
small school factor.  They believe that the obvious implication of this 
change is that they are to consolidate schools in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So let's talk about the small school factor, Mr. Minister, and tell us why 
it is that schools are being penalized if they're closer than 17 kilometres 
or if they're closer than 30 kilometres, but if they're further away than 
30 kilometres they get the full incentive. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, the change with regard to the small 
schools factor, in the past it's been weighted more for high schools.  But 
now of course you find that with some of the changes that are taking place, 
it makes more sense that this money be shifted now more to elementary so 
that you don't have smaller children travelling great distances to go to 
school.  The dollars are going to be the same, but it's a shift from high 
schools to the elementary schools, keeping them going. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I understand that you want to put more 
emphasis on rural elementary schools, and I understand that because we 
don't want small children having to travel great distances, Mr. Minister.  
But as a result of this shift in emphasis to elementary schools, what sort 
of impact is that going to have on small high schools in the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well in some cases it is going to mean that the 
high school sections of some schools will be shut down and the students 
will be transported to the next centre. 
 



 

 

But this is something that has been done in close consultation and is 
supported by the SSTA.  They understand that this is a change that is 
necessary, but it's more important that we keep those small elementary 
schools going than it is to support the whole school.  And high school 
students then will be transported, and in most cases not that much farther 
down the road. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Minister, can you tell me what rural school divisions 
in the province of Saskatchewan were negatively impacted upon in terms of 
funding as a result of your change to the small school factor? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, we can't say what divisions 
specifically would be affected by this.  There may be some adjustment, I 
suppose, in the final grant at the end of the year. 
 
But I would point out that there's another feature in here too that I 
didn't mention, and that's distance sensitive where you have some of the 
students that maybe have to go a great distance, that there will be some 
change as far as the grant that would go to that particular school board.  
But that is made at the end of the year on the final grant payment. 
 
The main thing that we have to keep in mind here, that with some of our 
small high schools -- if you only have, in some cases, 20 or 30 students in 
grades 10 to 12 -- it in many cases makes little sense to keep that 
particular high school going, and it would be better to take those dollars 
and put them into a good K to 9 or a K to 8 system and keep that going for 
the longer period of time and allow the high school students to go down to 
the next town, which in most cases in this country or in this province are 
not all that far away.  But if it is a greater distance, then of course 
there is another factor that kicks in to assist those boards. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you are telling me that you cannot 
tell me which rural school divisions in the province of Saskatchewan have 
had money taken away from them because you changed the small school factor.  
I don't believe that, Mr. Minister.  I think you do have that information, 
and I want you to tell me which school divisions have been impacted upon in 
terms of money being taken away from those school divisions because of your 
change in the small school factor formula. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, if the member wants to know the exact 
number of boards, the officials could get that information.  We don't have 
that here right now because what you'll find that the money is going to be 
the same; it's just that in some cases the board might get less, but 
another board may get more.  So I mean if you want us to get the list of 
those divisions, we can take a look at that and have it for you. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Minister, I wouldn't have asked the question if I 
didn't want the information. 
 
I don't see why we have to go through a teeth-pulling exercise here.  If 
you have the information and I ask for it, then I expect you to give it to 
me.  I expect you to give it to me.  So when can you give me this 
information? 



 

 

 
Excuse me, Mr. Chairperson.  While the minister is getting the information 
. . . Mr. Minister, I want to know which school divisions are going to have 
to close high schools.  That's what I want to know. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Which schools . . . 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Which school divisions and which high schools are going to 
have to be closed because of the change in formula?  Because, Mr. Minister, 
it's my impression that this change that your government has brought about 
is going to have an impact upon communities. 
 
As you know, communities, as a result of various commissions, are looking 
at rural consolidation of hospitals, post office closures.  The rural 
communities are seeing services leave those communities.  And your 
policies, Mr. Minister, aren't doing anything to encourage people to move 
into rural Saskatchewan.  What your policies are doing is encouraging 
school boards to consolidate schools because of your underfunding. 
 
So I want to know: which school divisions have received a decrease in 
funding as a result of your change, the small school factor?  What school 
divisions are going to have to look at consolidation of high schools in the 
province of Saskatchewan as a result of your changes? 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order, please.  It being 5 o'clock, the committee will 
recess until 7 o'clock tonight. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


