





























































Hansard: April 04, 1990


 

 

April 4/90 
 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I would like to today 
introduce to you, and through you to the other members of the House, Mr. 
Bill Routledge from the town of Unity.  He is sitting in your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker, alongside of my lovely wife.  Mr. Routledge is in town today, Mr. 
Speaker, taking therapy for a wound in the last war. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask you and all the rest to show our 
appreciation for people like Mr. Routledge, for their commitment and their 
sacrifice to help keep Canada free. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I am speaking to you 
today as the minister of Public Service Commission.  As the minister 
responsible for the Public Service Commission, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to 
introduce to you, and to all the members of the House, 30 public servants 
who are seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These civil servants are here today to participate in an in-depth tour of 
the Legislative Building and to get a firsthand glimpse of different 
aspects of the legislative process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these tours have been taking place since January and have been 
very successful.  I have enjoyed being part of them.  They are providing 
important insights to people who work in the various departments and are 
building a stronger team spirit between all of us who serve the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Today's visitors come from the Department of Health, Agriculture and Food, 
Education, Consumer Affairs, Economic Development and Tourism, Labour and 
Employment, the Public Service Commission, and the Clerk's office.  I would 
like to thank them for their professionalism and for their enthusiasm for 
their work that has brought them here to learn more about the government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, would you please join me and all the members of the House in 
welcoming them, the people of the public service. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like through you, sir, to 
introduce to all members of the House a group of grade 12 students from 
Riverview Collegiate in the constituency of Moose Jaw South. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it's my real delight to welcome these grade 12 students from 



 

 

Riverview, given that only a few short years ago I graduated from that same 
high school.  And I see, Mr. Speaker, that the tradition of RVCI (Riverview 
Collegiate Institute) in quality students continues.  I would hope that all 
members today would join me in welcoming these grade 12 students from RVCI 
in Moose Jaw. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce to you, and through you 
to other members of the House, a group of 37 students from the constituency 
of Saskatoon Sutherland from the Roland Mitchener School.  They're here to 
learn about the workings of the legislature and the democratic process.  
They're accompanied today by teachers Maurice Postnikoff and Jim Taylor, 
and chaperons Corinne Gogal and Greg Bubnick. 
 
I'd like to ask all members of the House to greet them in the customary 
fashion. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to add my words of welcome to those 
of my colleague, the member of the legislature for Saskatoon Sutherland, to 
the students and teachers and their chaperons from Roland Mitchener School, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I had the pleasure of speaking to this class on environmental issues some 
three months ago, and they're a very enthusiastic and able group of 
students, Mr. Speaker.  The question and answer period afterwards was 
excellent.  And I am very delighted to see them coming to the legislature 
this afternoon, and I wish them a very pleasant time here and a safe trip 
home. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Study by Coopers & Lybrand 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct my question to the 
Premier.  Mr. Premier, for a long time now many people have questioned your 
accountability practices and the business practices you conduct within 
government, but I think it reached new highs yesterday in the Public 
Accounts Committee. 
 
I was wondering if the Premier could explain why it is that $2.7 million 
was paid for a study done by Coopers & Lybrand, paid by Crown investment 
corporation, when only 5 per cent of the study dealt with Crowns that came 
under the responsibility of Crown investment corporation.  You think you 
could explain that to us, Mr. Premier? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- I'll take notice of the question, Mr. Speaker. 



 

 

 
Mr. Anguish: -- Well new question, Mr. Speaker.  I would want to say that 
the Coopers & Lybrand study that I'm referring to dealt with advice to you 
and your government on the firing of dental technicians; how to stomp all 
over public employees; how to destroy the prescription drug plan; how to 
give these employees 10 minutes to clean out their desk.  And, Mr. Premier, 
I want to say that the president and chief executive officer, Mr. W.B. 
Gibson, who paid for the study, admitted he hadn't even read it and had not 
really any idea who had possession of the report at this time. 
 
Is it not true that you acted in this fashion to move the study through 
Crown investments corporation to hide both the content of the report and 
the cost of the report, Mr. Premier? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- I'll take notice, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- New question to the Premier, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 
point out to you, Mr. Premier, that the study that I refer to was done 
under Mr. Gibson's signature, okay?  And it was not done at the direction 
of the board of directors of Crown investments corporation.  And he was 
given personal direction by the member from Souris-Cannington to sign the 
agreement with Coopers & Lybrand. 
 
Is that the way that things work in your government?  Is it if you want 
something done you send in one of your political heavyweights and order a 
public employee to sign a document that there's no apparent benefit to the 
particular department or agency and it's your political benefit?  Is that 
how you used your political heavyweights to badger public employees, Mr. 
Premier? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I've taken notice twice already. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- New question to the same minister, to the Premier, Mr. 
Speaker.  I can see that you must have certainly learned something from 
Decima when they contacted you this morning, the way you treated the 
farmers yesterday.  We expected you to have some answers for questions, 
though, at least this afternoon in the legislature, Mr. Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, this is an example of the blatant disregard that you have for 
the public purse, the blatant disregard you have for expenditures by your 
government.  How can you justify the expenditure of $2.7 million on a study 
where 95 per cent of it has nothing to do with Crown corporations?  Will 
you in fact instruct the Crown investment board to release that report, to 
table that report tomorrow in the Public Accounts Committee at 8:30 
tomorrow morning, Mr. Premier? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I've taken notice of the question for the 



 

 

fourth time. 
 

Premier Cdn and Employees at Carrot River 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a question today for the minister in 
charge of privatization, whoever that may be.  Mr. Minister, in 1987-88 you 
sold off, you gave away the assets of Saskatchewan Minerals to 
out-of-province corporations -- Kam-Kotia of Ontario and Premier Cdn of 
Quebec. 
 
Mr. Minister, are you aware that today in Carrot River, Saskatchewan, 
Premier Cdn in the peat moss division is asking the employees there to take 
a 35 per cent wage roll-back?  And further, Mr. Minister, are you aware 
that Premier Cdn is in fact threatening to pull up stakes and leave that 
community?  Are you aware of that, Mr. Minister, and what are you prepared 
to do about it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Speaker, I am aware that we have had very 
successful new private companies in this province owned by citizens; that 
WESTBRIDGE Computer Corporation is the fastest growing computer corporation 
in Canada.  I'm aware that the potash corporation is now running 
efficiently.  I am aware that Saskoil is building a new head office in 
Regina and that people are employed building that head office.  And I'm 
also aware that this minerals corporation has been run as an efficient 
company. 
 
Now clearly, from time to time all markets will have an upswing and a 
downswing.  I give a commitment to the member opposite to look further into 
his allegation, but I cannot accept his allegation as being fact.  Even 
considering his background, I cannot consider it fact. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, supplementary to the same minister.  Mr. 
Minister, obviously you are not aware of what is happening in Carrot River 
with Premier Cdn and the peat moss division.  Mr. Minister, as a result of 
a fire last week, Premier Cdn is threatening to pull up stakes and leave 
Carrot River. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have in front of me the agreement for sale made between 
yourselves and Premier Cdn, and I want to quote to you from this agreement.  
In this agreement Premier Cdn committed, and I quote: 
 

 . . . to modernize and ultimately to expand the production facilities 
comprised in the peat moss operations. 

 
And further, Mr. Minister, Premier Cdn committed, and I quote again: 
 

 All reasonable efforts will be made to maintain levels of employment 
currently in effect. 

 



 

 

Mr. Minister, are you prepared to take action against this Quebec company, 
Premier Cdn, if in fact this agreement is violated? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Speaker, possibly the member opposite is not aware 
that this corporation had a fire at their plant, and that could have 
something to do with the economic situation of this plant.  As the Minister 
of . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The minister is answering the question as 
asked him.  Members are interrupting him..  It's difficult to answer when 
one is being interrupted.  Give the man the opportunity to answer without 
interruption. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Well as I said, maybe the member opposite is not aware 
that there was a fire at this plant.  And as Minister of Economic 
Diversification and Trade, we will do everything possible to assist this 
corporation in continuing their production in Saskatchewan and continuing 
hiring Saskatchewan people.  And certainly we are not going to rush out 
with any lawsuits or any punishment because this corporation has had a 
fire.  We will help them work their way through this, and I expect that 
this will be a healthy company in the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, new question to the same minister.  Mr. 
Minister, so that you are clear.  Premier Cdn has laid people off.  Premier 
Cdn is asking for a 35 per cent wage roll-back that has nothing to do with 
the fire.  The fire has brought forward the threat of pulling out of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question to you is this.  For 40 long years, Mr. Minister, 
this Saskatchewan Minerals corporation provided consistent and stable 
employment in good years and bad.  This corporation provided profits to the 
people of Saskatchewan.  You sold it off for a song.  What is the result?  
Wage roll-backs, lay-offs, and now a threatened pull-out from the province.  
Mr. Minister, is this your idea of how privatization is to build the 
economy of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Speaker, what the member opposite doesn't 
understand either is that at Chaplin the employees now have profit sharing, 
something that the employees were never given when members opposite were 
the government that owned the plant and wouldn't allow the employees to 
share in their own productivity.  That is a considerable change. 
 
I believe that the member opposite should know better than to try to bring 
labour negotiations to the floor of this Assembly.  There has been a fire 
at this plant.  They're engaged in union negotiations.  I'm also the 
Minister of Labour.  If he doesn't know that, I can inform him of that.  We 
will not have labour negotiations on the floor of this Assembly, but we 



 

 

will have them at the bargaining table. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Taxation at Local Government Level 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to the 
Premier, and, Mr. Premier, I want to quote from your budget speech where 
you say, and I quote: 
 

 We could have followed the Government of Canada's example and shifted our 
fiscal problem onto others. 

 
Now it would appear to most people that by freezing the revenue-sharing 
grants and by making other cuts in funding to urban, rural, and northern 
municipalities that you are shifting your fiscal problems -- in this case 
to the property tax payers.  And you are doing the exact same thing that 
you criticize the federal government for doing. 
 
Now given an inflation rate of 4.8 per cent, given a 5 per cent cut in 
funding to local governments, how do you propose that these local 
governments maintain the same level of services and hold the line on taxes? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, our approach in the budget was, as I 
outlined a week ago, not to down load onto other levels of government, as 
the federal government had done.  We chose not to down load onto school 
boards or hospital boards.  And in fact, I think the evidence speaks for 
itself, an increase of 5.6 per cent for education and nearly 10 per cent 
for health care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Having said that, that doesn't mean to say that there 
weren't difficult decisions made, because some 21 departments had their 
funding either frozen or reduced. 
 
Now certainly some will make the observation and the argument that cutting 
the $300,000 grant to the Centennial Auditorium or putting the Regina rail 
relocation into review represents down-loading.  I would argue that it does 
not.  I think the number that municipalities particularly look to and 
looked to on budget night was the revenue-sharing grants.  And I 
acknowledge that they were neither increased nor decreased, but in fact 
that very major grant was held the same as last year, Mr. Speaker, and 
that's because we don't believe in down-loading. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- This question is directed to the Minister of Finance.  
Mr. Minister, under the questionable leadership of the Premier, and with 
your connivance as a cabinet minister and now as a Minister of Finance, 
Saskatchewan has gone from a have province to a fiscal and economic basket 
case. 
 



 

 

Governments in Saskatchewan, past governments, CCF (Co-operative 
Commonwealth Federation), Liberal, NDP have brought in balanced budgets and 
surpluses year after year after year in the good times and in the bad 
times.  You've given us deficit after deficit after deficit. 
 
And my question is: given cuts in capital funding to municipalities, given 
those cuts and in transit grants, where do you get off by using your words 
"down loading" your problems, down loading your fiscal mismanagement on to 
local governments.  How do you get off doing that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I think the hon. member overstates 
the case, I would argue, by using words like "fiscal and economic basket 
case."  I don't think the province is well served by that overstated 
rhetoric. 
 
What was our approach in the budget?  I just reiterate for the hon. member.  
Yes there were cuts, Mr. Speaker, we readily acknowledge that, because the 
approach was we would not raise taxes, Mr. Speaker.  We would cut back . . 
. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- We would not raise taxes, Mr. Speaker, but rather we 
would look to make cuts in internal government spending, especially no new 
array particularly of new initiatives, rather cut back on spending, no new 
tax increases. 
 
And yes, we do face the challenge of a deficit, Mr. Speaker.  And why?  Is 
it as the hon. member has described?  Or if you look past the rhetoric, are 
not the reasons things like high interest rates, lingering droughts, 
international trade wars, Mr. Speaker, federal off-loading.  By sort of 
every reasoned measure, I think those things are greatly impacting on our 
economy.  We're not happy that we're having to receive equalization 
payments from the federal government, but that's the reality of our 
economy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Production Loans and Farm Foreclosures 
 
Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to the Premier or 
the Minister of Agriculture, and it relates to this . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. 
 
Mr. Britton: -- I appreciate the applause, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of Agriculture, 
the Premier, and it relates to the government's position on the production 



 

 

loan and on the moratorium on farm foreclosures, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It is my understanding that the National Farmers Union, supported by the 
Leader of the Opposition, have advocated an indefinite moratorium on farm 
foreclosures, and that members of the opposition have openly advocated 
writing off any outstanding money owned under the production loan program, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Could the Premier please explain the implications of such a moratorium? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Member from Regina Elphinstone and all other 
members come to order.  Order.  Member for Regina Victoria. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- The farmers told me yesterday that the Leader of the 
Opposition had promised them that they would forgive the production loan 
and that would amount to about $500 million.  They also told me that the 
Leader of the Opposition would support a five-year moratorium, Mr. Speaker.  
They also said that outside the . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  The hon. members are interfering with a member's 
right to speak, I believe.  You're interfering with a member's right to 
speak.  The interruptions, as anybody can see who is reasonable, are far 
too vocal and continuous, and you're interfering with the man's right to 
answer a question.  I would like to ask you to allow him to answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  When we're dealing 
with the agricultural problem, it is very serious and it deserves the 
serious attention of this legislature.  As you know, Mr. Speaker, we have 
passed a unanimous motion here in the House that we would request the 
federal government to help. 
 
The hon. member asked me about the consequences of the position taken by 
the NFU (National Farmers Union) and the suggestion that we go into a 
five-year moratorium . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  It seems to me that what started this 
altercation in the House is that a government member asked the question.  
Well I'd like to remind hon. members, it is the tradition of any 
parliamentary system, including the one here in Saskatchewan, that 
government members have a right to ask a question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The member from Wilkie has asked a question.  
The Premier has a right to answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Thank you very, very much, Mr. Speaker.  We appreciate 
that. 
 
The response, Mr. Speaker, to the proposal that we have a five-year 
moratorium in the province of Saskatchewan, and indeed that the production 



 

 

loan is forgiven, Mr. Speaker, would have serious consequences to the 
people of Saskatchewan and to the credit union system.  And if you would 
allow me, Mr. Speaker, I use this as an example.  A credit union manager 
writing in to me, Mr. Speaker, about a moratorium, and I quote, and he 
says: 
 

 The credit union system would not be able to survive in rural Saskatchewan 
(with a moratorium) because their main dealings are with farmers.  The 
credit unions are at present the only ones that are dealing with farmers 
really that require financial help and they would not be in a position to 
do so (with a moratorium, Mr. Speaker).  Credit unions are locally owned . 
. . 

 
Mr. Speaker, could I get the attention of the opposition, please. 
 

  . . . and borrow money to their members. 
 
 If we have to write (down) loans . . . against members deposits . . . 

we'll have no other place to draw funds, (Mr. Speaker). 
 

Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Sale of Cameco to Uranerz 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is to . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier.  And it relates 
to the $160 million sale of Cameco to Uranerz, a West German company, just 
the other day. 
 
Mr. Premier, will your government table in this House immediately after 
question period the last evaluation done on the assets relating to this 
sale?  And will you also confirm, Mr. Premier, that the money will be split 
between the federal and provincial governments, and that indeed the money 
will be furthermore used just to sweeten the pot for further privatization? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Speaker, Cameco is a private company owned by the 
Government of Canada and the Government of Saskatchewan at present, and 
they operate as an ordinary company in this province, as do all the other 
companies.  If this company is chosen to sell some of their assets to pay 
down some of their debt, then that is a business decision they have made, 
and we are not going to second-guess them here in the legislature as to how 
they should do business on behalf of that company. 
 
And so Cameco is also, I understand . . . or some of the uranium companies 
have been buying uranium to try to stabilize the market.  These are 
ordinary business decisions, and we are not going to interfere here.  And I 
don't think the member opposite, the member for Cumberland, can say that he 
knows more about how to run a company than the people in charge of that 



 

 

company.  And we respect their ability and we will stick with their ability 
to manage. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Another question to the minister responsible.  The question 
relates to the fact that along with the $7 million royalty tax holidays, 
last year you laid off 100 workers at Cameco, an action which had severe 
consequences for the northern economy.  Will you confirm today that the 
reason behind the lay-off was to make Cameco a better prospect for sell-off 
this past week? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite should talk to the 
Leader of the Opposition.  It's his party who wants to stop mining uranium 
in Saskatchewan, and here we are . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Here we are doing our best to try to keep this 
industry going when the price of uranium has fallen from over $50 to $8 on 
a spot market.  That is putting that company and our uranium industry in a 
spot.  And to heap more trouble on this industry, the members opposite say 
we should stop mining uranium entirely.  What would they expect our 
citizens to do in northern Saskatchewan?  So the question is totally out of 
order.  He should go to his caucus and ask his colleagues why they want to 
shut down all the mines. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, another question.  Mr. Minister, is this . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Is this a supplementary or a new question? 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- This is a new question.  Mr. Minister, in regards to the 
$4.4 billion deficit that this government has given the people of 
Saskatchewan and the fact that you operate under crisis management on a 
daily basis, is this another just straightforward, piecemeal attempt in 
dealing with this issue of high unemployment?  Which I might add, Mr. 
Minister, they might as well shut down the mine with your unemployment 
situation in northern Saskatchewan and the way that you've operated in the 
past eight years.  What good, Mr. Minister, are your assurances about 
foreign ownership restrictions, environmental protection, and provincial 
control that you stated very clearly in the past? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, in all of that tirade it's hard to 
ascertain exactly what the question was.  But I will try my best to 
interpret what his question is. 
 
My understanding is that he has concern with respect to the Canadian 



 

 

ownership provisions, and he has concern with respect to environmental 
protection.  And I say to the member opposite that these are laws in this 
province and in this country.  And if he will read the laws, he will see 
that they are relatively sound laws, and there is a commitment from this 
government and the federal government of Canada to continue strengthening 
the environmental laws. 
 
So his question was so broad, it's difficult to pin-point exactly what the 
question was.  But I can assure him that our laws will be followed and that 
the Canadian ownership laws, as they were in the Air Canada situation and 
in the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, that those laws on ownership 
will be followed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I want to rise 
on a point of order.  It has to do with question period today where the 
member from Wilkie, I believe, clearly broke the rules of the Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to rise on a point of order today.  
Clearly, in question period it's our opinion that the member from Wilkie 
broke the rules of the Assembly by asking questions of the Premier to 
outline for him the policy of the National Farmers Union of Saskatchewan, 
and also alleged policy of the New Democratic Party, which he really got 
messed up.  And I can understand now why the farmers of the province are 
confused. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I want to ask you, Mr. Speaker, to look at 
Beauchesne's on rule . . . or the chapter 409, section (6), which clearly 
outlines, and I quote: 
 

 A question must be within the administrative competence of the Government. 
 

And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, for a number of reasons, this question was 
not in order, and I'd like you to check the verbatim from today's question 
period and make a ruling on this matter and bring it back to us.  Because 
we feel very strongly that the member from Wilkie was not within the rules 
of the Assembly, nor was the Premier when he attempted again today to 
mislead the farmers of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  In speaking to this point of 
order, I would like to reference page 21 of our Rules and Procedures, 
paragraph 35, subsection (1).  And it states, Mr. Speaker, that: 
 

 . . . oral questions may be asked seeking information from Ministers of 



 

 

the Crown relating to public affairs, and to other Members relating to any 
bill, motion or other public matter connected with the business of the 
Assembly in which such Members may be concerned . . . 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, if the NDP, Mr. Speaker, are taking the position, if the 
NDP, Mr. Speaker, are taking the position that a rural member representing 
thousands of farm families in these difficult times does not have the right 
to ask a question of the Minister of Agriculture, the Premier of this 
province, respecting farm foreclosures and moratoriums and/or the potential 
write-off of hundreds of millions of dollars of taxpayer's dollars, Mr. 
Speaker, then there is something wrong with these rules.  I suggest the 
member has every right and also, Mr. Speaker, not only every right, Mr. 
Speaker, but every obligation to ask such questions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- I'm sure it's unnecessary to point out to you, but it 
seems to be necessary to point out to the Government House Leader that the 
section you read from does not in fact deal with the oral question period. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  While I don't profess to be an 
expert on the rules, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Britton: -- Thank you.  Thank you.  I do happen to represent . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. 
 
Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Speaker, I do happen to represent a rural constituency.  
The question that I put to the Premier was brought to my attention 
yesterday, and I had thought it was quite relevant for me to find out the 
answers to that question. 
 
The Speaker: -- Well, hon. members, I believe that he's trying to speak to 
the point of order and he has that right to do, but we're having great, 
great difficulty hearing him.  Quite frankly, I don't know if he is 
speaking to it or not because I can't hear him.  Hon. members are not 
allowing me to hear him.  So let's give him the opportunity to speak. 
 
Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Speaker, it's a little confusing to me that the 
opposition won't allow a question on the farm question.  To me . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Thank you very much for your attention.  Mr. 
Speaker, when we are in a crisis -- by their own admission they say we're 
in a crisis -- I brought a question to the Premier to do with agriculture.  
Now as I said, Mr. Speaker, if I was not . . . if it was not in order for 
me to ask that question, somebody should have been asking that question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 



 

 

 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  From what I was able to hear of the question 
-- and of course I will have to review the verbatim to confirm it -- but 
from what I was able to hear of the question, it was a question relating to 
policies of the NFU as it affected our province, and if that in fact is 
what I heard, then I believe the question under those circumstances is in 
order, because it would be under the jurisdiction of the Minister of 
Agriculture.  However, I will review the verbatim, certainly to see exactly 
what was said, and be pleased to bring back a more official look. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, prior to orders of the day, I would seek 
leave of the Assembly to move a motion respecting some change in hours as 
discussed with the House Leader on the Easter weekend. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Change in Assembly Hours for Easter Weekend 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to move, seconded by the Deputy 
House Leader, that is the member for Rosthern: 
 

 That notwithstanding rule 3 of the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan this Assembly shall on Thursday, April 12, 1990, 
meet at 10 o'clock a.m. until 1 o'clock p.m., and that when this Assembly 
adjourns on Thursday, April 12, 1990, it do stand adjourned until Tuesday, 
April 17, 1990. 

 
 DMotion agreed to. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth that the Assembly resolve itself into the Committee of 
Finance. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I began my remarks on 
this budget debate last night before 10 o'clock and would like to conclude 
them this afternoon. 
 
I began those remarks by suggesting and arguing in this debate that the 
budget that was presented to us by the Minister of Finance only deepens the 
crisis of credibility; that this government, I maintain, has lost it's 
credibility, lost the confidence of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 



 

 

And it would strike me, Mr. Speaker, that the performance that we saw in 
question period this afternoon will again only deepen that crisis of 
credibility.  Anyone who may have watched what happened in this House this 
afternoon will know, not only has this government lost the ability to 
govern the affairs of the province, it can't even govern its own members. 
 
What we have here this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, was a very, very peculiar 
situation.  We have a member of the government, who I assume is part of the 
government caucus, who I assume attends government caucus meetings, who I 
assume has some access to the Premier -- if not the Premier's office, at 
least in caucus meetings, a member of the government get up in his House 
and ask the Premier of the province about the policy of the Christian Farm 
(Crisis) Action Committee and the policy of the National Farmers Union.  
Now if that member was interested in that policy, he might have taken the 
opportunity yesterday to meet those groups who were right here in the 
building.  He did not need to come into this House today and put a question 
to his Premier. 
 
What I found, Mr. Speaker, very interesting, and I guess where the question 
of credibility really arises, is that I note the member opposite, to ask 
his question of the Premier, gets up and reads, reads the question from a 
sheet of paper.  Immediately the Premier of this province stands up with 
another sheet of paper on which is the answer to the question. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in my view this makes a charade of what is a very 
essential part of the functioning of this legislature and the functioning 
of the democratic process in this province, and that is the oral question 
period when, on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, members of the 
opposition have an opportunity to question ministers of the Crown and those 
responsible for governing. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, when I say there is a crisis of credibility in this 
province, it was confirmed by the budget; it was confirmed again today in 
this House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last night in my remarks I tried to bring some general 
comments to the budget.  I tried to identify some of those issues that are 
important to the community I represent.  I lifted up the concern again of 
the investors who have lost life savings in Principal Trust, a concern that 
they are not identified in this budget. 
 
And today, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move to a conclusion in my remarks 
by discussing that cut-back in this budget, that of all of the many 
cut-backs to people in this budget, I think this one is the one that 
troubles me the most, that causes me only what I can describe as sadness, 
Mr. Speaker.  I want to say a word now about the cut in this budget to the 
matching grants program. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you will know and other members will know, it is through 
the matching grants program that the Government of Saskatchewan is able to 
reach out in a very small way, but in a tangible, real way.  It is the 



 

 

means by which the Government of Saskatchewan is able to reach out and help 
the very poorest of the poor on this globe, Mr. Speaker.  Sometimes I 
sincerely do wonder how members opposite can sleep at night when they know 
what they are doing and what they have done in this budget in terms of the 
matching grants program to the poorest of the poor of this world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just by way of background for members present, there are in 
excess of 30 organizations in this province, who, as part of their 
commitment and their mandate, reach out to the world, reach out to the 
hurting peoples of this world to extend the compassion and the generosity 
of Saskatchewan people.  There are well into 30 organizations in this 
province, Mr. Speaker, and they have banded together in an effort to 
co-ordinate the kind of aid and assistance, emergency and in long-term 
development that leaves this province for the Third World.  They have 
banded together in a group that's entitled, that calls itself, The 
Saskatchewan Council for International Co-operation. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to just point out a number of the groups that are 
involved in the Saskatchewan Council for International Co-operation.  They 
include, for instance, The Baptist Union of Western Canada. SCIC 
(Saskatchewan Council for International Co-operation) includes the Canadian 
Catholic Organization for Development and Peace.  They include the Canadian 
Crossroads International, the Canadian Lutheran World Relief, CUSO, 
Disciples of Christ Church, the Foster Parents Plan (of Canada), the 
Mennonite Central Committee (Canada), The Salvation Army, Save the 
Children, the United Church of Canada, and the list goes on, the YWCA.  
More than 30, Mr. Speaker, groups, helping agencies in this province band 
together in the Saskatchewan Council for International Co-operation to 
ensure that the generosity of Saskatchewan people reaches the Third World, 
reaches those who deserve and need it most. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this government opposite likes, and very often talks 
about, partnership, partnership with people.  Well 20 years ago, 20 years 
ago or thereabouts, Mr. Speaker, under a New Democratic regime, a 
partnership was established between the Government of Saskatchewan and 
these volunteer organizations within our province to reach out to the 
poorest of the poor in our world. 
 
The program at that time was started, it was entitled the matching grants 
program, and its goal, Mr. Speaker, was that the Government of Saskatchewan 
would match, dollar for dollar, those funds raised by volunteers in our 
province for work in the Third World and in international aid. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we never met that goal, we never achieved the goal of matching 
from the treasury, on a dollar-per-dollar basis, the dollars raised by the 
volunteer community.  In fact, I think the closest we came was in 1975-76 
when the match was about 80 per cent -- an 80 per cent grant from the 
government for the 100 per cent raised by the volunteer associations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they came to office in 1982, this group of men and women, and 
at that time the volunteer organizations in our province were raising in 
the neighbourhood of $3.6 million -- all volunteer dollars. 
 



 

 

The government of Saskatchewan, in 1982, budgeted $2.1 million to support 
the work of these provincial organizations in that partnership between 
government and these organizations, these helping organizations.  A year 
later, after they were elected, this government slashed that budget by 50 
per cent; cut that 2.1 to $1 million even as the volunteer donations were 
on the rise across this province. 
 
Then we come to post-1986 and this government opposite cuts the budget 
again to $800,000.  Meanwhile the volunteer gifts to these organizations, 
to CUSO, the Young Women's Christian Association, to the Foster Parents 
Plan (of Canada), to the Catholic development agencies, these donations are 
growing.  This partner is pulling funding. 
 
Last year, Mr. Speaker -- and I complimented the government on it at that 
time -- they added $50,000 to that budget in terms of an emergency relief 
provision.  So last year, Mr. Speaker, the government opposite contributed 
$850,000.  But you will want to recognize, Mr. Speaker, that last year the 
volunteer agencies in this province raised over $6 million.  People 
volunteering their time and effort raised $6 million. 
 
It's interesting, Mr. Speaker.  We've had tough times in our province; 
we've had tough times in our province, but those times have not defeated 
the compassion of Saskatchewan people.  For in these tough times, 
Saskatchewan people have reached out in greater and greater ways, in 
greater and greater amounts to support the poorest of the poor in our 
world: last year $6.1 million raised in volunteer dollars from this 
province to go to the third world for education, for food, for development. 
 
This government, in this budget Mr. Speaker, in what I think is the most 
tragic feature of this budget, cut the funding to SCIC, cut the 
partnership, cut the matching grant from $850,000 to $425,000.  They cut it 
in half again.  Mr. Speaker, sometimes I wonder if there is any conscience 
left here, if there is any compassion left. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they save, by this cutting measure, $425,000 as a percentage 
of the total provincial budget, Mr. Speaker.  That amounts to one-tenth of 
one per cent of the total budget of Saskatchewan.  One-tenth of one per 
cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, where are the priorities here?  Where are the priorities with 
this government?  They take two of their front bench cabinet ministers who 
want to get out; they put one in Hong Kong and they put one in Minneapolis, 
and between the two of those individuals they are taking more from the 
treasury of Saskatchewan than the money being saved in the cut to SCIC.  
For two men there is $400,000-plus; for SCIC, for 30 volunteer 
organizations in this province, there's a $400,000 cut. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will . . . You may have seen some of the press coverage of 
this issue, and you will know that those people involved in these 30 
organizations know what the consequence will be.  Mr. Speaker, I would like 
to, just for the record, indicate to you in a very succinct way what this 
grant has meant for people in this world. 
 



 

 

And I quote from the brief presented to government members opposite by 
SCIC, a brief that, I might add, documents every project undertaken by the 
volunteer organizations using public money, a brief that clearly 
demonstrates that every thin dime that leaves this province in aid is going 
to help those who need it most, in the most effective way, through the 
volunteer organizations who are on the ground in the Third World.  In their 
report they say this: 
 

 With the support of the Government of Saskatchewan, SCIC member agencies 
were able to assist hundreds of thousands of people in the Third World in 
their effort to achieve a better quality of life.  A total of $787,000 in 
matching grants was disbursed to 98 projects in 42 countries.  
Approximately 60 per cent of the funding went to food, agriculture, and 
rural development; the balance of the funding went to a variety of 
projects in health care, education, community development, and other 
sectors. 

 
 On behalf of our Third World partners, the poorest of the poor, SCIC and 

its member agencies thank the Government of Saskatchewan for its support 
in these projects. 

 
For the same amount of money as we are now giving to two individuals to put 
them in Hong Kong and Minneapolis, these agencies through SCIC were able to 
help literally hundreds of thousands of people.  Mr. Speaker, I wonder 
sometimes how members opposite can sleep at night. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people have demonstrated, over and over again, 
they are a compassionate people, they are a caring people, and even in hard 
times they are willing to reach out and help the least fortunate in this 
world. 
 
Now I recognize that some members opposite will be saying, well charity 
must begin at home.  Mr. Speaker, we are at home on this globe.  This world 
is our home, and yes, charity begins at home.  And whether it be a child 
who is hungry in downtown Regina, or whether it be a child who starves in 
the Horn of Africa, that child is our neighbour.  This world is our home. 
 
The development agencies, the churches, the volunteer groups, CUSO, Foster 
Parents, Cansave, and so on, are not asking for vast amounts of revenue 
from the provincial government, they're asking for a small partnership.  
This group of men and women have decided to sever that partnership in a 
very significant way, Mr. Speaker.  And that, in my view, is tragic. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to conclude my portion of the remarks 
in the debate.  I know others are anxious to enter into this debate. 
 
I just want to say again, as I said at the beginning, the budget that we 
have, a cut to international aid and the poorest of the poor, the cuts that 
we're going to see in education, the funding freezes to urban governments, 
the lack of support to the Saskatchewan farm family, is a consequence, not 
of one year of mismanagement, it is the consequence of eight years of Tory 



 

 

mismanagement in this province.  Eight years that has put us $4.36 billion 
in debt.  Eight years of mismanagement that now costs us $1.350 million 
every day of the year in interest charges alone.  That's why we're in the 
mess we're in, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The people of this province, across this province, are saying it's time for 
a new government who will bring a change to the fiscal direction of this 
province that will show us a way out of this financial morass.  And, Mr. 
Speaker, I can say to you and to all members of this House, the member from 
Riversdale and the New Democratic Party caucus is ready to undertake that 
challenge when the Premier is ready to call an election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting the budget of this 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it's indeed a great 
honour and a privilege for me to stand in my place and take part in this 
historic debate here today.  But before I do, Mr. Speaker, before I get 
into the main part of my address, I would like to congratulate you, sir, on 
accepting the job as Speaker again.  I appreciate that. 
 
I would also like to take this opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to say how proud I 
feel to be here representing the good people of Wilkie, a job which I take 
quite sincerely, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say historic because this budget that my hon. friend, the 
Minister of Finance, has announced is one of the finest budgets I have seen 
from any government.  This budget responds to the good, efficient 
management of our resources by restraining government spending.  But at the 
same time, this budget provides Saskatchewan people with a higher level of 
protection and service in health and education and agriculture than they 
have experienced before -- ever, Mr. Speaker -- and this has been 
accomplished without one single tax increase, Mr. Speaker.  And I think 
that's an accomplishment, and I am proud to have played a role in 
delivering this budget to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of this province rightfully expect responsible 
management of our resources, and at the same time demands for health, 
education, and agricultural programs continue to rise. 
 
But we can't simply write a blank cheque to be paid for by future 
generations, and it's simply not practical or right, Mr. Speaker, to keep 
on raising taxes.  So instead, we have introduced a number of cost-cutting 
measures: things like rolling back cabinet salaries; freezing government 
growth and spending; in fact cutting budgets in eight departments -- 
cutting budgets in eight departments, Mr. Speaker, by 10 per cent; ending 
the home program; eliminating the gas tax rebate, and others.  And there 
are many others, but the Minister of Finance has already described them in 
detail. 



 

 

 
(1500) 
 
I want to stress that these measures will save the people of the province 
$300 million in the next two years.  That is good management, Mr. Speaker, 
and it is management which allows us to respond to the pressing needs in 
other areas. 
 
Needs in health care, for example.  Once again this budget shows our 
government's tremendous commitment to health care.  We are increasing 
health care spending by $136 million, Mr. Speaker, bringing the total 
health care budget to $1.5 billion -- 1.5 billion, Mr. Speaker.  
Saskatchewan's health care is second to none, and this budget proves that 
our government is determined to keep it that way. 
 
This budget reaffirms our commitment to education as well.  If we want to 
compete and grow and prosper as a province, we must give our people a 
superior education.  Mr. Speaker, this budget does that.  And we have done 
that throughout the last decade.  And we have continued to do it this year 
by allocating $888 million to education, Mr. Speaker.  We will now be 
spending $2,600 for every single elementary and secondary student in the 
province and $8,500 for every university student. 
 
The education budget, Mr. Speaker, accounts for 20 per cent of the total 
budget.  That is a level of commitment and funding the likes of which this 
province has never seen before.  And I believe it's worth every penny, Mr. 
Speaker, because our greatest resource is our people.  Now I could stop 
there because what I have said so far, Mr. Speaker, is impressive enough.  
It could stand on its own. 
 
After a decade filled with drought and low grain prices, low uranium and 
potash prices, we have managed to provide more funding for education and 
health care than ever before.  And I have barely got started, Mr. Speaker.  
Because in this budget the Government of Saskatchewan has put the 
provincial treasury on the line in full support of Saskatchewan farm 
families.  We must stand behind our farm families, Mr. Speaker, because 
even though we managed to expand our manufacturing sector by over 600 per 
cent, and even though we are producing paper, gasoline, turbines, and 
tractors, agriculture is still what makes this province's economy work. 
 
So we have honoured our commitment to agriculture with $400 million in 
spending and $525 million in a spring program for spring seeding, Mr. 
Speaker.  That is the sort of commitment and support that Saskatchewan 
farmers must have to fight the subsidy wars and droughts, and this 
government has provided it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government recognizes the importance of a stable farm 
economy for the entire province's well-being, and we have responded by 
supporting agriculture better than any government in Saskatchewan's 
history. 
 
There are many other good things to talk about in this budget, Mr. Speaker, 
like Consensus Saskatchewan, which will give Saskatchewan people more input 



 

 

into government than any other citizens in the country and possibly the 
world, Mr. Speaker.  And the community development bonds, which I think are 
going to transform almost every community in Saskatchewan.  But I know my 
hon. colleagues will have much more to say about these and other items in 
the budget. 
 
So right now, Mr. Speaker, I'm going to do something a little bit out of 
the ordinary, but something I think it is important for the people and 
yourself to hear, Mr. Speaker.  In past sessions I have asked the hon. 
members opposite if they would put forward their budget based on their 
promises and party policies so that Saskatchewan people could have a look 
at the alternative fiscal plan for the province.  Unfortunately they have 
never done this, which has bothered me a little bit, Mr. Speaker, because 
the NDP say that they want to form government some time.  Heaven forbid.  
Heaven forbid, Mr. Speaker, and I'm very interested to know what sort of a 
budget they would present.  What's more, I'm wondering if there are any 
good, solid ideas these hon. members would have in respect to budgeting, 
ideas that this government maybe could use, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with all that in mind, I've set out to put together the 
NDP budget based on their promises and claims against this government's 
spending and on some of their party resolutions.  Without their 
co-operation, Mr. Speaker, of course it's difficult to be completely 
accurate, but I have been as precise and as fair as I can possibly be.  In 
fact, Mr. Speaker, I think you will see at the end of my remarks that I 
have been more than fair. 
 
I will be tabling documents supporting my remarks after I am done.  And I 
invite the members opposite, I invite the media, to look through my 
numbers, and if they can find something wrong in those numbers, Mr. 
Speaker, I would be pleased to have them show me where I am wrong.  
Because, Mr. Speaker, I have not had access to details of this year's 
budget until last Thursday, so the figures I'm using in this budget for the 
NDP, Mr. Speaker, are from the 1989-90 budget. 
 
The first commitment which came to mind was the Leader of the Opposition's 
promise to eliminate what he says is a $12 billion deficit in 15 years.  
Well, Mr. Speaker, this promise was reported in a March 8 Star-Phoenix 
article, and of course the hon. member has repeated it many times.  The 
easy answer for costing this out is to simply divide $12 billion by 15 
years.  Well that doesn't account for the interest charges along the way, 
Mr. Speaker, and I'm not an accountant and I don't have a fancy calculator 
that factors interest in as we go along.  So I phoned a friend of mine who 
has one of those, and assuming the real interest rate at 5 per cent, the 
opposition would have to make a payment of almost $1.2 billion a year for 
15 years to keep this particular promise.  Well that's a pretty hefty 
payment for the provincial treasury -- $1.2 billion a year for 15 years.  
Okay. 
 
The next thing, Mr. Speaker, that came to mind was the promise by both the 
Leader of the Opposition and the member from Saskatoon University to 
eliminate poverty.  Now this is a pretty tough one to tackle since there 
are many ways to define poverty. 



 

 

 
But what I did was using Statistics Canada on Saskatchewan figures in 1988, 
Mr. Speaker, and the low income cut-off lines defined by StatsCanada for 
the populations of 30,000 to 999,999 -- now that range is one that I've 
noticed the member from Saskatoon University is continuously using, so I 
think that's fair to use his figures, Mr. Speaker -- I used the categories: 
unattached individuals, and one, two, three, four, and five-member 
families.  Now from there it was simply a matter of finding the various 
income levels below the cut-off line, calculating what the government 
payment would be required to each individual family to make up the income 
shortfall, and multiplying that by the number of families in each income 
level, and then adding the totals from each family category. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there's a lot of figures but it's all here and the 
members are welcome to look at it.  All my figures are included.  All my 
figures are included in the documents that I will be tabling, Mr. Speaker.  
And after accounting for a raise in the consumer price index of 5.3 in 
1989, I came up with a total of $481 million per year that the opposition 
would have to pay out to bring Saskatchewan low income earners up to the 
poverty line.  And again, the calculation and statistics will all be tabled 
for the media, for the members opposite to view.  And I hope, Mr. Speaker, 
that they let me know if I am wrong.  I stand by those figures. 
 
Next, Mr. Speaker, I turn to health care to see what the opposition would 
do there.  Well I knew that the NDP has often said they would bring back 
the old dental plan.  And in fact I seem to remember the member from Regina 
Lakeview, just a few days ago, Mr. Speaker, talking about just that very 
thing in the House. 
 
I asked the Department of Health to find a cost for this, and they informed 
me that the old program would cost at least an additional $16.4 million the 
first year.  Mr. Speaker, the same member -- the same member, Mr. Speaker 
-- has also promised to bring back the old prescription drug plan.  That 
would cost an additional $70.6 million a year. 
 
The member opposite has also claimed that our health care system is in a 
crisis and has continually called for more funding.  And I just want to 
read you a quote, Mr. Speaker, from the last session, on page 4267 of 
Hansard where the member says, and I quote: 
 

 . . . we (still) have a health care system that's in crisis.  And 
regardless of what the minister says about his 11 per cent increase, the 
fact of the matter is is that hardly makes up for the (shortfall) . . . 

 
Now I'll admit I was trying to read minds there a little bit, Mr. Speaker.  
But I noticed that if the NDP were not satisfied with 11 per cent increase, 
then it was a pretty safe bet that they would increase the health care 
budget at least to 12 per cent -- one decimal.  And to do that, Mr. 
Speaker, would require an additional $165 million. 
 
Then I turned to education, and the first thing I found was an 1989 NDP 
Policy Commission Reports stating that the kindergarten to grade 12 
student-teacher ratio -- and I quote -- ". . . must be a priority for 



 

 

funding . . ."  Okay?  Obviously they plan to reduce that ratio which now 
stands at 16.5, Mr. Speaker, 16.5.  Again it was impossible to read minds, 
but I think all of us can agree that reducing that ratio to 16.0 is a very 
possible option and the NDP will follow that . . . will follow.  And that 
additional cost, Mr. Speaker, is $14 million a year for 0.5 -- very 
reasonable I believe.  And I'm trying to be very conservative here. 
 
And I want both the opposition and the media to note how reasonable I am 
trying to be.  When I assessed these budgetary commitments, Mr. Speaker, I 
did not go to the extreme and say, they must want to decrease the ratio to 
1:1 or any nonsense like that.  Rather I took the nearest possible ratio. 
 
Likewise in the health budget, Mr. Speaker, I did not say that they 
promised to increase it by 40 per cent, although considering the arguments 
members make, and about real increases over and above inflation, I could 
reasonably have done so.  Rather I used the closest incremental of only 1 
per cent.  So I am trying very hard to be reasonable and fair, Mr. Speaker. 
 
To continue then with the NDP budget.  In my search on pages 564 and 872 of 
last session's Hansard, I found that both the member from Saskatoon South 
and the member from Saskatoon Nutana claimed that universities require a 
5.3 per cent raise in operating grants.  That's in addition, Mr. Speaker, 
to the 2 per cent we had already given them.  That would require an 
additional $7.9 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I've also found a very curious entry in the NDP's 1989 Policy 
Commission Reports, where on page 21 they state that, and I quote: 
 

 The people of Saskatchewan support a full, public funded . . . educational 
system . . . 

 
Well I found that a little puzzling because the only thing not publicly 
funded now are private vocational schools and post-secondary tuition.  And 
since we have not heard the Leader of the Opposition promise to pay tuition 
fees since the early 1970s, I thought they had given that idea up long ago. 
 
Not so, Mr. Speaker.  Here we have the NDP again calling for public to pay 
post-secondary tuition, which adds another $31.5 million for university 
fees and $3.8 million for SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 
and Technology) fees to our total, Mr. Speaker.  Notice, Mr. Speaker, that 
I did not include the millions of dollars it would take to fully fund all 
the private vocational schools in the province.  I am trying to be as fair 
as I can, Mr. Speaker, and as conservative as I can with this budget. 
 
Now on page 4373 of last session's Hansard, the member from Saskatoon 
University promised to implement a school lunch program.  And in the NDP 
caucus news release accompanying that report on hunger and poverty, the NDP 
advocated a breakfast and lunch program, not only for schools but for day 
care as well. 
 
And I want the members opposite to note that once again I am being as 
conservative as possible with these numbers, and ignored the costs of day 
care breakfast and lunches, Mr. Speaker.  And I had a little trouble 



 

 

calculating the cost just for schools alone.  The problem is deciding how 
many children will we feed.  Well where do we draw the line between hunger 
. . . between a hungry child and one who isn't?  And what grade do we stop, 
Mr. Speaker?  Well I settled on the cost for a universal program, which is 
I think what the member from Saskatoon University has argued for in the 
past, and that would cost $67.6 million a year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1515) 
 
Now finally, Mr. Speaker, I noted that in this year's budget we have 
increased education funding by some $47 million.  And since the opposition 
continuously claims that education is underfunded, I think it is reasonable 
to expect that they would increase the education budget by at least that 
much.  I think they would go as far as we did, Mr. Speaker, 47 million. 
 
And incidentally, we have also increased our agricultural spending by 253 
million.  And based on the opposition's repeated calls for more funding in 
this area, I thought it reasonable to add the same amount to their 
agricultural budget, Mr. Speaker, their agricultural spending.  And after 
the performance in question period, I'm wondering if they're even 
interested in agriculture, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In other words, in these two areas I only assumed that the NDP would do at 
least as much as our government. 
 
Moving on, I found a call for -- and I quote -- "the creation of an 
environmental industry by establishing an Institute of the Environment" in 
the 1989 NDP Policy Commission Reports.  The cost estimates for such an 
institute range from 20 million to 100 million, Mr. Speaker, so I split the 
difference and I settled on a figure of $60 million. 
 
Moving to Social Services, I found numbers calling for increased assistance 
rates, but this NDP budget addresses many of those by eliminating poverty.  
However, Mr. Speaker, on page 4485 of last session's Hansard, I noticed 
that the member for Saskatoon University called on the government to 
subsidize day care for middle income earners, and I found, Mr. Speaker, 
that that would require an additional $7.6 million a year. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, I could not help but remember that the member from 
Regina Rosemont stated in a 1988 interview that if elected the NDP 
government would de-commission the Rafferty-Alameda dam project.  Now 
judging from their joy at the project being halted, I don't think their 
plans have changed.  The costs involved here are very hard to estimate 
since no accurate figures detailing how much has been spent are readily 
available.  As well, it is impossible to predict the cost of the lawsuits 
that would undoubtedly follow such an action. 
 
However, to be as fair as possible, Mr. Speaker, I kept my estimate very 
low and arrived at a figure of about $20 million.  Now this figure assumes 
that at least $10 million of the project has been completed.  The cost of 
tearing down and hauling away the concrete and re-landscaping the area 
would easily equal double the original cost.  Since lawsuits have not been 
included at all, I think the members opposite would have to agree with me 



 

 

that $20 million total is more than reasonable, much more than reasonable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you add up all the program spending I have talked about, 
you end up with a total of $2.4 billion -- 2.4.  Now not bad, except when 
you add it to the existing $4.47 billion of government spending, and that 
was only at the 1989-90 level, we get a total NDP budget of $6.87 billion, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- How much was that? 
 
Mr. Britton: -- $6.8 billion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, just so it is understood how reasonable I am being in 
preparing this budget for the NDP, be clear that I have not included their 
vague commitments to higher salaries for teachers, nurses, doctors, public 
servants, and almost all other groups who are involved in labour 
negotiations at any one given time. 
 
I have also not included increased cost from promises to provide increased 
funding to non-government organizations such as Planned Parenthood and the 
Status of Women and the various other advocacy groups, nor for the service 
organizations who have been promised more money, including every one from 
woman shelters to humane societies.  I left that out, Mr. Speaker.  I'm 
trying to be fair, and I think I have been. 
 
Nor, Mr. Speaker, have I included the many big-time commitments contained 
in the large number of resolutions passed at NDP conventions, which the 
Leader of the Opposition has repeatedly stated that he is bound by them.  
He is bound by the resolutions. 
 
So while he is bound by those resolutions and bound by many, many promises, 
I wanted to be extremely reasonable and present only a bare bones budget 
for the members opposite.  And yet this bare bones budget is a budget of 
almost $6.9 million which, using last year's revenue figures of 4.083 
billion, will give the NDP budget a deficit of $2.82 billion, Mr. Speaker 
-- a deficit of over $2.8 billion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And again, this budget I have calculated here today doesn't even include 
all the commitments and programs the opposition have promised.  I haven't 
used them all.  This from a party whose leader has promised to balance the 
budget.  And, Mr. Speaker, he has balanced the budget and eliminate $12 
billion in debt.  Obviously the member opposite will have to cut programs. 
 
So if we continue this exercise, let's suppose that the opposition do as 
good a job as we have in this year's budget and manage to save $300 million 
over two years by restricting government spending.  I realize that the hon. 
members opposite have opposed those cuts, but I want to be as fair as 
possible with this budget, so I'm going to give them a bit of a freebie 
here, Mr. Speaker.  Subtracting 150 million from their budget will give us 
a new total of $6.75 billion.  That's their budget.  Still an enormous 
budget, Mr. Speaker.  The opposition clearly must cut more programs. 
 
Well when we're looking for indications of what the opposition might 



 

 

eliminate, I ran across the following quote from the opposition leader, and 
I quote: 
 

 We have nine economic development departments under the PCs.  It's just 
been reduced to four.  Four.  That's ridiculous.  I mean, we can reduce 
that to one and it should be. 

 
And that was Cable Regina, Nightviews, March 20, 1990 -- very recent, Mr. 
Speaker.  So I have to accept the leader at his word.  I'm not at all sure 
what the Leader of the Opposition meant, but we'll accept him at his word. 
 
This government has already consolidated the departments of economic 
development and tourism, science and technology, public participation, 
trade and investment -- all into one department. 
 
Now I cannot believe that the opposition would be so foolish as to 
eliminate the departments of Rural Development, Consumer and Commercial 
Affairs, and Energy and Mines.  But once again, I have no way of reading 
their minds, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So to be generous, I cut four large departments.  I decided to cut the 
entire 1990 budgets for Economic Development and Tourism, economic 
diversification, and the investment fund; the Department of Public 
Participation; the Department of Trade and Investment.  These cuts would 
total $71.3 million and bring the NDP budget down to $6.68 billion.  But 
these cuts would also put many, many people out of work and still leave a 
massive deficit, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now and once again, just stress the fact that I'm being generous, because I 
do not think these departments the Leader of the Opposition wanted to get 
rid of, since three of them are the ones that were already consolidated.  
But it would seem too Draconian to eliminate the departments of Rural 
Development, Consumer and Commercial Affairs, and Energy and Mines. 
 
But I think we have to wait to hear from the horse's mouth, Mr. Speaker.  
And again, I do invite the Leader of the Opposition to be precise in 
exactly which four government departments he plans to eliminate. 
 
It is important to know how much money it would save, how many people it 
would put out of work, and what essential services he would deny to the 
people of the province.  And I think rural Saskatchewan would be very 
interested to know if he thinks their Department of Rural Development 
should be destroyed.  Be that as it may, Mr. Speaker, I have tried to be 
generous, and since the hon. members opposite have already cut $223.2 
million in one year, I cannot see many more cuts are possible, but he has 
identified a couple and we should put them forward for what they're worth. 
 
The member from Riversdale said he would save $48 million by cancelling 
advertising.  I find that very interesting, and we will, for this exercise, 
simply accept his number, since it is his budget.  But I also think it is 
important to recognize the impact of this decision -- no more advertising 
for government tenders.  That kind of contradicts the call for more open 
government, Mr. Speaker, and more open tendering. 



 

 

 
No more advertising for Crown corporations, and guess what I think about 
that, Mr. Speaker.  Imagine if the current government told SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance) that it could no longer advertise and 
it started losing business to its private sector competitors, imagine what 
the Leader of the Opposition would say then.  He would say the government 
is trying to privatize SGI by attrition. 
 
But he has promised to eliminate advertising.  That means senior citizens 
will no longer be informed about when it's time to apply for their heritage 
grants.  And I suppose that might mean there would be even a little more 
money saved for the NDP budget.  But just how much money is unpredictable, 
so we just can't budget for that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It would mean the children's reading campaign would be cancelled, the 
Lights On For Life campaign would be cancelled, and Everyone Wins campaign 
would be cancelled.  And these advertising campaigns, Mr. Speaker, were not 
created at the whim of the government, but at the earnest request and 
active participation of organizations such as Saskatchewan Safety Council, 
the Alcohol and Drug Abuse Commission, and some 20 health organizations, 
and on and on. 
 
But the opposition says it can get 48 million by attacking these groups, 
and it is their budget so we must account for their promises.  The $48 
million in cuts bring the NDP budget down to $6.63 billion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Finally, the Leader of the Opposition has said he would reduce the number 
of cabinet ministers.  And I'd just like to point out, Mr. Speaker, that 
the member for Riversdale does not have to wait for government to do 
something on salaries and benefits.  This government has already cut back 
the salaries of its members and the opposition has remained silent, opting 
instead to keep their salary increases when they have the option to reduce 
them. 
 
And the government has already passed regulations to prevent members on the 
government side from taking severance and going to other government jobs.  
But the opposition has kept this possibility for themselves, so there is no 
need to wait if he is really sincere. 
 
But let's take him at his word and let's totally eliminate salaries for 
cabinet and legislative secretaries, Mr. Speaker.  It would amount to a 
savings of about $818,000 a year, which still leaves the NDP budget with a 
deficit of over $2.5 billion.  Now obviously the only option left is 
taxation and very heavy taxation at that. 
 
The following quote from the Hon. Leader of the Opposition clearly shows 
that increased taxation is part of his plan for government.  And I quote: 
 

 . . . (If) you want to take a look at whether or not there are any sources 
of taxation in the large resource area . . . 

 
That is Cable Regina Nightviews, March 20, 1990.  They will look at 
resources of taxation resource area.  They will look at the sources for 



 

 

taxation. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I can predict what the opposition response to the budget 
I have described here will be.  And if they gain power, I know the first 
place they will look for more revenue -- from the oil industry in this 
province . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I hear agreement from the 
opposition, Mr. Speaker, so let's go on with what we have in here. 
 
(1530) 
 
In fact the opposition has already claimed that they could have taken $2 
billion a year or more from the oil industry over the last eight years.  
But, Mr. Speaker, the opposition is wrong.  There has been no $2 billion 
more for that opposition to take, or anything close to that. 
 
The fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, that under the present oil royalty 
structure this government has received $863 million more in oil revenue 
than we would have under the royalty system used by the NDP in 1981.  Now 
we have achieved this by using a royalty structure that has stimulated 
tremendous growth in the oil industry.  And since our election in 1982, 
there have been 7,000 wells drilled, 960 drilled in 1989 alone.  In 1982 
there were only nine oil wells drilled.  Since 1982 $1.9 billion has been 
invested in Saskatchewan's oil industry, and an average of 5,000 jobs have 
been created each year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our oil royalty system has stimulated growth in the oil 
industry, and in turn we have increased oil revenues for the provincial 
treasury significantly and created thousands of jobs for Saskatchewan 
families.  Stifling the oil industry with large tax increases would be 
disastrous for families and small businesses all throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I used to be a bulk fuel dealer and I know how the large oil 
companies react to increased taxes.  You only have to look at the refinery 
that used to be in this city.  The company I worked for moved that refinery 
out of this province, took 400 jobs with it because of the excessive tax 
load the previous government had on the oil industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they vote with their feet.  They either shut down all 
exploration or they leave for greener pastures.  The ones left behind are 
the small producers.  And what happens to them, Mr. Speaker?  They go 
bankrupt.  So in reality there are no huge tax revenues to be taken from 
the oil industry, which brings us back to the original problem of finding 
enough money to finance this $2.5 billion deficit. 
 
But even if we accept this fantasy that somehow over the past eight years 
the opposition could have extracted two additional billion dollars from the 
resource sector, let us see what that impact would be.  Two billion dollars 
divided by eight is 250 million.  So we can up the revenue side of this 
budget by 250 million and come up with a deficit now of $2.25 billion, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
As you can see, I'm giving them every advantage I can.  But the opposition 
leader, Mr. Deputy Speaker, has promised a balanced budget, so he must cut 



 

 

more.  I know the member will support this move and I'm going to assume 
that he would cut the $64 million investment in Saferco fertilizer program. 
 
Still the opposition have a deficit of 2.2 billion, Mr. Speaker.  How is 
the Leader of the Opposition going to balance the budget with a shortfall 
of $2.2 billion? 
 
Well we have the answer, Mr. Speaker, in his remarks to business groups in 
Regina and Saskatoon.  In the question and answer session at the North 
Saskatchewan business association on March 7 of this year, the Leader of 
the Opposition outlined his plan for eliminating the debt. 
 
He mentioned, Mr. Speaker, the things that I have already covered such as 
advertising and salaries, and then he concluded, and I quote: 
 

 Fourthly is the question that I'll only mention but you'll know why I'll 
only mention it, and not say any more about it, (it) is of course 
additional revenue by way of taxes. 

 
Additional revenue by way of taxes, Mr. Speaker.  That is the source of the 
$2.2 billion shortfall, Mr. Speaker -- taxes. 
 
Now according to this year's budget papers, our entire tax revenue now 
amounts to only slightly over $2 billion.  In order to balance his budget, 
the member from Riversdale will have to raise Saskatchewan taxes by over 
100 per cent -- over 100 per cent -- more than double the taxes that 
Saskatchewan people pay today.  And I guess, Mr. Speaker, we can say the 
Leader of the Opposition is running to become the governor of "tax-us".  
Simply put, Mr. Speaker, the cost of the opposition's plans for 
Saskatchewan taxpayers would bankrupt this province and drive all 
Saskatchewan people into poverty. 
 
Now I can just imagine what the response to the speech will be.  Well, Mr. 
Speaker, they will say that I've inflated the cost and unfairly interpreted 
their statements.  Well, Mr. Speaker, that's not true.  I will be tabling 
my documents and I will be tabling my numbers so they can go through that 
because in fact they are correct.  Because, Mr. Speaker, in fact I have 
completely ignored many NDP promises, like full compensation for all 
involved in the collapse of Principal Trust, and full scale public 
inquiries into everything which has any possibility of being controversial, 
and a $500 million grant, not a loan, Mr. Speaker, but a grant to 
agriculture in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as I have pointed out several times in my speech, I consistently 
selected the lower cost estimate when compiling my figures.  Mr. Speaker, I 
know that the members opposite will say I'm being ridiculous to suggest 
that they would pay $1.2 billion on the debt each year.  But even if the 
member from Riversdale breaks his promise to eliminate the debt in 15 
years, he would still be faced with a deficit of $1 billion -- $1 billion 
to be taken from the taxpayers of this province each and every year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Progressive Conservative government budget that the 
Minister of Finance tabled in this House is an effective, practical, and 



 

 

one which addresses the reality of our situation, and finds a balance 
between this province needs and its resources.  It too includes a deficit, 
but a much more rational one of $363 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Personally I do not believe in deficit budgeting, Mr. Speaker, but I 
realize that the negative economic influence that have faced us in recent 
years have made it a necessity.  We cannot sacrifice our health care system 
nor our education system, and we must protect our Saskatchewan farm 
families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget does this and much more, while at the same time 
keeping expenditures as low as possible through careful, efficient use of 
our resources.  I am particularly pleased, Mr. Speaker, that the budget 
addresses concerns of all citizens.  It cannot be called a rural budget or 
an urban budget.  It dramatically increases spending in health and 
education, and it firmly and clearly carries out our commitment -- the 
commitment of the Premier, the commitment of this government -- to protect 
the farm families of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I support this government . . . this budget.  I'm proud to 
support this budget, and I know it will help Saskatchewan to continue to 
grow and prosper throughout the decade ahead. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the member from Riversdale can show me how he can balance 
his budget, considering all the promises he has made, I will go home and 
immediately put a big window in the east wall of my house, because the last 
time a miracle like this happened, a star rose in the East, and I don't 
want to miss it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
 DMr. Britton: -- Thank you.  I will be supporting the budget, Mr. Speaker, 
and thank you very much for listening. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Let me first of all say that it is 
a privilege to speak in this legislature once more.  It's not a particular 
privilege to speak on this budget because I don't think the budget offers 
very much to the ordinary people of Saskatchewan and I will point that out 
during my deliberations. 
 
The member from Wilkie who just spoke, Mr. Speaker, said, I wonder what the 
response of the members opposite will be.  I can tell him what the response 
will be to that drivel and voodoo remarks that he made -- there won't be 
any response to his particular remarks. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- It's very interesting, Mr. Speaker, that he spent about five 
minutes, five minutes on the budget presented by his Minister of Finance 
and he spent the 45 minutes telling the people of Saskatchewan what he 
thought, what he thought the NDP would put forward. 



 

 

 
And we saw, Mr. Speaker, in question period how ridiculous that member 
could be.  Worked out an arrangement with the Premier of this province, 
worked out an arrangement with the Premier of this province to ask a 
question on the NFU and the Leader of the Opposition's position on 
agriculture.  It wouldn't have been so bad, Mr. Speaker, but the Premier 
had the written response before him.  The Premier had the written response 
before him. 
 
I notice, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of Finance again is talking from 
his feet.  He had an hour and a half the other day.  He had an hour and a 
half the other day and he blew it the other night, and now he feels he 
wants to get a second chance. 
 
Well I can tell him, he doesn't have to worry about the member from Wilkie 
taking his place because with that kind of voodoo economics that he brought 
forward this afternoon, the member's only concern should be that if he 
moves five feet further back he will right out of this legislature, and 
that is what's going to happen to him in the next election, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to take this opportunity today to wish a very happy 
anniversary to one of my constituents.  She is celebrating her 29th 
anniversary today, and I wish I could be with her but I had to speak in the 
House here today.  And I do want to wish her a very happy anniversary and a 
good day, and I will be seeing her on the weekend. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
An Hon. Member: -- That's your wife . . . 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- That is my wife, you're right . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . and as the member opposite said, she's a lovely lady, and she 
certainly is.  She chose very wisely. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do want to this afternoon address a few words to the 
constituents of Saskatoon South who I have had the privilege to represent 
for approximately 15 years.  But, Mr. Speaker, I do want to talk a bit 
about gerrymandering and the drastic effects on democracy of a government 
that does away with the principle of democracy, and that is representation 
by population; or one person, one vote. 
 
We experienced this in 1971 in Nutana South -- that's what it was called at 
that time -- when the then Thatcher government, aided and abetted by the 
present Minister of Justice, gerrymandered all the seats or most of the 
seats in Saskatchewan, mine particularly, Mr. Speaker.  And I can remember 
very well when I put out my pamphlet on gerrymandering and I got a couple 
of phone calls from Liberals, and they said to me: look, Mr. Rolfes, that 
can't be true; no government would do that. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, order.  The members aren't to use names of 
members, even of your own name, during your speech. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Speaker, they said to me, yes, they said to me that, 



 

 

look, a government simply wouldn't do that.  No government, no government 
would take away the democratic principle on which this country has been 
built.  But they did it, Mr. Speaker, in 1971, and I'll tell you what they 
did to my seat at that time. 
 
We had 4,500 voters in that seat.  They took the good portion of the west 
side of my seat, which was good NDP support, and threw it in with the 
member from Riversdale who had 16,000 voters -- 16,000 voters.  But, Mr. 
Speaker, the people, the people of Saskatoon South -- Nutana South at that 
time -- said, enough is enough, and they elected me in 1971. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the things that we did was we set up an independent 
boundaries commission to make absolutely certain that this would not happen 
again, that the principle of democracy would be protected.  And what did 
the government opposite do?  They simply did away with the independent 
boundaries commission, set up a commission, Mr. Speaker, on which they had 
their own political hack on it who drew the boundaries.  And that, Mr. 
Speaker, was a hack again of the Minister of Justice today, the same 
individual -- the same individual Mr. Minister, the member from Lumsden, 
who did the gerrymandering in 1971 again is doing it today. 
 
There is no reason, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the constituents of 
Saskatoon South, there is no reason why Clarence Avenue should be the 
dividing line in my constituency, absolutely none. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what they have done is very calculatingly they have 
gerrymandered the constituencies, not only in Saskatoon, but we can see it 
in the province throughout rural Saskatchewan.  And what they have done, 
Mr. Speaker, they have given 35 seats to rural Saskatchewan and only 29 to 
urban Saskatchewan, but there are more people in urban Saskatchewan. 
 
The very principle of democracy has been abandoned by these people.  And, 
Mr. Speaker, I think the people again will rise up in this province and say 
to the members opposite, enough is enough. 
 
(1545) 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Speaker, the Finance minister said the other day, and I 
quote: 
 

 We could have followed the Government of Canada's example and shifted our 
fiscal problems onto others. 

 
And then he went on and did exactly that.  Then he went on and did exactly 
that!  In the city of Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, we will be affected by 
millions of dollars -- millions of dollars that should be coming to our 
city are not coming. 
 
To do away with the transit subsidy, Mr. Speaker, just does not make any 
sense.  In a time when we want to conserve, when we want to protect our 
earth and the natural resources that are in it, instead of doing away with 



 

 

the subsidy as this government has done to transit, they should've 
increased it so that the local governments could reduce the fares and we'd 
have more and more people using the transit system and fewer and fewer 
people using their own vehicles.  That's what we should have done.  But oh, 
no.  They did away with it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again we see this government, because they have very few seats 
in the urban areas -- one I believe in Regina and one in Saskatoon . . . 
two in Regina and one in Saskatoon . . . actually only one in Regina.  Mr. 
Speaker, that is why they're doing it.  That's exactly why they're doing 
this.  They don't care about the urban people.  And this Premier time and 
time again has tried to put a division between urban and rural people -- 
time and time again.  Time and time again he has put labourer against 
farmer.  It is divide . . . rule and divide.  That's what he works on, this 
Premier has. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what had the minister has done?  He says he has been very 
generous with school boards and universities.  Let me tell him, 3 per cent 
is not very generous when inflation is over 5 per cent; 3 per cent to the 
school boards, 3 per cent to the universities, and 3 per cent to SIAST is 
not being very generous. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do want to comment a little bit about libraries a little 
later.  But I want to tell the people of Saskatchewan that when you average 
0.4 per cent over five years, less than one-half of one per cent for 
provincial libraries, no one in their right mind -- no one in their right 
mind -- would come to the conclusion that these people are supportive of 
libraries in this province.  No one. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they just simply have taken the wrong priorities in this 
budget.  The money is there.  The member from Wilkie says, but where are 
you going to get the money?  While he was speaking, Mr. Speaker, I did a 
very quick calculation on Weyerhaeuser -- just on Weyerhaeuser.  And the 
deal that this government has struck with Weyerhaeuser over 30 years, not 
counting the 20 kilometres of roads that we will have to build, not 
counting those, what they have done is given $432 million in subsidies to 
Weyerhaeuser. 
 
And how do I come to that?  Well the contract states that they will give 
$240 million at 8 per cent for 30 years.  Well no one gets money at 8 per 
cent.  Not even our farmers get money from these people at 8 per cent; they 
charge them ten and three-quarters.  But the multinational corporation, 
Weyerhaeuser, gets money at 8 per cent for 30 years. 
 
If they were going to pay, if they were going to pay the going rate of 14 
per cent today, if that was calculated over 30 years they would have to pay 
an additional $432 million.  That's how we're subsidizing Weyerhaeuser.  
Cargill.  Cargill is exactly the same thing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So when the farmers, when the farmers say to this government, yes you have 
money, they are absolutely right -- they are absolutely right.  Why, Mr. 
Speaker, you yourself, you're a farmer.  Why should you pay ten and 
three-quarter per cent?  Do you have more money than Weyerhaeuser?  I don't 



 

 

think you have; something I don't know then if you do have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Weyerhaeuser is one of the richest forest companies in United 
States.  Do you think that's fair for them to get money at 8 per cent and 
you pay ten and three-quarters?  Surely you don't, and neither do the 
members opposite if they were to only think for a moment and have the 
interest of the people of Saskatchewan at heart. 
 
What did they do to home owners?  They raised the interest rate to ten and 
three-quarter per cent, but Weyerhaeuser 8 per cent.  Now where is the 
justice?  Where, Mr. Speaker, are they coming from?  There are many other 
areas, Mr. Speaker, where we certainly . . . mismanagement and waste. 
 
We found out today, and you were in public accounts yesterday, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker.  Found out yesterday, $2.7 million expenditure, 95 per cent of 
which there was no legislative authority -- none; no legislative authority.  
And when the Premier in question period today was asked about it he took 
notice.  He took notice on all four questions because he doesn't want to 
answer about the corruption and mismanagement and waste of his government 
over the last eight years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has been the incompetence -- it's not the province, it's 
not the economic conditions, it's the incompetence of this Premier and the 
incompetence of the cabinet ministers opposite that have run this province 
into the hole of $4.5 billion in our current account.  It's the 
incompetence opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can understand why people are angry, why people are 
frustrated when they see the waste and the mismanagement and the 
wrong-headed decisions and policies of this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why, why, for example -- and I want to go back a few years -- 
why, for example, in 1986 when the production loan program came in for 
farmers at $25 an acre, why weren't cabinet ministers excluded from that?  
You can't tell me a cabinet minister making $80,000 needs additional 
subsidy from the poor in this province.  Why should the personal minimum 
wage, or why should the welfare individual subsidize a cabinet minister 
who's making 80 grand a year?  Why should he subsidize the Premier, who 
also took the production loan program?  He indicated that himself in a news 
conference.  Why?  And the people are asking over and over.  Why should 
this happen?  It shouldn't, Mr. Speaker, it shouldn't happen.  And when we 
form the government, Mr. Speaker, those things will be done away with, and 
we will bring back justice for the ordinary citizen in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they are fed up with corruption, they are fed up with waste, 
they are fed up with incompetence.  And it's time, Mr. Speaker, that we 
call an election and let the people decide. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to address a few words now on the speech made by the 
Minister of Education yesterday, and I will elaborate more on education 
later on in my remarks.  But it was interesting to note, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, it was very interesting to note when the Minister of Education 
spoke yesterday there was not a word on agriculture -- not one word.  There 



 

 

wasn't one word on privatization.  And you know what happened in this 
legislature last year in privatization, and it was only because the people 
rebelled and the people said no to this government that we saved SaskPower. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- It was the efforts, Mr. Speaker, the combined efforts of the 
people of this province and the opposition that stopped this government 
from privatizing SaskPower.  And I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, should they 
win the next election again, SaskPower will be gone.  SaskPower will be 
gone and so will SGI be gone.  All they're doing is biding their time, 
hoping that they can sneak through, through the next election, not talk 
anything about privatization. 
 
And I notice, Mr. Speaker, that the member from Regina South last year 
spoke well over an hour on privatization; not one word in his speech in the 
legislature the other day, not one word on privatization.  But he is 
committed to privatization, and should he be a member of the government 
side next time, he will do everything he can to privatize SaskPower and to 
privatize SGI. 
 
And I say to the people of Saskatchewan, just because they don't talk about 
it now, don't be fooled again.  The Premier last time said in the 1986 
election, we will not privatize SaskPower.  What did he do?  The first 
opportunity he got he tried to privatize it.  And I say to the people of 
Saskatchewan, congratulations to you.  You went out there.  You signed the 
petitions.  You supported the opposition and we stopped this government in 
its tracks. 
 
But I note that the Minister of Education did not speak about agriculture 
or privatization, not one word from the Minister of Education about the 
debt of this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it's advantageous to review where these people came from, 
what they inherited when they came to power in 1982.  And the member from 
Regina South knows well that there was $139 million in the kitty when he 
took over, signed by Bob Andrew, the then minister of Finance, signed 
saying that there was $139 million.  And I know the member from Regina 
South, deep down in his heart agrees with me, but he won't say that 
publicly.  But I know he agrees with me because I believe he's an honest 
individual. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what have they done to this province?  What have 
they done to this province?  Mr. Speaker, I want to tell the member from 
Regina Wascana what he and his colleagues have done to this province.  
Instead of a surplus of $139 million in our current account, in our 
consolidated account, you now have a deficit of $4.369 billion, over $4,300 
per man, woman, and child -- $4.369 billion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Not only that, Mr. Speaker, what they've done in the long-term debt . . . 
the long-term debt has increased by about $9.8 billion under this 
government -- 9.8 billion.  The total debt of this province in 1982 was 
only 3.3 billion; 3,300 per man, woman, and child, the lowest in Canada. 



 

 

 
Mr. Speaker, I noticed last night on the American news that the Americans 
were bemoaning the fact that they had a national debt amounting to the 
trillions of dollars.  In fact they said that for every man, woman, and 
child it was $12,000, and they thought that they were the highest indebted 
people in this world. 
 
But I have news for the Americans.  Oh no.  Grant Devine is first.  Pardon 
me.  Pardon me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I apologize. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, I apologize.  The Premier of this 
province is number one in that category too.  He has indebted, he has 
indebted the people of this province to the tune of 13 to $14,000 for every 
man, woman, and child -- 13 to $14,000.  And I can't be more specific, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, because we don't have a look at all the details in the 
budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member also, the Minister of Education who represents the 
seat of Mayfair in Saskatoon, not one word about his city of Saskatoon; not 
one word did he speak about what this government has done for Saskatoon.  
And I don't blame him.  I don't blame him because he didn't do very much 
for the city of Saskatoon.  And, Mr. Speaker, if I was the Minister of 
Education in his position, I wouldn't speak about it either. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to now turn to agriculture.  I'll spend a few 
minutes on agriculture.  And I want to do that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because 
I've had some very personal experiences over the last two or three years in 
what has happened in the agricultural situation.  I think it is well-known 
that I do own some land and I don't mind saying so.  I don't farm it any 
more; I've rented it out.  And I've rented it, Mr. Speaker, out to my 
brother-in-law for the taxes and little more, because I know the situation 
that he is in.  What . . . the agriculture crisis in this province is 
ripping families apart, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and the debt must be taken care 
of. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, what this budget did for agriculture was to make the 
situation even worse.  The problem out there is about a $6 billion debt.  
You don't resolve that problem by saying to the farmers, here's another 
$525 million at ten and three-quarters per cent, and put yourself further 
in debt.  That is not a solution. 
 
(1600) 
 
What we needed and what the farmers needed was some cash -- real, hard, 
cold cash is what they needed.  To say to a farmer that's 200 or $300,000 
in debt, borrow another 50,000 or borrow another 20,000, is not a solution.  
And that's exactly what the farmers opposite have come up with.  It's 
exactly what the members came up with on the other side. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said, what we needed was debt relief, not more debt 
increase.  What we needed was debt restructuring.  And it's incumbent upon 



 

 

this Minister of Agriculture, the Premier, to go down to Ottawa and 
convince eastern Canada . . . and the associate deputy minister of 
Agriculture, to go down there and convince them that agriculture is an 
integral part of Canada and that they have an obligation to support 
Saskatchewan and the prairie provinces.  And you don't do that by adding 
more debt to the farmers at ten and three-quarter per cent. 
 
The least you could have done is said, all right, we'll treat you as we 
treated Weyerhaeuser and we'll give it to you at 8 per cent.  Why at ten 
and three-quarters, when you've got lots of money for Weyerhaeuser?  Mr. 
Speaker, what farmers need is a reduction in the high input costs that they 
have today.  The input costs are simply too large.  And the expenses 
involved in fertilizers and chemicals and machinery and fuel are simply too 
significant, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for the price of the commodity that they 
get. 
 
And the last thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the high interest rates.  I 
don't know why we can't go back to the early '60s in this country.  I 
bought my house, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at $13,650 -- it's a 1,200 square foot 
home -- and at an interest rate, I want to tell the minister from Rosthern, 
at a fixed interest rate of 6 per cent for 25 years. 
 
Why can't we, why can't we today say to the financial institutions that 
they must.  The federal government could pass legislation which says that 
the finance institutions must make available to each individual farmer a 
certain amount of money, let's say 250 or $300,000 at 8 per cent, fixed 
interest rates.  You say that to the financial institutions.  We did it in 
the '60s.  Why can't we do that to small-business people?  Also 250 or 
$300,000 at 8 per cent. 
 
The financial institutions, the banks have made millions and millions of 
dollars in the last few years, and I know the members opposite will agree 
with me, while farmers have gone bankrupt. 
 
We should apply that same principle, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to home owners.  
Why can't we say to home owners today, you can buy a house at $100,000, 
fixed interest rate of 8 per cent for 25 years.  Why can't we do that?  
That's what I'd like to see the associate deputy minister of Agriculture go 
to Ottawa and fight for us.  And you'll get some support on this side of 
the House if you come through with such a policy from the federal 
government. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that did not happen.  That did not happen and that 
doesn't seem to be a policy of this government.  And therefore, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, you don't see any action from the federal government in this 
regard. 
 
I say to the financial institutions that certainly, certainly, they have 
made sufficient profits on the backs of small-business people, on the backs 
of home owners, on the backs of farmers, and surely they can forgo some of 
those profits in hard, difficult economic times and make those fixed 
interest rates available to farmers and small businesses and home owners.  
If we had the will, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there's a way of doing it. 



 

 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I wish you would ask the member from Lloydminster to 
please not interrupt while I am speaking. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to now turn to another item, and that is the 
item on private vocational schools.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have now for a 
number of weeks talked to the Minister of Education on private vocational 
schools.  We have a very serious situation out there.  Literally dozens of 
people are being ripped off by private vocational schools. 
 
I have written to the minister.  The member from Prince Albert three years 
ago, three years ago when he was the critic for post-secondary education, 
asked of the then minister of Education, the now Minister of Finance, that 
he had to do something about our private vocational schools.  Nothing was 
done until 1989 when he set up a committee, and that committee is still 
studying the situation. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I get annoyed, and we should all get annoyed, when 
people on welfare are encouraged by the Minister of Social Services to take 
programs in private vocational schools and those programs aren't worth the 
paper they are written on.  They aren't worth the paper they are written 
on, and I'll tell you why. 
 
First of all, there's no prerequisites required in some of these private 
vocational schools.  Number two, the staff simply are not qualified.  In 
some instances, I want to tell the members opposite, in some instances the 
staff person takes the class in the morning and teaches the class in the 
afternoon.  These are qualified staff people? 
 
Now I've noticed, I noticed in the Minister of Education's speech in this 
House that he said all qualifications of staff are perused by the 
Department of Education.  Well I say to the Minister of Education, if that 
is the case then he better do a better job and his officials better do a 
better job. 
 
So we don't have any prerequisite.  If, for example, grade 12 is required 
to get into a program, they don't even ask whether you have grade 12, and 
they don't. 
 
If, for example, you go for a security . . . a private investigation, they 
don't even ask whether you've had a record.  A student came to me the other 
day.  He had gone through the security and private investigation course in 
Saskatoon.  He had received a loan from the Department of Education and he 
couldn't get a job.  Of course he couldn't get a job; he can't get bonded; 
he's got a criminal record, and yet they've given him a loan from the 
Department of Education. 
 
In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I will pursue this in estimates, the 
Minister of Education, in a letter he wrote to me, indicated that $22.2 
million of student loans went to private vocational schools last year.  
That is where a lot of the increase in expenditures for education is going, 
into private vocational schools that are very . . . it's very dubious of 
the value of the certificate that the individual receives.  In many 



 

 

instances, when they take that certificate out into the business world, the 
business industry simply laughs at them. 
 
And what is so sad, Mr. Speaker, is that these people on welfare . . . I 
had a meeting with 17 people a week ago last Saturday who asked to meet 
with me -- 17 people who were attending a private vocational school; about 
six or seven of those were single parent mothers -- they had received loans 
from the Department of Education of about 7 or $8,000, and each one of them 
said that the program that they were in was useless.  Each one of them knew 
that they were going to be another 7 or $8,000 in debt unless the 
government forgave the loan. 
 
And I want to make a comment on that.  What's happening, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is that in some of these private vocational schools they get a 
loan from the government.  The private vocational school says, yes, come on 
in.  One individual told me she didn't understand anything of the program 
because she wasn't qualified; she didn't have the prerequisites.  They said 
to her, ah, don't you worry.  Don't you worry.  You'll get a certificate.  
You'll get through.  They gave her a certificate.  She attended 40 per cent 
of the classes; she got a certificate.  What did the Department of 
Education do?  Forgave the loan. 
 
And what's the sense of it?  That's corruption.  That's rip-off.  If it 
isn't ripping off the individual, it's ripping off the province.  And there 
are millions of dollars involved, Mr. Speaker, millions of dollars. 
 
And I say to the Minister of Education -- and I have a lot of respect for 
this Minister of Education, a lot of respect -- I say to him that he must 
act quickly to put those regulations into effect.  Manitoba and Alberta did 
it in 1988 because they were running into a problem.  This government 
should have acted in 1987 when we asked them to. 
 
Those regulations should be in effect today, where we say to the private 
vocational schools: you will have prerequisites, you will have qualified 
staff, we will approve the standards of your programs.  We will do it.  The 
certificate, Mr. Speaker, must be recognized by the industry out there. 
 
And lastly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, those regulations must give some assurance 
to the individuals that there is some opportunity, some opportunity at 
least for employment.  There is no sense in putting out another 400 CNAs 
(certified nursing assistants) or cosmetologists if the market out there is 
already flooded with those. 
 
And I think the Minister of Education, when he looks at the application for 
loans, must look at those circumstances, those conditions, and say, no, the 
program simply doesn't measure up to our standards. 
 
And these individuals, Mr. Speaker, have been ripped off too long.  And I 
want to say to those people out there, yes, the government will get its 
welfare rolls down by forcing you or encouraging you to go to private 
vocational schools.  And if you don't pass, I know you will be stuck, I 
know you will be stuck with that money, with that loan, with that debt, but 
it's not your fault.  It's the fault of this government. 



 

 

 
I had a 45-year-old woman come to my office; she was in tears.  She went 
into a private vocational school, Mr. Speaker, into a program that she 
simply could not handle.  She was ridiculed by the staff, she did not 
finish the course, but she had taken a loan from the Department of 
Education.  She now owes the Department of Education $6,000.  She's had a 
nervous breakdown; she's seeing a psychiatrist.  The Department of 
Education has put a collection agency on her.  She's lost her car.  She's 
working for minimum wage for about 20 hours a week.  And they have the 
audacity, the nerve to say to her and force her, putting the pressure on 
her to pay back her student loan. 
 
That program she had entered, number one, didn't have the prerequisites 
that it should have had.  She couldn't do it.  And that woman is shattered, 
Mr. Speaker, because of the lack of action by this Minister of Education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don't know what it takes for this government to take some 
action in some of these instances.  I mean, the proof is there; the 
examples are there.  And I heard the Minister of Education in his speech 
say the other day that overall the private vocational schools are giving a 
good program.  I grant him that there are some who do, but how does the 
public out there know?  How does the public know which ones are good and 
which ones aren't?  And when they get you in the office, as one former 
staff member said at my news conference, she said her job was to sell.  
Once that person came in the office, don't let that person out.  Her job 
was to sell the program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is unfair, totally unfair, and I think that the minister 
must take action.  The $22.2 million, certainly some of that money went to 
good private vocational schools.  How much of it went the schools that are 
very questionable?  We don't know, but I intend to find out in estimates.  
I will ask the minister how much money went to Bridge City College.  I want 
to know how much money went to Victory Manor.  I want to know how much 
money went to a good school.  And I also want to weed out those schools 
that simply do not meet the standards that we expect.  And I expect the 
minister to give me those answers during estimates. 
 
The people out there are fed up.  Those 17 students that I  
 Dmet with have asked me to set up a meeting with the Minister of 
Education.  Granted, my letter was only delivered to him about five days 
ago, but I need an answer from him as to whether or not he's going to meet 
with them.  One of them is from his own constituency; the others are from 
various parts of Saskatoon and outside of Saskatoon. 
 
(1615) 
 
I want him to meet with them and I want him to give them the assurances 
that he will act immediately to implement those regulations pertaining to 
private vocational schools, so that we give the assurances to people out 
there that when they apply for a program, they know that there are high 
standards, they know that there are qualified staff, and they know that 
when they get a certificate it will be accepted by the industry out there 
and not simply that the industry will laugh at them. 



 

 

 
Mr. Speaker, I want to also turn to another part of my address this 
afternoon and that is to address the area of universities.  Mr. Speaker, 
our two universities -- and I can speak more of the University of 
Saskatchewan because it has a longer history -- have graduated some very 
well-known individuals, people who have taken their place in the business 
world, in the academic world, in the health world.  And they have made 
names for themselves right across this world -- very, very high quality 
graduates who have made their mark in the world. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there is some fear, and that is not just from me -- that 
is from the present president of the University of Saskatchewan.  There is 
some fear that the quality of our graduates is being compromised because of 
the lack of funding and the lack of commitment by this government, the lack 
of commitment by this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker,  I am not going to spend very much time -- I did this last 
year -- but every one of us, I think, who had his car parked out front of 
the Legislative Building had this pamphlet on the windshield.  And it says 
. . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Just the NDP. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- The member from Lloydminster is interfering again.  The 
reason they didn't give you one is because they didn't have any pictures in 
it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- There's only writing on this one.  Sorry about that, but 
that's the way it was. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I see the Minister of Finance is also interested in what I 
have to say, and I'm glad he's here.  Mr. Speaker, the students of the 
University of Regina have said on their pamphlet: "The students are ready.  
How about the government?" 
 
In the budget, the government was not ready; the government was not ready.  
Did they provide for a student centre at the U of R?  No.  It was promised 
by the Minister of Finance and by the Premier when they made a special trip 
to the U of R and they promised that it would come immediately.  They 
promised that in the 1986 election.  Immediately after the election it was 
cancelled. 
 
They have also, Mr. Speaker, asked for a new fine arts building.  Did they 
meet that request?  No, they didn't. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the president of the University of Regina said that he needed 
at least a 4 per cent increase plus the government had to take care of the 
debt at the U of R.  Didn't get 4 per cent; they only got 3-point-some per 
cent.  We don't know exactly how much they're going to get because of the 
enhancement fund.  I'm going to say a word about the enhancement fund a 
little later. 



 

 

 
Mr. Speaker, if we want two universities in this province and if we want 
high quality university, high quality education, then we have to have the 
will to pay.  We have to have the will to fund those universities, Mr. 
Speaker, and we have not done that. 
 
The Minister of Finance is clapping and he says, 3 per cent is sufficient.  
He is saying that 3 per cent for the university is sufficient.  It 
certainly isn't. 
 
Let me remind the Minister of Finance, and I have before me here, February 
2, 1990, from the Star-Phoenix, "U of S fees could sky-rocket": 
 

 Tuition fees at the University of Saskatchewan could rise 30 per cent over 
the next three years unless the provincial government increases operating 
grants or programs are slashed. 

 
 Even with tuition hikes (even with tuition hikes) and continued enrolment 

quotas, the university will need a 23.8 per cent or $30 million increase 
in its operating grant over the next three years. 

 
Did you do that?  No you did not; no you did not. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- We've got two more years, Herman. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Oh, the Minister of Finance . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The Minister of Finance should not be 
continuously interrupting the member for Saskatoon South.  At the same time 
I remind the member for Saskatoon South that it does not add to the debate 
if he's going to debate with everybody who makes a comment.  So I ask the 
co-operation of members on both sides, but most particularly those who are 
interrupting the member from Saskatoon South. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, as a fellow colleague, 
you know how difficult . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I'm going to ask the Minister of Finance 
once more to cease interrupting the member from Saskatoon South. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Speaker, the point that I want to make is this.  The new 
president of the U of S has said that he will need substantial increases, 
$30 million in the next three years, in order that he can carry on offering 
quality education to the students and the people of Saskatchewan.  This has 
not happened.  He needed an 8.5 per cent increase.  And as I said before, I 
don't know just how much they will get out of that enhancement fund, but 
even if we are very generous, the most they will get is about a 3.8 per 
cent total. 
 
I want to say to the Minister of Finance, last year in question period . . 
. or pardon me, in estimates, I asked the Minister of Finance whether or 
not the portion, that portion of the enhancement fund that went to the U of 
S and the U of R, whether that would be included in the base funding for 



 

 

those universities next year, that meaning this year.  And we got pretty 
good assurance that he would. 
 
And I have discussed this with members of the University of Saskatchewan, 
and they got complete assurances from the Department of Education that if 
they met certain conditions, then the enhancement portion that they 
received last year would be put in their base funding this year.  That was 
not done.  That was not done. 
 
I want to say to the Minister of Finance that, had he done that, the base 
that he would be starting with this year would be $155 million -- 155 
million.  But his new base, his new base with his 3 per cent increase, is 
only 153 million.  So, Mr. Speaker, the universities can't exist, they 
simply can't exist and offer quality education with the underfunding and 
the lack of commitment by this government.  It simply can't be done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to draw to the attention of the members opposite what 
the Hon. Minister of Education said a little while ago when, I believe, he 
was speaking to the University of Saskatchewan students.  And I quote from 
the Star-Phoenix of February 9, 1990.  He said: 
 

 Students denied entry into universities because of quotas could, as early 
as this fall, take their first- and second-year courses at regional 
colleges, says Education minister, Ray Meiklejohn. 

 
He said that they would be taking their first and second year out in 
regional colleges.  All right, let's accept that.  And he gave a 5.8 per 
cent to regional colleges.  But what did he do?  The delivery mode for 
distance education is SCAN, Saskatchewan Communications Advanced Network.  
That's the model that you're going to use for delivering it.  He cut that 
budget by 33 per cent - 
_ $1.5 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if we are going to give quality education to people in rural 
Saskatchewan through regional colleges, they also need resource centres.  
They need up-to-date libraries.  It is not a matter of just pouring in the 
facts and say, now you'll get a certificate.  No, they need to be able to 
research.  They need to be able to develop these ideas.  You can't do that 
without adequate resource centres or adequate libraries. 
 
And as I've indicated, their library funding has increased less than 
one-half of one per cent over the last five years.  And the letters that I 
have been receiving from regional libraries -- and I know the minister has 
been receiving these -- clearly indicates that they do not have the volumes 
of books that are required in order to meet the Canadian standards.  They 
don't have them. 
 
This budget does nothing.  In fact, Mr. Speaker, those libraries, in many 
instances I think, will have to shut down their doors for certain days of 
the week because the budget will not be there, or they will have to go to 
their local towns in their local municipalities and ask them to 
substantially increase the property tax in order that they can increase the 
volumes in their libraries. 



 

 

 
Now I say to the Minister of Education, you can't on the one hand say that 
we are not going to support the universities of Saskatchewan and Regina to 
the extent that they need in order to do away with the quotas, and then on 
the other hand not provide the mode of delivery and the libraries in rural 
Saskatchewan where you say you are going to educate students for the first 
and second year. 
 
I want to direct a question to the Minister of Education.  What happens, 
Mr. Minister, if you are successful in rural Saskatchewan?  Let's say 
another 500 students next year take first-year university classes and the 
following year another 500 take first and second year.  You now have a 
thousand students taking first and second years in two years.  Where are 
you going to accommodate those students in the third year?  You have 
offered no incentive, no additional funding to the U of S to build 
additional facilities.  Where are you going to put those students? 
 
They haven't, Mr. Speaker, they haven't gone beyond this budget to look at 
the implications of what they are doing.  And I know the president of the U 
of S has made these people aware of it because he made me aware of it.  
When I met with him he said, all right, I don't necessarily agree that 
that's the best education that students can get, but maybe for the first 
and second year. 
 
There is more to education, those of you who went to university, you know 
that there's more to education than just the acquisition of knowledge.  
It's the whole atmosphere, the whole aura of a university campus.  The 
intercommunication that you have with students, not just from Saskatchewan, 
but from Canada and world-wide. 
 
And maybe in the first and second year we don't need that, but I say to you 
people three years from now these students will not be able to be 
accommodated at our campuses.  You're not building.  We need a building at 
the U of S to house these students.  We need a building at the U of R and 
that construction has to start now.  Three years from now we'll have a 
crisis on our hands.  And I ask you people to give some thought to that and 
make sure that we accommodate those students. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are so many things that I could talk about in 
post-secondary education.  I will spend a lot more time in estimates on it. 
 
The Minister gets rather annoyed when I say that we are one of the lowest 
on a per capita basis of funding of education in Canada.  And he says the 
tax foundations are all wet.  Well there are two or three other 
organizations who say that no matter what criteria you use, Saskatchewan 
ends up seventh, eighth, or ninth of the provinces for funding in 
education, and that also includes post-secondary education. 
 
I have a study here by the Council of Ministers of Education in Canada, who 
indicate very clearly that in the '70s in Canada the expenditures on 
post-secondary education, gross expenditures of a province, was about 5.7 
per cent.  It's now in the 3.7 per cent.  And Canada . . . pardon me, and 
Saskatchewan comes in about eighth in that ranking, comes in about eighth. 



 

 

 
I will recognize, Mr. Speaker, that this government has put some money into 
buildings at the U of S.  We haven't seen very much at the U of R but we 
certainly have seen some at the U of S, and for that the people of 
Saskatchewan are thankful.  But buildings by themselves do not add up to 
good quality education.  They don't add up to good quality education. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- You need to provide them with good quality staff.  And there 
are lots of indications here, Mr. Speaker, that in the very near future 
Saskatchewan will not only be short of thousands of teachers in grades 1 to 
12, but that we will not have sufficient professors at the Ph.D. level here 
in this province because the salaries that we are offering are much too 
low, are much too low. 
 
We have to, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if we are committed to quality education, 
we have to provide additional salaries, adequate salaries to attract the 
best.  We can't afford to let them go to Alberta or British Columbia or 
Ontario, and that is what is happening.  They are fed up.  They are 
absolutely fed up with what is going on in this province at the present 
time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only do the quotas have an impact on university students 
who can't enter and then they have to go into the work-force -- and sadly 
enough there simply isn't any work available so they leave this province, 
and we will see very few of those coming back -- Mr. Speaker, it also is 
having an impact on the high school situation.  We have now in some of our 
schools, 20 per cent -- 20 per cent -- of the grade 12 students coming 
back, not because they don't have completed their grade 12 but because they 
don't meet the entrance requirements at the University of Saskatchewan and 
the University of Regina. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- What schools would these be, Herman? 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Well I don't mind saying it.  The schools for example in 
Saskatoon, schools in Saskatoon have in the neighbourhood of 20 per cent -- 
20 per cent of the grade 12's going back to upgrade. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there is absolutely no validity in the argument that 
those people make that say a 65 per cent average isn't high enough to have 
success at the university because it has been demonstrated time and time 
again in the past that many, many -- a large percentage -- of the people 
with a 65 average in grade 12 do very well at the universities.  That does 
not diminish the fact, Mr. Speaker, that our grade 12 students shouldn't 
struggle to get the 75's and 80's and 90's.  Not at all.  But why are we 
denying, why are we denying an opportunity for our young people to receive 
a university education because this government has its priorities all mixed 
up? 
 
They are more concerned about giving money to Cargill, money to Millar, 



 

 

money to Weyerhaeuser, and as I indicated before $432 million in subsidy 
over 30 years to Weyerhaeuser -- $432 million.  Mr. Speaker, yesterday or 
the day before when the Minister of Education spoke, he said, Mr. Speaker, 
the Minister of Education made a comparison of funding for universities 
when we were the government and now when they are the government. 
 
Let me, Mr. Speaker, for the edification of the Minister of Finance, let me 
just read to him what happened in 1980 to 1983.  In 1980-81, 8.5 per cent 
increase; 1981-82, 12 per cent increase, operating grants; 1982-83, 17 per 
cent increase, for an average of those last three years of an NDP 
government of 12.5 per cent.  And we had a balanced budget, in fact, we had 
a surplus. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let's take the last three years of this government for 
universities.  In 1988-89, 2 per cent; 1989-90, 2 per cent; 1990-91, 3 per 
cent, for an average of 2.3 per cent.  And if you want to add in the 
enhancement fund, which the Minister of Finance does not include in the 
base funding, you may get up to 2.7 or 2.8 per cent. 
 
Compare that to 12.5 per cent for the universities in operating grants when 
we were the government.  There is no commitment to post-secondary education 
by this government.  Mr. Speaker, if there were, they wouldn't be giving an 
average increase of 2.3 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the last item I want to talk about is SIAST, the great 
invention of the present Minister of Finance.  We know, Mr. Speaker, what 
happened in 1987 when his officials herded people into rooms like cattle, 
like cattle -- that's what it was -- herded people who had 25 years 
experience, herded them into a room and told them in 10 minutes to be out 
of the office and not to show their face there again.  In fact, Mr. 
Speaker, they walked in with their red crates and put the things in, the 
possessions of some of the people into those boxes, and told them to get 
out.  Twenty-five years of service. 
 
And what did they do, Mr. Speaker?  They replaced some of these very 
valuable and qualified people with their own political hacks, people, Mr. 
Speaker, who had absolutely no experience, no experience in post-secondary 
education or technical school, no experience in administration, and they 
wonder.  They wonder why they're having problems.  They wonder why they're 
having problems. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order. Why is the hon. member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Can the hon. member enlighten the legislature as to 
what people he is referring to when he says they . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The hon. member is not permitted to ask a 
question unless the member speaking approves.  Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, would the hon. member answer a question 
then please? 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- No I will not.  But I want to make a comment, Mr. Speaker, I 



 

 

want to make a comment.  That is the same minister that instructed his 
official . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The hon. member responded to the minister's 
query.  The debate continues.  Shouldn't be any more interference. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance, who was then the 
minister of Education, is well aware of what transpired in 1987 and how he 
mistreated long-term civil servants in the reorganization of SIAST, and how 
he instructed, how he instructed the people how they were to go about 
firing these people.  That is well documented. 
 
And I am not, Mr. Speaker, today going to name some of those officials.  He 
knows who they are because he was the one that instructed others to carry 
out his dirty work for him. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a real problem in SIAST.  Was talking to an 
individual the other day and, Mr. Speaker, I used to work in a high school 
as a counsellor and we were very proud, very proud to send students to any 
one of those technical schools -- to Kelsey, Saskatchewan Technical 
Institute at Moose Jaw, Wascana at Regina.  We were extremely proud because 
they matched the standards of any other technical school across Canada, any 
other school.  They matched the Mount Royal College in Calgary, SAIT 
(Southern Alberta Institute of Technology) in Calgary, NAIT (Northern 
Alberta Institute of Technology) in Edmonton -- no difficulties. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the teachers can't have that same pride any longer 
because the programs have suffered so severely.  And what have they done, 
Mr. Speaker, they have taken out many of the good programs that were 
over-subscribed in 1987, over-subscribed by the students.  They have taken 
those and put them into private schools, and I told you what I thought of 
some of those private schools before, where we have no prerequisites, no 
standards of programs, staff not qualified, and the certificate is simply 
not accepted at all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they have ruined the technical schools in this province by 
their arrogant and -- well, I don't want to say it -- by their arrogance in 
dealing with the reorganization of technical schools in this province.  Mr. 
Speaker, what they have done is unacceptable. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the members opposite that you have an 
opportunity, you still have an opportunity to change direction.  You still 
have an opportunity to say to the universities and say to SIAST and say to 
those librarians out there: yes we made a mistake; we didn't fund you 
adequately, and we're going to do it; we're going to bring in supplementary 
estimates and we're going to do it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget does not address the problems of Saskatchewan.  It 
does not address the agriculture problem by giving relief in the debt of 
the farmers as I've indicated.  It does nothing in giving cold, hard cash 
to those farmers out there who're going bankrupt -- 4,400 farmers in 
Saskatchewan went bankrupt last year.  And what is your answer?  We'll give 
them more debt.  That is not a solution. 



 

 

 
Our universities, Mr. Speaker, I wouldn't be a bit surprised . . .  Mr. 
Speaker, I would not be a bit surprised if the president of the U of S will 
have to eliminate colleges at the U of S because of lack of funding.  Don't 
be surprised, ladies and gentlemen opposite, that you will hear the 
president of the U of S saying that he has to eliminate colleges because of 
the lack of funding over the last number of years by your government, but 
particularly this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this problem . . . Oh, pardon me.  This budget does not 
address the problem of jobs and the exodus of people in this province.  It 
does not address, in any way, shape, or form, the problems that we have in 
education.  I cannot and I will not support this budget.  Thank you very 
much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure to 
enter into this debate on the budget.  And I would firstly, Mr. Speaker, 
like to congratulate my colleague, the Minister of Finance, for the budget 
that he brought down last Thursday evening. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- I want to say, Mr. Speaker, and I believe that the 
majority of people who attended the budget speech in this legislature, and 
to those people who watched the budget speech on television last Thursday 
night, I think it would be safe to say, Mr. Speaker, that most fair-minded 
people, after hearing the comprehensive outline of the budget and the 
finances of the province of Saskatchewan, would say, yes indeed, for the 
times, Mr. Speaker, given all of the circumstances, given where 
Saskatchewan is today, that budget was most appropriate for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I say most appropriate, Mr. Speaker, for the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, 
most appropriate, Mr. Speaker, for the farmers of Saskatchewan, the 
students of Saskatchewan, the senior citizens of Saskatchewan, the youth 
and the elderly, the working people, men and women of all ages and all 
categories in all segments of our society. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I think that you would know that the task 
of making a budget is a difficult one in these troubled economic times; 
these economic times that have difficult international price perspectives 
put on them; these difficult times that have natural forces beyond our 
control, Mr. Speaker, and I refer to drought upon drought and many of the 
harsh realities that have gone our way over the last few years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, realizing the challenge that has been faced by my colleague, I 
am impressed, and I am heartened by it, Mr. Speaker, by the budget document 
that he presented to this House.  Mr. Speaker, that document is a tribute 
to the Minister of Finance.  He has met the challenge confronting him 



 

 

through three types of things, and I will talk to you tonight, or this 
afternoon, Mr. Speaker, about some courage, about compassion, and about 
consultation. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it takes courage and it takes political will in these 
times to eliminate some programs that were popular programs, programs that 
the public and the populace of Saskatchewan indeed thought were right, 
programs that the people most appreciated.  It takes courage, Mr. Speaker, 
to do what is right.  And I have every confidence, Mr. Speaker, that the 
public of Saskatchewan recognize the difficult choices and the difficult 
decisions that had to be made. 
 
I would use for an example, Mr. Speaker, another one of those difficult 
decisions that had to be made was the overall spending level of many 
government departments.  Contained in that budget, Mr. Speaker, is 
something like 21 government agencies that have either been frozen or 
reduced -- reduced somewhat. 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Speaker, those are not easy things.  Heavens above, I think every human 
being alive knows that it's easy to spend money.  It's nice to spend money, 
Mr. Speaker.  It's nice to do good.  But, Mr. Speaker, there comes a time 
when you have to very responsibly look and see, and do it very objectively 
as well, Mr. Speaker, what is right for the people of Saskatchewan, what is 
in the best long-run and short-run interest of the people of Saskatchewan.  
And, Mr. Speaker, taxpayers across this province from one end of it to the 
other said: Mr. Government, you've got to get a control on government 
spending; Mr. Government, notwithstanding all of the calls of the 
opposition time and time again, totally irresponsible calls, Mr. Speaker, 
by the opposition over the last seven years -- whatever you're spending, 
it's not enough; we need more, we need more, we need more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, are those the words of a responsible opposition?  I say to 
you, no, they were not, Mr. Speaker.  Was the budget the words of a 
responsible government?  I say yes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, it took some political will to control 
some of the spending with respect to government construction projects.  It 
took political will to do that, Mr. Speaker.  Had we listened to the 
opposition, government spending would have increased significantly at a 
time when the taxpayers cannot afford it.  Mr. Speaker, another one of the 
difficult decisions it had to make. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that demonstrates to me some courage, strength, some 
determination, some sense of purpose, some sense of direction, some sense 
of responsibility.  Those are the words that I would like to use this 
afternoon to sum up this budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does that have to mean just because a government has tightened 
its own belt, just because a government has looked responsibly to the will 



 

 

of the taxpayer, does that mean that that government does not have to be 
compassionate?  No, Mr. Speaker, the two are not mutually exclusive.  You 
could have a government that has the courage to take difficult decisions, 
and yet a government that has compassion -- compassion for the people of 
this province. 
 
And that's another word that I feel applies to this budget, one of 
compassion, Mr. Speaker.  And I'd like to talk to you a little bit about 
the areas of compassion; compassion for people like farm families.  
Contrary to the calls of the opposition, Mr. Speaker, inherent, innate in 
this budget is some real, true testimony to compassion for what our farmers 
and their families are going through in this very difficult time. 
 
Compassion, Mr. Speaker, for the infirm and the elderly.  Compassion, Mr. 
Speaker, for people like our students and our hungry kids. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our Minister of Finance has singled out three key, important 
areas in this budget, and I'd like to talk to you a little bit about those 
areas prior to me going into my own particular budget area, that being the 
environment. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to talk to you today about one of the 
corner-stones of the whole economy of this province, one of the 
corner-stones of the budget, Mr. Speaker, and that being agriculture.  Mr. 
Speaker, there's no question our farmers are hurting today.  Our farm 
families are hurting today.  And in turn, Mr. Speaker, our farm businesses, 
businesses directly or indirectly related to agriculture, are hurting. 
 
Our towns, our villages, our hamlets are suffering the consequences of 
serious agricultural problems -- places in my constituency like my home 
town of Melfort.  Small towns like Naicam, St. Brieux, Ridgedale, Star 
City, Beatty -- these small rural communities, Mr. Speaker, have felt this 
impact.  Places like Cupar where I was . . . or, pardon me, Quinton, where 
I was the other night.  All of these rural places in Saskatchewan are 
feeling this.  And, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance, and through him 
this government, are duty-bound, are absolutely duty-bound to do what we 
can to ease that hurt, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan I think we do this out of instinct, out 
of a natural reaction when our friends and our families and our towns and 
villages and businesses are hurting.  It doesn't take a rocket scientist, 
Mr. Speaker; it doesn't take a lot of debate in our minds, Mr. Speaker, we 
do this as a natural reaction.  Agriculture is Saskatchewan, compassion is 
Saskatchewan, instinctively helping our friends and neighbours. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in this budget I think there is absolute proof positive 
of this government's commitment to agriculture.  And I talk to you this 
afternoon, Mr. Speaker, about direct spending on agriculture and tax 
assistance to the farm sector of more than $400 million.  This is separate 
and apart from the seeding loan programs, but $400 million in the 
agricultural budget of this year. 
 
 DI believe that that is a significant amount of money.  Every member on 



 

 

this side of the House wishes that we could have more money to spend on 
agriculture, but we've got 400 million this year, Mr. Speaker.  In addition 
to that you have a farm seeding program, a spring crop seeding program that 
will allocate more that $525 million at subsidized interest rates to 
farmers who are having a difficult time in obtaining credit from 
traditional lending institutions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is clear, it is absolutely crystal clear to me that this 
government, on behalf of the taxpayers from all over Saskatchewan, has 
taken a major step once again to go to the wall to back our farmers, our 
farm families, and our farm businesses through these kinds of expenditures. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, furthermore I was pleased to see this 
entire Assembly pass a unanimous motion respecting agriculture and the 
involvement, the absolutely necessity for involvement, by the federal 
government with respect to immediate cash injections of $500 million prior 
to seeding.  And Mr. Speaker, this is not an unreasonable request to our 
federal government.  Mr. Speaker, this is a very necessary request to our 
federal government. 
 
I believe that it is the federal government's responsibility when you 
consider that other countries, other major countries, the United States of 
America, for instance, where their taxpayers from all around the United 
States are backing their farmers through the export enhancement program.  
When you've got all the citizens of Europe, of western Europe, banding 
together through their tax dollars, subsidizing their farmers, Mr. Speaker, 
it is crystal clear to me that it is the responsibility of the federal 
government and it is the responsibility of us as legislators in this 
Legislative Assembly, together with farm groups, rural councillors, rural 
reeves, municipal people, all people from across Saskatchewan, that we have 
solidarity on this absolute commitment that we need from the federal 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, there is no question.  Agriculture was 
one of the mainstays of this budget. 
 
Second, Mr. Speaker, is the subject of education.  Where is the future of 
this province?  Where is the future of this country?  There is no place to 
look, no place to look other than to the young people, the youth of our 
province, Mr. Speaker.  And if there's one thing that they need, Mr. 
Speaker, it is the finest education system available anywhere.  We must be 
competitive, Mr. Speaker.  We must have our young people well educated.  
Mr. Speaker, we are a certain, certain lot here in Saskatchewan.  We've got 
an abundance of good values and good qualities, and we're good, hard, 
honest-working, dedicated, and committed people and, Mr. Speaker, all we 
need is a system in place to better educate our young people. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when I look at this budget, when I look at this budget 
that's contributing almost $900 million to education, I'd say that's a 



 

 

tremendous amount of money.  I'd say, Mr. Speaker, it's almost 20 per cent 
of our entire budget is spent on education. 
 
Members opposite will cry and whine and make believe that there's cut-backs 
in education, make believe that the province could afford significantly 
more, close their eyes to where we'd really find additional moneys.  But, 
Mr. Speaker, being responsible, an increase of, I think, $36 or $40 million 
in education, up to nearly $900 million -- 888 I think it is -- Mr. 
Speaker, that's a fair commitment to education, and that's a fair 
commitment to the future of this province and to our young people, most 
specifically. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, this budget also contains something else 
to do with young people, very young people, Mr. Speaker, and I'm talking 
about hungry children.  I'm talking about, Mr. Speaker, nearly 
three-quarters of a million dollars -- $750,000 -- being spent on the needs 
of hungry children, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I commend, Mr. Speaker, the new Minister of the Family.  The new 
Minister of the Family, Mr. Speaker, who has travelled the width and the 
breadth and the length of this province talking to families, seeing where 
there is real hunger.  And, Mr. Speaker, certainly there is, not all over 
the province, but, Mr. Speaker, there are pockets.  There are those in 
need.  And, Mr. Speaker, I don't believe that there's hardly a taxpayer in 
this province whose heart and pocket-book doesn't go out to hungry children 
when there's a real need for it. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, members opposite like to dramatize like a Hollywood movie 
the whole subject of hungry kids.  But, Mr. Speaker, here's something 
that's not showmanship; this is not a Hollywood movie production.  What 
this is, Mr. Speaker, is real, honest, hard-working men and women paying 
their tax dollars to the extent of nearly three-quarters of a billion 
dollars to feed our hungry children here in Saskatchewan, the Saskatchewan 
way, Mr. Speaker -- out of compassion, Mr. Speaker.  And it's nothing to 
sneeze at. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to turn to health care, Mr. 
Speaker.  And there's nearly one-third of this budget is spent on health 
care.  And here again, contrary to cries of the NDP, cut-backs in health 
care, not nearly enough money in health care, well, Mr. Speaker, we are 
spending $1.5 billion on health care.  We are spending nearly one-third of 
our budget on health care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I forget what it adds up to on a daily or an hourly basis, but 
I think hourly it's something like $175,000 an hour, $3 million dollars a 
day or thereabouts, tremendous amounts of money on health care. 
 
Why is this, Mr. Speaker?  It's because there is a firm dedication and 
commitment on behalf of the Progressive Conservative Party in the province 



 

 

of Saskatchewan to this thing called health care, Mr. Speaker.  And those 
dollars are proof positive of a real genuine commitment to health care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, there is more money here for home care, 
more money for nursing homes, more for hospitals, more for the people that 
work in these institutions, the real care givers, the real compassionate 
people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say that this budget was not drafted in the back rooms of 
any cabinet or any caucus or any political party.  Where this budget was 
really drafted, Mr. Speaker, was out in the open, was out in consultation 
with groups of people all across this province, and I commend the Minister 
of Finance for those pre-budget meetings.  I commend the people of 
Saskatchewan for their input into this budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm here to make a prediction.  The 1990s, Mr. Speaker, will 
be a period of mass consultation with the public, not only across 
Saskatchewan as set by this example in the budget, but this will happen 
across Canada and across North America.  Mr. Speaker, and members opposite 
scoff at Consensus Saskatchewan.  And I'd like to stop for just a minute or 
two and use this budget as an example of a mini Consensus Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there's so many choices to make, so many difficult decisions 
to make, so many unanswered questions.  So where does a true government 
that is caring and compassionate for the people go to help find some of the 
answers?  A true, caring, compassionate government goes to the people.  And 
the best example that I can think of in recent history was the Minister of 
Finance going all across this province consulting with people to find out 
what their ideas were, what their choices were, and where this budget 
should take them. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that is why this budget, although not satisfactory to 
all, has been accepted for the most part, by and large by the public of 
Saskatchewan in a very positive way.  Mr. Speaker, I believe that to be the 
case. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, and if we carried this example of how the 
Minister of Finance consulted with the people, brought a budget that is for 
the most part satisfactory to the people of Saskatchewan, I believe that 
Consensus Saskatchewan, dealing with other complex issues, will have the 
same results, Mr. Speaker.  It is based on the same type of consultative 
mode that I predict is being started today with Consensus Saskatchewan, and 
will very, very much be the way of the 1990s, because there's difficult 
questions that will be asked all throughout the 1990s. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to turn now to a priority of my own, something 
that I believe is a priority of the people of Saskatchewan, something that 
has been noted in newspapers around the world recently, noted in all types 
of media recently, noted as being the subject of regional, national, 



 

 

international, and indeed global conferences.  I'm talking to you this 
afternoon, Mr. Speaker, about this big thing that we call the environment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  It being 5 p.m., the House stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 2 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 
 


