





























































Hansard: March 26, 1990


 

 

March 26/90 
 
 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice that on 
Wednesday next I will move first reading of a Bill to amend The 
Environmental Management and Protection Act with respect to the ozone. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As you probably have heard, 
the ministers of Agriculture from the prairie provinces have been meeting 
in Saskatchewan and in this building today, and we are meeting with other 
ministers in Ottawa on Thursday and Friday with our federal counterparts. 
 
Three of the ministers are in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, and I want to take 
the opportunity to introduce them to you and to members of the Assembly.  
The Hon. Glen Findlay is Minister of Agriculture from the province of 
Manitoba. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- The Hon. Ernie Isley is Minister of Agriculture from 
Alberta. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- And the Hon. Shirley McClellan is Associate Minister of 
Agriculture of the province of Alberta. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  On behalf of the opposition side 
of the House, I too would like to welcome the ministers and associates 
visiting our legislature.  I presume that you in Alberta and Manitoba go 
through many of the same things we do in Saskatchewan with regards to 
agriculture, and I hope you enjoy your visit with us today. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'd like to 
introduce to you and to all members of the legislature a person from the 
Naicam area.  We have the administrator of the town of Naicam, Ruby 
Lindsay.  Ruby was in this morning with a delegation from Naicam and from 
Spalding, meeting with the Associate Minister of Health, and we had a very 



 

 

good meeting this morning. 
 
I hope that Ruby and her delegation has a good stay here in Regina and a 
safe trip home. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Rise in Farm Credit Corporation Interest Rates 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 
Minister of Agriculture. Mr. Minister, you've done it again.  You told us . 
. . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- That's right.  You've done it again.  You told us you were 
going to go down to talk to the Farm Credit Corporation about restructuring 
loans to farmers.  And so they have.  And so they have.  As of today, loan 
rates for FCC (Farm Credit Corporation) have increased by one-quarter of 
one per cent.  Good job, Mr. Minister.  But I can say on behalf of the 
Saskatchewan farmers, thanks for nothing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- My question, Mr. Minister, is: can you tell this House 
whether or not that you knew that this increase was coming?  And if you are 
so in touch with the farm crisis in this province, why, can you tell me, 
have you failed again to stand up for the interests of Saskatchewan farmers 
and protecting them from high interest rates? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I share with the hon. member 
the concern with respect to high interest rates.  Part of the budget in the 
province of Saskatchewan for the last several years has been addressed to 
lowering interest rates for farmers, cash advances at zero per cent 
interest rates, or 6 per cent money, nine and three-quarter per cent money, 
and various programs to protect people.  I believe it's now between 350 and 
$400 million savings in interest rate protection alone in agricultural 
programs.  So I certainly share with the hon. member that interest rates 
have been significant in the damage they've done to local people.  And 
Saskatchewan has put its treasury in the face of banks and credit unions, 
FCC, and other people to make sure that we could provide some relief. 
 
With respect to the federal and international interest rates, the hon. 
member knows that the province of Saskatchewan does not control those 
rates, and it is in the Bank of Canada and it's internationally.  We're 
looking at 4 or 500 basis points between the difference between provincial 
and Canadian rates and international rates.  Those, as well, hurt a great 



 

 

deal, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the ministers that are here today have agreed with me that in our 
meeting with the federal Minister of Agriculture, that's one of the key 
areas that we'll be focussing on -- lowering interest rates, not only to 
farmers but to everybody in western Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- New question, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, the FCC rates 
increased by a quarter of 1 per cent in December, and a month ago they went 
up by three-quarters per cent.  There are about 24,000 FCC contract holders 
in Saskatchewan and about 5,400 of those are in arrears.  You said that you 
talked privately to the lending institutions asking for greater 
flexibility.  But now, on the other hand, you and your federal counterparts 
are doing exactly the opposite to what you were asking them to do -- 
becoming tighter and tighter in asking for more interest rates, higher 
interest rates. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you tell me why you do not show some leadership to the 
farmers of this province and illustrate that by demanding the federal 
interest rate in FCC be reduced, and show some leadership on your own 
through ACS (Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan)?  Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, as you know, we are in the process of 
bringing in agricultural groups and, in part, to redesign the Agricultural 
Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan, including the interest rate part of it, 
and restructuring and the guarantees. 
 
I met this morning, Mr. Speaker, with the SARM (Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities), with the Saskatchewan canola growers and the cattle 
feeders, the pork producers, stock growers, and the wheat pool, the farmers 
union and the United Grain Growers, and flax growers.  And the consensus 
there was to reduce farm interest rates, to do the kinds of things that we 
would like to see in ACS, to make sure that same message is directed 
towards the federal government and indeed the international governments 
because of the subsidy wars and high interest rates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can only say to the hon. member, and I'm sure all members of 
the legislature, Saskatchewan has put its reputation on the line in front 
of other provincial colleagues in terms of putting our treasury there to 
protect people against high interest rates. We're going to continue to do 
that, Mr. Speaker. And we have certainly encouraged the federal government 
along with our provincial counterparts to reduce the rates with FCC and 
interest rates in general. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- A new question, Mr. Speaker, to the same minister.  Mr. 
Minister, I've been in this legislature since 1986, and every time you say 
something, you're either negotiating or in the process. But during your 



 

 

long process, we're losing thousands of farmers off the land every year. 
 
Mr. Minister, you say on one hand you're giving, but on the other hand 
you're taking.  And I'll tell you, if you add up all the cuts and the 
increases that farmers have to pay, they outweigh anything that you've been 
giving them.  And it's a fine little routine to be in, but it certainly 
isn't helping the farmers. 
 
My question to you, Mr. Minister, is this: have you had any correspondence 
with the Prime Minister indicating to him that this rate makes absolutely 
no sense, and will you table that correspondence today? Or, Mr. Minister, 
are you waiting for a consensus to come and hit you over the head to tell 
you that this is going to be very negative with respect to farm income? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I can say to the hon. member, as a result 
of meeting with the prairie ministers of Agriculture, there is a telex 
going to the Minister of Agriculture federally this afternoon.  We will be 
meeting with him on Wednesday night, Thursday and Friday of this week, on 
interest rates, on the price of grain, on drought and deficiency in terms 
of income.  And all those will be put into one package and placed before 
the federal government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The combination of the things suggested by people who we met with this 
morning will also be presented.  And indeed, Mr. Speaker, a consensus is 
important.  We had a consensus here the other day in terms of a resolution 
in this House that we all talked about; we all stood in our place and we 
all voted and sent that message to Ottawa.  The prairie ministers are 
meeting today, right here in Saskatchewan.  There's a consensus there. 
 
Farm groups met this morning and there was a consensus that high interests 
are a very significant problem, plus the price of grain, plus drought.  We 
put all those together, Mr. Speaker, and yes, when we speak here on 
agriculture it represents an awful lot more than Saskatchewan.  Most times, 
Mr. Speaker, it represents western Canada and, from time to time, the whole 
nation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Emergency Assistance to Farmers 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to direct my question to the 
Premier, the Minister of Agriculture.  As you will be aware, the federal 
Finance minister, Michael Wilson, was in Saskatchewan, and indeed in 
Saskatoon, where he said that the funds for emergency assistance for 
farmers is in fact in reserves.  He said all that it takes now is an 
agreement for a cost-sharing by the federal . . . by the provincial 
government, their participation. 
 
I want to ask you: will you tell this Assembly today how much your 
government has been asked to put up towards this package of assisting the 
farmers in this crisis, and whether or not you have agreed to participate 



 

 

in providing immediate package for the farmers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, the ministers met today and agreed that 
any deficiency payment is a federal responsibility alone.  We're dealing 
with international interest rates, we're dealing with prices 
internationally that are being . . . we're taking on the treasuries of 
Germany, of France, of Great Britain, the United States. 
 
And quite frankly we don't see the state of Montana financing the 
international export enhancement program.  We don't expect to see the 
Alberta treasury or the provincial treasury of Manitoba or Saskatchewan 
take on international treasuries. 
 
We're saying, we have put our money up, and you see increases in the amount 
of money we've put into agriculture and a great deal of protection.  The 
federal government bears some federal and international responsibilities, 
and protecting people against price wars and interest rates falls squarely 
in the lap of the federal government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Mr. Minister, I want to be perfectly clear so the farmers of 
Saskatchewan know where you stand.  You have been advocating a $500 million  
spring pay-out.  Is it the position of the Government of Saskatchewan, the 
Minister of Agriculture, the Premier, that he is not intending to 
participate in spite of the request for the federal government that you 
participate?  Is that your position?  Can it be perfectly clear to the 
farmers that you are not intending to participate in any federal package? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, we just jointly agreed on a resolution in 
this House, asking the federal government for $500 million now, $400 
million later, and another billion dollars in the contingency fund, and it 
said absolutely nothing about the provincial government. 
 
Now you voted on it, you stood in your place and you stood there and said, 
I agree, the federal government should put up $500 million, $400 million, 
and a billion dollars.  I agree with that resolution.  We all said it, we 
all signed on it, and we sent it down east. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that's our position.  The federal government should come up 
with $500 million now.  You will see in our budget, our expenditures are 
large and increasing in agriculture, but this responsibility on 
international prices and interest rates falls squarely in the international 
lap, and that's a federal government responsibility. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Supplement to the Premier.  Mr. Premier, I ask you a simple 
question.  Have the federal government asked you for a participation, and 



 

 

are negotiations still continuing, whether or not you're going to 
participate; and is the federal payment dependent upon your participation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, the telex that will go today, that the 
hon. member and his colleagues have asked for, says that it is a federal 
responsibility that the federal government come up with the $500 million 
and the $400 million this year for our farmers.  And on top of that, Mr. 
Speaker, you will see in our budget that we have made substantial 
commitments to agriculture, not only in the past but certainly now and in 
the future, and you'll see that on Thursday. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I say to the hon. member, the motion that he voted on 
here, the 500 and the 900 and the billion dollars, is all a federal 
responsibility, Mr. Speaker, and we'll hold them to that responsibility. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- A new question to the Premier.  Mr. Premier, you will be 
aware that during the 1988 fall election of the federal government they 
promised a drought payment during that election, and part of the delay, a 
very significant part of the delay, was that they demanded that you as a 
province participate.  And the Minister of Finance stood in this office and 
indicated that he indeed was participating. 
 
That was the agreement then; that was the cause of the delay.  I ask you 
again: is the federal government requesting participation by your 
government, and is your position that, despite the fact it will delay and 
maybe not prevent any assistance to the farmers, that it's your position 
that you will not participate? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- This . . . just so that I understand, just so I 
understand your question, so the hon. member is clear: are you recommending 
that we make the payment and then we then go to Ottawa and ask for . . . 
(inaudible) . . . paid back?  No?  Well come on, I mean, what are you 
recommending? 
 
I stood in here and . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I said to the . . . introduced a 
resolution here that asked for money from the federal government.  The NDP, 
Mr. Speaker, as I understand it, are standing up and saying . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I must interrupt the Premier, unfortunately, 
because there are two or three other members who are trying to answer the 
question on both sides of the House.  Now let us allow the Premier to 
answer the question. 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, if the hon. member is suggesting that 
Saskatchewan should offer to pay in place of the federal government, I have 
to disagree with that.  If the hon. member . . . if the NDP are saying, 
well, Mr. Premier, you're holding this up because you're not paying your 
fair share, then you're saying, right, Saskatchewan should pay.  Now if the 
NDP are going to be on position that Saskatchewan should pay this program 
because of international prices, because of international interest rates, 
then I have to disagree with my hon. colleague. 
 
What I'm saying is, I want to see their money; I want to see their cash -- 
$500 million dollars now, $400 million dollars later, and a billion dollar 
contingency fund that carries on, and you will see Saskatchewan standing 
behind the farmer, Mr. Speaker, you will see, day in and day out, and 
certainly in this budget and in future budgets. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Supplementary to the same 
minister.  Mr. Minister, my question to you is this:  Mr. Mazankowski said 
in a reply in Ottawa a few days ago that he was negotiating the terms of 
this deal.  Can you specifically tell me whether those negotiations are (a) 
whether or not to participate, or (b) for an actual dollar amount of 
participation?  Can you answer that please? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I can say to the hon. member, I'll make it 
as clear as possible.  A telex is going out today and you can have access 
to it.  It takes Saskatchewan, Manitoba and Alberta provincial governments' 
position, saying the federal government has responsibility for injecting 
cash into the western Canadian agricultural economy.  They have that 
responsibility.  Alberta's just come down with their budget.  Our budget 
will come down on Thursday night and you will see our own contributions; 
federal government, cash, and our own contributions will both be there, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now I will say to the hon. member, I am not, unless he's . . . if the 
members opposite are recommending that Saskatchewan put up money first, or 
Saskatchewan make the payments in place of the federal government, then I'd 
like to see them stand up and make that recommendation, because we're not 
about to do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Cut-back in Hog Production 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have a question for the 
Premier, the Minister of Agriculture.  Intercon is apparently going to cut 
back its hog buy by 1,000 animals a day, Mr. Premier, and that would be 
about 30 per cent of the hog production at the Intercon plant.  And that of 
course will seriously hurt Saskatchewan hog producers and will quite likely 
result in lay-offs at the plant. 
 
Now the downswing in the market that is the cause for this, is in large 
part the countervailing duties that have been imposed by the United States 



 

 

government on pork.  And this was a problem that was supposed to have been 
addressed by the free trade negotiations and the free trade agreement. 
 
The question I have for you, Mr. Premier, is:  what have you got to say to 
Saskatchewan hog producers who were betrayed by the free trade negotiations 
on this question of countervail . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I'm 
sorry, that's a fact.  The Prime Minister said that was the purpose for the 
negotiations, and the hog producers seemed to buy it, that it would solve 
the problem of the countervailing duties, and it did not do so.  And what 
do you say to hog producers about your uncritical support of that free 
trade agreement which was such a failure? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I have asked my Associate Minister of 
Agriculture to meet with Intercon officials to get the full details.  I 
just heard briefly about it at noon today. 
 
I will say to the hon. member that it has nothing to do with free trade 
agreement, and the hon. member knows that.  And the minister and his 
colleagues laugh on the other side of the House because they don't 
understand that tariffs are associated with trade and a trade agreement 
that you'll reduce the tariffs. 
 
And if, in fact, that you run into various kinds of action that would be 
associated with dumping or countervail, it's not because of tariffs, it's 
because of subsidies,  And they're not related.  And as a lawyer, you 
probably should know that, that they are not connected. 
 
So the free trade agreement has to do with tariffs; it is not to do with 
countervail.  And we each have our countervail laws and we each have our 
anti-dumping legislation, and ours is the same as theirs.  So it's not even 
in the agreement associated with the tariff reduction, Mr. Speaker.  So the 
hon. member is saying, well he assumes that this is associated with the 
free trade agreement.  We'll find out.  I'll ask him and the minister will 
find out, and if it has nothing to do, we will certainly be prepared to 
report back to the legislature and clear up this misconception that you 
have that it's related to the free trade agreement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- A new question, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, you must be the 
only person in this province connected with trade or hog production that 
doesn't know that the Prime Minister said that the purpose for the free 
trade negotiations in the first place, the reason why Canada went in, was 
to solve this problem of countervailing duties being imposed upon our 
goods.  Now he said so. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Show me. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- I'll show it to you.  Okay. 
 
Now I want to ask another question.  You told . . . You were the one who 



 

 

encouraged our farmers to get into hog production -- were your words -- 
that's where the future is.  And now we have producers all over the 
province who are raising hogs that they will have difficulty selling, based 
upon this decision of Intercon that we heard about today, and we will have 
packing plants laying off staff. 
 
My question is: on what basis did you decide to tell the farmers of this 
province that they should get into hog production, and how did you get 
yourself into a position where you were promoting this trade deal which was 
supposed to be for the benefit of hog producers and other producers, when 
in fact there was no real protection in that agreement on the 
countervailing duty weapon in the hands of the United States government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, is this ever interesting, because the hog 
board and the hog producers were afraid . . . were in favour of the free 
trade agreement.  The head of Intercon, Mr. Fred Mitchell, said that he 
would increase the jobs by 150 if he had the free trade agreement. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member, the member of the legislature for the 
NDP says that the hog producers are going to be hurt as a result of the 
free trade agreement, and Intercon is going to be hurt as a result of the 
free trade agreement, and both supported lower tariffs as a result of the 
free trade agreement. 
 
So now he's coming up and saying, well it really doesn't have anything to 
do with tariff; it's something called dumping or countervail, which is 
associated with subsidies on either side of the border, which could be in 
Quebec or it could be in British Columbia or it could be some place else. 
 
And he's trying to bring that back and say, well, as a result of the free 
trade agreement, Saskatchewan hog producers who have benefitted out of 
access to the United States market are hurting.  Well, Mr. Speaker, I would 
say to the hon. member, he'd have to go to the Saskatchewan hog producers 
marketing board and the chairman who was in my office this morning and met 
with me, and to Fred Mitchell who's the head of Intercon, and convince them 
they don't want access to the United States market with lower tariffs. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I'll just say to the hon. member, it just leaves a 
slight impression that what, with the greatest respect, there's a fair 
amount about the hog industry and anti-dumping and countervail and tariffs 
that the hon. member might have to brush himself up on a little bit here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- I'm not sure, Mr. Speaker, in asking a new question, how I 
should interpret that last remark.  If you're suggesting that I wasn't born 
and raised on a farm in Saskatchewan, then you're wrong -- you're wrong. 
 
I'm going to just ask you one more question.  The American hog producers 
are now looking for subsidization under the export enhancement program.  
And if they get such protection, then Canadian producers will be in even 



 

 

worse shape. 
 
Last Friday I understood your Trade minister to say to the House that your 
government is prepared to use article 701, subsection 4, of the free trade 
agreement as a weapon to protect our producers.  And my question for you 
today is: are you able to tell this House what steps you plan to take in 
order to use that article to protect our producers from the effects of the 
export enhancement program? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I will give the hon. member credit.  Now 
he's getting closer to the free trade agreement, and his previous 
discussions were not connected . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, 
he's admitting it now. 
 
Let me just say to the hon. member, when we're dealing with the Europeans 
and now Americans on the export enhancement program, there's an area that 
we're prepared to take them on every way that we can, Mr. Speaker -- 
provincially, jointly, with the prairie hog producers or the prairie 
provinces and the federal government together to make sure that we don't 
get caught in the cross-fire. 
 
They're using the excuse that they're taking on the Europeans, not us.  
Well, Mr. Speaker, I can say that we export most of the pork; we export 
most of the grain.  Therefore our markets, traditional markets, have been 
more vulnerable as a result of the export enhancement programs and the 
various kinds of subsidies in Europe.  So yes, we're prepared to take those 
on and we're prepared to look at the kinds of things that we can do to make 
sure that they don't cheat and take the kinds of markets we've had. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, a final question to the same minister.  Mr. 
Premier, are you prepared to go this far?  If the United States is going to 
persist with this export enhancement program in plain violation of that 
article 701(4) of the free trade agreement, are you prepared to ask the 
federal government to cancel that agreement, to abrogate the agreement in 
the event that the United States refuse to abandon the export enhancement 
program and refuse to comply with the terms of the free trade agreement? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to get this clear.  I want to put 
you on the spot here just so that we know what you're talking about. 
 
Are you prepared to cancel the whole free trade agreement as a result of . 
. . out of a hog export subsidy?  If that's what you're saying, I want to 
make it very clear so that I know that you're prepared to cancel all that 
for . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you will allow me, I will ask the hon. member a question to 
say he would cancel that on that basis alone. 



 

 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Speaker, with leave, before orders of the day I would 
like to address a few remarks about the fact that Agnes McPhail, the first 
woman parliamentarian, had her 100th birthday on Saturday. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Tribute to Centenarian 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  As all parliamentarians 
know in this country, Agnes McPhail was the first woman ever elected to the 
House of Commons in 1921.  She was elected under the banner of the United 
Farmers, which later became the Progressive Party.  On Saturday people in 
Ontario, particularly in her home county, celebrated the fact that Agnes 
McPhail would have been 100 years old. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Agnes McPhail was way ahead of her time.  In 1948 Agnes 
McPhail was talking about day-care legislation in the Ontario legislature.  
Agnes McPhail spoke of many, many social reforms, including unemployment 
insurance, pensions, and numerous other social programs that have now 
become well-known and well established in Canada. 
 
Agnes McPhail was a pacifist and very interested in peace.  In 1951, I 
believe, she was sent with J.S. Woodsworth to Geneva to the League of 
Nations to talk about peace in the country.  At that time there were 
numerous poets, writers and singers talking and speaking of the need for 
world peace. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it's appropriate that we recognize our first woman 
parliamentarian in Canada, and therefore I appreciate very much the 
legislature's agreement of leave to myself in order to recognize Agnes 
McPhail. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  On behalf of the government 
side of the House, let us add our agreement to the minister from Saskatoon 
. . . member from Saskatoon Nutana.  Well I think we need more women 
ministers. 
 
In keeping with the spirit of the resolution, I would simply say that in 
Canada, and in democracy in fact, it has been a slow struggle for the 
participation of women in the democratic process.  However, gains indeed 
have been made.  And when I think of what it must have been like a hundred 
years ago, 50 years ago, for women to take on the process and get involved, 
then we can only say that we admire the personality with the tenacity to 
get in there and do the job that she did. 



 

 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, with that we concur. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in reply which was 
moved by Mr. Toth and the amendment thereto moved by Mr. Pringle. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd just like to say that I'm 
pleased to rise again to address the throne speech, and very pleased 
because we have an honoured guest here, one Hewitt Helmsing.  I spoke 
briefly about our progress in the field of health care on Friday, and I'd 
like to just remind the members opposite of some of the achievements that 
we've had over the past 10 years.  I spoke about 14 hundred million dollars 
being spent on health care in this province in the current fiscal year, and 
that it's one-third of the provincial budget and that it's up some 90 per 
cent over the course of the last eight years. 
 
Hospital services are up substantially.  They're up to $600 million.  A lot 
of the members opposite don't know, but we have over 7,000 hospital beds in 
this province -- probably more hospital beds in this province on a per 
capita basis than any place in Canada or North America, or possibly the 
world. 
 
We have 1,100 new nursing department positions to help staff those 
hospitals.  We have 2,000 new or replacement beds either constructed or in 
the planning and construction phase at this time.  We have a lot of 
progress made across this province in construction.  It includes not only 
the rural areas but it includes the cities.  There's been great advances 
made at Regina General Hospital, St. Paul's, University, City Hospital, 
Pasqua, the cancer clinic in Saskatoon.  We've had advances in Saskatchewan 
alcohol and drug abuse, the Calder centre, and Whitespruce, the Wascana 
Rehab Centre, St. Joseph's Hospital in Estevan -- the list goes on and on. 
 
We've taken the lead in health care.  And recently we announced a pilot 
project, a pilot project to address a concern of many of the people of this 
province, and that being breast cancer.  A lot of the members opposite 
probably don't know, but about 500 people each year develop breast cancer 
in this province, and about 150 women die.  It's the leading cause of death 
from cancer in Saskatchewan in women. 
 
The progress has been great.  There's a lot of things that still need to be 
done, and we'll continue to work towards them.  But as I told the members 
opposite last day, more health care doesn't necessarily mean better health.  
And one of the things that we all have to come to grips with is the fact 



 

 

that maybe we should look at different kinds of bench-marks.  Rather than 
more drugs and more dollars and more beds, possibly the need for less would 
be a more appropriate way to go.  And we have to work together towards 
those common goals. 
 
I spoke a little bit about health promotion and the kinds of things that we 
should be doing there.  I talked a bit about the drug plan and the progress 
that we've made and the fact that more drugs don't necessarily relate to 
better health.  There was an increase of close to 85 per cent in the use of 
antibiotics or anti-infectives in a period of 1977-1978 to 1985.  And that 
didn't necessarily mean better health. 
 
I spoke a little bit about the advances in technology and how good our 
health card was, and how we could possibly advance that in the years to 
come, to do things with admissions and other related things that could be a 
help to all of us. 
 
I spoke a little bit about the dental plan and that now we have 
professionals in some 36 communities which previously did not have 
professional services at the local level.  We talk about the progress 
that's been made in providing those professional services to all the people 
of the community -- not just the kids in the schools but the adults and the 
seniors and everyone. 
 
I'd also like to speak briefly to the advances that we've made in the 
special care home sector, especially in light of their convention being in 
town this week.  The advances have been substantial.  Probably one of the 
most significant advances is the fact that special care homes are no longer 
under Social Services.  I think that it speaks well to the progress that 
we've made, and it speaks to the respect that our seniors deserve, and the 
proper place that they really belong. 
 
The increases in funding have been close to 70 per cent in the last eight 
years.  We've over $210 million.  A lot of members opposite, a lot of 
people in this province probably don't know, but we have over 10,000 
special care home beds in this province, the highest per capita in the 
country.  Thanks to the work of the members on this side of the House, 
there's been an awful lot of beds that have been replaced and an awful lot 
of new construction.  Some 2,400 beds, either new or replaced, and the list 
goes on and on. 
 
And nurses and people to work in those special care homes have been 
available, too.  Close to 600 special care home positions have been 
provided in the past eight years.  The advances have been great.  There's 
more to be done, there's no question about that. 
 
Seniors are an enormous challenge; they're also an enormous responsibility.  
They're our forefathers, they're the people that built this province, and 
we must continue to address their concerns.  Home care funding has 
increased over 100 per cent and now we provide home care to most of the 
province.  In the beginning of the early '80s we served only a small 
portion of the province. 
 



 

 

I spoke a little bit about SADAC (Saskatchewan Alcohol and Drug Abuse 
Commission) and a threefold increase in funding to address the problems of 
alcohol and drug abuse.  I didn't speak to waiting lists, and I notice that 
the member from Saskatoon is making a little bit of noise over there, and I 
wonder if he needs to be reminded about his comments about moratoriums and 
waiting lists and how they might be used. 
 
I don't have the quote, but it seems to me that there was some comment of 
the member opposite previous, when he held the health portfolio position, 
that it might be a way to efficiently manage the health care system or 
something like that.  But I would like to report to him that those waiting 
lists have come down substantially in the last few years, mainly because of 
new beds and because of day surgery and a few things like that.  But the 
list goes on and on. 
 
I spoke about seniors, and one of the things that we've done is we've been 
able to introduce a chiropody program, a first in this province, to address 
some of the needs of seniors.  We've also expanded community therapy, and 
we continue to work to try to address the concerns and the pressures for 
occupational therapists and physiotherapists.  But we go on and on. 
 
I was very pleased today to see that the members opposite finally decided 
to get a little bit back to their roots and talk a little bit about 
agriculture.  As I said on Friday, agriculture is our roots, and the 
challenges in agriculture are enormous, and we are working very, very hard 
to try to address some of those. 
 
Some of the fundamental problems with agriculture lie in things like farm 
debt, and the debt in this province is well over $5 billion.  The interest 
on that debt alone could be something like 700, $750 million a year just to 
service the debt. 
 
It's an enormous challenge, an enormous challenge for us all.  There's a 
need for change.  There's no doubt about that.  There's a need for change 
in agriculture.  The days of the past when people like Gordon MacMurchy 
talked about seeding everything to wheat, I think, are days that we'd just 
as soon forget about, to be quite honest with you.  It's time to diversify. 
 
We heard a few comments today about the pork industry, and I'd just like to 
speak briefly about the pork industry and how it's one of the simplest ways 
that this province can diversify.  Maybe rather than exporting just our raw 
products, just ship our grain out of the country, and maybe if we turned a 
lot of it into meat, maybe that would be a much, much better way.  If we 
were to turn our grain into hogs and slaughter them here and export the 
finished products, that that would be a way of the future. 
 
And there's been an enormous amount of progress made there.  Thanks to the 
work of the members on this side of the House, there's been a whole lot of 
things done.  We could talk about the cattle industry and the increases in 
slaughter in this province and how the numbers have increased from possibly 
less than 100,000 at the beginning of the '80s to numbers that reached 
close to 400,000 towards the end of the '80s, and how a lot of those cattle 
are slaughtered here and how the jobs that are created at Canada Packers 



 

 

and Intercon have created jobs for our youth and opportunities for 
everyone.  And maybe it's time that we continued to process and process all 
our products, not do what was done in the past, mainly ship our grain out 
of the country. 
 
I could go on and on about agriculture and I'd like to do that.  I'd also 
like to give the members on the opposite side an opportunity to speak. 
 
But I would like to say that the theme of the throne speech is basically 
people and their futures, communities and their futures, economic 
development, diversification, stabilization of the communities, fiscal 
responsibility. 
 
The future growth of Saskatchewan depends on the achievement of economic 
growth and diversification of the province's economic base.  It will depend 
on giving people the opportunities they need to succeed and develop to the 
fullest of their human potential.  It will depend on securing and 
stabilizing our communities.  It will depend on physical responsibility at 
all levels of government.  And it will depend on how we as people of this 
province work together to meet those challenges and how we step forward.  
Because that is the major theme, or themes of the throne speech, Mr. 
Speaker, I gladly support the throne speech.  Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Before I get into my Speech from 
the Throne, I'd like to just take this opportunity to congratulate you, 
sir, and your new bride.  I understand you have been recently married, and 
I wish to extend to you my personal congratulations and very best wishes 
for many happy years together.  It's a very important step in one's life 
and I find it personally very enjoyable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'd like to raise a number of things with respect to this 
Speech from the Throne.  I see right off the bat that we have another 
effort by this government opposite who more and more people across this 
country are referring to as the Keystone Cops of government. 
 
I have been doing a lot of travelling outside this province, and, I may 
add, Mr. Speaker, at my own expense.  And I have an opportunity to meet 
more and more people in the oil business and in the mining business and 
business in general, people who deal with this government on a day-to-day 
basis and from time to time who have head offices outside of our province.  
And it's almost unanimous in their appraisal of this government that the 
Keystone Cops description of government fits, and is attributed to this 
government and suits them very well. 
 
(1445) 
 
They are very discouraged with the way this government has been operating 
in terms of accountability, in terms of managing the province and dealing 
with many issues which are important, not only to residents of this 
province but to the people who operate businesses here as well. 
 



 

 

I've witnessed, as the rest of the province did, Mr. Speaker, an effort 
last fall by the Premier of rejuggling his cabinet. And it came to mind 
that it was very similar to an event that happened in the United States not 
long ago.  I guess the analogy I have drawn from this reshuffling of 
cabinet would be similar to what people are now calling the Jimmy 
Bakker-Tammy Faye Bakker cabinet shuffle, where Jimmy Bakker, who is the 
Premier, stands up and says, forgive me, I have sinned; if you vote for me 
one more time, I won't bankrupt this province again.  If you vote for us 
one more time, we won't sell our Crown corporations off at half their value 
again.  And if you vote for us one more time, even though we have sinned in 
terms of giving away our assets, we won't do that again, Mr. Speaker.  Just 
give us one more chance.  And if there's anything left that we can do to 
help you out as a people, we will. 
 
And then the Premier waits for three months after this Jimmy Bakker-Tammy 
Faye Bakker cabinet shuffle because nothing he did since that shuffle and 
before has improved his standing with respect to the people of the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now we see this throne speech doing just what the pollsters said that this 
government should be doing, and that is to change their ways; to act like a 
real government; to be competent, or create the perception that they're 
competent; to be accountable; to be honest, and to get rid of some of the 
waste they've been involved in.  And of course what this Speech from the 
Throne says is exactly what the pollsters and the majority, the vast 
majority of the people of this province are saying, in that the only way 
that this government can change their standing is to have an election and 
provide some new people to run this government, not the 100 people that 
they're trying to collect through this Consensus Saskatchewan, but in fact 
to elect a new government to run the province of Saskatchewan, rather than 
this incompetent bunch. 
 
So we're looking, Mr. Speaker, at a Speech from the Throne that tries to 
create a public relations perception that, if one was to read this and not 
know the history of the government, would feel quite good about it, in 
terms of the perception.  But what we're faced with right now, Mr. Speaker, 
unfortunately, is a very poor record -- eight long, lean years of 
Conservative government in this province that have shown day after day and 
time after time their inability to govern and their inability to manage the 
resources and the budgets of this province. 
 
We have seen on page no. 3 a reference that they want, and I quote: 
 

 People have said they want to see better management of our resources.  
They want waste eliminated.  They want their governments to make sensible 
choices, provide strong leadership and renew their commitment to service 
and efficiency. 

 
And I don't think that's something that is incorrect.  People do want that.  
And they've seen through this government's experience, and they've been 
under the thumb of this government for so long with respect to their 
programs that they want some of these things corrected.  For example, Crown 
corporations is the latest example -- I'll go through the litany in a few 



 

 

moments of the image the people of this province have of this government -- 
but the Crown Corporations Committee is an example . . . is a committee 
through which the government is held accountable for the Crown corporations 
that the people of this province control through the government. 
 
Yet we have seen, Mr. Speaker, the Crown Corporations Committee meet only 
23 days last year when the House was sitting for about 110 days.  So we met 
for about 20 per cent of the time.  And the last 30 days of the legislature 
the Crown corporations never met one day.  And that wouldn't be so bad if 
we had dealt with the business of the major Crown corporations in those 
only 23 days.  But what happened is that for 23 days this government 
dragged its feet in terms of bringing forward major Crown corporations that 
the people of this province have significant investment in and significant 
interest as well. 
 
The House was adjourned last August 30 on the assumption and on the 
agreement between the two House leaders that the Crown Corporations 
Committee and the Public Accounts Committee -- two very important 
committees which hold this government accountable -- would meet 
intersessionally to go through the financial statements and the 
expenditures of these Crowns and these government departments, the many 
departments and agencies the government is responsible for. 
 
Well as of December 21 we hadn't heard back, so as co-ordinator for the 
Crown Corporations Committee for the opposition, I dispatched a letter to 
the chairman of the Crown Corporations Committee as well as to the House 
Leader, reminding them of this deal, of this gentlemanly arrangement, this 
commitment of the government to meet intersessionally.  We did not hear 
back.  I had to contact the House Leader's office again in January a couple 
or three times.  Finally February 7 or 8 or 9 rolled around and they got 
back to us and said, well that commitment we made to you is really not a 
commitment.  We're going to be sitting again pretty soon, maybe March 19, 
and when that occurs we'll resume the sitting of the Crown Corporations 
Committee. 
 
Well we've been sitting in this legislature for one week, Mr. Speaker, and 
we have not heard from the Crown Corporations Committee chairperson.  
Indeed I'm not certain whether the government has appointed a new one yet, 
because we haven't been informed as yet as to whether there has been a new 
appointment. 
 
But I want to just go through a couple of points on this Crown Corporations 
Committee and what this government has done in terms of not bringing 
forward these major Crowns.  The Crown Corporations Committee, for the 
information of many people out in the public, is a committee which reviews 
the financial statements of each of the Crown corporations that the 
government is in control of. 
 
We have not seen Crown corporations come before the committee to review 
their expenditures in any great detail, and the major Crowns that have not 
been reviewed are as follows: the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan has 
not been reviewed, and that's been privatized; SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance) has not been reviewed for 1987 nor 1988, and that was on the 



 

 

books to be privatized last spring; Saskatchewan Mining and Development 
Corporation has also not been reviewed, and that's been privatized; the 
Saskatchewan Computer Corporation has been privatized.  We want to know who 
got the deals and who got the benefits of the give-aways in all of these 
corporations.  As well, SaskPower has not been reviewed because that was an 
attempt last spring and last summer of the government to try and sell off 
SaskEnergy. 
 
We want to know some of the details with respect to the restructuring of 
SaskPower and the re-financing of the debt that they have been very 
modestly making reference to. 
 
We have not dealt with the Crown investments corporation, which is the 
holding company of all of the Crowns which, if you look very closely at, 
has accepted significant hundreds of millions of dollars of debt 
transferred to it from corporations like the potash corporation. 
 
What this means to the taxpayers of this province, Mr. Speaker, is that the 
Crown investments corporation or the Crown Management Board, as the 
government refers to it as, has assumed hundreds of millions of dollars in 
more debt from corporations like the potash corporation and SMDC 
(Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation), yet they've sold off their 
equity for no money in return to the private sector.  So we are stuck with 
the debt and we don't have the assets.  And that is why the Crown 
corporation capital debt has sky-rocketed from $2 billion in 1982 -- which, 
by the way, was a self liquidating debt -- to one where we're now over $9 
billion, but we've lost over half of our Crown corporations that made 
profits over the years which retired their debts.  So now we're stuck with 
the $9 billion of Crown corporation capital debt as well as the $4 billion 
in operating debt, but we have no revenues from these Crown corporations to 
retire those debts. 
 
So who's getting stuck with the bill?  We have no assets, no 
revenue-generating assets to pay down those debts because they've all been 
sold off.  Yet the Crown Corporations Committee hasn't been called by the 
Keystone Cops of government opposite to review these expenditures and to 
answer questions with respect to accountability.  Yet they bring forward 
the Speech from the Throne, and they're asking us to be supportive and 
co-operative in some of the honesty and good management in their 
commitments that they want people to believe that they're serious in 
putting forward. 
 
Yet their commitments they've broken, just on this one Crown Corporations 
Committee exercise, very clearly and at the detriment to the public.  They 
have been shrouded in secrecy with respect to these privatizations.  And we 
cannot get the information by asking the ministers questions that are 
responsible for selling off these Crowns through this committee because 
they haven't met. 
 
So now we're stuck with 1987-1988 annual reports. The 1989 annual reports 
have yet to be tabled in this House, and we're looking forward to them. 
 
And we want to know as well . . . we haven't covered SEDCO, the 



 

 

Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation.  This corporation has 
hemorrhaged money, has lost money every year this government has been 
running it, and they've been losing tens of millions of dollars every year. 
 
And we want to know who's getting the benefit of these deals.  We know that 
Pocklington has got it; we know that GigaText has received 5 or $6 million; 
we know Supercart International and Joytec; we know that the game farm in 
Indian Head-Wolseley, the son of which was a principal of the minister 
opposite, Mr. Graham Taylor, who is gone.  And we want to ask questions of 
these officials and the ministers with respect to these very secretive 
deals that are costing the taxpayers tens of millions of dollars just in 
the last two years alone.  We also want to get to the bottom of the Cargill 
deal, which I'll be talking about in a few minutes. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, here we have a commitment made by the members opposite to 
meet intersessionally to discuss these important questions with respect to 
the Crown corporations and their privatizations, yet they act as if it 
never happened.  In the Speech from the Throne there's not one reference to 
privatization.  And we wonder about that, Mr. Speaker.  Perhaps it's not a 
very good word for them to be using now.  But they have come up with a new 
one and they call it Consensus Saskatchewan, or as my  
 Dcolleague, the member from Regina Centre, referred to it on Friday as 
ConSask, short for Consensus Saskatchewan.  But they're trying to con the 
people of this province into believing that there will be some consensus. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we all know that the Speech from the Throne is strictly 
a public relations effort.  There has been no resolve of the government, 
through this speech, to bring forward legislation which will introduce 
better times for the taxpayers of this province.  Quite on the contrary. 
 
But I think, Mr. Speaker, the consensus of the people of Saskatchewan is 
that they want leadership.  And the government opposite have created this, 
this consensus very easily . . . or I should say over a long period of 
time.  The government opposite has been the author of this consensus 
because they have not shown leadership, because they have been incompetent, 
because they've wasted millions and millions of taxpayers' dollars, and 
because they've mismanaged the entire economy.  Everything they've touched 
has turned to stone or to red ink -- every single effort.  The only thing 
they haven't bothered with has not been in their own jurisdiction.  Even 
that they've been trying to work at from time to time. 
 
So we've seen, Mr. Speaker, a little consensus developing in this province.  
And a consensus, through the Oxford Dictionary, says that it's a general 
agreement in opinion for the majority view.  And I believe very seriously, 
Mr. Speaker, that the majority opinion, the majority view of all the people 
of this province, when they look at the deficit, when they look at the 
betrayal of the promises this government has made over the years, when they 
look at the competence, and the out-migration, and the bankruptcies, and 
all of the economic indicators, will be that the government opposite has 
failed.  That's the consensus. 
 
And the consensus of the people of Saskatchewan feel is that because of 
these failures, they want to change the government of the day.  And I just 



 

 

want to go over for two minutes the economic indicators, just to prove my 
point with respect to their incompetence and their mismanagement. 
 
We've seen the deficit, as I referred to earlier, rise to $4 billion in 
operating.  We'll likely be four and a half billion by the time the budget 
is brought down in the next 10 days.  And we've seen the Crown corporation 
capital debt increase to $9 billion, which is, when you consider it, Mr. 
Speaker, $13 billion in total debt for a population of a million people.  
That's just outstanding.  The burden . . . just the interest of that alone 
is $1.3 billion a year in interest.  For a million people that's $1,300 for 
every man, woman and child just on a 10 per cent interest payment alone.  
If you've got a family of four, you're looking at over $5,000 a year just 
on the interest of that debt.  People don't understand the massive debt 
that we're stuck with.  But the consensus on that, Mr. Speaker, is that 
this government has burdened the taxpayers with debt far more than we can 
stand for far too long, and the consensus is that that debt has to be 
relieved very quickly. 
 
We've had a number of promises this government has made over the years.  
They've promised to reduce the personal income tax by 10 per cent.  We've 
seen new taxes, and the total tax result is 100 per cent increase in 
personal income taxes since 1982.  We've seen the promise of the gas tax.  
The Premier out here stood in the front of the buildings in 1982 and said 
that as long as there's a Conservative government in Saskatchewan there 
will never, ever be a gas tax. 
 
(1500) 
 
We have not only seen the gas tax reintroduced, we've seen it increased to 
over 45 cents a gallon from 28 cents a gallon -- a 50 per cent increase.  
So, we've seen betrayal of these promises. 
 
We heard about the elimination of the sales tax.  They promised in every 
one of those campaigns opposite to eliminate the 5 per cent sales tax, and 
I suppose they did, they did eliminate the 5 per cent sales tax.  
Unfortunately, they increased it by 40 per cent and made it a 7 per cent 
sales tax. 
 
So we've seen all of these promises made and these promises broken, and 
they've betrayed the people of this province, and the consensus is that 
they've had enough of this government's betrayal.  That's the consensus of 
this province.  And I believe that the hundred people they choose will 
provide them with that consensus. 
 
We've seen out-migration figures, a total of about 24,000 people leaving 
the province of Saskatchewan, a net migration loss just in the 1989 year 
alone, which is the second highest loss of population in the history of our 
province.  And the sad part about that is the majority of those people were 
young people. 
 
We've seen total bankruptcies increase up to 1,600 bankruptcies in the 
province last year, which was a 32 per cent increase over the 1988 year 
which was the previous record year.  So they broke their own record by 32 



 

 

per cent, a world class record, if you will.  That's the terms I would like 
to use. 
 
We've seen housing starts -- 1988 was the worst on record for housing 
starts in this province, but that was a record that was only short-lived, 
because in 1989 they broke the record again.  And in 1989 there were 1,906 
new housing starts in Saskatchewan, and that's the second lowest ever 
recorded, and certainly the lowest in the last 20 years.  In the first two 
months of 1990 alone there were only 82 new starts, which is a 47 per cent 
decrease over '89.  So the 1989 record year will be short-lived before this 
year is out as well. 
 
So I've gone over, Mr. Speaker, a number of economic indicators that the 
people of this province would have a consensus on as a result of the 
government's efforts opposite.  The consensus is the government has failed 
in every one of these.  And we can talk about the waste, the ministerial 
assistants that they have, and the number of ministers they have in their 
cabinet and what it cost, and the patronage of former Tory MLAs like Paul 
Schoenhals and Paul Rousseau and Gordon Dirks and Jack Sandberg and Keith 
Parker and Tim Embury and Bob Andrew and Taylor and Childers, and on and on 
and on.  What you conclude from this and what the consensus is from the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan is that every living, breathing 
Progressive Conservative in this province has received some kind of 
patronage appointment or some kind of government job or government 
contract. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, we get on to the accountability with the auditor 
and the public accounts, and I'm sure my colleague from Regina Victoria 
will be making some passing remarks and very serious remarks with respect 
to that.  And in the Speech from the Throne, Mr. Speaker, they also talk 
about on page 14, and I quote: 
 

 To avoid even the appearance of any wrongdoing by my ministers, my First 
Minister will implement a set of guidelines for the ethical conduct of 
Cabinet Ministers and Legislative Secretaries.  These guidelines, 
enforceable by the Premier, will be made public. 

 
And that's what this Speech from the Throne says, Mr. Speaker.  Well it's 
like closing the barn door after the horses have left, Mr. Speaker.  And 
let me tell you how serious this is.  In 1986 during the campaign I was 
knocking on a lot of doors in my constituency, and I might add that there 
are about a hundred families whose families . . . one family member are 
employed by the police, either the RCMP or the Regina city police.  And 
over the course of time I got to a fair number of these homes and spoke to 
a number of the families, and it seemed to me that they were volunteering 
in a large number their support for the NDP in the 1986 election.  By no 
means were they unanimous, but in the past in my campaigns they've been 
very quiet and very neutral on the doorstep.  But many of them were saying 
to me that they were going to support the NDP in the next election. 
 
And finally after a number of people had said this to me, I said: well, 
sir, I'd like to believe that it's because you have such a fine candidate 
locally who's running that that's why you're voting NDP -- and I'm sure 



 

 

that was part of the reason -- but I want to know the real reason, sir.  
And this police officer said to me, well, I can't be too specific, Mr. 
Solomon -- at that time I wasn't a member -- but I can tell you this.  Let 
me put it to you this way, he said.  During the course of our business 
hours, we've met all of the Progressive Conservative MLAs.  And I got to 
thinking about that.  That's all he had to say to me.  And that was the 
time of Colin Thatcher and a few of the Conservative members opposite's 
former colleagues who have left this House in disgrace. 
 
And that to me, sir, was an example of what this government's record has 
expressed to people very clearly.  It's confirmed to them their 
incompetence and their mismanagement and the corruption that is involved in 
this government.  And this little Speech from the Throne reference is 
clearly too little too late.  The Premier said this back in 1983 and '84, 
and we're still waiting for it six, seven short years later. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, that's all the comments I want to make with reference to 
that paragraph.  But I want to take a couple of minutes, if I might, to 
raise some information and ask some questions about the Cargill deal. 
 
As critic for the Crown investments corporation, I see this Cargill 
arrangement, Mr. Speaker, as a bad deal for the taxpayers of this province.  
And I want to read into the record some information and express some of my 
comments regarding Cargill so that the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan might better understand why I and my colleagues believe that 
this is not a very good deal for the taxpayers of this province. 
 
And I want to start by asking: who is Cargill?  Many people in this 
province don't know exactly who Cargill is.  Well I have a photocopy of 
Fortune magazine, September 11, 1989, and it makes reference to Cargill, 
and this is a list of the billionaires club in the United States.  And 
number one in the billionaires club are two individuals named Cargill 
MacMillan Jr. and Whitney MacMillan. 
 
And these two individuals own 60 per cent of Cargill Inc., whose sales 
reached in 1988, I believe, as it says here, about $47 billion Canadian -- 
$47 billion Canadian.  Now that may sound like a lot of money, because it 
is a lot of money.  If you took the four western provinces in Canada and 
put their budgets together, their budgets in total would be about half of 
this $47 billion annual sales for Cargill incorporated out of the United 
States.  They had a very modest profit, however -- about $340 million 
Canadian.  That was pretty modest.  I'm sure they have ways of working 
things around. 
 
But many people don't know this, but there's a corporate group in this 
Cargill Inc., a small group.  Some people refer to them as the hit team.  
Some of them refer to them as the planning department.  But what in reality 
exists with Cargill is a group of individuals, very well educated, very 
skilled in looking around for good deals for Cargill.  This group looks 
around for governments who have very deep pockets.  They look in the Third 
World.  They look in eastern Europe.  They look in western Europe.  They 
look all over the world and try and figure out what governments are in 
desperate need for help; what governments, as a result of being in 



 

 

desperate need of help, will contribute a fair amount of money towards a 
project. 
 
And what we've seen, Mr. Speaker, is that this group in Cargill have put 
Saskatchewan on their top 10 list of people and governments who have deep 
pockets and not a very broad-based business sense, even though they project 
to be business people, Mr. Speaker.  So we've got this little hit team out 
of Cargill, and they're doing a very good job for their employers and 
they're doing a very profitable job for their employers, and they've seen 
Saskatchewan as being in one of the top 10 provinces or governments or 
potential business partners, as they might call them, in order to subsidize 
Cargill's sales and profits. 
 
In a book written by Dan Morgan entitled Merchants of Grain, on page 171 it 
discusses some of the aspects of Cargill. And I'm just getting on with 
building a little profile of Cargill for my colleagues in the House. 
 
The members opposite are just sitting there on the edge of their seats 
waiting for more information on this, and I'm sure they're they're anxious, 
and I'll get to it right away. 
 

 Cargill headquarters in Minneapolis is, in fact, the global command post 
for a multinational commonwealth of 140 affiliates or subsidiaries in 36 
countries.  Cargill's money may be thousands of miles away (this book 
continues); but the decisions are made in Minneapolis, or rather, in the 
woods outside of it.  In 1978, the company moved 900 employees into a 
tiered, tent-shaped office building with 350,000 square feet of space in 
Wayzata, fifteen miles outside of Minneapolis and a seven-minute drive 
from Lake Minnetonka.  Top executives continued to work in what is 
commonly called "the castle", a 63-room replica French chateau close to 
the new building. 

 
 It seemed an odd place to locate the headquarters of a grain company.  

Inside were thirteen fireplaces and sixteen tiled bathrooms.  Outside were 
lush lawns.  Its most castlelike properties were the steep, gabled roofs. 

 
So that's what the Merchants of Grain say about Cargill.  And they talk in 
here about, as well, Cargill's strategy for making deals.  For example, and 
I quote this little article, Mr. Speaker, if I might: 
 

 In the late 1950s, the company had had the idea of building a 
soybean-processing plant in Norfolk, Virginia.  This seemed like a wise 
move at the time, since Midwestern soybeans could be processed there and 
sold as meal to the expanding broiler industries of Georgia, the 
Carolinas, and Maryland's Eastern Shore; or the beans or meal could be 
exported if prices abroad were better.  However, the Southern Railroad 
spoiled this scheme by instituting "Big John" rates that overnight lowered 
the cost of shipping beans or meal from the Midwest to the South, and the 
Norfolk plant was unable to compete for the southern broiler markets. 

 
The point this book is making, Mr. Speaker, is that Cargill will look at 
the deals, look for the business partners, gather the cash, get the most 
advantage to them, and they'll try and get into markets that are subsidized 



 

 

by a government, like the Government of Saskatchewan through Saferco, get 
into the market, get their toe-hold in, make their profits at the expense 
of the taxpayers, and whether the thing flies or not, there's certain 
guarantees they will have had with the deal.  And I'll be asking some 
questions about that later on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But who else is Cargill?  We have Cargill . . . I have a little note here.  
I believe it's from the library in Ottawa, and it's concerning the 
contributions to the PC Canada fund by Cargill.  And Cargill is a friend of 
the Conservative Party.  Many people would be shocked to hear that, but 
indeed it is.  As a matter of fact, in 1984 Cargill gave the PCs 
$15,454.24.  And of course there's a gentleman in '84, Mr. Kerry Hawkins, 
who is involved with Saferco through Cargill, gave a thousand dollars. 
 
In '85 that declined to $10,000.  It wasn't an election year so they gave 
the government opposite $10,000.  But Mr. Kerry Hawkins continued his 
support of Cargill with a thousand dollars. 
 
Then we've seen in 1986, Cargill give $10,892.72 and Kerry Hawkins gave 
once again a thousand dollars. 
 
In 1987 Cargill gave, not 10,000 or 15,000, Mr. Speaker, but $20,225.20.  I 
don't know what the government opposite did with the pennies, but it seems 
to the government opposite thousands of dollars are pennies, so the pennies 
are probably not that important.  And of course Kerry Hawkins appears on 
the library's information as being a donator to the PC fund of another 
thousand  dollars in '87. 
 
Then we get to 1988 and Cargill gave the PCs $15,000.  And we see Kerry 
Hawkins again giving a thousand dollars to the PC Party. 
 
And we're looking forward, Mr. Speaker, to seeing the 1989 rates because 
that's when Cargill struck the deal.  The deal came up in 1989.  That's 
when it was announced and signed. 
 
And so we've seen, out of the large numbers of dollars that Cargill has 
provided the PCs opposite, I'd be very interested to know, as would the 
people of this province, how much more they'd be giving later on in 1989 
and in 1990.  Maybe they might shock us and give a little less, but I'm not 
too certain.  We're looking forward to getting those details, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we've seen . . . That's the profile of Cargill.  They're a modest size 
company.  It's the largest U.S. private corporation.  As a matter of fact, 
Forbes magazine lists Cargill as the largest private corporation in the 
U.S., the second largest in the U.S. next to Cargill with modest sales of 
about $30 billion Canadian is Safeway.  So Cargill is about 50 per cent 
larger than Safeway, and Safeway is the second largest U.S. privately owned 
corporation.  Now, Mr. Speaker, that's the history or the profile. 
 
(1515) 
 
What I'd like to talk about now is a bit of the history of Cargill.  As 
people will remember, 1989 in the spring, to be exact April and May, the 



 

 

government opposite introduced privatization legislation for SaskPower and 
SaskEnergy, and they wanted to sell off SaskEnergy.  The government's 
opposition, actually the Queen's loyal opposition opposite, led by our 
leader, the member from Riversdale, objected to this privatization of 
SaskEnergy in a very strenuous way.  And we wanted to confirm our feelings 
by taking a number of days to travel throughout the province, by letting 
the bells ring, in obtaining a consensus.  The government of the day did 
not wish to do a consensus.  They wish to obtain a consensus now over the 
next eight or 10 years. 
 
So during this heat that was being applied to the government opposite from 
the public, from the opposition, from everybody in the province except 
perhaps Cargill, they came up with a little deflecting plan.  Well how do 
we get out of this mess?  Well obviously we're not going to be able to 
cancel SaskEnergy privatization right now, but maybe we can throw some 
tidbits out to the people out there who are looking for jobs in the public 
and get their mind off this SaskEnergy debacle. 
 
And what do they do, Mr. Speaker?  They held a press conference, and the 
Premier called a press conference to announce a press conference project.  
And we referred to it at that time as a press conference project, because 
here he was in the middle of a rock and a hard place as Premier of this 
province, as an incompetent Premier of an incompetent government, saying, 
well, we're going to build this megaproject, this great Cargill fertilizer 
plant out by Belle Plaine.  So they call this press conference and at the 
press conference he outlined the details of the plan.  Well it's going to 
cost $350 million, it's going to be a 50-50 deal, and of course like all 
the projects we're involved with, it's going to create hundreds and 
hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of jobs.  And that was his commitment to 
the people of this province. 
 
Of course at that time, Mr. Speaker, as critic I said, well just a second, 
Mr. Premier, this seems to me a very dangerous way to strike a deal.  Are 
there any other details you can provide us?  He says, well the project is 
being negotiated, and the final details will be announced at a later date.  
We're just announcing the principles of the project. 
 
And the reason I said, Mr. Speaker, was a dangerous way to undertake 
megaprojects, or economic development, was because once you've made an 
announcement as a government, made a commitment to build something in 
partnership with another government or another company in a joint venture 
operation and you haven't finalized the details . . . if you're in a tight 
spot, your partner will take advantage of that and cut a deal for their 
benefit. 
 
Well of course the Premier said, oh no, those pitfalls will never happen.  
So here we see, Mr. Speaker, we see as the details of the project were 
released . . . only after questioning in this House we find that the 50-50 
deal wasn't really 50-50; that it was going to be $60 million taxpayers, 
$50 million Cargill, and the taxpayers would guarantee a loan of $230 
million. 
 
We asked for more details.  The Premier kept saying, well, no more details.  



 

 

We said, well that doesn't sound 50-50 to us; it sounds like we're taking 
the gas for $290 million, taking the risk for $290 million.  Cargill's 
taking the risk at $60 million and is getting all these guarantees, and 
where's the details?  Where's the feasibility study, the break-even point 
analysis?  Where's the market agreement?  Where are all these things that 
will show that it's going to be a good deal? 
 
And of course the Premier said, in due course they'll be announced.  As a 
matter of fact, he said September.  So over the summer we raised some more 
questions.  We asked about the guaranteed rate of return for Cargill 
because that was the industry rumour at that time.  The deputy premier at 
that time, the member from Souris-Cannington, stood in this House and said, 
there's no deal.  There's no guaranteed rate of return, he said, for 
Cargill. 
 
He walks out of this House, goes into his lounge and phones Saferco and 
Crown investments corporation and he says, cut the deal.  Cut the deal but 
get away from that guaranteed rate of return.  They're asking me questions 
in the House and the media are waiting to ask me questions outside.  So he 
goes out there and tries to kill the deal over the phone. 
 
But things unfolded, Mr. Speaker.  Things unfolded on this deal that showed 
that even though the deputy premier tried to rearrange the arrangement, 
which was already cut in Cargill's favour, it didn't materialize. 
 
Finally, eight months after the announcement, nine months after the 
announcement, in February of 1990, the Premier announces the details of the 
Cargill fertilizer plant at Belle Plaine.  Not all the details, mind you.  
Just the tidbits that the media, he was hoping, would report.  Just the 
tidbits that the people of Saskatchewan would bite on and not worry about 
it down the road. 
 
Well we saw, Mr. Speaker, the tidbits, and here they are.  The tidbits he 
announced in . . . By the way, at the same time at his side was Kerry 
Hawkins; he was the person I referred to earlier who gave all that money to 
the PC Party over the years.  He's probably neutral politically, but he 
likes the PC Party, but maybe it was tax credit money. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Thousand Dollar Kerry. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- My colleague, the member from Moose Jaw North, refers to 
him as "Thousand Dollar Kerry." 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we see the details announced.  Instead of being $350 
million project, it's no longer $350 million; it's now $435 million, an 
increase of 24 per cent in eight months.  Instead of having a 50-50 deal 
like the Premier said we would have during the course of the heat of the 
SaskEnergy debate, it's no longer 50-50. 
 
As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, it's a very bad deal for the taxpayers of 
this province.  This project alone is going to cost $3.4 million per job 
created.  This is what the bottom line of the project is: $435 million is 
going to be spent to create 130 full-time jobs, which amounts to $3.4 



 

 

million for every job created.  Tory economics, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We've seen the bad deal, and here it is, Mr. Speaker: $65 million is put in 
by Cargill for 50 per cent of the ownership and equity and control; 64 
million is put up by the taxpayers, cash up-front equity, for 49 per cent.  
But the government guarantees the balance of $305 million, so Cargill puts 
in 15 per cent and gets 50 per cent of the equity.  The taxpayers of the 
province of Saskatchewan put up initially a risk of 85 per cent of the 
total amount of the project for only 49 per cent in a minority share. 
 
And one financial institute, yet unnamed, gets 1 per cent for a measly $1 
million.  So for four-tenths of one per cent equity, they get leverage on 
that million dollars up to 1 per cent.  So here we have, Mr. Speaker, a 
very suspicious deal. 
 
Now the Premier at the press conference, with his good friend Kerry 
Hawkins, says that this is a state of the art arrangement.  And he called 
it, "A state of the art joint venture management agreement."  And he called 
the financial arrangement, and I quote again, Mr. Speaker, "An excellent 
financial deal." 
 
Well the questions I have for the Premier, Mr. Speaker -- and I'd like him 
to perhaps stand up today and respond to these -- is if it's such a state 
of the art joint venture management agreement, could he table this 
agreement to prove that it's a state of the art agreement?  And if it's 
such a great deal, who is it a great deal for?  Is it a terrific financial 
arrangement for Cargill?  Or is it a terrific financial arrangement for the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan?  I doubt that.  I think Cargill has the leverage 
on this one. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the question that was asked at the press conference, 
another one was asked by one of the media people:  Mr. Premier, if it's a 
white elephant, what do we do with the plant?  And the Premier's response 
was, well, we'd have the plant.  We'd have the plant, he said.  And my 
question to the Premier is, well yes, we'd have the plant, but we've also 
got the assets from GigaText which is $150,000 out of $6 million that we 
spent.  So what do we do with this plant if it doesn't work? 
 
We've got Supercart.  We have an investment in Supercart.  What do we have 
as a result of that one going belly up under the administration opposite? 
 
Kerry Hawkins, the representative from Cargill, went on to say, "It's a 
very complicated deal."  We can't announce the details.  But why is it 
complicated?  Why is this deal so complicated?  Is it to keep the truth 
away from the public?  Is it to keep the truth secret, like this government 
has always done with its fiscal arrangements. 
 
Every dollar it's invested and every dollar it's spent through the Crown 
corporations, through the privatizations, through their polling, through 
their travelling, through all of their handling of funds, has been done in 
as much a secret cocoon as possible.  And that is hiding from the people of 
this province, hiding from the opposition and not being accountable to the 
taxpayers of this province for the money they're spending. 



 

 

 
So I think, Mr. Speaker, that that's why the deal is not being tabled.  But 
the PCs have failed to disclose, I might add, on many occasions in the 
past, financial dealings.  For example, the GigaText dealings, Supercart, 
Saskatchewan Transportation Company, and even the Co-op upgrader. 
 
And there's a story behind that Co-op upgrader, Mr. Speaker.  We have seen 
upon requests, no answers.  We've asked them for a tabling of the Co-op 
upgrader deal with NewGrade Energy, and they haven't tabled it.  They said 
it was going to cost $150 million, and it was a 50-50 project with the 
Consumers' Co-op Refineries Ltd.  And we said, fine, we have no problem 
with an economic arrangement.  Unfortunately there were two things wrong 
with it.  One, it was done in haste.  The deal was cut in 1986, prior to 
the provincial election of 1986.  And secondly, they haven't released the 
details. 
 
And now what's happening is we're getting some details trickling out of the 
Minister of Energy's office that now say the government opposite has had to 
spend $65 million in the last eight or 10 months to help subsidize the 
Co-op upgrader, because of some of the problems it's having. 
 
Well why weren't these arrangements made public so the people of 
Saskatchewan would know that when they get into a deal, whether it's for 
the economic good of the province or not, how much taxpayers' dollars are 
going to be at risk?  We'd like to see more of that coming, or some of it 
coming. 
 
So we want to know, Mr. Speaker, where is the deal?  Have the taxpayers' 
best interests been served and protected?  Where is the marketing 
arrangement? 
 
The industry rumours are, the fertilizer industry rumours are that the 
Cargill corporation has a marketing arrangement whereby they receive a 
marketing fee for every tonne of fertilizer produced.  It doesn't matter if 
the company makes money or not.  Now if there's a marketing agreement 
that's guaranteeing a market fee to Cargill regardless of the profitability 
of the company, let's have a look at it.  Let's see what it's going cost 
the taxpayers of this province and what further liabilities will taxpayers 
have.  Who pays for the construction cost overruns?  We want to know the 
answers to that.  They haven't provided answers to that, Mr. Speaker.  Who 
is liable during the construction period? 
 
In the event the company is losing during its operations, who is liable for 
the operating losses?  Is it the taxpayers of this province?  And if so, 
why and for how much? 
 
Where are the feasibility studies, Mr. Speaker, on this Cargill fertilizer 
plant that shows it's a deal that'll make some money -- if not make money, 
at least return the investment the taxpayers have put in -- and certainly 
not expose us to tens and maybe hundreds of millions of dollars of further 
liability? 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, why was not an environmental impact statement 



 

 

undertaken for this plant?  There's a lot of questions that arise with 
respect to the environment on this plant.  For example, their water 
consumption. There are industry statements made that this plant will 
consume between 15 and 20 per cent of the daily supply of water used in the 
city of Regina.  Twenty per cent of our supply is going to be used at a 
Buffalo Pound, yet they say, oh no, it's not going to be that high.  But 
where are the documents which prove this, Mr. Speaker? 
 
They haven't given us any kind of reason to be complacent on this.  And 
their track record has shown that every time they've made a statement 
they've done the opposite, or they've misled people when it comes to 
environmental impact statements; for example, the Rafferty dam. 
 
There's also speculation that the soil on which the plant will be built is 
not sufficient for a fertilizer plant; it's not adequate. It has to be a 
clay base, but it's a sandy soil base out there. So they will have to haul 
in clay. What impact will that have? 
 
So we are looking at, as well, waste water, Mr. Speaker.  Where does the 
waste water go from this plant?  These are questions that the government 
has failed to provide to the public to ensure that what they are cooking 
here with Cargill is a reasonable, economic and environmental project which 
will benefit the people of this province. 
 
 DWe also have some concern, Mr. Speaker, with respect to dumping the 
product in the United States, vis-a-vis the free trade agreement and, of 
course, the countervail actions which might arise to that, not only 
jeopardizing Saferco and the Cargill fertilizer plant but jeopardizing the 
entire industry in Canada as we know it today, because that's where a 
significant percentage of fertilizer is exported to from Canada. 
 
And of course the rumours in the industry are very hot and heavy that 
Cargill is indeed provided with a guaranteed rate of return.  And we want 
to know, Mr. Speaker, whether that's the truth, and if it is, how much this 
is going to cost the taxpayers of this province. 
 
(1530) 
 
So you see, Mr. Speaker, very simply put, a government that has come 
forward trying to trick the people of the province just one more time into 
believing that they are a government of consensus, they are a government of 
fair-minded men and women.  Well we know from their track record, Mr. 
Speaker, that that is as far from the truth as you can possibly be and 
still stand in this House and say that it is.  I mean, it's just so far 
away, Mr. Speaker, that it's unbelievable. 
 
And you may think that what I'm saying is rhetoric, but let me just point 
out one other aspect.  I have here, Mr. Speaker, some documentation from 
the Canadian Council of Nitrogen Producers.  This is a document which is 
well researched, that has covered a lot of the points that I have made, in 
far greater detail than I have, but it supports basically the premise that 
I have put forward and the thesis that I've put forward, and that is that 
this Cargill is a bad economic deal for the people of this province. 



 

 

 
And I just want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the member from Weyburn there is 
very interested in this speech because he knows that on Saturday night in 
Weyburn city, there was an NDP nominating convention at which over 500 
people attended, and they were excited and we had a terrific nominating 
convention.  The people there were wearing the member from Weyburn's name, 
lapel pins with X's on them -- I don't know what that meant.  And the 
member . . . I can't say his name; it's unparliamentary, Mr. Speaker.  But 
the point is, Mr. Speaker, this Weyburn nominating convention, the people 
that were there were enthusiastic; they believe there's going to be a 
change in this province, and the consensus of these members is that the 
opposite government has to be defeated in the next election, and really 
quick. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- There were many people at that convention that were 
ex-friends of the former member . . . or the member opposite as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Canadian Council of Nitrogen Producers says, and I quote 
from their documentation: 
 

 This plant would not be built without the participation of the Province. 
 
 We believe the Saskatchewan Government is operating on a series of 

overly-optimistic and unrealistic cost and market assumptions.  In 
particular, the government has over-estimated the economic viability of 
the plants and it has underestimated the potential damage to existing 
privately financed Canadian producers both directly . . . and as a 
consequence of possible U.S. trade actions. 

 
And in this brief, Mr. Speaker, it goes on to make four points.  One: 
 

 There is nothing in the history and development of the Canadian nitrogen 
industry which suggests that government financial assistance is required 
to encourage any reasonable investment. 

 
Number two: 
 

 The industry has expanded to meet market demand on its own. 
 

And number three: 
 

 The inevitable impact (of the Saferco plants) will be predatory pricing, 
lower plant production levels, more idled capacity, net industry losses 
and plant closures.  (And) Saferco will be hurt along with the rest of the 
industry. 

 
And that's the point of my remarks today, Mr. Speaker: how much will 
Saferco and the taxpayers of this province be hurt as a result of this 
quickly and hastily put together deal of the government opposite with 
respect to Cargill? 
 



 

 

And it goes on to talk about a number of items, but it says in this one 
page, Mr. Speaker, and I quote: 
 

 We can only conclude that the Government of Saskatchewan has entered into 
a one-sided arrangement in which most of the risks and liabilities are 
assumed by the public sector.  The Saskatchewan taxpayers are being 
committed to a project whose benefits may turn out to be short term, 
transitory, and mostly out of province.  We believe the economic viability 
of the Saferco project is very much in question. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, I appreciate having had the opportunity to speak on this 
matter, and I can tell you that I will be supporting the amendment put 
forward by the member from Saskatoon Eastview, and I will be opposing the 
motion put forward by the government.  Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: -- Mr. Speaker, it's indeed a privilege, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, for me to join with my colleagues and the members on the other 
side of the House to participate in this debate on the Speech from the 
Throne.  I join in congratulating the mover of the speech, my colleague 
from Moosomin, as well as the seconder, my colleague from Nipawin, on a job 
very well done. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, you know we've heard a little bit of rhetoric from the 
opposition in saying that, you know, they couldn't understand, that they 
hadn't much to work with and all the rest of it.  Well I want the members 
opposite to know that, as was outlined in the Speech from the Throne 
delivered by Her Honour our Lieutenant Governor, when the members opposite 
degrade or knock that speech in any way, many of my constituents in Regina 
South believe that that's a personal insult to her high office, and the way 
that the opposition carves their words and degrades the tone of that 
speech, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people in Regina South feel that, I 
suppose, it's very unfortunate that they would take that kind of an 
attitude on behalf of Her Honour. 
 
I believe that the Speech from the Throne carried a significant message, 
and I intend on speaking at some small length as to why, and explain to 
them.  Perhaps the members opposite in their rebuttals to what I might have 
to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, could then tone it down somewhat, keeping in 
mind that it is a major document delivered. 
 
I would want to begin by advising you, sir, that the constituents of my 
constituency of Regina South have tremendous respect for the manner in 
which our government is facing the urgent major challenges confronting our 
province and the steps that are being taken by our government to meet those 
challenges.  And clearly the Speech from the Throne outlined that. 
 
The new decade has already seen extensive and unprecedented change 
presenting major challenges for all of us in our province.  Our people have 
been hurt by the huge subsidies received by farmers in the European 
Economic Community,  and in the country, our friends to the south of us. 
 



 

 

Our competitors in the agricultural markets of the world have hundreds and 
hundreds of millions of dollars of supporting them in subsidies.  And the 
effect of that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is very important on our agricultural 
industry because agriculture is still the very base of Saskatchewan's 
economy.  And the staggering amount of dollars put forward by these 
countries has had a significant effect and has never been more severe on 
our agricultural community than now. 
 
All of us, all of us are being hurt by the economic impact of this crisis 
on our farming community, not only farmers but business, labour, the 
professions, both urban and rural areas.  And as the throne speech put it 
so well, the world has declared economic war on Saskatchewan.  But the 
people of this province have faced crisis before, and I've spoken on this 
many times before, and we have risen to the occasion.  We have successfully 
met challenges in the past, just as we will handle this one. 
 
As rich as we are in resources, our greatest resource of all is still our 
people.  Those who settled our frontier lands over the past hundred years, 
they never had it easy.  They came here from all parts of the world for a 
new beginning, for a new life for themselves and for their families.  And I 
know that my ancestry and my heritage, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is of Polish 
descent.  And my grandparents came from that great country to establish 
here in Saskatchewan, and I was born here in Saskatchewan.  Matter of fact, 
my wife too is of Polish descent.  And I proudly say to the ethnic 
community as we travel around Saskatchewan and our city, and I think 
everybody is aware of this, we now have two grandsons that are fifth 
generation Polish.  We're very proud of that heritage. 
 
But these settlers from all walks of life, from all nations, came here to 
share and develop in the great resources of our province, to start new 
lives, and they suffered many hardships.  They managed to prevail, and over 
the years developed a rising standard of living.  And now we, as their 
descendants, will carry on in the face of the new challenges that we now 
have before us as we enter indeed a new decade, indeed a new century.  As 
second, third, and fourth, and fifth generation Canadians, we'll succeed, 
just as our forefathers did.  We have always pulled together in times of 
crisis and will do so again.  Together we'll face these challenges. 
 
And that's what the speech indicated, Mr. Deputy Speaker -- togetherness.  
And that's exactly what the opposition fails to recognize in that document.  
And together, all of the people, with the exception, I suppose, of a 
handful of members opposite, we will face these challenges with the same 
sense of hope, of conviction and co-operation that has kept us strong in 
the past.  We must now decide on a plan and a strategy, and how to meet and 
overcome these challenges and take advantage of new opportunities before 
us. 
 
Our people want to be involved in this process.  Nowhere in the western 
people is the spirit of involvement and co-operation greater than among 
those of us who call Saskatchewan home.  As I've said, people are our 
greatest asset.  And they are eager to become involved in making choices 
about the future of our economy, of our society, and be active participants 
in the whole process of change. 



 

 

 
Our government is providing the leadership for an unprecedented process of 
public involvement in the affairs of our province.  Our government is 
giving every sector of Saskatchewan's society the opportunity to 
participate with their ideas, with their suggestions and recommendations 
for the future development of our province, Saskatchewan. 
 
Appropriately, it's called, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Consensus Saskatchewan.  
And it will be developed into the most extensive consultation with the 
public in the history of this province.  People working together, people 
working in partnership with their government to develop the future of their 
province. 
 
Of course without even taking the time to study it, the Leader of the 
Opposition dismisses this major initiative, as do all the members opposite.  
We hear the old refrain that it won't work.  Of course that old refrain, 
emanating from the benches opposite, is prevalent during any discussion, 
during any plan, during any process that you put forward.  The NDP probably 
is the single most political party afraid of change.  They always have 
been; they always will be. 
 
So this whole area of public involvement and dealing with the public in 
consultation is totally unfamiliar to the NDP.  It always has been, and 
perhaps it always will be. 
 
Their biggest claim to fame, I suppose, whenever they have held the office 
here in Saskatchewan, is big government where the government makes all of 
the decision and where the public be damned: who cares? 
 
Now the member from Regina Centre sits there and, you know, again speaks 
from his seat and doesn't want to listen to the remarks that I have to 
make.  My remarks are right on; they're exactly what we're talking about.  
We don't have to unnecessarily talk about the things that the member is 
very articulate on.  Last year in a long session we heard him articulate to 
no end on the Alamo and on kiddie TV programs and all the rest of it.  That 
puts his thinking into perspective, and that's what the people of Regina 
Centre know that their member is famous for.  But to speak on a relative 
topic and stand in his place and say something meaningful, and criticize in 
a meaningful way, or to come up, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with some alternate 
plan, that's not in his make-up.  And why isn't it?  Simply because he 
won't go out and consult with his constituents, and it's unfortunate. 
 
But we should not expect him to understand any program, and he's still 
going on, babbling from his seat, now Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I can, you 
know, hardly . . . He was referring in his remarks -- and I was hoping to 
have the opportunity to study Hansard -- where he had some significant 
findings of budgetary dollars that were missing.  Did he do any study, or 
does he have any real fact or material?  No. 
 
(1545) 
 
I will speak later about a little fib that I was involved in publicly in 
the Leader-Post, a little fib, and I'll speak to that in a moment.  But in 



 

 

the meantime, as I sit here and listen to other members when they get up 
and babble without any kind of a consultative process or any meaningful 
debate, and just pull a figure out onto the air and say, well this has been 
cut by 40 per cent or that has been cut by 50 per cent or whatever, it's 
more than that. 
 
If you shift things in a budget process, that isn't a cut.  So when he says 
that Urban Affairs was cut dramatically, he has no substantial proof for 
those kind of statements.  Certainly, as far as it relates to the numbers 
that were in the book . . . and now he's trying to prove his point.  But he 
can't prove it in debate, that's the unfortunate part.  He doesn't have the 
oratorical skills that are required to stand in his place and do that in a 
proper debate, but rather he would choose to babble from his seat and prove 
his point there. 
 
Well in any event, it's unfortunate.  But we should not expect the NDP, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, to understand any program that would involve people in a 
decision-making process.  And when they were in office, it was take it or 
leave it, period.  This is how government operates.  This is how it works.  
This is what will happen. 
 
Later in my remarks, I will speak for a moment on my new department, on my 
new portfolio, on exactly how the consultative process . . . and the member 
from Saskatoon South is laughing.  And I've got some remarks for him as 
well in that thing.  And I know why he's laughing and giggling there, but 
we'll face him because undoubtedly he will say something smart, that he 
thinks is smart, when I speak, but in any event . . . 
 
All of us are really too familiar with the heavy handed treatment -- that's 
the easiest way to say it -- that we all received at the hands of the NDP 
with their big government, their big government of the past.  And boy did I 
ever live with that big government.  You try, as a little operator of 
family businesses, to get by with the unbelievable amount of bureaucratic 
red tape that was in existence when we were trying to operate our family 
operations, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
We almost had to hire a host of lawyers and a host of accountants to deal 
with the problems that they put in front of small business.  And why did 
they do that? Why did they put all of those obstacles in front of small 
business . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Now he's accusing me about a 
credit rating.  Well I'll put up my credit rating against the credit rating 
of some of the members opposite that tried business and failed.  And why?  
And why they failed -- because they don't understand business. The NDP 
never have and never will. 
 
Now the member from Regina North West wants to compare.  Any time.  My 
skills versus yours; my business acumen versus yours.  Any time.  Why don't 
you stand up in this Assembly the way I do and speak on behalf of small 
business?  I'll tell you why.  Because your record isn't there.  Your 
membership in the chamber of commerce isn't there.  Even some of the people 
in those benches, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that are in the legal fraternity 
don't belong to the chambers of commerce.  And I ask, why not? Why not?  Do 
they hate the business groups that much?  Probably.  And yet now we can't 



 

 

help seeing in the media the new Leader of the Opposition claiming to be 
the great white knight for the small-business community in this province. 
 
And all of the business community that went to share a dinner with him and 
the fact that it had to be moved to larger premises and the like -- 
balderdash!  And interestingly enough, the opening remarks of the Leader of 
the Opposition to my friends in the business community, and he said, if you 
think that you're nervous, think of how I feel.  Can you imagine the leader 
of a political party being nervous and afraid to speak to members of the 
business community?  Virtually unheard of. Virtually unprecedented. 
 
So enough said about the business community unless they choose to speak 
more.  And I could speak at some length about it, but I had some remarks 
that I would like to stay with, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the short time 
that's available to me this afternoon. 
 
But my main point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, all of us are all too familiar with 
the heavy handed treatment that we received at the hands of the NDP with 
their big government of the past.  And the people of this province don't 
ever want that again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my remarks today I want to put on record some initiatives 
and programs that my department, my new department of Consumer and 
Commercial Affairs, to underline how eager and how enthusiastic the people 
of this province are if you give them the opportunity, if you are prepared 
to share with the people of this province that opportunity, as we have 
since 1982 and as we will concentrate in the future to play a key role in 
the management of their public affairs. 
 
And of course all of this is absolutely foreign to the NDP.  And it strikes 
quite a nerve because we're getting quite a chirp from the members opposite 
as my remarks continue.  They don't believe in giving the public any voice 
in the affairs of the province.  And they laugh out loud because you're 
striking a nerve, you're hurting them, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and they have no 
recourse but simply to sit back and giggle. 
 
The public -- who cares!  That's their attitude.  Their big government will 
do the thinking for the people of this province.  That's the way they 
behaved when they were in office before; that's why they were turfed out; 
that's why they will never be back.  All that has happened in the past 
year, all that has happened in the past year in eastern Europe has 
completely passed them by, just completely passed them by.  The people of 
eastern Europe have spoken out against big government in their countries, 
just as the people of this province have done when they turfed out the NDP.  
It's ironic, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but perhaps the fight for freedom to tear 
down the walls of socialism began right here in Saskatchewan in 1982. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: -- Ah, they laugh.  Even members opposite acknowledge that, 
and I appreciate that they recognize that, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Back in 
1982 there was a wall built by the NDP right around this province, a wall 
that stopped investment because the government had to do it all.  



 

 

Conversely, a wall that stopped trade because the government of the day had 
to learn to trade on their own as best they could, you know, keeping in 
mind that the flow of investments had stopped. 
 
The government had to do everything.  There was no members of the business 
community would come in and invest in NDP Saskatchewan.  If it turned out 
to be a good idea, they'd nationalize it.  Conversely, they believed that, 
you know, they could have the expertise to merchandise everything from 
Saskatchewan, so they would hire more people in government to do all of the 
exports for everything. 
 
Well the people of Saskatchewan realized that that doesn't work, so they 
tore those walls down in a democratic process.  They destroyed the NDP.  
They decimated them to the point of eight sitting members left in 
opposition.  The people did that.  The people of Saskatchewan tore down 
those walls.  Now we have seen those same walls coming down on the eastern 
bloc, beginning of course with the large, famous wall and continuing right 
through one socialist nation after another destroying socialism, throwing 
away socialism, and throwing away big government; the people coming to the 
conclusion that socialism does not work and they have lived with it long 
enough.  Saskatchewan arrived at that point a long, long time ago. 
 
Trade, a necessity for Saskatchewan, an absolute necessity.  When this 
province first began, Mr. Deputy Speaker, trade was a necessity.  Our 
forefathers recognized that even before the formation of Saskatchewan as a 
province -- our people recognized that.  Our resources so abundant, our 
ability to work freely to produce much more, produce much more of 
everything than we could possibly use -- we had to depend on trade.  So the 
people of Saskatchewan in 1982 said we'd better learn how to trade freely; 
it's a necessity for Saskatchewan.  We have to trade freely, not only with 
the rest of our provinces, we have to trade freely with the United States 
of America, and we have to trade in this huge global village in which we 
now live, throughout the world. 
 
Then when you take that, the next step -- and I will speak in a moment a 
little more at length about how can you trade freely if you don't have 
Saskatchewan presence in other countries.  And that's a great question.  
And yet when our government establishes a presence in another country, what 
happens?  The NDP, and with the remarks that I have just said, 
understandably will not accept it.  And why would they?  They condemn this 
government for trying to create an absolute presence in another country 
that is really required if indeed we want to expand the trade relationship 
throughout the world. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, right now we in Saskatchewan are a major player in the 
Canadian free trade agreement with the United States.  And it's simple 
because we depend on trade.  And why wouldn't we then have a free trade 
agreement with the largest market that's available to us?  The friendliest 
border in the world, totally unmanned, and we want to trade freely with 
them.  Why wouldn't we, with that opportunity? 
 
And all the members well know that our former colleague, Bob Andrew, who is 
a trained lawyer by profession, in his former capacity as minister was one 



 

 

of the most knowledgeable people in Saskatchewan on the free trade 
agreement and how it affected Saskatchewan and how we could best use that 
agreement for the good and welfare of our province. 
 
Well I ask you, I ask this Assembly, what better qualifications for his new 
post in Minneapolis than that?  Our own Saskatchewan representative in the 
United States, exploring new markets, total familiarity with our province, 
a recognized expert in the free trade agreement, firsthand, in the city of 
Minneapolis in the United States of America.  And yet they sit back there 
and say he's unqualified.  It's unbelievable that they would make that kind 
of a statement. 
 
I should mention that in this global village we now live in I understand 
that new technology and knowledge changes, expands, doubles, perhaps every 
two months or so.  And so Saskatchewan presence world-wide is absolutely 
essential.  And I will go on to explain why. 
 
Today I would like to share with you a few of my observations on my recent 
trade mission to the Pacific Rim.  But before I begin on the results of 
that . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Nine months of summer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: -- Yes, the member mentioned it, nine months of summer. 
 
I would like to begin first of all with an apology, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 
the media and others.  I've had a little fun with a statement, not 
attributed, but rather that I made concerning nine months of summer in our 
province.  And actually I have to admit that I'm rather pleased that the 
media seemed to play with it as they did, because as much as I would like 
to think that I may have been able to convince five million people 
listening to that radio show that there was indeed nine months of summer 
here, I think that that remark . . . I don't believe I could win that 
argument in that. 
 
So I'd like to quote from a recent editorial in the Regina Leader-Post who 
perhaps sums it best up where they attribute me with just a little fib.  
And I read from the editorial: 
 

 Saskatchewan cabinet minister Jack Klein's little fib about 
nine-month-long prairie summers (uttered during a radio interview while on 
a recent trade and investment mission to Hong Kong) appears a minor slip 
of the tongue . . . 

 
Well they were kind, and rightfully so.  The members giggle and that's 
fine.  It indeed was not a minor slip of the tongue; it was a major slip of 
the tongue. And unfortunately that happens to all of us except if you're 
perfect I guess, and I certainly am not perfect. 
 
But in terms of the entire interview, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we were indeed 
talking about British Columbia and Ontario, and that was dominating the 
interview and I certainly had that slip of the tongue.  In any event, I do 
sincerely apologize for that error.  I certainly meant no harm.  I had no 



 

 

intention of being misleading. 
 
(1600) 
 
And if I did indeed offend anybody at all, I regret that.  And I would like 
to see this apology placed on record and I bring it forward today. 
 
But continuing on with my observations of that recent trade mission to the 
Pacific Rim, both from a political perspective and from my thoughts as an 
independent business person . . . and if the members opposite would pay a 
little attention perhaps they could learn a little something about 
business.  It's something that they've never had the opportunity before.  
So pretend you belong to a chamber of commerce and pretend that a minister 
of the Crown is speaking to you about business, and you might just pick up 
a few points.  Matter of fact, you might pick up enough points that you 
could talk about it at one time, but you'd have to study it a little bit. 
 
But in any event, the first thing that I noticed on my first visit to the 
Pacific Rim, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was indeed the distinct lack of image that 
Saskatchewan had in the three countries that I visited -- Hong Kong, Japan, 
and Korea. 
 
It's not that Saskatchewan was never heard of.  I mean, these people are 
intelligent.  They know; they've heard about Saskatchewan.  But by and 
large they had no idea of what to expect.  They had no idea about our 
infrastructure.  Did we indeed have roads and sidewalks?  Did we indeed 
have hotels?  You know, what happened?  Was our land flat?  Did we have any 
trees?  That kind of thing. 
 
An extremely poor knowledge of our total economy, certainly as it related 
to the specific areas of concern that either of those countries may have 
had, whether it be agriculture or oil or potash or uranium.  Yes, they were 
aware of that, but it was limited to that very narrow, focused degree. 
 
They had absolutely no idea, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of the industry involved 
in our province.  They had absolutely no idea, as the NDP don't, about the 
necessity of trade by our province, how important it was to our economy, 
and why we had to trade even more freely. 
 
So that the underlying thing in all of this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was that 
we had to dispel the myth that we have no infrastructure, that we have no 
beauty, that we are winter-bound year-round, and the like.  We must counter 
the image that Saskatchewan is permanently cold or uninhabited, that there 
is no question that we have to let the rest of the world know about our 
tourism plant, about our great country in the north. 
 
Our members from the north would be absolutely, totally disappointed, if 
they had the opportunity to meet and visit with these leaders in the other 
countries, as to the lack of knowledge of the beauty and the sports fishing 
and the commercial fishing and the fur trapping and all the like that goes 
on in our northern half of our province. 
 
And it's this kind of thing that we require.  It's a presence that we need 



 

 

more than anything else. 
 
There is serious competition, in these countries, between our provinces.  I 
mean -- B.C. and Ontario, Quebec, Alberta, Saskatchewan -- we're 
competitors.  And yet, we have to work under the global network of the 
federal government because after all Canada is the nation that deals with 
these countries.  It's not Saskatchewan the province, but it is Canada the 
nation, so that the federal role is prime. 
 
But it's awkward for the federal government because there is no open 
warfare among the provinces.  But the presence is so vital because it's 
awkward for the federal government when we travel into the various 
countries and we see Ontario or Quebec represented with a staff of 15 or 20 
in each country.  We see B.C. and Alberta represented with a staff of five 
or 10 in each country.  And here is Saskatchewan, limited to a presence 
only in Hong Kong, and we have a total complement of four. 
 
It's no wonder we have a great deal of difficulty selling this province.  
And when we try to establish a presence, the opposition hoots and hollers 
and screams about it.  How do you expect to sell this province if you don't 
get out . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- By telling them that there's nine months of summer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: -- Oh, by telling them there's nine months of summer.  Now 
the member from Regina Centre seems to harp on that.  I've made a public 
apology.  I have no qualms about it.  I have no hesitation about it.  You 
want . . . this is the rhetoric.  We'll probably keep hearing about the 
nine months of summer from that member for the next three or four years, 
except he's not going to be a member that long, so it doesn't really 
matter. 
 
But in any event, if that single remark, without offending any of the 
people, took 5 million people in Hong Kong by surprise and got them to pay 
attention . . . At least, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we got them to listen to the 
word "Saskatchewan" and got them to recognize that we weren't winter-bound 
for 9 or 10 or 12 months of the year, as a lot of people felt we may have 
been. 
 
Why should we be ashamed to sell our province?  We don't have to have any 
shame at all, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  We should be proud.  So now when we 
appoint Graham Taylor, a former cabinet minister, a man . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Where is he? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: -- He's in Hong Kong.  The member for Moose Jaw says, where 
is he.  He's in Hong Kong; everybody knows that.  The appointment has been 
made.  Who better to sell Saskatchewan than a former cabinet minister who 
is totally familiar with every square inch of this province?  I'm not 
ashamed of the fact that Mr. Taylor represents our province in Hong Kong.  
As a matter of fact, I'm very proud of it.  And as a matter of fact, we 
should have more Graham Taylors and more Bob Andrews and more Paul 
Rousseaus right around this entire world selling this province.  And, Mr. 



 

 

Speaker, I have no hesitation in saying that, because you can't sell it 
from your desk here, and you can't have the government selling it all by 
itself. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: -- Mr. Speaker, all three countries I've discovered as well 
-- and that's why presence is so important -- all three countries are 
different from each other.  Hong Kong different from Japan, different from 
Korea -- different problems, different goals, different objectives.  You 
don't learn that by telephone calls; you don't learn that by letters or 
faxes.  You learn that by visiting with the officers and the officials from 
those countries, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hong Kong.  My immediate impression of that country -- one of the very 
easiest of all countries for our private sector to join in and develop a 
joint venture with.  Their business community is anxious for new 
opportunities.  They're searching the world for new opportunities.  They 
are major importers.  Why?  They don't have the resources that we do.  They 
are major world exporters, but they have to import everything first, 
manufacture it, and then export it.  It's a very exciting, vibrant business 
community for our Saskatchewan entrepreneurs to visit and to talk with. 
 
And yes, we have a presence there and that makes it easier, so that if any 
of the business community are interested in establishing contacts or making 
a link with Hong Kong, relatively easy for them to do that because we do 
indeed have that presence. 
 
The government of Hong Kong is extremely co-operative, and in my visit 
there I was not denied any formal meetings or discussions that I at all 
required or asked for from their government.  And that was a very 
encouraging kind of discussion to have where we could sit down and 
seriously talk about different problems that existed in Saskatchewan or 
that existed in Hong Kong, or what the feeling was or what the mood was, 
and all the like, and it was a very good feeling to get along so well with 
their government. 
 
But it's now interesting to see as well, Mr. Speaker, Japan buying into the 
Hong Kong market-place.  We have in Hong Kong an active alumni association 
from the University of Regina and some from the University of Saskatchewan.  
That again helps the Saskatchewan business community.  And of course all of 
Canada is active in searching out business investor funds from Hong Kong, 
but again this is a federal program.  And the federal government have 
invented for the good of all of Canada, certainly all of our provinces, 
Saskatchewan included, simply an excellent program of attracting investor 
dollars to flow into this country.  Saskatchewan can certainly use those 
investment dollars. 
 
But as I mentioned in my earlier remarks, their business community, being 
so anxious to establish here in Saskatchewan, have caused quite a flood 
onto the existing system of immigration approval. 
 
And I try to understand the federal situation with that regard, but some of 



 

 

the waiting periods are totally unacceptable to us as a government, and 
hopefully Saskatchewan can figure out some kind of a system and work 
together with our federal counterparts to hasten that process and speed up 
the process of immigrant approval so that those funds could flow into, 
certainly into Saskatchewan. Because it can be very well used right now, 
these equity dollars that we could put in, while Saskatchewan pays quite a 
price on high interest rates in the business community due to the hot 
economy of central Canada.  And we will work with the federal government in 
that, Mr. Speaker, so that we can overcome any of those problems. 
 
There was some perception regarding the fund raising problems in Hong Kong 
prior to my going there.  And as I arrived there, it was easy to determine 
why, Mr. Speaker, that problem or that perception of a problem could have 
existed.  It appears that a prime method that the Hong Kong people use in 
putting these funds together, Mr. Speaker, is one of networking, where the 
senior member of a family, perhaps the father or the uncle or some such 
head of a household, becomes interested in an investment in Canada.  And 
their family is doing rather well, so over a dinner or a family gathering 
or the like, the head of the family starts convincing the little cousins 
and the brothers and sisters that this would also be a good investment for 
them, and that's perhaps where the perception of some of this problem 
begins. 
 
 DBut in any event, in our discussions with the Hong Kong government . . . 
and I wish the member from Regina Centre would listen to this.  He knows 
absolutely nothing about business.  I'm trying to give him a little 
informative information on the fund raising.  He's a lawyer as well.  I 
mean, most lawyers understand that business immigration thing.  I don't 
think you know a darn thing about it.  I'm trying to tell you a little bit 
about it, and all you can do is sit there and giggle.  Why don't you pay 
attention and learn something for a change. 
 
Now when I was meeting, Mr. Speaker, with the government in Hong Kong, it 
became apparent that the Hong Kong security commission became interested in 
some of the perceived problems as well regarding this networking and the 
like.  We expressed our opinion that as far as the Government of 
Saskatchewan is concerned, and certainly the Government of Canada, we would 
be prepared to work with the Hong Kong security commission to help 
establish some rules that they would be comfortable with, because after all 
it affects their people. 
 
So I understand that the Hong Kong government is now in the process of 
establishing some rules, and this is good.  And Saskatchewan looks forward 
in working with the Hong Kong government in seeing that those rules would 
be put in place and carried out. 
 
Of course, Mr. Speaker, as much as I wanted to go and visit Taiwan on that 
trip, because of the tender situation that exists between the federal 
government and the government of Taiwan, we . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I think it's safe to say that the hon. 
member has attempted to give a speech and he's being interrupted, quite 
loudly at times, by some hon. members, and I ask them to pay him the 



 

 

courtesy of allowing his speech to continue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: -- Well thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I think it's kind of 
enjoyable when they interject every now and then.  Obviously I strike a 
nerve and I just . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I believe that we should just . . . The 
members . . . The attention has been called to a misdemeanour, if we may 
call it that, and I ask the hon. member to make no more reference to it and 
just continue his speech. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  But we do look forward in 
working with the Hong Kong government.  And perhaps one day the federal 
government will be able to overcome its situation with Taiwan and we look 
forward to being able to go in and visit that country as well. 
 
But Japan was the second country that I visited during that mission, Mr. 
Speaker, and unfortunately Saskatchewan does not have a presence in Japan.  
And I say unfortunately because of the economic conditions that exist in 
Japan and the opportunity that exists for a government, such as 
Saskatchewan, to be able to work with, and put deals together with, that 
would greatly affect the future of our province.  To establish an office in 
Japan would be extremely expensive.  And I suppose that if we did that, it 
would have a real howl of complaint from the NDP.  But I can assure you, 
Mr. Speaker, that whatever the expense was to set up a presence in Japan 
would be returned tenfold or a hundredfold or a thousandfold in very short 
order. 
 
One simply has to pay a visit there, a short visit as I did, to understand 
their economy and exactly why they become so important and such a major 
player in the economic development of the entire world.  I read recently 
where a trading company in Japan was prepared to buy out the national debt 
of Brazil.  Now if you can imagine, one trading company in Japan trying to 
salvage the entire national debt of the country of Brazil.  Just 
unbelievable, but that's the kind of wealth that they have. 
 
They have many executives in Japan, Mr. Speaker, that earn big, huge 
salaries in comparison to what we have here -- probably in the area of 2, 
3, and $400,000, many millions of people earning that kind of money.  So 
that as they've established their homes earlier on in life, they're not 
caught up with the huge expense of buying a home right now, because even 
with the command of those salaries they certainly couldn't buy a home 
within a reasonable working distance of their larger cities -- certainly 
not within two or three hours. 
 
But we see the expansion of the Japanese companies into areas of Canada 
such as Whistler or in Banff, where they indeed take over golf courses and 
ski areas and the like.  And you wonder why they do that.  Well I can give 
you an example of golf courses in Japan where, to join a golf course, the 
joining fee is $3 million.  And then after the joining fee is paid, it 
probably costs another 4 or $500 to play a game of golf. 
 
Well these executives, although they may be able to pay the green fee, 



 

 

certainly can't assimilate that kind of a saving, a $3 million saving, to 
be able to go and join the club.  As a result, it's simply easier for them 
to travel abroad, visit Canada, go skiing or play golf, fly there, return 
home, pay the fees in Canada, and still save money from what it would cost 
them to do at home.  So that's the reason that they're taking over a lot of 
those resort areas, and that's the understanding. 
 
So part of my mission was to try to convince one of these Japanese 
companies to invest in the tourism plant in Saskatchewan, because if we 
could create that kind of interest, if we could indeed convince one of 
these Japanese companies to . . . and the member from Saskatoon shakes his 
head, no.  Well let me tell you, that possibility is there. And if they 
came in and made that investment, it would be great indeed, Mr. Speaker, if 
we could see bus loads of Japanese visitors touring Saskatchewan and 
visiting us and dropping all those badly needed tourism dollars into our 
economy.  Because they are there and that can happen, or as they visit 
Banff.  It's not much of a trip to go from Banff even by bus into the areas 
of Saskatchewan that they would like to see, or indeed into northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But these huge trading companies that operate within Japan, Mr. Speaker, 
are interested in huge megabuck projects, is about the best way to describe 
it.  There are smaller companies now that are enjoying joint ventures to 
some degree of success. 
 
I know that some of the people that accompanied me, some of the private 
sector people that accompanied me on that mission, did very, very well with 
some of the smaller trading companies as far as it related to their 
products here in Saskatchewan vis-a-vis shipping them to Japan. 
 
But government assistance is absolutely necessary, in my mind, if the 
business community in Saskatchewan would like to do business in Japan.  We 
as government must open the doors.  We must encourage these huge trading 
companies to come in to joint venture with our people and to increase our 
manufacturing sector or to increase our tourism plant or whatever 
investment we could get so that we could encourage both the influx of 
dollars coming in as well as the visitors that would come. 
 
Very briefly, Mr. Speaker, I'll touch on Korea, which was my final country.  
And again, Saskatchewan has no presence. And all of these trips, Mr. 
Speaker, are just simply to point out why trade offices around the world 
are absolutely mandatory by this province if we want to see our economy 
grow, if we want to see Saskatchewan's economy prosper, if we want to see 
our country diversify so that Saskatchewan can indeed offer a good quality 
of life to the young people of our province -- and if I can be permitted to 
be selfish for a moment, to give a good quality of life to my grandchildren 
that are very rapidly starting to come of age in this great world and in 
this strong province of ours. 
 
But Korea, again no presence by Saskatchewan.  A huge population, a major 
importer of Saskatchewan uranium, and they know about our uranium, they 
know about our potash.  In Korea, Mr. Speaker, they are obligated to put 
another nine nuclear energy plants into that country.  They have no way of 



 

 

supplying their tens of millions of people with electrical power other than 
nuclear reactors. 
 
And I asked them if they had a problem with that, with promoting nuclear 
reactors to their people.  They said, well it's very simple.  When the 
people have to do without electricity, they recognize very quickly the 
importance of nuclear reactors, because it's either that or no electrical 
energy. 
 
None the less, I was very happy to learn that of the new nuclear reactors, 
three of them were going to be Canadian Candus, and that was good news to 
us.  And the president of the Korean electrical company that I met with, 
were entertaining the signature of a long-term uranium supply contract to 
feed these reactors, and again the importance of uranium to our 
Saskatchewan economy. 
 
But basically in Korea, many, many government restrictions.  To some degree 
the Government of Korea reminded me of the old NDP -- very protectionist 
for their own economy, making it very difficult for the ordinary business 
person to go in and do business, because they have some strange notion of 
how all this would work. 
 
For instance, on our mission were representatives of Prairie Malt.  Now 
Korea is very protective of their barley industry, and as a result will not 
allow the importation of barley into Korea.  And it's unfortunate because 
they can't raise enough barley for their dairy herds and beef herds, but 
let alone have a good malt for their beer, and beer is a big industry 
there, and they have a private company and of course they have a Crown 
company as well. 
 
But in any event they will not consider, at least they haven't, but perhaps 
now after my visit they are giving it some consideration, that malt, 
malting barley, will be considered a finished product and will be allowed 
to be imported into the country of Korea.  And hopefully the federal 
government will be able to open that one door and, without affecting 
Korea's intention of keeping out barley, still allow Saskatchewan malt to 
be imported into that country.  That would certainly be great news to that 
private sector plant that we have in operation here in Saskatchewan now. 
 
But again we had some private sector business people with us to Korea, 
trying to crack that market.  We were able to help them to some degree, but 
again the presence of government, the presence of a Saskatchewan office, if 
you want to do business in Korea, is absolutely mandatory. 
 
Now the member from Moose Jaw North, he doesn't want to hear any of this.  
But in any event, Mr. Speaker, it is absolutely mandatory for our 
government, if we want to succeed in trade and trade practices right around 
the world, we have to increase the presence of Saskatchewan or we will be 
lost in the dust. 
 
The other governments of Saskatchewan, the other province of Saskatchewan, 
have a good presence in all four countries, while we only have one small 
office in Hong Kong.  And we're just going to have to simply do something 



 

 

about it, and I'd like to see the members opposite come to some conclusion 
that perhaps that would be a good idea. 
 
Continuing, Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity now to share 
with you, as well as to inform my constituents of Regina South, by making a 
few remarks concerning my new portfolio of Consumer and Commercial Affairs.  
Obviously I just spoke for a moment on trade. 
 
I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that consumers and major consumer 
associations, many various special interest groups, do not share the view 
of the NDP that my role is that of a part-time minister.  Now as a matter 
of fact those interest groups are extremely disappointed with the attitude 
of the members opposite in the way that those members opposite diminish the 
importance of the roles of those interest groups and the roles that those 
interest groups play in this province as they will help this government 
mould the future direction of Saskatchewan. 
 
Consumers association, very, very important association, not only in 
Saskatchewan but throughout our country.  And they shouldn't be knocked in 
any way, shape, or form.  Also the financial institutions and the like.  
They don't see the role of Consumer and Commercial Affairs at all as being 
a part-time role.  It plays a vital role in ensuring integrity, fairness, 
and balance in the Saskatchewan market-place, a fair and equitable 
market-place where buyers and sellers can exchange goods and services with 
confidence, and that is a corner-stone of a stable economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is committed to economic expansion and 
diversification, as the Speech from the Throne outlined.  Saskatchewan    
Consumer and Commercial Affairs' goal is to ensure that a level playing 
field exists for both consumers and business, and it's demonstrated through 
a range of innovative and effective initiatives and programs. 
 
I guess, firstly, consumer protection.  And in that area Saskatchewan 
enjoys an enviable reputation as a leader in the area of consumer 
protection.  And it's accomplished through a balance of effective 
legislation and education programs as well as through a very important 
process not familiar with the members opposite.  We call it consultation. 
 
We emphasize education and prevention as a priority, recognizing the need 
for some protective legislation.  We strive for better and not for more 
legislation.  But yet some examples of our legislative leadership are The 
Consumer Products Warranties Act.  Now, Mr. Speaker, that was first 
pioneered in Saskatchewan and was the first piece of legislation of this 
type in North America.  It has been adopted now by four other provinces.  
The Direct Sellers Act was the first of its type in Canada, licensing door 
to door 
sellers.  Three years ago our government amended this legislation to 
provide even greater protection to many vulnerable consumers and 
unfortunately including some of our seniors.  And we did that by extending 
the Act to include telephone solicitations and to provide a 10-day 
cooling-off period. 
 
We've become involved in consumer economic living skills education.  And 



 

 

again Saskatchewan is the recognized leader in consumer education in 
Canada. 
 
Consumer economic living skills education provides Saskatchewan residents 
with the knowledge and skills that they require to function effectively in 
our highly complex and changing market-place, and I spoke of that earlier.  
All Saskatchewan citizens can benefit from effective economic living skills 
to manage personal finances, to analyse market-place alternatives, to solve 
problems, and to interact competently -- all very important sections of 
quality of life. 
 
The department has developed and delivers across the province programs in 
education and self-help resources to meet the needs of the general public 
as well as special target groups, such as low income and low literacy 
Saskatchewan residents, seniors and young people in school who need this 
kind of help and information and who want that kind of help and 
information. 
 
(1630) 
 
Now I know that my constituents of Regina South will be very pleased to 
hear what this department does to some degree, Mr. Speaker, and I will try 
to . . . I have tied in some of the remarks from the Speech from the Throne 
and now I will tie in these.  Because I would like my constituents to note 
that the high calibre of the department's education and information print 
materials now enjoys national recognition and demand.  And we are currently 
in discussions with education publishing companies to publish our materials 
for international sale.  And I'm sure people of Regina South would like to 
hear that.  This will of course generate some revenue for our government 
and will permit us to provide more of these excellent education print 
materials to the people of our province, to the people of Saskatchewan, at 
no cost to them. 
 
I would like to mention just a few of the exciting education programs and 
initiatives that we are currently involved in.  Economic living skills for 
high school students, and it's my intention to visit the high schools in 
Regina South and talk about this one, Mr. Speaker.  And I think that the 
young men and women in the high schools will really be interested in this 
little program. 
 
And we're doing it in co-operation with five other provinces in Canada.  
And our department, my department, is co-ordinating the design of an 
activity-based curriculum supplement for students in grades 10, 11 and 12.  
And this resource is being designed to be used as a supplement to the 
existing curriculum in our Saskatchewan high schools.  It will provide 
those young people with an introduction and orientation to the economic 
realities and the possibilities of our society, as well as provide a base 
of practical knowledge and skills to manage money effectively and to solve 
problems in the market-place. 
 
And I know that those young people, as they wait for their summer vacation 
and to earn their badly needed spending money and the like, will be 
interested in this kind of a topic.  Because as they earn those dollars, 



 

 

they'll want to learn how they should handle and manage their money.  
They'll want to, perhaps, put some away for their future and their 
universities or whatever their future may hold, or indeed to just be able 
to spend it properly and be able to budget properly. 
 
Another one we call market-place living skills education, and that's 
designed for low income people.  And we're currently designing a collection 
of new educational tools for people on social assistance in our province. 
 
We've heard a lot about that recently, Mr. Speaker.  And again, in 
consultation with self-help agencies, community groups and Saskatchewan 
Social Services, we will be delivering educational programs and resources 
to welfare recipients that will assist them in managing their resources 
effectively and in helping them with their problem solving of the 
market-place. 
 
Now, that's a very big problem for them.  You might not think that that's 
such a big problem, but if you've never been exposed to that, it's a major 
problem for them to learn how to buy, where to shop, how to spend, how to 
budget. 
 
And you take it very lightly; you believe that that's not necessary.  Well, 
unfortunately I believe that it is, and you'd be well-advised to talk to 
some of those welfare recipients that need that kind of help.  And don't 
sit there in your seat and criticize, because it is a good program and 
they're waiting for it and we'll deliver it to them. 
 
Another one, Mr. Speaker, and the member from Saskatoon University in his 
Speech from the Throne, as I listened to what he had to say, expressed some 
concern about this particular item that I will speak on now. 
 
But along with expressing his concern, Mr. Speaker, he coupled his concern 
with a demand from my department.  Well obviously he, as many others of the 
members opposite, has not again, they have not done their homework and 
they're not aware of what we are already doing, because here this member 
from the Saskatoon University is asking for something that's already in 
place.  And I'm sure that if he pays attention to what I am about to tell 
him on this item, he'll be delighted to hear what we're doing. 
 
But we call it choose to conserve.  And the consumer in the environment in 
co-operation with Saskatchewan Environment and other departments, we have 
just finished the design of a fine new self-help education tool for 
individuals, families, and school use which has been developed specifically 
to provide practical ideas to all of us as consumers as to what we can do 
to protect our environment. 
 
Now this education tool, Mr. Speaker, will enable consumers to make wise 
decisions about their life-styles, and that will have an impact on our 
environment.  For example, and this is what the member referred to and he 
should know it, packaging of products is a federal government 
responsibility.  While it is that federal government responsibility, Mr. 
Speaker, we can assist consumers in choosing those products that are least 
damaging or are environmental friendly to our province. 



 

 

 
Another item, Mr. Speaker, is the senior in the market-place.  And the 
seniors continues to be of particular concern to us as they tend to be more 
vulnerable in the market-place.  And I know that in Regina South I indeed 
have many, many seniors that I enjoy visiting with, and I will be speaking 
to them and they will be awful interested in what I have to say now. 
 
In the upcoming year, my department will be providing increased focus to 
the delivery of special education programs for seniors, touching on such 
topics as money management and investment -- very important to them as 
they're growing older -- important information on wills and estates, 
purchasing special aids such as hearing aids and the like.  And that will 
be coming along over the next year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And finally, the other initiative which we have undertaken that is 
contributing significantly to the stability of our economy is the 
introduction of industry self-administration.  Now, Mr. Speaker, I am proud 
to let you know that under our government, Saskatchewan has pioneered this 
concept in Canada and in North America. 
 
And like most ideas, the self-administration idea is basically a simple 
one, something that the NDP never cherished very much. And I hope that they 
pay attention, because self-administration gives an industry responsibility 
for its own general administration, including such things as licensing and 
fee collection, education, establishing and maintaining professional 
standards, and overseeing consumer protection compensation funds and the 
like. 
 
It gives them their own self-administration in those areas.  And this is 
operating very successfully in three industries in our province today, Mr. 
Speaker: the insurance industry, which comprises of general, hail, and life 
insurance companies; the real estate industry; and the funeral services 
industry. 
 
And by the establishment of industry commissions and councils, our 
government has given back into the hands of those industries, into the 
hands of the people who know most about their businesses, the 
responsibility for the administration of their day-to-day affairs. 
 
Now through the Superintendent of Insurance the government does however 
retain final authority, under legislation, so that consumer protection is 
enhanced, and yet in no way has consumer protection been compromised. 
 
And that's been quite a change from the old system that was in operation 
under the former NDP government, Mr. Speaker, which was basically direct 
government control and direct government intervention.  But the people in 
those industries concerned were indeed asking for those changes. 
 
Through the consultation process, which is normal to this side of the 
House, we listened to them.  And as a government, we then introduced 
amendments in recent years in The Saskatchewan Insurance Act and in The 
Real Estate Brokers Act to facilitate self-administration of those two 
industries.  It's a program and a policy that we hope to extend because we 



 

 

believe that there could be several other areas that could do the same 
thing, because in a moment I will tell you why it's good news for the 
province. 
 
Recently I had the pleasure of attending a meeting of the new insurance 
councils of Saskatchewan.  It was a meeting that took stock of the new 
system of self-administration of the insurance industry that has taken 
place in the past four years.  It all began back in 1986 and our 
government, working with the insurance industry, brought in amendments to 
The Saskatchewan Insurance Act.  With these amendments, the new system of 
self-administration of the insurance industry was born. 
 
Under the new program, the insurance industry assumed responsibility for 
all licensing, for all fee collection, and ensured that educational 
qualifications and standards were met.  Our government, through the 
Superintendent of Insurance, retained final authority under the Act, as I 
mentioned a few moments ago, and any discretionary powers that may be 
needed.  That was so that there would not be a compromise for the consumer. 
 
There was a clear need for a new system of administration.  The rapidly 
changing market-place was not being properly supervised by the old system, 
which was basically direct government intervention, direct government 
control.  As I mentioned at the beginning of my speech, Mr. Speaker, just 
simply more large government. 
 
The old system could not reflect these changes, could not adapt to the new 
realities.  And as I mentioned earlier as well, we are now living in a 
global village.  This whole world of ours is just compressed into 
neighbourliness, and the old system just couldn't keep up to the changes, 
to the demands, to the expectations that the new world, this new global 
village, is living with.  So the people who know the most about the 
insurance business were at best only indirectly involved in the day-to-day 
administration of the laws governing their affairs. 
 
The industry was therefore calling for change, and at the same time there 
could be, as I mentioned, no compromise in consumer protection.  Nobody can 
afford to erode consumer confidence in the insurance industry and the 
market-place and still survive.  Technology and the global market-place 
dictated that the Saskatchewan insurance industry and the laws governing it 
change, or face the prospect of being unable to compete effectively in an 
intensely competitive market-place. 
 
The world of financial services is changing enormously.  There has been a 
lot of hard work put in to make this very simple idea the success story 
that it has become, and yet so often in our history we have discovered that 
these simple ideas turn out to be extremely successful if handled properly, 
if handled carefully, and if dealt with in an honest fashion.  So as I 
mentioned, there has been an extreme amount of hard work put in to make 
that very simple idea of self-administration the success story that it has 
become. 
 
Consumer protection has been enhanced by improved education and by 
standards in the industry.  Public confidence has increased.  On the other 



 

 

side, taxpayers no longer have to foot the bill. And that's where I said, 
Mr. Speaker, the good news of self-administration comes in. Because with 
self-administered plans such as that, taxpayers no longer have to foot the 
bill for the day-to-day supervision of industry professionals, and why 
should they?  Why wasn't it something that the prior administration 
couldn't have thought of a decade ago -- just a sound, simple idea like 
that? 
 
That new system of self-administration came out of the industry, out of 
consultative process between the industry and this government, something 
that the members are not familiar with -- the industry and government 
working together, sharing ideas, sharing concerns, in the finest of 
Saskatchewan traditions. 
 
The new system of insurance councils is an outstanding success.  It's truly 
unique and it is a successful program of self-administration done in that 
Saskatchewan way.  It's such a success that it is now being studied and 
copied, Mr. Speaker, by not only other provinces across our country, but 
indeed by some states south of the border.  I should tell you that there 
are three insurance councils in all -- the general insurance council, the 
hail insurance council, and the life insurance council. 
 
(1645) 
 
And with the kind of public savings generated by the new insurance 
councils, our Department of Consumer and Commercial Affairs has been able 
to assume now, new responsibility. 
 
Now there's the member from Regina North West.  Now, Mr. Speaker, I'm 
explaining to him exactly how our government is compressing and saving 
dollars, saving taxpayers' dollars for the taxpayers of our province, 
because it's with this self-administration that we're saving the money that 
our department can now assume new responsibilities at no cost to the 
taxpayers. 
 
Now the NDP, Mr. Speaker, they don't care about that. They'd rather expand 
the government.  Now they can sit there and listen to me speak because if 
it's not me, they're going to be listening to somebody else.  My 
constituents of Regina South are extremely interested, Mr. Speaker, in 
hearing exactly what I'm going to be doing with my department and how I'm 
going to be saving them taxpayers' dollars. 
 
So that with the kind of public savings generated by the new insurance 
councils, our department has been able to assume new responsibilities 
without asking the Minister of Finance for additional funding. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The hon. member had already had an 
opportunity to speak in this debate, and if he had more to say, I suppose 
he should have said it at that time.  I would ask him now to allow the 
member for Regina South to continue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: -- Now I know that that information, Mr. Speaker, is 
welcome news indeed, not only to the taxpayers of Regina South, but to the 



 

 

taxpayers of the entire province.  And in the past few years, we have 
enjoyed similar success in the self-administration of other industries in 
our province -- in the real estate industry, for example. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, I was in the real estate industry for about 10 
years and I worked my way through the presidency of the Regina real estate 
association, and later I served on the board of directors of the 
Saskatchewan real estate board and the like.  And my background in the real 
estate industry is quite extensive.  And it seemed so simple. 
 
I was in the real estate business during the term of the NDP when they were 
in office.  Now we approached them with this kind of a situation but they 
wouldn't hear of it.  We offered that we could, so to speak, police our own 
system.  We could educate our own brokers.  We could handle the licensing.  
We could save the government of the day an awful lot of money.  We wouldn't 
need this many civil servants.  We could do all of that.  That was the 
voice of experience talking but they wouldn't listen to us.  Why would 
they? 
 
But when our government came along, after 1982, we indeed listened to that 
industry.  We indeed gave the real estate industry the self-administration 
that they were looking for, and again, without compromising consumer 
protection.  Because that entire industry services the people of our 
province and services them very well in perhaps what the majority of their 
consumers will do is make the largest investment of their history and that 
is the investment of their own home. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it's these kinds of things . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  I'm going to ask the hon. member for Regina North 
West to please refrain from interrupting the hon. member from Regina South.  
It is not courteous and I'm sure he is well aware of that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: -- So those initiatives, Mr. Speaker, have realized savings 
for the department that I presently am in charge of, Consumer and 
Commercial Affairs, and permitted the department to assume those new 
responsibilities without the necessity of acquiring additional funding. 
 
My government, Mr. Speaker, is deeply committed to the security and the 
stabilization of all of our communities.  We have been and we will continue 
to build partnerships with the Saskatchewan people and their communities.  
And our department demonstrates that commitment in a number of ways. 
 
And I have told my constituents in Regina South a little bit about how we 
affected them as an individual.  And now I will go on and describe just a 
few broader programs in detail in the hopes that they can use those as 
well, Mr. Speaker, because this is vital as we go and consult with the 
people throughout the province in determining with them exactly what the 
consensus building will be. 
 
And I'll describe first the consumer education community program.  In 1984, 
Mr. Speaker, with the establishment of the consumer education community 
program, Saskatchewan led the way in innovative extension programming by 



 

 

calling on and training volunteers from the public in communities across 
the province to deliver those education programs. 
 
Now throughout my career as I have moved through various portfolios, Mr. 
Speaker, I very quickly learned to work with and respect volunteers in any 
area, in any post that I've held.  Volunteers always held a significant 
amount of work and advice and enthusiasm that they did freely because of 
their interest in whatever particular field they were in.  Saskatchewan has 
more volunteers per person in terms of population than any province in our 
country. 
 
And that's another reason, Mr. Speaker, why our government is so popular 
with these volunteers, because they know that so long as we are here, 
they've got a chance of being heard.  They've got a chance of working with 
the government and being responded to, and the like.  So that in area after 
area after area in our various agencies and in our various departments of 
government you can see how volunteerism comes to the fore.  So we work with 
these volunteers in delivering these consumer education programs. 
 
Now in addition to permitting the department to reach more people with 
education programs, our volunteers -- and at the moment, Mr. Speaker, we 
have 75 -- they also serve as emissaries from the government to a range of 
special interest groups.  And as well, they provide insight and input and 
ideas and recommendations regarding their priorities and other priorities, 
regarding direction that the government should take, needs in education and 
information programming for all of the province.  And that's exactly what 
we're talking about when we talk about Consensus Saskatchewan, and that is, 
working with these people and responding and responding to their needs and 
taking their advice. 
 
Now to administer this particular program, Mr. Speaker, the department 
developed a comprehensive and innovative volunteer management program, 
including a policy and a procedures manual on the use of volunteers in the 
public service.  And that's been very highly used and very highly 
acclaimed. 
 
In the past year, Mr. Speaker, our volunteers have permitted us to deliver 
close to 300 programs to more than 5,000 Saskatchewan residents.  Now they 
might think that 5,000 Saskatchewan residents is not significant; 5,000 
Saskatchewan residents are a significant number. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Is that how many left this month, Jack? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: -- No.  But when we are working with 300 volunteers, to 
talk to 5,000 Saskatchewan residents, you have to admit that that's a 
pretty good batting average. 
 
And these programs range from various important things, Mr. Speaker, 
programs ranging from money management and budgeting sessions, for 
pre-marriage courses, right through to food buying.  Courses for low income 
residents, financial planning and investment courses for middle income 
residents.  All of these things, very, very important educational process 
to the consuming public of our province. 



 

 

 
Because as our province grows and diversifies and our economy expands and 
their quality of life and their life-styles continue to improve, they will 
require this information, Mr. Speaker.  Proper investments, proper 
financial planning, how to shop, will be very, very important, not only for 
them but for their children as well.  And that's why, as I mentioned 
earlier, I'm anxious to get into the school system to talk to those young 
people about their futures. 
 
A second thing that we do -- and I know that there's going to be an awful 
lot of people in Regina South interested in this, Mr. Speaker -- and that 
is industry co-operation and community consultation.  That's going to be a 
key one for all of us in this province.  And it has the objective of 
establishing and enhancing co-operation and working relations with industry 
and communities.  And as a lot of our economic diversification and economic 
plans unfold and we want to work with communities, it will become extremely 
important to work with the communities and to work with the industries to 
ensure that all of that combines into a good, solid, effective way of 
working. 
 
 DAnd we take a proactive stance, and that includes the identification of 
co-operative ventures.  Now members opposite might be surprised to hear 
that, but co-operative ventures we have no problem with.  We worked with 
the Co-op refinery in establishing the upgrader.  We don't have a problem 
with co-operatives, and that's going to be very important is the 
identification of co-operative ventures. 
 
Cost-shared initiatives.  That will be extremely important, where community 
and industry, Mr. Speaker, can work together on cost sharing of certain 
initiatives; the inclusion of appropriate industry or community groups 
right at the conception stage, so that when ideas come together there will 
be no surprises.  Everybody will be aware of what each other is doing.  
They'll be able to work together; they'll be able to accomplish things; 
they'll be able to do a lot of economic diversification and economic 
development in these communities if we get together at the conception stage 
in the development of the new programs and the new resources. 
 
And the training of industry and community volunteers to deliver the 
education programs that I spoke of earlier -- extremely important to work 
with these volunteers in the consultative process and to listen to them.  
And this is in addition, this is in addition, Mr. Speaker, to the 
industry's self-administration councils and commissions that I have already 
spoken of. 
 
Now the member from Moose Jaw North, again chatting from his seat, doesn't 
care to listen.  I have a very important message to carry to my 
constituents, something that I was hoping that they would pay some 
attention to, particularly as it relates to the observations that they've 
made regarding my new portfolio. 
 
Now when I get up and I try to tell the people of Saskatchewan and my 
constituents about the work that this department is doing, they seem to 
have no interest in hearing it; begs the question why, Mr. Speaker, but in 



 

 

any event, I will continue. 
 
The work that Saskatchewan Consumer and Commercial Affairs does has been 
summarized in the new mission statement, which is to build consumer and 
business integrity and confidence. So the work that we do with and for 
consumers -- and I'm speaking here of our education programs as well as our 
investigation and mediation role in helping them solve market-place 
problems, and in the roles that we perform for business such as 
incorporations, licensing of industry groups, and so on -- my department 
also provides direct assistance to consumers and to businesses in 
protecting and enhancing their economic well-being. 
 
Mr. Speaker, each year we are in contact with every business in 
Saskatchewan, and I can tell you that that pleases me to no end, because 
each and every business in this province, I will have the opportunity of 
being in contact with. 
 
We have close to a half a million contacts for the distribution of our 
education resources, courses, and the handling of consumer complaints with 
the people of Saskatchewan.  The demand for our services and for our 
programs continues to grow, Mr. Speaker, and I think that we can expect 
that this will continue to be the case as the Saskatchewan market-place and 
our Canadian society . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I was mentioning, with me being able to be in contact with 
each and every business in this province pleases me to no end. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- It being 5 o'clock, the House stands recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


