





























































Hansard: June 12, 1990


 

 

June 12/90 
 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to take this 
opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to introduce to you, and through you and to the 
other members of the Legislative Assembly through you, some 23 students 
from Davin School who are sitting in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, grade two 
students.  They are accompanied by J. Finlay, the teacher, and Grace Penny 
and Mrs. Kulynych as chaperons.  I will be meeting with the students after 
for drinks and pictures, and I would like to ask you to join me in 
welcoming them to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It gives me pleasure this 
afternoon to introduce to you and other members of the legislature a group 
of some 24 students sitting in the west gallery from Wolseley School.  
These students are in grades 9-12.  They're accompanied today by teachers 
Bernie Martineau and Gary Frederickson and their bus driver Marvin Rein.  I 
will be meeting with this group following question period, Mr. Speaker, and 
I would hope that the visitors today will enjoy the proceedings in the 
legislature, and I look forward to any questions that they may have 
following the session.  I'd ask all members to welcome them in the 
traditional manner. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to 
introduce to you and to other members of the House some 24 grade 8 students 
from Lake Lenore School.  They're seated in the east gallery.  They're 
attended . . . with them is their teacher, Wade Weseen; other parents and 
drivers, Myles Yeager, Dan Kolbeck, Gwen Stuckel, Agnes Viczko, Eugene 
Schemenauer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had planned to meet with the group following question 
period.  However, I'm going to have to be in a debate and my colleague, the 
deputy leader of our party, will meet with the students following. 
 
I want to welcome you here and hope that you have an enjoyable visit here 
to Regina. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's with pleasure that I can join 
the member from Quill Lakes in agreeing with him in the reception of our 
students from Lake Lenore. 
 



 

 

I would like to indicate to the students that, and I'm sure that many of 
them wouldn't know me, but I had attended Lake Lenore first 16 years of my 
life, and I think it's one of the greatest communities in this province.  
And I would hope that the students are very proud of their home and their 
school. 
 
And I too would like to take the opportunity to welcome them and ask all 
members to make it a point and take it upon themselves to stop in the 
community of Lake Lenore as they're travelling the province.  I know that 
they'll be received well.  Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I would just 
like to add my own words of welcome, through you and to you, to all members 
of the legislature, to the students from Lake Lenore.  Lake Lenore borders 
on my constituency and names such as Schemenauer and Yeager and so on 
certainly are from my constituency as well.  And I'd like to add my own 
personal words of welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to introduce some 
grade 3 students from Wilfrid Walker School, Mr. Speaker.  They are in your 
gallery.  And they are accompanied by Darlene Lazenby, who is the teacher, 
as well some chaperons: Terri Tramer, Mrs. Zinkhan, and Johnston 
Sattelmeier.  And we have some parent drivers as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It's my opportunity to meet with these young people in a few minutes and 
talk about Wascana Centre and etc., and what they see here in the next 
half-hour or so.  So, Mr. Speaker, I'd ask all members to join with me in 
welcoming the students from Wilfrid Walker School. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I just got a note here that I 
have grades 4 and 5 from Macoun School from Macoun, Saskatchewan.  There 
are 15 of them in the west gallery.  They are accompanied by their teacher, 
Merv Young; the bus driver, Ray Leise. 
 
And I'm going to be meeting with the students later and we'll be having 
pictures.  I would like all members to please welcome the students in grade 
4 and 5 from Macoun, Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure to introduce 
to you a new candidate for the New Democratic Party in the next provincial 
election, the candidate from the Rosthern constituency, Kim Dmytryshyn. 
 
Kim is seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker.  Along with her is her husband, 
Zane, and the three children.  I want all members to welcome them here 
today and I'm sure that they will enjoy the proceedings here this 



 

 

afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Direct Mail-out on Health Care 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to the Minister of 
Health.  Mr. Minister, a while back I asked you about a massive mail-out 
conducted for your department by Nancy McLean's Corporate Strategy Group 
and David Tkachuk's firm, Strategic Direct Marketing.  I have the results 
of that survey and I find them quite interesting.  Out of some 394 cards 
mailed out by your department, only about 7,000 had comments to make on the 
health care system.  That works out to about $43 a response, Mr. Minister.  
How do you justify that sort of an expenditure out of what you describe as 
a tight health care budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, the direct mail program that was conducted 
by Corporate Strategy Group and that the Department of Health sent out 
direct mail on a whole series of issues related to health and especially 
with specific reference to the Everyone Wins program and the emphasis 
within that Everyone Wins program in terms of the value of good nutrition 
and the accident prevention, a whole series of other areas, Mr. Speaker.  
By anyone's measurement the response, the level of response to that from 
the citizens of Saskatchewan and the continuing responses, I might add, 
asking for materials that go on even at this date, quite a number of months 
after the first mail-out was sent out, by anyone's measurement is a 
tremendous success. 
 
And the people of Saskatchewan have appreciated the information that had 
been sent out.  They appreciate the thrust of the Everyone Wins programs 
and of the whole area of promotion of wellness.  And it will be an 
initiative that this Department of Health of Saskatchewan will continue 
because we believe that that is the direction for the future -- promotion 
of wellness rather than a continuing emphasis only on the curing of 
illness. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Minister, the final . . . new question, Mr. Speaker.  
The final report sets out the reasons why people responded to your 
mail-out.  And one of the reasons stated is the friendly and open manner of 
the minister's letter, that positioned the minister as interested and 
caring.  In other words, making it look like you really care what was said. 
 
And then the report contained some 36 computer-generated, interchangeable 
paragraphs which you could slip into any letter to make it look like the 
letter was written for the individual.  Is that what the report refers to 
as positioning the minister to look interested and concerned, Mr. Minister, 
as opposed to being a minister who is open and concerned? 



 

 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- The emphasis on the direction of the whole campaign as 
it relates to the promotion of wellness is one that I will not apologize 
for to the hon. member or to anyone else.  The fact is . . . I mean the 
member can make, you know, can speak in derogatory terms, whatever, of this 
program.  The member full well knows that the program has been successful 
and it's been successful for the following reason. 
 
It's been successful because the people of Saskatchewan believe strongly, 
as well, in the promotion of wellness.  They believe strongly in the 
emphasis of the Everyone Wins program.  The member can say, well it's 
positioning the minister to look interested.  I'll let the people of 
Saskatchewan decide, others decide whether the Department of Health in 
Saskatchewan, the Minister of Health in Saskatchewan at the present time, 
displays an interest in the health and well-being of Saskatchewan citizens, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
This Department of Health and this minister and this government do care 
about the health and well-being of the citizens of Saskatchewan.  And the 
programs throughout the Department of Health -- $1.5 billion worth of 
health care programs; $170,000 an hour on health care out of the budget of 
the province of Saskatchewan.  There's no question, Mr. Speaker, the people 
know this government, this minister, and the Department of Health, care for 
the health and well-being of Saskatchewan citizens. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- New question, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, if you cared and 
your department cared and the government cared about the health and 
well-being of Saskatchewan people, you wouldn't have cut the northern food 
transportation subsidy.  You wouldn't have cut back on public health nurses 
and community health nurses.  We wouldn't see such high levels of 
tuberculosis in northern Saskatchewan.  And you wouldn't have decimated the 
school-based children's dental plan, Mr. Minister. 
 
Now it's interesting to compare your planned response to those with 
concerns about your dismantling of the dental plan to the realities of what 
people think.  And your computer-based response states, Mr. Minister: 
 

 By assigning children enrolled in our children's dental program to private 
practice dentists, we have ensured that they have the best qualified 
practitioners assessing and treating them. 

 
Now in view of the fact, Mr. Minister, that the studies do not bear out 
that there was a lesser quality of service in the school-based dental plan, 
in view of that fact, Mr. Minister, how do you justify having your 
Toronto-based consultant answering these concerns with rhetoric that is 
simply not based on fact? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, the Corporate Strategy Group -- the member 
says Toronto-based consultant -- Corporate Strategy Group is a professional 
organization that does the kind of direct mail activity that we entered 
into in the promotion of wellness, all of those things.  And we entered a 
contract with them as do departments of Health and departments of 
government and the private sector corporations, and others across Canada 
will engage companies like this to put out the message that you want to put 
out. 
 
We determined the message; we determined the message that went into the 
letter.  The letter . . . and I make no apologies for anything that was 
said there because everything that was said there was factual.  The member 
raises examples of the school-based dental program.  I just remind the 
House, Mr. Speaker, there are 37 communities in Saskatchewan today who have 
dental services -- dentists there for all generations, people of all ages, 
in those 37 communities where there was not dental service prior to the 
change that took place. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Minister, there were 338 school-based clinics across 
this province and 400 dental therapists employed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Now the minister will know that yesterday was the third 
anniversary of your government's dismantling of the school-based children's 
dental plan.  And of those who responded to your mail-out with comments on 
the dental plan, fully 81 per cent were opposed to your government's 
privatization of the school-based children's dental plan.  If your 
privatization of health care in this incidence was such a good idea, Mr. 
Minister, why are people so soundly rejecting it? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, I think it's fair to say that the only 
place in Saskatchewan that you will hear any sort of prolonged disagreement 
with the way in which dental services are delivered to the citizens and the 
children of Saskatchewan is from that member in this House.  That's a fact. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member has raised this question for a good long time and 
has said, rural people, they have always disguised all that they've said 
and said rural people do not have the services, rural people don't like the 
change, rural people are not using services.  Mr. Speaker, rural people are 
using the service to a greater degree than are urban; rural people are 
using the services, increased enrolment and increased utilization in the 
program by rural people; 37 communities that now have dental services that 
did not have dental services.  The member cites 300 and whatever odd number 
of school-based clinics that were in existence before, but she neglects to 
say that many of those 338 had a visit perhaps once a year, in some of 
those cases once a year, by a dental therapist, once a year. 
 
Now that, Mr. Speaker, you can't characterize, nor can the hon. member, as 
once-a-year service being service to the whole community, grandma, grandpa, 
the parents and the children of the family. 



 

 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Minister, your own response to your mail-out shows 81 
per cent of those who responded were opposed to your changes.  You can't 
ignore that, Mr. Minister. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, there are approximately 3,600 more children from 5 to 13 
who could be covered under your plan as compared to the old plan, because 
there are simply more children who are eligible to be enrolled.  But even 
at that higher number, there are approximately 3,500 less children who were 
treated; and of those who are eligible, 83 per cent were treated as opposed 
to 88 per cent under the old plan.  And of those actually enrolled in the 
new plan, 11,000 were missed for treatment, Mr. Minister.  And we don't 
even have all the statistics with respect to completes, but we know many of 
them haven't received complete treatment, or a certain percentage hasn't. 
 
Now in view of the fact, in view of those facts, Mr. Minister, in view of 
the increased cost to parents in taking time off and travelling, and in 
view of the fact 14- to 17-year-olds are no longer included in the plan, 
what I want to know is how you can stand in your place and defend it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, on several occasions the hon. member has 
characterized the change in the dental program as a privatization.  You 
know, she uses that word -- privatization of the dental plan.  And I have 
said -- I've given this response to the member before and I'll give it to 
the House again -- Mr. Speaker, I would ask anyone to tell me, what is the 
difference? 
 
They say that medical services, physician services in Saskatchewan are not 
privatized; that's what they say.  They're not privatized, physician 
services.  But what happens?  A citizen of the province goes to a 
physician, receives a service, and the physician is paid by the Government 
of Saskatchewan, and that's a public medicare system.  That's what they 
say, and I agree with that. 
 
But a citizen of Saskatchewan goes to a dentist, in this case a child -- 
goes to a dentist; the dentist is paid by the Government of Saskatchewan on 
behalf of that citizen, that client; and the members opposite say that's 
privatization.  They say that's a privatized dental plan when they don't 
say medical services that are paid for in exactly the same way are not 
privatized.  They can't have it both ways in this either, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Rafferty Dam Project 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my question 
today is to the minister responsible for the Souris Basin Development 
Authority.  Mr. Minister, once again the Canadian Wildlife Federation has 
attacked your bull-headed approach in going ahead with building the 



 

 

Rafferty-Alameda dam regardless of the consequences. 
 
I quote to you, Mr. Minister, the lawyer for the Canadian Wildlife 
Federation, Joanna Bernstein who says that the building of the dam makes 
"an absolute mockery" of environmental law at a time when work is supposed 
to be stopped.  It's obvious, Mr. Minister, that the Canadian Wildlife 
Federation, along with everybody else in this province, sees your political 
tactic of driving ahead with this project regardless of the consequences. 
 
My question to you, Mr. Minister, is this: when are you going to stop 
flouting the laws of this land, doing whatever you want regardless of what 
the law says, in order to fit your own political agenda?  When are you 
going to stop, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- I want to indicate to the Assembly and to the member 
opposite that this government has always operated under the auspices of all 
of the law in relation to the building and construction, the licences in 
the Rafferty dam.  And I think that as we go through the process, Mr. 
Speaker, the items of the legality and the consequences of the law are 
becoming more and more evident to me that we are operating within that 
framework.  And we have on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan, 
stopped work when they asked us to; we've proceeded with work when we were 
given a licence to; we have always operated under the jurisdiction of the 
law. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- A new question to the same minister, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 
Minister, there are very few people in the province of Saskatchewan who 
believe that you are not violating the spirit of the agreement that you 
signed, you and your government signed, with Ottawa.  They see your actions 
for what they are, Mr. Minister, which is nothing more than a very cheap 
method, a very cheap method of getting around the laws of the country which 
shows, I would say, your contempt, your very real contempt for the 
environment and for the environmental process in this country. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, have you consulted with your former cabinet 
colleague, the member from Turtleford, whether or not he agrees that you're 
perfectly within the spirit of the agreement that you signed with Ottawa?  
Have you consulted with that member, Mr. Minister, your former cabinet 
colleague on whether he agrees with your assessment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, I just wanted to reaffirm what I said 
before: that we have operated within the framework of the law on every 
licence that was issued and every deflection or moving away from that 
licence that the federal government told us we had to do.  We stopped 
building.  We proceeded when they authorized us.  And, Mr. Speaker, as a 
matter of law, they are paying us a million dollars a month because we are 
the injured party, the people of Saskatchewan are the injured party in the 



 

 

way that it was handled by the federal government, not by us, Mr. Speaker 
-- the federal government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- A new question to the same minister.  Mr. Minister, in 
today's announcement the Canadian Wildlife Federation is asking the federal 
government to stop paying you that $1 million a month.  They're saying that 
because you have broken the agreement, that they should be cutting that 
funding to you.  If that money is to stop, Mr. Minister, if that money is 
to stop, Saskatchewan stands to lose millions of dollars.  I wonder, sir, 
if you can give this House an accounting here today of how that money that 
you have received has been spent, and whether or not you think you're 
taking that money in good conscience. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation have 
indicated support for the project, so has the Canadian Wildlife Federation.  
They are involved in this debate on the basis of law and the regulations as 
they apply, and the process.  The thing that points to the fact that they 
are in agreement with it is that they have stated it.  The second thing is 
that the federal government realizes the inaccuracy of the way they 
proceeded and are paying us a million dollars a month, which we are keeping 
in trust in the Saskatchewan Water Corporation until the matter is totally 
resolved. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- New question to the same minister, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 
Minister, I'm glad that you rose here today and said that you're keeping 
that money in trust, because if the Canadian Wildlife Federation takes you 
to court and you're found, in fact, to have broken the spirit of that 
agreement, it would certainly put the reputation of this province in 
jeopardy.  Something that the Premier of this province has already done in 
the past week. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to ask you this question.  It seems to me, Mr. 
Minister, that you're making the same mistake in regards to the Cargill 
plant at Belle Plaine that you made with Rafferty-Alameda.  There have been 
environmental objections raised that you are aware of because it deals with 
groundwater; it deals with the water quality and the water quantity and its 
effect that the Cargill plant will have on that, Mr. Minister.  I wonder 
whether or not you people will believe . . . do believe in any advance 
planning whatsoever, and are you totally blind to the consequences of your 
actions.  And will you, if you are not, if you are not totally blind to 
those consequences, if you will agree to hold open public hearings on the 
Cargill plant in Belle Plaine so you don't end up in the same kind of mess 
that you ended up with Rafferty-Alameda? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member has now switched gears 



 

 

and is talking about the Saskatchewan fertilizer plant at Belle Plaine.  
The member may not be totally familiar with the announcements that I made 
last week, but I want to reiterate, Mr. Speaker, what the mechanism is that 
we are using to deal with the Saskatchewan Fertilizer Company plant at 
Belle Plaine.  Mr. Speaker, departmental officials in the Department of 
Environment maintained, after reviewing the proposal, that this project was 
not a development as defined by the Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I, after considerable thought and consideration and discussion 
with the people of Saskatchewan, made the decision jointly with the 
Saskatchewan Fertilizer Company, that notwithstanding the letter of the 
law, we will still proceed with a formal environmental impact assessment, a 
formal process, Mr. Speaker, that will go a step above and beyond what is 
required by law.  And that process will be followed to a T, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And in direct response to the hon. members question, yes, there will be 
public meetings; yes, there will be a good process; and yes, that plant 
will operate, but only after thorough environmental reviews have been 
conducted once again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Tabling of Financial Statements on Crown-Controlled Corporations 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question, Mr. Speaker, is 
to the Premier and it deals with his pledge to bring about a more open and 
honest and responsive government in the province of Saskatchewan.  Mr. 
Premier, today your Public Accounts Committee, in the Public Accounts 
Committee, your caucus members used a majority to defeat yet another motion 
which called for more accountability of how taxpayers' dollars are spent.  
The motion in question called for the legislature to receive annual 
reports, quarterly statements, and all other pertinent documents from firms 
in which the government has an equity share of less than a hundred per cent 
and more than 10 per cent. 
 
Since this is information that shareholders can get by merely holding one 
share, why would you deny this information to the legislature and the 
public who, through you, own many shares? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, I think there's been a long established 
convention through many administrations relative to what's made public when 
governments are in joint venture commercial enterprises with other private 
parties, Mr. Speaker.  It stems from the fact that whatever political 
stripe the administration is, there are certain things that you can't be 
making available to the opposition, to the competitors.  I think that's a 
long standing convention.  Having said that however, of course 
corporations, private and public, are bound by their own audits and audit 
processes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Mr. Speaker, a new question to the minister who as 
previous Finance minister, is barely comprehensible on the subject.  



 

 

Shareholders, people who own one share in these companies, get information 
that is denied to the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan. 
 
We're talking about corporations in which taxpayers own major, major 
portions of shares -- companies such as the potash corporation, Cameco, 
WESTBRIDGE, Ipsco, and Saskoil.  Saskatchewan people have substantial tax 
dollars in these companies but you're saying that they're not entitled to 
any information.  How can you possibly call that accountability, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, the traditional practice is being 
followed. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Mr. Speaker, I didn't hear the answer and I assume 
it's the same kind of non-answer we've been getting to many questions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to put a new question to the 
minister.  Mr. Minister, in 1987 the Public Accounts Committee, and this is 
both sides of the committee -- the Conservatives and the New Democrats - 
_ passed a resolution recommending that the government prepare legislation 
which would ensure that audited financial statements for Crown agencies 
established under The Business Corporations Act and owned 100 per cent by 
the Crown be tabled in the legislature, the same as Crown corporations. 
 
Now to date we haven't seen any of that.  And my question is: when is your 
government going to prepare that legislation, as requested by the 
committee, so that there's an accounting of the public's money spent in 
these corporations? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, relative to any specific requests, I'd 
want to examine that, number one.  And number two, I would just repeat, not 
wanting to sound repetitive, but probably being repetitive, that 
traditional practice is what's being followed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Interprovincial Trade in Beer 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is to the minister responsible 
for Economic Diversification and Trade.  Recently your government met with 
federal officials to discuss the lowering of provincial trade barriers in 
the sale of beer.  Since such a move would have a dramatic impact on the 
brewing industry in Saskatchewan, could you tell this House whether or not 
you support the federal proposal to remove trade barriers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Speaker, we support in part the federal measures 
because we have a new brewery in Saskatchewan, Great Western Brewery, which 
we believe should be able to sell beer in Alberta, Manitoba, British 
Columbia.  And there is a policy Canada-wide that is if you have to . . . 
in order to sell it in a province, you have to brew it in a province.  
Saskatchewan is making progress with respect to negotiating with the 
western provinces for reciprocity in beer with respect to our new small 
brewery that is growing every day in Saskatchewan, that is an 
employee-owned brewery, and we'd like these employees to be able to compete 
in the western Canadian  
 Dmarket. 
 
So we're not now going to a wide open market, but we have been having some 
brands come in from Alberta in cans, and we would now want our brewery to 
be able to sell into Alberta and also Manitoba and British Columbia.  
That's the direction we're going. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 44 -- An Act to amend The Occupational Health and Safety Act 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 
amend The Occupational Health and Safety Act be now introduced and read the 
first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next 
sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 16 
 

Economic Conditions in Rural Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to rise 
and enter the debate.  And at the end of my speech I want to move a motion 
which essentially in these words: 
 

 That this Assembly regrets the continued steady decline of Saskatchewan's 
rural communities as is evident in the alarming rate of rural 
depopulation, education cut-backs and lay-offs, and business bankruptcies 
on main street. 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Mr. Speaker, there can be no other word to describe the 
economic conditions in this province other than to say that the economy of 
Saskatchewan is in a shambles.  Every aspect of the economy is under 
attack.  And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the priorities of this 
government is what is at stake here. 
 



 

 

If we take a look, Mr. Speaker, and we go around Saskatchewan and you go to 
rural communities, one of the major concerns . . . and I was out to a 
community the other day in the Shaunavon riding.  And talking to people, 
their major concern is so many young people are leaving the province.  
There is no opportunity for my children to stay in Saskatchewan, said a 
farmer.  My boys were carpenters and skilled, trained.  And today, he said, 
they have had to leave and go to Ontario or British Columbia to seek work 
because there is no economic activity here in the province of Saskatchewan.  
And that's a shame. 
 
And recently, the other night, Mr. Speaker, another devastating blow to 
hundreds of workers across this province.  In the town of Hudson Bay, the 
announcement that some 500 workers are going to be laid off in the timber 
industry. 
 
Eight years this government had, and eight years its priorities was not 
addressed to maintaining jobs that were in place or looking for 
alternatives.  The priorities of this government, Mr. Speaker, I say were 
the wrong priorities.  The government economic policies to date have not 
focused on the local level or community economic development.  Instead it 
has focused its attention on megaprojects and big money give-aways to a few 
large, out-of-province businesses and investors -- the Cargills of the 
world, Gainers, and other megaprojects. 
 
This also focused on the commitment of millions of Saskatchewan taxpayers' 
hard-earned dollars to wasteful, failed, unproven enterprises that this 
government undertook, such as GigaText and Supercart and Joytec and 
Canapharm.  Millions of dollars poured into these types of businesses that 
had no firm foundation nor no appraisal as to their success.  And at the 
same time, Mr. Speaker, the very heart and soul of the economic community 
in Saskatchewan, is our small-business community and that was neglected. 
 
What we got from this government were slogans -- open for business; 
Partnership For Progress; Saskatchewan Builds.  And what we have seen is 
the massive depopulation of rural Saskatchewan.  We have seen massive 
cut-backs in education, and we have seen unprecedented bankruptcies on main 
street in all communities throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to say that this government did introduce a wide assortment of 
so-called job creation and industrial economic development programs in the 
last eight years, all of which were initiated at the politically 
appropriate moment, but abandoned along the way.  We have witnessed a cycle 
of announcements and then terminations.  And as a result we have no 
foundation on which to build a stable and secure economic provincial 
economy. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, as a result of the government's own fiscal 
mismanagement, what we have seen is a massive build-up of debt, over $4 
billion in the operating or Consolidated Fund, $13 billion in total debt.  
We have seen the credit rating of this province deteriorate and we have 
seen the aid that they had previously provided to local business community, 
and Saskatchewan has been eliminated. 
 



 

 

The industrial incentive program is gone; small business interest reduction 
program is gone; Aid to Trade is gone; market developing fund is gone.  I 
want to say, Mr. Speaker, the government's new economic diversification and 
investment fund has been a poor substitute.  And recently they have 
announced at this late date that they're going to have community bonds to 
save the economic ruin that is taking place across this province. 
 
And as you go to talk to individuals and communities and ask them what they 
think of the government's Community Development Bonds, and they say there's 
no possibility of getting many people to start investing in communities 
that are being destroyed under the economic conditions as brought about by 
this government. 
 
I started out to say that this economy can be described no other than that 
it's in a state of shambles.  And, Mr. Speaker, if we take a look at some 
of the devastating statistics of what has been going on here in 
Saskatchewan -- worse than anywhere else in all of Canada -- the sad part 
is that we have a Premier who is the Minister of Agriculture and recently 
he was down East as a cheer-leader to saving the country.  Saving the 
country, he says, as his economic policies are destroying Saskatchewan.  
This Premier forgot about Saskatchewan and the Saskatchewan people. 
 
Let's take a look at some of the statistics in respect to what is happening 
and what is causing the depopulation and disintegration of Saskatchewan 
society as we knew it.  You take farm bankruptcies, Mr. Speaker.  Consumer 
Affairs Canada bankruptcy branch reports that in 1989, there were 152 farm 
bankruptcies in Saskatchewan.  This is a 32 per cent increase over 1988 
level.  In 1989, Saskatchewan accounted for 45 per cent of all farm 
bankruptcies in Canada.  And for the first quarter of 1990, there were 60 
farm bankruptcies in Saskatchewan, up 131 per cent from the first quarter 
of 1989. 
 
And if you take a look at total bankruptcies that are taking place here in 
Saskatchewan, again Consumer Affairs Canada, bankruptcy branch, reports 
that in 1989 there was a total of 1,566 bankruptcies in Saskatchewan -- 
farm, business, and consumer.  And in the first quarter of 1990, there were 
527, up from 387 in the first quarter of 1989, or an increase of 36 per 
cent. 
 
We find, Mr. Speaker, in respect to the bankruptcies in Saskatchewan, first 
of all in 1989, the first quarter, business there was 137; consumer, 224; 
farm, 26, for a total of 387.  And in the first quarter of 1990, we have 
business, 187; consumer, 280; and farm, 60, for 527 -- as I said, a 36 per 
cent increase. 
 
What else can one say except that this economy is in the shambles.  There 
is no direction from this government.  They absolutely refuse to address 
the problems that are facing rural Saskatchewan today, indeed Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
(1445) 
 
As I said, Mr. Speaker, they have been occupied with megaprojects -- not as 



 

 

any sensible government as tough economic conditions arrive, that they 
would in fact take a look and see what is the base that keeps our economy 
going.  It's agriculture, and it's small business essentially. 
 
And why wouldn't a government in these economic times say, let us 
consolidate and let us assist those two key areas of our economy.  But not 
this government.  This government launches out onto a megaproject mania and 
pours millions of dollars of taxpayers' money into the likes of Cargill, 
Gainers, and other megaprojects. 
 
As I've said, Mr. Speaker, in respect to population loss it has been 
absolutely devastating.  In 1989 the net out-migration from Saskatchewan 
was 23,705 people -- out-migration in 1989 was 23,705 -- the second worst 
year on record in Saskatchewan.  As of the end of April 1990, Saskatchewan 
Bureau of Statistics reports that the out-migration totals 7,654 
individual.  This represents one-third of the total net out-migration in 
1989.  Mr. Speaker, in April of 1990, net out-migration totalled 2,218 
people, individuals, as compared to 1,502 in '89 -- in other words, an 
increase of 48 per cent. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, this government has failed the people of Saskatchewan.  
This government has no economic plan in order to keep our people here in 
Saskatchewan.  This government has no plan to assist small business.  This 
government has no plan to assist, in the long term, farmers.  This 
government is out of touch with the needs of the people of this province.  
And I say, Mr. Speaker, come the next election, this government will be 
thrown from office. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many measures as to how this government has 
squandered an opportunity to build here in Saskatchewan. 
 
We can look at other indicators such as housing starts, and we find that 
housing starts are down considerably.  The CMHC (Canada Mortgage and 
Housing Corporation) reports that in 1989 there were only 1,906 new housing 
starts in all of Saskatchewan.  That is the second lowest level recorded 
and the lowest in almost 20 years. 
 
The slide continues: as of the end of April 1990, four months, there were 
307 new starts in Saskatchewan.  This is 33 per cent decrease below the 
number, 459, in the first four months of 1989. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those are indicators that indicate that this here economy is 
stalemated, that the government has not reacted to the crisis that exists, 
that this government is out of touch with the realities of what's going on, 
that the people of Saskatchewan certainly have been the losers in respect 
to their economic policies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you can take a look at jobs and exactly the same thing 
happens.  If you take a look at unemployment, we find that St. John's, St. 
John, Saskatoon -- third highest rate of unemployment in all of Canada, and 
Regina has the fifth highest rates of unemployment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my time is nearly to the end.  I want at this time, Mr. 



 

 

Speaker, to indicate clearly that the people of Saskatchewan have had 
enough of the mismanagement, the waste.  And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I 
move, seconded by the member from Humboldt: 
 

 That this Assembly regrets the continued steady decline of Saskatchewan's 
rural communities as is evident in the alarming rate of rural 
depopulation, education cut-backs and lay-offs, and business bankruptcies 
on main street. 

 
I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan last 
year, 1989, lost 23,705 people, net loss -- 23,705.  There's 469 towns and 
villages in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  Out of those 469, 303 lost 
population -- 65 per cent of them lost population.  You have to ask 
yourself why.  Why in a time, as time passes, do we continue when the trend 
is set and nothing is done to stop the continuation of that problem? 
 
And there are two basic reasons, two basic reasons why we are losing 
population in Saskatchewan.  Number one, it's the cut-backs to programs 
that involve people, programs for people.  And secondly . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- What programs? 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Programs . . . he says, what programs?  Programs like the 
dental staff, programs like nursing staff, programs like the drug plan, 
programs like keeping teachers in a good working environment, our education 
system, hungry children.  There are a thousand or more reasons . . . or 
examples rather, of how they cut back programs for people -- working poor, 
unemployed, hungry, the farm community, the labouring community trying to 
hang on to their jobs from the attacks from this government.  But that's 
one reason. 
 
The other one is, Mr. Speaker, are all the give-aways to the multinational, 
large corporations.  And we've seen them in the past.  We've seen the 
Weyerhaeusers -- Weyerhaeuser last year making $377 million profit and not 
paying one red cent on principal back to the province of Saskatchewan.  Now 
you must wonder if the agreement . . . that was an agreement made by this 
Tory government with Weyerhaeuser, a United States-based corporation.  If 
this government was working in a sensible manner to try to recoup any 
profit from Saskatchewan resources, why would they allow a corporation to 
make $377 million in one year and the people of Saskatchewan not benefit 
one red cent on the principal?  That to me is simply ludicrous, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Then there's the sweetheart deals with Peter Pocklington.  And there's a 
long list and I'll just go through some of them, Mr. Speaker.  If you look 
at the list of ventures that this government has come up with and has had 
absolutely dismal failures from, you'll understand why there is an 
atmosphere in Saskatchewan where people are leaving.  Most people are very, 
very proud of Saskatchewan and it is very hard for them to leave.  But I'll 



 

 

tell you when they think there's nothing left for them, when they see the 
legacy of this government, many have no other choice. 
 
And look at the bungled schemes -- Joytec.  I mean, this was going to be a 
great business in Saskatchewan.  And the government put money into Joytec 
through SEDCO and they were going to have this great booming golf simulator 
business running in Saskatoon, and it vanished, and money lost. 
 
And then there was the GigaText deal, where we saw well over $5 million 
just vanish.  And there was Supercart, another great industry of this 
province -- vanished.  And Principal Trust, and the Rafferty dam fiasco, 
and the STC scandal.  All these things -- WESTBRIDGE Computer -- all these 
endeavours of this government, Mr. Speaker, they have totally bungled and 
failed at.  And the result is that they're taking down the economy of this 
province with them. 
 
And privatization is one of the biggest ones.  Every privatization that 
this government endeavours to do, people lose jobs.  And when people lose 
jobs, people leave the province.  When people leave the province, the 
economy goes into a further tail-spin. 
 
And I ask you, Mr. Speaker, why this government when it sees all the 
economic indicators . . . farm bankruptcies up 32 per cent; total 
bankruptcies in the province, another 32 per cent increase; losing 
population; housing starts were down.  Oh yes, and I understand the members 
opposite, they stand in their place and they say, well it's because of the 
weather and it's because of the European community and the United States.  
And they blame person after person after person, but they never once stop 
and say, well maybe we're doing something wrong.  They blame the whole 
world for the fact that they cannot manage this province. 
 
If they simply would look in the mirror and say look, how could we as a 
government make a turnaround in this province.  Well some suggestions would 
be not to throw away $5 million in the GigaText scandal, not to give 
Cargill a guarantee and buy into Cargill to the tune of $369 million. 
 
I mean, that money could be . . . Just think, if you gave a $305 million 
loan guarantee to 305 communities, a million dollars each, just think of 
the economic activity that would stimulate.  No, they're pumping it into 
Cargill.  And I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, when that deal is done, when all 
the tale is told on Cargill you will see that this government will have put 
in many, many millions of dollars more than what they're saying right now.  
I predict that. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that goes right, as I said . . . Programs that hurt 
people over the last five years, this is just a few of the things that they 
have done to cripple this economy.  They eliminated the property 
improvement grant in 1985.  Then they put on that famous used car tax.  
Then they established the flat tax at half a per cent.  So then in 1986, 
things were getting a little tighter, so they increased the flat tax to 1 
per cent.  In 1987, what else do we do?  We increase the flat tax to 1 and 
a half per cent.  And then we put the sales tax up to 7 per cent. 
 



 

 

All the time pumping money into multinational corporations, having it 
squandered and having the people of Saskatchewan being drained through 
heavier taxes.  And in 1987 they imposed the 7 cents a litre gas tax; 1988 
the flat tax increased to 2 per cent.  All the while nothing is changing.  
It's not our fault the economy is going to hell in a hand basket, but we 
got to get money somewhere so we go to people . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order, order.  I think, while they are cliche pés, etc., 
that may be used in the House, I think hon. members should try to refrain 
from remarks that might be construed as unparliamentary. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- I apologize, Mr. Speaker.  I was using it as a well-known 
phrase.  I will not do that again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I was saying, increasing taxes.  In 1989 the gas tax 
increased 10 cents a litre, and then they put on the lottery tax. 
 
The point I'm making here, Mr. Speaker, is, instead of looking at ways to 
develop this economy by using the resources, the resource industry, they're 
giving it away.  They're privatizing and letting the profit be reaped by 
those people who are basically not in Saskatchewan.  We've seen it with 
Saskoil, we've seen it with Sask Minerals, and the list goes on and on.  
And every privatization, like I say, results in fewer jobs. 
 
(1500) 
 
And I just want to take it a little closer to home, Mr. Speaker, in my area 
-- the Carlton Trail Regional College area of Saskatchewan.  This is a 
report put out by the Carlton Trail Regional College, and this is a very 
recent report -- February 1990.  And here are some of the notes as 
indicated in this report.  And it says, and I quote: 
 

 Considerable rural depopulation has taken place with 2,425 individuals, 15 
years of age and over, moving off farms from 1981 to 1986. 

 
People leaving. 
 
It goes on to say, Mr. Speaker, and this is the one that's very sad.  This 
is the one that's sad because this is the government that says they're 
standing up for rural Saskatchewan and farm people. 
 

 Over 40 . . . (and I'm quoting) over 40,000 people, 15 years of age and 
over, live in low income families. 

 
That's 80 per cent of the total people in this Carlton Trail region; 80 per 
cent are low income families.  And this is the government that says it's 
going to the wall for farmers.  Well I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, they can 
say that, but the statistics don't indicate that. 
 
And that's another long whole debate, because they simply have not solved 
the problems of long-term debt or income stability.  They have not even 
addressed that. 
 



 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I'd just like to make one more quote.  This report talks 
about the anticipated changes in . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swan: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, after my remarks today I 
will be making an amendment to the motion, and the amendment will read: 
 

 That all the words after the word "Assembly" be deleted and the following 
substituted therefor: 

 
 recognizing the dramatic impact on rural communities of international 

grain price wars, drought, low commodity prices, high interest rates and 
excessive dependence on a single economic sector, commends the provincial 
government for its concrete action plan to reduce population loss, enhance 
rural opportunities, develop the potential of Saskatchewan people, promote 
economic diversification and strictly manage our scarce resources as 
exemplified by the completed and continuing elements of that action plan 
including: rural natural gas distribution; individual private telephones; 
the underground power line program; a new world class regional college 
system; a dramatic program of educational facility renewal and 
construction; the creation of the distance education network known as SCN 
(Saskatchewan Communications Network); the creation of the rural service 
network; the creation of the rural development corporations; the creation 
of the community economic development program; the creation of the 
agriculture, diversification and development system; the creation of the 
$200 million agriculture diversification fund; the creation of the 
Saskatchewan Water Corporation; the development of extensive irrigation 
and water assistance projects; the development and promotion of tourism in 
small communities; the enhancement of provincial and regional parks vital 
to rural communities; the expansion of the rural health care system 
through the creation of the first province-wide community physiotherapy 
system; the lifting of the former administration's moratorium on the rural 
health care facilities; the largest health care construction program in 
Saskatchewan's history; the dramatic increase of professional dental 
services available in rural communities; the wide array of agricultural 
support programs; the venture capital program; the small-business loans 
association program; the small-business property tax assistance program; 
the recent announcement of community bonds; and many other projects and 
programs which together provide a strong basis on which to build the 
future of the province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it is plain to see from our amendment that this government has 
done more to ease the hardships in rural communities than any other 
government before us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swan: -- Now I'm not going to deny that Saskatchewan's rural 
communities are suffering as a result of farm crisis in the province, but 
if it wasn't for the efforts of this government, if we did not have a plan, 



 

 

well I dare say that the situation facing our rural communities would have 
been a great deal worse. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has a plan.  It is a plan for economic 
development and diversification.  It is a plan to protect Saskatchewan 
families, and it is a plan for growth and prosperity.  Indeed, our 
amendment outlines some of those programs involved in that program -- 
programs which the members opposite have continually opposed and voted 
against. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I often wonder if the members opposite are truly concerned 
about Saskatchewan's farming sector and Saskatchewan's rural communities 
when they consistently vote against our programs and policies, the kind of 
programs, Mr. Speaker, that can save the family farm.  When they 
consistently oppose projects that we bring forward to help rural 
communities in these difficult times, when they do that, well I just wonder 
how sincere  
 Dthey really are about the people and about the communities in this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP are in favour of the land bank.  They are in favour of 
a moratorium on farm debt.  But they are not in favour of any programs and 
policies that promote new investment and growth. 
 
It is hard to ignore the tremendous pressures facing our province and 
especially our rural communities.  International subsidy wars, drought, low 
commodity prices, high interest rates, and heavy debt loads have all taken 
their toll on Saskatchewan families, but we have taken and put into place 
the opportunity for communities to develop and diversify. 
 
We have given them, Mr. Speaker, the opportunity to offset the effects of 
these pressures, to get away from having all of their eggs in one basket 
and to build a solid, economic foundation.  That, Mr. Speaker, is the 
premise behind our economic diversification initiatives. 
 
We are now processing our own natural resources: paper, oil, natural gas, 
bacon.  And we are preserving for this province the benefits of those 
resources.  We are creating new industries, generating new revenue and new 
jobs.  And, Mr. Speaker, our strategy has taken quite a bit of success and 
I believe quite a few compliments from many of the communities in our 
province. 
 
Since 1982, Saskatchewan has had a 600 per cent increase in manufacturing.  
And that increase is good news not only for Saskatchewan, but also for our 
smaller towns and villages. 
 
Mr. Speaker, through diversification we have decreased our dangerous 
dependence on agriculture.  We have created new jobs and indirectly saved 
the jobs of many others.  Our economic plan has and will result in more 
growth and prosperity.  It has and will provide the people of this province 
with new opportunities and it will stabilize many of our communities that 
are presently feeling the pinch. 
 



 

 

Among the many diversification efforts that we have implemented since 1982, 
the new community bonds program is one in which I am most proud.  This new 
program, Mr. Speaker, will allow Saskatchewan people with a direct stake in 
this province to invest in community-based initiatives of their own choice 
without risk of losing their initial investment.  This program puts 
Saskatchewan's ideas and money to work here at home to create new 
industries, new jobs, and to stimulate and strengthen local economies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this and all our programs exemplify what this government is 
all about.  We want to give Saskatchewan people control over Saskatchewan 
resources.  We want to work with them to give them the assistance they need 
to build their communities and to build this province.  We have provided 
that assistance and we will be continuing to do so.  We have diversified, 
we have helped out our farming sector, and we're still going to bat for 
them.  We have provided Saskatchewan families with a first-class 
educational and health system, and we have expanded that system so that 
more people can take advantage of the many benefits and opportunities. 
 
We have, Mr. Speaker, stood behind rural Saskatchewan during these 
difficult times.  The crisis in agriculture has placed an unbearable 
economic and emotional strain on rural Saskatchewan, but we have eased that 
strain and we have lessened the hardships.  This government has built on 
Saskatchewan's tradition of working together.  We have put aside our 
differences to overcome our difficulties and secure a better future for our 
families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many of the families in Saskatchewan who I believe 
have been assisted through the programs that I've listed.  There are many 
other programs, too numerous to mention, that I haven't touched upon today.  
But I believe when the member opposite introduced this motion, he failed to 
realize how much the government has assisted the rural part of Saskatchewan 
through very, very difficult financial times.  And I believe that as the 
economy begins to take a turn in the very near future, we're going to see 
Saskatchewan families benefit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would take this opportunity now to move the amendment, 
seconded by the member for Kelsey-Tisdale. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's always a pleasure and an 
honour to be able to talk and speak about what's going on in rural 
Saskatchewan, and the role the Government of Saskatchewan has played over 
the last eight years in developing new industries and new opportunities for 
our young people out in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to take just a moment or two and go back to where we started in 1984 
and how we got to where we are with the development end in rural 
Saskatchewan; how it was structured and put together to make it available 
for people out there so they could become part of a development in rural 
Saskatchewan.  Back in 1984, Jake Brown, a professor from the University of 
Saskatchewan, did a study on rural Saskatchewan, and through that study 
came a lot of different ideas.  And some we used and some we put to good 



 

 

use in developing a basis so you could go out there and do a development in 
rural Saskatchewan to keep our young people there. 
 
We did the road rationalization, which was all the road systems through all 
the RMs which was designed so that the service to take . . . roads that 
were needed to take them to their service centres.  And a lot of the roads 
that were under the old system didn't do that; they were designed for the 
times.  Times have changed a great deal.  We drive a lot further.  So we 
did a whole road rationalization including to the highway system. 
 
While we were doing that, we brought in what we called the economic 
development committee, and there's 55 of them in the province right now, 
Mr. Speaker.  There's been 55 for quite a while in fact.  They rotate; 
they're on for five years and then a new one comes in.  And of those 55 
economic development committees, we have about 428 development projects has 
taken place over the last eight years.  They'd be small little retail 
outlets all the way up to such things as a peola chip plant that's being 
built at Kelvington. 
 
Then at the same time we put together -- because we knew we needed more 
than just the urban people involved, we needed the whole of the province, 
all of rural Saskatchewan, which is both small town, village, hamlet, and 
RMs -- we put together what we call the Rural Development Corporation.  And 
since we put that together, which was just three years ago, Mr. Speaker, we 
have now . . . I'll be signing this weekend at Plenty, I'll be signing the 
27th RDC (Rural Development Corporation) for the province of Saskatchewan 
which will be in fact . . . there be involved in that about 80 rural 
municipalities, about 100 urban municipalities and over 130,000 people 
involved.  That's taking the population that they represent in, under the 
RDC program.  And an RDC is to look at the area to see industry you could 
bring to your area for development to make your industry and create jobs 
and opportunity, enhance the farm opportunities out there. 
 
Just to give you an idea of the first RDC that we signed, was down at Wood 
Mountain.  That was the very first one, Poplar Hill RDC.  They have put 
together a crushing plant, a ready-mix plant.  They have looked at bringing 
in a hide tannery. They brought in snail plant; it grows snails.  They are 
at the process of looking at their whole area for development in such 
things as bucking up their health care systems and all the ones, so that 
would fit their needs.  So they have done a great deal down there. 
 
(1515) 
 
The second one is really interesting, that we put together.  It's the Sage 
Hill Rural Development Corporation, the Dana radar base.  They have built 
the first fire truck ever built in Saskatchewan, there at the radar base.  
And they've now been on a national defence contract which we believe they 
have a good opportunity of getting -- we've worked with them -- which will 
build fire trucks for some of the national defence and some of the army.  
That will be out there for fire trucks, will be built in Saskatchewan at 
the Dana radar base.  We believe we have a good opportunity of getting 
that. 
 



 

 

At the same time they have now brought into their focus and input, which is 
a generic roundup.  They've been working with those people, and it looks 
like that plant has a real opportunity to go into there.  Those people on 
the second RDC that we've set up have taken and put together and the 
prospects of putting together over 300 jobs directly for that area. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is development in rural Saskatchewan.  That's just the 
second one.  And we have done 27 of them.  And we have a whole list of 
things that each one is either in the process of or has in fact completed. 
 
The other things that we did as we put this together, we've asked all the 
RMs to form an ADD committee or an ADD (agricultural development and 
diversification) board, and that's to look at what you could do in your RM 
to tie it in to the other committees.  And that has really become a very, 
very popular way of doing things out there.  Since we have brought the ADD 
board structure into place, along with the rural economic development grant 
that we have, we have almost 40 new industries that have been funded or in 
the start of the process of setting up since January 1. 
 
And I'm just going to read you a few of them, because a lot of people say, 
well it's all right to say you're doing them, but you really don't have 
anything going.  To give you an idea of it:  NorSask Forest Products -- 
that's a mill up in the Meadow Lake area who was almost not operating at 
all.  They have put in a new line.  They're making a finish board. 
 
Thiessen Agri Business which is making new equipment, agriculture equipment 
and manufacturing.  Renee pé Blanchard, he's a poultry eviscerating plant 
where they take chickens and they make it into little patties and it's sold 
into the cities.  In fact it sort of initiated out in Vancouver or B.C.  
Jensen seed cleaning plant up around the Shellbrook area where they in 
alfalfa seed, cleaning it and bringing it down for human consumption.  Kim 
Gehl, making tables, manufacturing tables, out at Dysart, a furniture 
manufacturing plant. 
 
We have an outfit just out of here a little ways that's manufacturing and 
setting up a noodle manufacturing plant that we're funding just out of 
Moose Jaw.  Arc Alloy Welding, manufacturing machinery and trailers.  We 
have the King of the Road Trailers, which is the name of a company and 
they're manufacturing livestock trailers.  We have another company up 
making water equipment at Demaine.  We have Manitou Springs Hotel which is 
the complex where RMs got involved in, where they're going to be part 
owners in a resort thing.  Select Feed Products which is an oat processing 
plant. 
 
I could go on much more, Mr. Speaker.  And that's just some of the ones 
since the first of the year -- or some them started a little before that, 
but most of them since the first of the year -- to tell you that we are in 
fact, Mr. Speaker, doing a lot of development and diversification out there 
in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
It's always interesting to hear somebody talk about, you know, you're not 
really doing anything out there.  You haven't started anything small.  I 
heard the member from Quill Lakes say, only large projects like the 



 

 

Cargill.  That's not true, Mr. Speaker. We do many, many small ones.  
They're not being done by government, but being done by the people in the 
communities.  They've been set up so the financing package is available 
there, so that the information is available there, and I'll talk about how 
that is there, and also, Mr. Speaker, the community leadership.  And we're 
putting them together.  And what's happening, we're getting the development 
diversification that is important, I believe very important for the future 
of rural Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to make just mention about a few other things.  We talk about the 
financing package, we talk about infrastructure, and that's one of the 
things we did earlier -- about four years ago, five years ago.  We started 
putting into place infrastructure that is needed for development 
diversification in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
There was natural gas in most of the major towns, but the farm areas had no 
natural gas.  Rural natural gas was not available; we put that into place.  
All, or nearly all of the villages, hamlets, in this province now have 
natural gas.  That is needed, Mr. Speaker, that is needed very much if 
you're going to have industry manufacturing processing.  Without that, 
without cheap energy, it just doesn't happen. 
 
The other thing that we've done, Mr. Speaker, we brought in individual line 
service.  That is important with the technology of the day that everybody 
has that kind of service, because individual line service leads to new 
technology, leads to opportunities, particularly for our younger farmers, 
those that are building and doing things on the farm.  They need that kind 
of opportunity to be available to them. 
 
We've also put together, we call CORA (catalogue of opportunities for rural 
areas) which is just an information package on about 1,400 different 
industries that may fit into one of those small communities out there in 
rural Saskatchewan.  We've had the Saskatchewan Research Council do it. 
They've researched all of the western provinces; they've researched into 
Ontario; they did some in the United States; did some even in Germany and 
some of the European countries -- what might fit in rural Saskatchewan.  
And they packaged it together with information on how much it would cost to 
do it, the number of jobs, where you'd find the equipment, where is one 
located now, the markets that might be available.  Basic kinds of things 
that may give you an idea that you may fit one of them into your 
communities. 
 
So we've done a lot, Mr. Speaker, in putting together a package that would 
be available for people out there, people in their communities who want to 
develop and diversify their communities. 
 
A financial package, you talk about that.  There never really was a really 
good financial package available till about four or five years ago, I 
believe.  And we started putting together a financial package that will 
give small communities the opportunities to develop and diversify. 
 
We have SEDCO with a participating loan of up to $300,000 that's interest 
free for five years and based on a net return. 



 

 

 
We have the rural development grant which I just mentioned.  What you need 
is to take a share or you can take it in or give it as a grant to an 
industry in the area, administered by the RM. 
 
We have the community bond which has just been announced here which I 
believe can play a major role in the small industries in rural 
Saskatchewan.  I believe that people invest in their community when they 
see it creates opportunities and jobs for the young people to keep their 
community alive and vibrant. 
 
We also have the small-business incentive grant, which you know is a 25 per 
cent rebate for those who want to take a bit of a risk to go into a 
community.  Any time you set up a new industry it is a risk, it always is a 
risk. 
 
We also have the western economic diversification which has been putting a 
lot of money out into rural Saskatchewan, matching or top-loading or 
interest-free loans. 
 
So there is a package now together, a financing package that can, Mr. 
Speaker, allow the people in rural Saskatchewan to put together a project 
that would be beneficial to them and certainly make their community a 
better place to be and to live. 
 
I want to just run through a few of the numbers, the total numbers of 
projects that has been happened, like I was . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Time has expired. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to be able to enter into this 
debate and I will be interested in having the ability to respond to the 
member from Rosetown's amendment to our resolution. 
 
First let me say that the resolution that we had originally introduced is 
relevant to this debate.  Because if you look at what has happened in rural 
Saskatchewan, we continue to see an alarming rate of rural depopulation.  
We continue to see educational cut-backs; we continue to see lay-offs; and 
we continue to see business and farm bankruptcies in rural Saskatchewan.  
And why would that be, Mr. Minister, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The reason is because this Tory government is market oriented, private 
sector led. It has an industrial policy and this industrial policy which is 
dependent upon the private sector only, has clearly failed.  And as a 
result of that we have seen record unemployment in this province.  We have 
seen record business and farm bankruptcies.  We've seen record rural 
depopulation.  We've seen record low housing starts.  We've seen record job 
loss.  And if you go to any town in this province, or village, you will see 
empty store fronts and you will see empty houses with for sale signs on 
them. 
 
Now what does the Premier of our province do at a time of economic crisis?  
The Premier of our province has been in Ottawa, Ottawa, Ottawa, Ottawa.  



 

 

Has he been standing up for Saskatchewan people?  Has he been standing up 
for all of the people of this province who are facing an economic crisis?  
Has he had a bottom line in Ottawa?  The answer is clearly no -- clearly 
no. 
 
The Premier of our province has been in Ottawa negotiating the Meech Lake 
deal.  Did he have a bottom line for Saskatchewan people?  Did he say no to 
the GST(goods and services tax)?  Did he say no to free trade?  Did he say 
no to changes to the Crow rate?  Did he say no to the dropping of the 
two-price wheat system?  Did he say no to the dropping of advanced 
payments?  Did he say no to oats off the Canadian Wheat Board?  Did he say 
no to anything? 
 
He has not.  He has said yes, Mr. Prime Minister; yes, Mr. Prime Minister. 
And the people of this province believe that our Premier is in the Prime 
Minister's hip-pocket. He has no bottom line and he does not stand up for 
the people of this province when it comes to the problems facing the people 
of this province. 
 
Now let's talk about the government's resolution that they introduced, and 
they list tens and tens of programs -- tens and tens.  We've heard the 
minister responsible for rural affairs and the former minister of the 
Environment speak about all that has been done for rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Well I want to talk about what's happening in rural Saskatchewan from an 
educational point of view.  In 1982-83 when this government came to power, 
there were 90,926 rural students in this province.  And in September or 
November of 1989 there were 85,913 -- a drop of 5,013 students.  And I will 
repeat those numbers.  In 1982-83, the first year of their government, 
90,926 students in primary and secondary school.  In 1989, November 11 of 
1989, 85,913 students -- a drop of 5,013 students. 
 
Clearly the policies of this government are not working.  They are simply 
not working.  And to trot out tens and tens and tens of programs that the 
government has implemented in rural Saskatchewan is meaningless to the 
people who have had to leave rural Saskatchewan or for the people who are 
there and on the verge of leaving rural Saskatchewan.  These programs are 
meaningless. 
 
Now this government, it pretends to be the friend of people living in rural 
Saskatchewan.  In fact they like to brag about the fact that most of their 
members come from rural Saskatchewan.  But I ask those members, I ask those 
members, where have you been, where have you been when the farm families of 
this province have been facing horrendous economic and social programs?  We 
have had the Premier, the Minister of Agriculture, down in Ottawa pandering 
to the interests of eastern Canada, but he has not been representing the 
interests of this province.  And the Minister of Finance laughs.  The 
Minister of Finance laughs. 
 
Well I want to tell you, Mr. Minister, you go anywhere in this province, 
you go anywhere in rural Saskatchewan, and they will tell you that your 
Premier and your government does not represent the interests of rural 
Saskatchewan, but you certainly represent the interests of big eastern 



 

 

business and big eastern governments. 
 
Now where has this government been?  When the federal government decided to 
remove oats off the Canadian Wheat Board, what did this government do?  
Nothing.  When they decided to change the Crow rate, to do in the Crow 
rate, what did this government do?  Nothing.  And that has an effect on 
rural Saskatchewan.  When they decided to no longer allow advanced payments 
without any interest -- now farmers have to pay interest on these advance 
payments -- what did this government do?  Nothing.  And when the Prime 
Minister of this country moved to introduce legislation which would put 7 
per cent on every item that farm families have to purchase, what did this 
government do?  Absolutely nothing. 
 
Now we have been waiting for some five years for a long-term agricultural 
policy -- five years we've been waiting. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Rain.  It's rain. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- This government has been . . . oh, and the minister talks 
about rain.  The minister talks about rain.  We've got rain all over 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister, but what price do we have for a bushel of 
wheat?  What price do we have for a bushel of wheat?  What we need is 
long-term stability on the farm and at the farm gate, and we don't have 
that.  And we don't have that because of your Tory cousins in Ottawa and 
because of the Saskatchewan Tories in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(1530) 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Now these people continue to talk about drought and this 
and that and the other thing -- grasshoppers and drought and low commodity 
prices.  They continue to talk about these problems that Saskatchewan 
people have faced and the grain wars.  But what has Ottawa done for 
Saskatchewan people?  Absolutely nothing.  The Premier of the province of 
Saskatchewan and the Prime Minister of Canada have been focused on Meech 
Lake, on a constitutional accord that means absolutely nothing to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
But what does mean something to them is a long-term agricultural policy, a 
policy that would mean real money in their pockets, Mr. Speaker.  But this 
government, does it do anything in terms of going to Ottawa and getting 
anything?  Do they have a bottom line?  Absolutely not.  We have a 
cheer-leader that's reported in the papers all over eastern Canada and in 
Saskatchewan, a cheer-leader who cheers to the Prime Minister of Canada.  
He does whatever the Prime Minister wants. 
 
And I would say to the people of this province, if the Premier of 
Saskatchewan was interested in the people of Saskatchewan, he would have 
said if you want my agreement on Meech Lake, then we've got to have more 
than $5 a bushel . . . or $5 an acre; if you want my agreement on Meech 
Lake, then we've got to have a long-term agricultural policy that puts 
stability onto the farms.  That's what I would have said. 



 

 

 
But does this Premier have a bottom line?  Absolutely not.  He has no such 
thing as a bottom line.  And the people over there are getting a bit upset.  
Well you should get out into rural Saskatchewan and listen to what they're 
saying.  Our Premier has no bottom line.  He will do anything to pander to 
the big business interests of eastern Canada and to the Prime Minister of 
Canada who represents those interests in eastern Canada. 
 
Now the member from Rosetown introduces a motion where he talks about the 
need for . . . or all of these rural health care facilities that have 
occurred in rural Saskatchewan.  And he talks about a moratorium on home 
care in the province of Saskatchewan under the former NDP government.  And 
I think it's time we put something on the record because if you look at 
what Bob Murray had to say, what Bob Murray had to say is that you put 
money into home care which allows people to stay in their homes and stay in 
rural Saskatchewan.  You put money into that and you don't put money into 
large institutional facilities.  That's what Bob Murray had to say.  Now 
just don't put any words into my mouth.  That's what the Bob Murray 
commission had to say. And he was disappointed  
 Dthat the Government of Saskatchewan put absolutely very little money, 
additional money into home care in this past budget.  That kind of money 
into home care would assist elderly rural citizens in maintaining 
themselves in their own homes and in their own communities. 
 
And what is happening with some of these rural nursing homes that are being 
built, they're not being built in an individual's community, and in order 
for them to access those facilities, they have to move out of their 
community and into a larger centre.  And what we say is that this 
Government of Saskatchewan which pretends . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm pleased to enter into 
the debate on the motion and the amendment relative to some of the economic 
circumstances and their implications that we find ourselves facing in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And certainly none of us in this Chamber of whatever party or philosophy 
like to see young or old people leaving the province for whatever reason.  
Certainly the population decline, albeit that it's still higher today than 
it was when we assumed office in 1982, we're still over the million person 
mark.  And certainly, Mr. Speaker, I think that speaks to the opportunities 
we have provided, albeit some of the momentum has been taken out of that 
climb over this last couple three years because of drought and other things 
particularly impacting on our agricultural sector. 
 
But the interesting thing, Mr. Speaker, that we've heard today, and we 
heard three NDP members stand in their places, Mr. Speaker, we heard three 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  Now the hon. member for Saskatoon Nutana is acting 



 

 

in a very rude manner, to put it mildly.  She's challenging the Chair, and 
I warn her that if she does that again, she will have to pay the price.  
The member is speaking and I won't say anything more at this time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  And it was interesting to 
note that when that member from Saskatoon Nutana was on her feet, the 
member for Quill Lakes or the member for Humboldt, when they got up in this 
debate, Mr. Speaker, did you hear one proposal put forward to help build 
the Saskatchewan economy? to help diversify the Saskatchewan economy?  Did 
you hear one ounce of policy from those NDP, Mr. Speaker?  Was there one 
recommendation?  No.  We heard lots and lots of the old line.  We heard 
about GigaText and we heard about Supercart and we heard about Joytec and 
we heard about Weyerhaeuser, and we heard about the sweetheart deals, Mr. 
Speaker, with Peter Pocklington and those kinds of people that the NDP are 
wanting to attack.  But did we hear one new proposal, Mr. Speaker?  Did we 
hear one ounce of economic development or diversification policy strategy 
from the NDP? 
 
The answer is, Mr. Speaker, no.  And the reason is, Mr. Speaker, they don't 
have a policy.  The NDP, Mr. Speaker, are caught up . . . and I think the 
member from Saskatoon Nutana exemplifies it the best of any.  Because while 
they were going into their NDP convention last fall, Mr. Speaker, and the 
leader of the party was trying to move the NDP Party into a more proactive 
and moderate position, November 16, '89, Leader-Post heading, Mr. Speaker: 
"Romanow hopes delegates adopt moderate philosophies."  Well, Mr. Speaker, 
he's been betrayed and betrayed mightily by the left-wing element, the 
radical element in that party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Today we heard the same old NDP lines, Mr. Speaker, 
that we heard a year ago, 5 years ago, 10 years ago, 20 years ago, that 
everywhere else in the world they have abandoned, including Sweden -- 
everywhere else in the world is abandoning.  But here today the member from 
Saskatoon got up and used those four-letter words, right in this 
legislature.  She used words like market-oriented, private-sector led, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, she got right to the heart of the issues facing 
rural Saskatchewan.  She recapitulated the hardship that Saskatchewan 
farmers are facing because oats is gone from the wheat pool . . . the wheat 
board, Mr. Speaker -- a mighty, a mighty, mighty issue facing Saskatchewan 
farmers today.  And the Crow rate change that took place some several years 
ago, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And she talked about big eastern business and big eastern government, Mr. 
Speaker.  Not one shred of agricultural policy, not . . . And she got up 
saying she wanted to talk about education.  Did we hear any education 
policy from that member? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was on a podium with her leader at the STF (Saskatchewan 
Teachers' Federation) forum a year and a half or two ago, Mr. Speaker.  And 
what I heard him say, what I heard their leader say, Mr. Speaker, was they 



 

 

would be coming forward with an educational policy.  Has anybody seen or 
heard the NDP education policy, I ask you?  Have you seen it? 
 
Our policy is clear -- a new technical college in Prince Albert; a new 
agriculture college in the University of Saskatchewan; regional college 
network across this province; distance education so that people wherever 
they live have access to first- and second-year university, to technical 
institute courses, to literacy training, things that are important to rural 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  We haven't heard one ounce of educational 
policy come from that member who pretends to be the education critic. And 
she says from her seat, we won't because they don't have a policy, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And why don't they have a policy, Mr. Speaker?  This is key, Mr. Speaker.  
The reality is the NDP cabal of socialists, Mr. Speaker, cannot cast off 
the dogma of the past.  They cannot grapple with that one word, Mr. 
Speaker, that one word that is driving everything in this world today, and 
that word is, Mr. Speaker, change.  Global change.  The NDP cannot grapple 
with that concept, Mr. Speaker.  They have the blinkers on. They have the 
mentality of the '60s and the '70s, Mr. Speaker. They cannot cast off that 
old dogma, Mr. Speaker. 
 
A final point I would like to make when it comes to economic development 
diversification.  If you look at the examples that they pick, that they 
criticize . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And the hon. members says, 
we stand up for Saskatchewan.  I'll tell her how our Premier stands up for 
Saskatchewan in a minute. 
 
But let's look at the examples, let's look at the examples, Mr. Speaker, 
that they pick when they pick examples of economic diversification that in 
their minds have gone wrong.  They pick Weyerhaeuser and Cargill, Mr. 
Speaker. They pick Weyerhaeuser and Cargill which are these awful North 
American multinational vertically integrated companies.  They always pick 
on those examples. 
 
Why, Mr. Speaker, do they not mention the joint ventures with the Co-op, 
the upgrader.  We never hear anything about that joint venture, do we?  And 
the wheat pool is one of the biggest corporations in this province.  Or, 
Mr. Speaker, why don't we hear about the joint venture with the wheat pool 
at the Biggar malt plant. Now why don't they attack that one, Mr. Speaker?  
Mr. Speaker, why don't they attack that one? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the reason is that their strategy is not based on any tenets 
of economic development or diversification.  It's based on what can they be 
against.  And, Mr. Speaker, it's been no secret that in the '60s and in the 
'70s and in the '80s with this gang, and now into the '90s, because they 
have no new ideas, they're still against Americans, they're still against 
the multinational agri-food corporations, and that is the sole basis for 
their policy is what can we be against, Mr. Speaker.  It's not what can we 
be for -- not what can we be for.  One could argue that they are steeped in 
hypocrisy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But now let's look at the agriculture policy and who speaks for who in this 



 

 

province and who stands up for Saskatchewan farmers.  The hon. member from 
Saskatoon Nutana said our Premier has no bottom line, that he doesn't speak 
for Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this House, would the western Canadian 
farmers, would the western Canadian farmers be getting a 200 or a 490, $450 
million payment from Ottawa if it hadn't been for our Premier?  The answer 
is no.  Not only did this Premier deliver for Saskatchewan farmers, Mr. 
Speaker, he delivered for Manitoba farmers and for Alberta farmers, and 
quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, we ought to be charging a commission.  Every 
time he goes down there he gets money from not only Saskatchewan farmers 
but for the other provinces as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Now you contrast that, Mr. Speaker, with what was 
happening when the NDP were in power and the interest rates were 22 per 
cent.  The minister of Agriculture then, when members of the Tory caucus 
who were in opposition at the time asked the member, who at the time was 
Mr. MacMurchy, are you prepared to help with the high interest rate 
problem; and do you know what his answer is?  And I'm paraphrasing it -- 
well these high interest rates, you know, that's a federal issue and we're 
not going to get into it. 
 
And while he fiddled and while the NDP fiddled, I'll tell you, rural 
Saskatchewan burned and home owners across this province burned, Mr. 
Speaker.  Farms were lost and houses were lost because the NDP chose not to 
help farmers, Mr. Speaker.  When the choice has come, Mr. Speaker, between 
helping farmers and sticking to their socialist dogma, guess which wins out 
every time, Mr. Speaker?  Every time.  Well I tell you, Mr. Speaker, this 
party . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Time has elapsed. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to respond just briefly 
to some of the comments made by the Minister of Finance.  And first off, 
the NDP are against one thing in the province of Saskatchewan and that's 
the Progressive Conservative government and the destruction they've done to 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- The second comment I'd make, Mr. Speaker, in regards to 
remarks from the Minister of Finance is this: it's not us that are looking 
to the past in Saskatchewan; it's the people of Saskatchewan looking to the 
past because it looks so good compared to what they see now under this 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Speaker, we put a motion forward this afternoon: 
 

 That this Assembly regrets the continued steady decline of Saskatchewan's 



 

 

rural communities as is evident in the alarming rate of rural 
depopulation, education cut-backs and lay-offs, and business bankruptcies 
on main street. 

 
Now that is a valid motion we put forward, Mr. Speaker, and they come in 
and with what hypocrisy they talk about the good job they've done in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Nobody out there listening today would believe that this government has 
done a good job because people in Saskatchewan are suffering while they do 
support the Weyerhaeusers and the Cargills and the multinationals.  But 
they don't support business in Saskatchewan, they don't support the 
ordinary individual in Saskatchewan, they don't support education at 
adequate levels. 
 
They might build elaborate medical buildings.  They might build elaborate 
educational facilities.  But then they take away the means for our young 
people and the sick to attend those facilities, Mr. Speaker.  That's what a 
Progressive Conservative government has done in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would hold the fact the bankruptcies in the province of 
Saskatchewan . . . You look at 1988, Mr. Speaker, total bankruptcies in the 
province of Saskatchewan, 1,236 bankruptcies in the province of 
Saskatchewan in 1988, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In fact, between the period of 1982 and 1989, under years of a Progressive 
Conservative government, bankruptcies in Saskatchewan have increased by 100 
per cent -- 100 per cent.  Why is that, Mr. Speaker?  Because they've taken 
all the money out of the economy in the province of Saskatchewan and given 
it to their multinational friends and their patronage bin and their hog 
trough so that the ordinary individual is struggling to exist in the 
province of Saskatchewan today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They sit around and they pretend they're constitution builders while 
Saskatchewan is withering on Devine, Mr. Speaker.  That's what's happening 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- They run off to Ottawa and they don't say, this is what 
Saskatchewan needs: Mr. Mulroney, we need better prices for agriculture 
products; Mr. Mulroney, we need help in bad economic times; Mr. Mulroney, 
we need the Farm Credit Corporation to do some restructuring on debt and 
not let them run away on interest rates.  They don't go down and say that. 
 
The Premier of this province goes down and says: yes, sir, Mr. Prime 
Minister; yes, sir, Mr. Prime Minister; yes, sir, Mr. Prime Minister; never 
standing up for the people in the province of Saskatchewan.  And that's the 
problem with this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 



 

 

Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Speaker, let's look a little more closely at the first 
quarter of 1990, bankruptcies in the province of Saskatchewan.  Farm 
bankruptcies in the first quarter this year over the first quarter last 
year, up, record -- up by 131 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how about personal bankruptcies in the first quarter of this 
year over last year?  Personal bankruptcies up by 29 per cent.  Mr. 
Speaker, business bankruptcies in the first quarter this year over the 
first quarter of last year, up by 36 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government should be ashamed to come into this 
legislature and talk about what they call the good job they've done in the 
province of Saskatchewan.  If that's the good job they've done in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, the electorate in Saskatchewan will throw these 
people out so hard come next election they'll be decimated to the extent 
they were last time they were government in Saskatchewan, back in the 
1930s, Mr. Speaker.  That's what'll happen to this government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- While rural Saskatchewan hemorrhages -- and you can look at 
facts in the movement of population out of rural Saskatchewan -- since 
they've been in office, half-way through their first term of office, '82 to 
1986, almost 20,000 people left rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, almost 
20,000 people. 
 
And I'd even hate to guess at how many people in their second term of 
office have left rural Saskatchewan because they don't support the small 
farmer.  They don't support the small-business person.  They don't support 
the average individual in Saskatchewan.  The average individual, the 
average small business, the average farmer are in a time of crisis in the 
province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  And this government stands by and 
does nothing of substance about it.  They have empty rhetoric.  They still 
blame governments from a decade ago for their problems of today.  They 
blame the world economy on the Saskatchewan situation.  They'll blame 
pensioners.  They'll blame trade unions.  They blame inefficient farmers, 
but never once stopping to take blame for where blame is due, and blame is 
due on the Progressive Conservative government in the province of 
Saskatchewan.  That's where it's due, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- We know that.  The people of Saskatchewan know that.  They 
don't want to call by-elections because they're afraid of that.  Three 
vacant seats in the Saskatchewan legislature, they should all be safe seats 
for the Progressive Conservative Party.  They've taken care of them.  But 
they're not.  They won't even call by-elections in the seats that are 
vacant because they know they're in trouble even in strong Tory 
constituencies, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 



 

 

 
Mr. Anguish: -- Where is the shame in these people who have decimated the 
economy of Saskatchewan?  They have no shame, Mr. Speaker, in what they've 
done.  Smoke and mirrors and deceit and deception by a government that has 
gone astray: spending like drunken sailors, Mr. Speaker, increasing taxes 
at unprecedented rates in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they should be shameful of the job that they've done on the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan.  They should be ashamed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- The New Democratic Party, Mr. Speaker, has travelled far 
and wide throughout this province in recent years, and we hear what people 
are saying.  We've heard the hardship stories that they've expressed.  
We've heard many people say, never again in my lifetime would I vote for a 
Progressive Conservative candidate because of how they've deceived us in 
the past election, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The promises they've made and none of them kept.  You can't find a single 
election-time promise that was made by the Progressive Conservative members 
that was kept at this point in time, Mr. Speaker.  They said they'd remove 
the gas tax, and they did.  But the gas tax is back on.  They said that 
they would reduce personal income tax, Mr. Speaker, and they've increased 
it.  They said they'd give senior citizens free telephones, Mr. Speaker, 
and my grandmother passed away with no free telephone. 
 
They have misled the people of the province of Saskatchewan.  They have 
driven children into hunger.  They have driven families into poverty and 
they have driven some of the brightest and the best right out of the 
province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- And do they show shame?  They show no shame.  They still 
stand up in their arrogance and pump their chests and cry out rhetoric that 
they hope in desperation that the people of Saskatchewan will believe, 
because Allan Gregg and Nancy McLean from Toronto say this is what you have 
to do if you want to go on deceiving the people in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But people bitten once in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, are not so easily 
deceived again.  People in Saskatchewan are the most politically aware 
people of anywhere in Canada, and actually anywhere in North America, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- And when the Saskatchewan electorate turns out in the next 
election, turning out in volumes of 80 per cent or greater of the eligible 
electors, they'll show the Progressive Conservative members opposite what 
they really feel about them.  They'll show them that expression by turning 
them out of office, Mr. Speaker.  They will reduce them to minor opposition 



 

 

in Saskatchewan . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Speaking to the motion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: -- Time has elapsed for debate on the motion. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I would seek leave of the Assembly to 
move to government orders at this time. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 25 -- An Act to amend The Provincial Court Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- This Bill, Mr. Speaker, contains provisions aimed at 
ensuring judicial independence.  Presently provincial court judges' 
salaries are set out in the regulations, passed pursuant to The Provincial 
Court Act. Pursuant to this Bill, they will be included in The Provincial 
Court Act itself.  The federal Judges Act has set a precedent in this 
regard with provisions aimed at guaranteeing the independence of judges. 
 
This Bill will also provide for the establishment of an independent 
commission to make recommendations on compensation and benefits for judges.  
Again, the federal Judges Act, with the purpose of ensuring judicial 
independence, provides for the appointment of such a commission. 
 
In Saskatchewan the commission will be made up of three people who are not 
judges who will be appointed by October 1, 1990 and by October 1 in every 
third year after that.  The recommendations of the commission will cover a 
three-year period. 
 
They will be submitted to the Minister of Justice who will lay the 
recommendations before the Legislative Assembly within 30 sitting days of 
their receipt. 
 
The Bill before this House also incorporates a guarantee that unless the 
contrary is recommended by the judicial council, the residence of judges 
will not be changed without their consent.  Again the purpose of this 
amendment is to remove any doubt about their independence.  I'm confident 
these amendments will clearly ensure the independence, the continued 
independence of the judiciary, and I'm pleased to move second reading of An 
Act to amend The Provincial Court Act. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Well a few preliminary comments, Mr. Speaker, in respect to 



 

 

the amendments that have been put forward in The Provincial Court Act.  I 
just want to say at the outset, Mr. Speaker, it is not out of the goodness 
of the heart of the Minister of Justice that he comes forward with these 
amendments. 
 
History of these amendments will indicate that last fall that the 
provincial court judges came to the Justice minister making certain 
requests in respect to guaranteeing the independence of the judiciary.  And 
they indicated that several changes were necessary in order to bring about 
a greater independence of the provincial court judges.  And they set forth 
a number of concerns that they had and recommendations as to how greater 
independence of the judiciary could be forthcoming. 
 
And I want to say that out of the discussions, initially the Minister of 
Justice indicated clearly that he felt that The Provincial Court Act as set 
out in 1988, the amendments of 1988, provided and guaranteed judicial 
independence to the extent that it would meet any of the tests under the 
charter of rights. 
 
And negotiations and the threat of taking the government to court initiated 
first of all a response by the minister.  It is clear that the judges 
wanted an independent commission.  They wanted the independent commission 
but they wanted it to report directly to the legislature not to the 
minister first, and to be tabled in the legislature. 
 
They wanted other concessions from the Minister of Justice and it's 
interesting to note that the Minister of Justice has since come further in 
appeasement of what the judges have been seeking.  Because I note that in 
the initial response from the minister as far back as November 14 to one of 
the judges that were concerned with the issue, it indicates in that letter, 
and I quote in part: 
 

 Further to our discussion on November 8, 1989, we agree to consider an 
independent third party to examine and determine the national average of 
provincial court judges.  The same independent third party is also to 
review the merits of establishing an independent commission to review 
judges' salaries, compensation, and residency only for future years. 

 
So the initial offer by the Minister of Justice did not go to meet the 
demands or the requests of the provincial court judges.  I want to say 
that, as the minister has indicated here, that what he has done is to 
appoint a commission which will look at the salary of the judges and the 
benefits that that commission will be established at a given period of time 
each year and will report to the minister to be tabled in the legislature. 
 
(1600) 
 
I want to say that I think is . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . yes, 
every three years.  But it starts off in October 1, 1990, and subsequently 
every three years.  I just want to say, Mr. Speaker, that very important 
that we have judicial independence.  I think that the judiciary should not 
only be independent but it should be perceived to be independent. 
 



 

 

And one of the concerns that the judges raised not -- I don't believe 
indicating that there had been direct interference or political 
interference to be fair -- but they indicated that it could be possible 
under the system of placement of judges, that in the event that a judge 
gave a decision, which the government of the day or the Attorney General or 
the Minister of Justice did not like, it is a possibility under the 
previous provisions that that judge in effect could be sent to Siberia.  
That was a concern, and don't shake your head, there was a major concern. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Couldn't send it out of the province. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Now I know that, but I use it in the terminology as in the 
broadest sense. 
 
All I want to say, Mr. Speaker, is that these amendments do in fact address 
to a large extent the concerns of the judges.  It doesn't go to the full 
extent that they had requested and there are a number of concerns that we 
will want to deal with in the Committee of the Whole, but essentially we 
are in agreement with the provisions that have been put forward in the 
amendments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I just wanted to respond to the 
one point without prolonging the debate so that the record is clear that 
the provincial court judges did make it abundantly clear during the dispute 
that the present government had not moved any judge and that it had 
happened only under a previous administration. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- They didn't say that either. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Yes they did. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- They didn't say that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Yes they did. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- They did not. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- They did and that was your concern that it would be 
happen again.  And so I just do want to make it clear that they were aware, 
Mr. Speaker, that this government had not moved any judge without the 
judge's consent and that secondly it had happened under a prior 
administration. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee 
of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 39 -- An Act respecting Summary Offences Procedure and Certain 
consequential amendments resulting from the enactment of this Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Mr. Speaker, this new Act which replaces the existing 
Summary Offences Procedure Act introduces a number of changes to the 
procedure relating to offences under provincial . . . under legislation.  
It also provides a more rational approach to, and clarification of, 



 

 

existing procedural provisions. 
 
The new legislation focuses primarily on incorporating provisions to 
implement a new program that will use the driver's licence application 
process to collect defaulted fines for offences respecting moving traffic 
and faulty vehicle equipment.  These changes will result in the removal of 
the cumbersome time and labour intensive process associated with the 
issuing and enforcing large numbers of warrants for people who ignore their 
moving traffic or defective vehicle equipment tickets, or who fail or who 
refuse to pay fines assessed for such violations. 
 
It is anticipated that these changes will result in a reduction of the 
work-load for our police officers and a saving of approximately 86 
person-years in provincial police forces.  Police forces will be able to 
devote existing resources to other matters such as crime prevention. 
 
In addition, the province will recover many fines that are now uncollected 
because the present process is both cumbersome and simply not very 
effective.  Additional amounts to be collected are estimated to be at least 
$950,000 every year.  I'm confident, Mr. Speaker, that this system will 
provide the most efficient, effective, and appropriate enforcement 
mechanism for collecting outstanding and unpaid fines. 
 
It has proved successful in a number of other provinces including Ontario, 
Alberta, and Manitoba. 
 
In addition, removing the warrant system for these offences means that 
individuals will no longer be subject to an arrest in their homes or at 
their place of work or elsewhere in order to meet the requirement to appear 
in court, or so that they can serve time in prison for failure to pay a 
fine for a traffic offence.  Thus this new enforcement mechanism also 
recognizes a concern for the civil liberties of people charged with 
provincial offences. 
 
Among the most significant provisions of this new Act is a provision that 
will have Saskatchewan Government Insurance refuse to issue a driver's 
licence where a person has not paid fines resulting from an offence 
specified for this  
 Dpurpose.  The specified offences will be moving traffic violations and 
faulty equipment offences, and such offences constitute approximately 92 
per cent of all summary offence tickets currently issued. 
 
Individuals served with a moving traffic ticket will have a number of 
options available to them.  They may pay the voluntary penalty indicated in 
the ticket; register in a fine option program; appear before a justice to 
plead guilty but request a lower fine than the voluntary payment because of 
extenuating circumstances; or if they wish to plead not guilty, they 
obviously may request a trial. 
 
To deal with problems that are created where an individual chooses to 
ignore a ticket served upon him or her, a deemed conviction procedure is 
added to the Act with respect to moving traffic offences.  Such people will 
be notified of the conviction and of the amount of the fine assessed.  The 



 

 

Act also provides that a person convicted by this process, who has not had 
an opportunity to respond to the ticket, may apply to a justice of the 
peace to have the matter reconsidered.  An additional feature associated 
with this deemed conviction procedure is that the fine amount for offences 
with this new process are limited to a maximum of $400. 
 
For unusual situations, a last resort incarceration provision is maintained 
as an enforcement mechanism.  This would apply where the licence 
non-renewal process is unsuccessful, the person does not participate in the 
fine option program and refuses to pay the fine even though numerous 
extensions for time of payment may have been requested and granted. 
 
Likewise, when describing offences for the purposes of this new system, we 
will ensure that incarceration will continue to be available as a 
sentencing and enforcement option for offences relating to driving while a 
person is disqualified from driving or while a driver's licence has been 
suspended or refused by SGI. 
 
Finally, a late payment charge will be assessed on overdue fines for these 
offences.  This administrative fee will offset the cost of enforcing the 
payment of unpaid fines. 
 
The existing summary offence procedure, which people may be authorized to 
pay a voluntary penalty but register in a fine option program or otherwise 
appear in court, is being continued.  This process will continue to apply 
to offences other than moving traffic and faulty vehicle equipment 
offences.  Such examples are offences under The Alcohol Control Act, The 
Wildlife Act, parking offences under municipal by-law. 
 
Likewise, existing enforcement mechanisms will be retained so that if a 
person charged with a non-moving traffic offence failed to pay the fine or 
participate in the fine option program, that person is subject to jail. 
 
The other new provisions to improve the summary offence procedure are, 
generally, giving people, charged by way of summary offence tickets for all 
offences, the option of registering in the fine option program to work off 
the amount of the voluntary penalty without first having to appear in 
court. 
 
Providing that where people pay their voluntary penalty by a cheque that is 
dishonoured, the conviction continues and after notice to these people that 
their cheque has been dishonoured, the fine can be enforced by the means 
provided in the Act and permitting civil enforcement of fines.  This will 
ensure that means of enforcing fines assessed against corporations is 
authorized by the Act. 
 
Consequential amendments that accompany these changes in the summary 
offences procedure are being made to The Highway Traffic Act, The Vehicle 
Administration Act, and municipal statutes.  Minor reference changes are 
also made to several Acts. 
 
Consultation respecting this legislation has occurred with those involved 
in the process of administering the system from the commencement of the 



 

 

process where a ticket is issued, until enforced.  In addition, the major 
municipalities have been consulted.  All parties consulted welcome the 
proposed changes as positive measures in dealing with certain provincial 
offences. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government has a responsibility to be fair and to ensure 
that laws are duly enforced for the benefit of law-abiding people, but also 
to respect the rights of the individual.  We have kept in mind the need to 
balance the interest and enforcement of the law with the interests of the 
individual.  The proposed process is the best option available to ensure 
careful allocation of scarce resources with these principles in mind. 
 
People charged pursuant to the new procedure will be given several notices 
advising them of the procedure and how they may respond.  The ticket will 
contain such information as will the notice sent to everyone who has been 
deemed convicted.  And subsequent notice will be sent prior to the person's 
driver's licence renewal period. 
 
Anyone and everyone who wishes to dispute a charge on the merits will be 
given their day in court and the opportunity for a fair and full hearing.  
Thus these changes will not deny a right of trial to anyone and do 
incorporate full procedural protections for those charged with these 
offences. 
 
This system will not have an impact on the vast majority of people of our 
province who pay the voluntary penalty or appear in court when charged with 
a moving traffic violation.  Only the minority of the people who fail or 
refuse to pay and fail or refuse to appear in court and are a resulting 
drain on the entire justice system will be affected. 
 
I believe that law-abiding people will welcome a system that enforces fine 
payment by those who have attempted to evade payment in the past. 
 
The objectives of the legislation are increased effectiveness, greater 
efficiency, protection of the rights of those charged with offences, and 
improved service to the public.  The new traffic fine collection program 
and the other changes included in this legislation will achieve those 
objectives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm very pleased to move second reading of an Act respecting 
Summary Offences Procedure and Certain consequential amendments resulting 
from the enactment of this Act. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I want the opportunity 
to review the remarks of the minister.  We had no explanatory notes.  
There's a fairly . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- It's a new Act. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Yes, it's a new Act, but I thought you might have compared 
it with the previous sections.  And I appreciate that it is a new Act.  
There is some significant changes that have been brought forward.  I want 
an opportunity to look at the minister's comments and to have an analysis 



 

 

of the Act, and therefore, at this time I would beg leave to adjourn 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(1615) 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 
Bill No. 5 -- An Act respecting Child and Spousal Maintenance and 
Consequential Amendments resulting therefrom 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  It's with pleasure that I 
introduce to the Assembly, Doug Moen, co-ordinator of legislative services 
and Susan Amrud, the Crown solicitor of legislative services. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, in respect to The Family 
Maintenance Act, I want to indicate that we support the provisions that you 
have provided within there.  We want to indicate that, in reviewing it with 
various law firms and those that are handling a number of cases in this 
area, that they do find a number of positive aspects of the Bill.  I note, 
for instance, the order freezing assets prior to obtaining an order.  The 
mediation is a sound innovation and respected. 
 
There is only a couple of areas that were raised for your consideration.  
And first of all is in respect, Mr. Minister, of the definition of 
agreement.  If you take a look at the Act in section 2, if I may refer you 
to section (a): 
 

 "agreement" means an agreement with respect to a matter that is dealt with 
in this Act that is: 

 
  (i) made in writing; and 
  (ii) signed by the parties. 
 

And then I believe that further on, if I might, Mr. Chairman, in following 
it through for the minister, I believe it also refers in filing the 
agreement under section 9. 
 
I ask the minister whether he considered really, in the definition of 
agreement, putting in a proviso similar to The Matrimonial Properties Act 
whereby the agreement had to be approved by independent counsel on each 
side.  That was because sometimes you could have an agreement which is 
perhaps not the best interest and would be proceeded with, and doesn't have 
that particular protection. 
 
That was one of the concerns that was raised.  And I was wondering whether 
or not you would consider that possibility of amending the definition of 
agreement at this time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- The matter was considered.  One of the concerns brought 



 

 

forward by those that we consulted was that a lot of people that will be 
helped with this may not have the financial resources for the added step, 
and that more formality may discourage the agreements than will help.  So 
it was considered, but on balance we thought that the more informal, the 
easier it would be for people to access the Act.  So that's the reason for 
it. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Yes.  I guess the concern that was raised and that I raise 
is that having the safeguard that the agreement which is going to be 
incorporated really fairly reflects in the best interests of both parties.  
So that is the initial concern.  And I understand what you're saying is 
trying to keep it as simple as possible.  But I also know in The 
Matrimonial Property Act, I believe that provision is there.  And I suppose 
the same reasoning could have been made there, because not necessarily are 
people particularly well off or sometimes no better off than they are under 
The Family Maintenance Act. 
 
So I guess it's a balance.  And my recommendation to you would be to 
include a provision similar to The Matrimonial Property Act which would 
assure that the interests of the parties in that signed agreement are 
fairly reflected. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I'm not disagreeing with the point raised by the hon. 
member, but I am arguing that we want people to take advantage of the 
provisions of this Act, and we want to reduce the formalities.  Certainly 
you may have a situation where if one of the parties is dissatisfied with 
the agreement that they sign, they obviously won't file it.  And they have 
the option then of going the traditional routes to get a fair agreement. 
 
So it's not that it's necessary that they have to sign this if they're 
dissatisfied with it . . . or file it.  They don't.  But assuming they're 
satisfied, in our view it is in the best interest to encourage people to 
use the procedures here as opposed to discourage them.  So I'm not 
disagreeing with the point the hon. member made.  It was a choice we had to 
make that we wanted to encourage and keep the formalities for minimum and 
with the protection that as I've already stated. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Well yes, I accept that explanation.  However I would urge 
at least a consideration of that.  I note in your . . . you're correct in 
section 9 where it says they may file it and not required to, and as a 
consequence I suppose they could opt not to use the agreement and take the 
procedure before the court for a determination. 
 
There is, if I might just, Mr. Chairman, and then we can proceed through, 
just raise a couple of other items.  And that is, Mr. Minister, in respect 
to clause 5(1)(d) where you . . . in section 5 it deals with the amount of 
maintenance, and there is some concern as to why (d) would be put in.  In 
other words, when you're determining the amount of maintenance to be paid, 
the courts shall take into account the needs and the means and economic 
circumstances of the party.  And one of the things that you . . . as (d) 
indicates, it says "in the case of maintenance for a child, the cost of the 
respondent of exercising access to that child." 
 



 

 

I would have thought that the first . . . if you're going to set a 
maintenance order, that what you would be doing is determining how much is 
required to maintain that child; not how much it would cost for one parent 
to access cost of the respondent of exercising access to the child.  And 
there was some concern raised for that and I was wondering what the 
rationale is there. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Well one of the problems is the courts have been 
inconsistent in taking into account the costs sometimes of access.  We 
obviously want the access to be given and to in fact happen.  Sometimes 
that cost can be extreme, can be a fairly heavy amount for an individual, 
and could discourage access. 
 
So the courts can take that into account in determining the amount of 
maintenance because obviously we want to encourage access.  The Canadian 
Bar Association has recommended that this be done this way, that the courts 
can take that into account and shall take it into account.  What weight it 
puts onto it of course is a matter of judgement.  But it was recommended, 
one, by the Canadian bar; secondly, it meets the principle of encouraging 
access to the child. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- But to some extent it runs counter to the amount of 
maintenance perhaps, or conceivably could, because if you take this into 
account and take the extreme example of where there's a separation and one 
is living in Toronto when one is living in Regina, and you're going to 
start taking into account the cost, you're determining what maintenance you 
should give to the child; in the case of maintenance for the child, the 
cost to the respondent exercising access to that child.  I don't know how 
that fits into really determining how much money is needed for the 
maintenance of the child. 
 
And would, if the court were to decide to take that in, could it not in 
fact bring access but a decreased amount in maintenance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- It's simply one of the factors that the court can take 
into account.  How it weights that factor, the court could very easily say 
that, look the amount of the maintenance here we are simply taking into 
account, given the financial circumstances and whatever else, that this is 
the amount needed for maintenance.  That's the most that can be carried. 
 
It's one of the factors.  The courts have been inconsistent.  The courts 
have in some cases ruled that it should be taken into account and others.  
It's only a factor.  The weight will be in the judgement of the court.  So 
the court may give very little weight to that criterion, but it certainly 
is one that the recommendations were at least be one of a criterion and 
that the courts be able to use their judgement as to what weight they're 
going to give to it. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- I refer you just to one other concern if I may, or a couple 
more, and that is in section 7, the powers of the court, and section 
7(1)(b) it indicates: "that a lump sum be paid or held in trust on any 
conditions the court considers appropriate."  Is there any merit there in 
adding to that or by the agreement in writing by the parties? 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- But they can do it by agreement anyway.  If they have an 
agreement, they can file that agreement and have it in force.  So they can 
do it by agreement anyway. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- I know, but it indicates here in section 7, if I read it 
correctly, it says: 
 

 On an application pursuant to this Act, the court may make an interim or 
final order on any terms and conditions that the court considers 
appropriate including one or more of the following provisions: (and) 

 
 (b) that a lump sum be paid or held in trust on any conditions the 

court considers appropriate; 
 

So there you have exclusively the court deciding.  All I'm asking, is it 
possible to have by the agreement in writing by the parties? In other 
words, rather than just the discretion of the court. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Again, we're having a little difficulty in that if they 
agree to file their agreement, they can have in there the provisions, okay, 
and if they don't have an agreement, they're getting a court order.  It's 
certainly one of the things that a court obviously would take into account. 
 
We're not understanding the difficulty, I gather.  If they didn't agree 
with the agreement of course, going through the court, the court would 
again make its order as it deems appropriate on any of the conditions.  So 
if they're filing the agreement, then that's covered off, otherwise the 
court has the discretion that a lump sum be paid or held in trust in any of 
the conditions that it deems appropriate. 
 
So if we're not answering the question, I apologize and perhaps could 
explain it again. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Not a major problem with it. 
 
Section 8 is the last one that I just want to ask, and that is in respect 
to section 8(1)(a) where variation of an order, and it says: 
 

 (a) may: discharge, vary or suspend any term of the order, 
prospectively or retroactively." 

 
And a number of lawyers wondered why retroactively in there.  Because where 
the circumstances change, are you going to go back or are you going to as 
of the time of the change?  Because it seems to imply that not only once 
the circumstances change and are brought to the attention of the court that 
they can vary it, but also in suddenly being brought to the attention of 
the court, that they can go back  
 Dsomehow, retroactively.  And that was the concern. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Well it's being done now.  And a circumstance can happen 
where supposing there's a maintenance order and say the mother has custody 
of a son; the son goes and lives with the father with the consent of the 



 

 

mother.  Okay?  And then they come back to vary it later.  They could go 
back and change the order back to the time that say the son went with the 
father.  Not a common circumstance but not an uncommon one where it could 
be reviewed after a child went with another parent. 
 
And so as I say as well, that the courts do it.  But that would not be an 
uncommon situation where it would be necessary. 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Mr. Chairman, those are the essential concerns that I wanted 
to raise to the attention of the minister.  Overall, as I indicated, the 
provisions of this Bill we are in concurrence with and will be supporting 
it. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 35 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 6 -- An Act to amend The Dependants' Relief Act 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, in clause 2(1)(c) is 
amended by adding . . . Well it's subclause (c) that I want to refer you 
to.  It says: 
 

 (iv) a person of the opposite sex with whom a testator or an intestate 
cohabited as husband or wife: 

 
 (A) continuously for a period of not less than three years; or 
 (B) in a relationship of some permanence, if they are the parents of a 

child. 
 

I'm wondering in respect to (B) whether . . . It says, "in a relationship 
of some permanence, if they are the parents of a child."  I suppose that 
would be left in the determination of the court as to whether or not they 
had lived together prior to the birth of the child, and certain criteria 
would be set forward.  I'm wondering whether it leaves some indefiniteness 
as to what is a relationship, but I suppose it would be left in the 
discretion of the court. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Yes, it does.  It's obviously in the judgement of the 
court.  They'll take into account all the factors which we would expect in 
determining permanence, but it has to be in their discretion.  The 
criterion to get away from the less than three years is the parents of the 
child.  But it still is in the discretion of the court. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Fine.  I also note subsection 9(2) is repealed and 9(2) 
previously indicated that no allowance ordered to be made to the spouse of 
a testator shall, in the opinion of the court, be less than that the spouse 
would have received if the testator had died intestate leaving a spouse and 
children.  That is being deleted. 



 

 

 
All I raise here is certainly in commencing an action, previously with that 
subsection 9(2) in, those who were seeking relief in court were certain at 
least to obtain a minimum.  I guess now what you have done is to in a way 
taken out the certainty, but perhaps I guess the counter argument to that 
is that maybe in some instances, that set amount should not have been 
allowed in some circumstances.  And I guess there's a counterbalance to it. 
 
But I raise that for your comments as to your reasoning or the reason for 
deleting that certainty that was there before. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Well it did in some circumstances cause unfairness where 
the courts, with the limited amount available, wanted to allocate it to 
another dependant and couldn't do it -- perhaps a handicapped child, for 
example.  So the Law Reform Commission has recommended that the court have 
the discretion and those arbitrary figures be removed. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Bill No. 3 -- An Act respecting Custody of, Access to and Guardianship of 
Property of Children, Child Status and Parentage and Related Matters 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, during second reading on 
this debate, I raised a number of concerns with you with respect to the 
Bill.  I know that you undertook at that time to review my comments and I 
invite you now to make any response that you wish to.  So I invite some 
comments from you before we enter into a debate on this. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Well I could give a rather lengthy reply.  I'm not sure 
that's what you want . . . that some will be picked up on clause by clause. 
 
One of the questions you raised was the matter of accessibility to 
mediation services at a reasonable cost.  In our view, the consequential 
amendment to The Department of Justice Act will help ensure accessibility 
to mediation at reasonable costs in all parts of the province. 
 
Mediators currently on contract to the department for mediation under the 
farm security Act, for example, do more mediation than any other mediators 
in the province.  They are already involved peripherally in family 
mediation because of the fact that farm families who are in danger of 
losing their land are also experiencing marital problems as a result of the 
obvious stress they're under. 
 
We propose that these mediators will be taking extra training in family 
law.  We will make it available to these  
 Dmediators.  This we believe is the best way to make sure that mediation 
is widely distributed across the province at the least cost.  So within 



 

 

reason, I believe we will be responding with The Department of Justice Act 
plus the additional training in family law to the mediators, that under the 
circumstances we responded in the question of mediation services at 
reasonable cost. 
 
You ask as well that the Act be reassessed and amended to comply with the 
United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child.  In fact the Act was 
drafted with that very convention in mind.  The Act as well has been 
reviewed by the department's human rights solicitor and was found to be in 
full compliance with the convention.  Those were the key, in my view, 
overall thrusts that you worked from, and if you want to debate those or if 
they're adequately answered then we can get into the specifics. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- I just want to be clear about your proposal with respect to 
mediation services.  It's our position, Mr. Minister, that we should try as 
much as possible to provide mechanisms available to parties in a custody 
dispute to resolve that as much as possible outside the court, an informal 
resolution rather than a formal one that requires significant amounts of 
legal fees. 
 
Mr. Minister, we had put forward a proposal that basically mediation 
officers be available to people in all the major court centres of the 
province.  And I was not fully clear from your remarks about whether it's 
your intention to move towards that kind of a model, and I wonder if you 
could clarify that for me. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Well we looked at many options, and what we realized is 
that the people under the farm security Act . . . and those mediators 
across the province do more and have received more experience obviously 
over the last few years than virtually anybody else.  There has been some 
private law firms that have tried the mediation, and I gather with some 
mixed results out there.  So when we came back and looked at how to get 
this out to the greatest number of people with the ones that will need the 
least amount of training to be able to deal with these problems, it was the 
mediation people, the services that we already had. 
 
So our proposal is to train them further in family law.  They're already 
working in many cases in family mediation, so here we have a storehouse of 
experience already.  And I'm sure, and I'm not arguing with the hon. member 
that there probably aren't other solutions, but given the vast experiences 
out there and the numbers involved, that this is probably the best way to 
get mediation services out to as many people as quickly as possible. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- I guess the bottom line, Mr. Minister, is will mediation 
services be available upon request at reasonable cost throughout 
Saskatchewan?  And that's what we're looking for assurance of, and frankly 
we would like to see an amendment to this legislation that would in effect 
provide assurance of that.  And what I'm asking you is whether you're 
prepared to amend the Bill to in effect ensure that mediation services will 
be available to parties upon request at reasonable cost. 
 
(1645) 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Well let me come at it this way: that I think the way 
we're proceeding is . . . will accomplish that objective.  If it doesn't, 
then obviously we have to come back and this House will have to make the 
changes or it'll be budgetary, I'm not sure which. 
 
But starting this process, we're comfortable that we will get the greatest 
number with the greatest experience to the widest area of the problem, 
accessible to more people than anything else we could have done.  So we're 
starting with that.  I'm not sitting here, saying that it will be the 
ultimate solution.  We think it will be the best, but I don't rule out the 
need perhaps to come forward in the future.  There may be other solutions, 
and I don't discount those.  We're obviously making a judgement call here 
as to what we think is best. 
 
So to put it in as a guarantee may be a difficulty.  We think we're meeting 
the objectives.  And I certainly would like this to be accepted, and I 
don't rule out the possibility that we may be back in the future.  It may 
end up that we've got particular areas.  There may be, over time, different 
needs in the North.  I mean, we understand that those things could happen. 
 
But I really believe that this is worthy of an effort because if it works 
-- as we believe it will -- we will get, as I say, mediation services 
available to the greatest number in the shortest period of time. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Well, Mr. Minister, your mechanism may well work in rural 
Saskatchewan.  I'm more worried about what the results will be in terms of 
northern Saskatchewan.  You mentioned the North.  And I frankly don't think 
that using farm mediators is going to work in northern Saskatchewan, where 
I suspect there are none. 
 
So I'd like to be clear about how this proposal is going to work in some of 
the cities that don't currently have a lot of access to mediation services.  
I think of places like Moose Jaw and Prince Albert and how this model is 
going to work in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Yes, these people, one, don't just work in rural areas 
now.  And secondly, one of the difficulties we have -- and I would ask for 
your assistance -- we do have to get away from believing that it's just 
farm mediation that they're interested in.  With the training program, it 
will be wider than that.  They don't, as I say, all live in the rural 
areas. 
 
Secondly, under the system that's been developed, they also have . . . not 
really circuits, but they have travel based on need, so that these people 
are able to be, one, proactive, so . . . There will be a period of time 
making people aware of this, as we've had to learn just on the private 
practitioners trying to set this up.  I mean mediation is not a service 
that everybody sees the advantage to right away.  So I'm not expecting this 
to be a cure-all, but I think it will accelerate awareness. 
 
And again, I give you the assurance these people, one, are not all located 
in the rural; and then secondly, they do have the practice of being able to 
be mobile.  So I freely acknowledge it will take some time for the public 



 

 

to adjust to it even if these people are available. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Well just to close on this point, Mr. Minister, what we 
would like to see is an amendment to the legislation brought in by you that 
would in effect ensure that these services will be available. 
 
There is a difference between establishing as an objective to gradually get 
these services into place -- and by the way, that objective isn't really 
adequately laid out in the legislation, at least in our view.  We would 
really like to see an amendment to the Bill that in effect guarantees 
access to mediation services to people around the province and that an 
objective clearly stating that is established in the legislation itself.  
And right now I don't see it there. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Well I mean understand that the legislation is enabling 
legislation to set this up.  We're comfortable that it does it. 
 
But again I am not saying that it will necessarily happen.  Our objective 
is to do that.  I think the wise thing is, because we're starting out on a 
process, the public is really starting out on a process, that why don't we 
let it work, and if it's not adequately met again, we will be back to try 
and make it work. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Mr. Minister, I want to ask you another question, and that 
relates to the statement that you made with respect to having reviewed this 
legislation to ensure that it meets the conditions laid out in the United 
Nations convention on the rights of the child.  I'll have a number of 
questions with respect to that. 
 
The first one I want to ask you about is with respect to the need for a 
children's advocate in this province.  I am very disappointed that you have 
again brought forward legislation that doesn't take account of the 
potential that a children's advocate could play in this province. 
 
I've raised this on previous occasions in debate on The Family Services 
Act, but with respect to this piece of legislation, it's our judgement that 
a children's advocate could play a very useful role in providing children 
with a voice during court hearings related to a custody order. 
 
And my question to you is: would you be prepared to bring forward an 
amendment to this Bill that would make provision for a children's advocate?  
And the services of a children's advocate I think would play a number of 
roles.  One of them would be to give voice to the concerns of children so 
that their voices are heard before the courts in custody matters. 
 
But another important role, Mr. Minister, would be with respect to the 
management of property because at this point in time, when someone is 
established as a guardian under this piece of legislation, the guardian of 
course has authority to manage property on behalf of a child under the age 
of 18 years.  And there is really at this point no requirement in law for 
an independent third party to ensure that the property is being adequately 
managed. 
 



 

 

And it seems to me, Mr. Minister, that one of the very useful roles that a 
children's advocate could play is in effect they could receive on an annual 
basis, a report from the property guardian on the state of finances that 
the guardian is managing -- the state of property; the value of the 
property; check to ensure that it's being wisely managed, Mr. Minister; and 
in effect protect the interests of the minor who is not, under this 
legislation, even entitled to any information about how the property is 
being managed until they're 18 years of age. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question to you is, would you be prepared to stay the Bill 
for today and bring in an amendment that would in effect set up a 
children's advocate and allow the children's advocate to undertake the task 
that I've just described. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Well we have to make a distinction with respect to the 
hon. member, of a right to be heard and then deciding what's in the child's 
best interest.  I mean they're two different aspects.  And then let me 
separate the property argument because I believe it is separate from the 
point about representing the child's interests.  Right now we do have a 
representative of a child's interests in terms of property, being the 
Public Trustee.  The Public Trustee is responsible for the property of the 
child under the age of 18.  The Public Trustee can or the court can order 
that there be private guarantors of the property, if I can use that, or 
trustees of the property.  But that's subject to court review whenever that 
happens. 
 
It is the practice as well of the Public Trustee, if the child is a 
responsible child under 18 -- we're not talking about a five-year-old or a 
six-year-old coming in off the street -- that they will sit down and 
explain the situation and the status of the property to a child that can 
understand it, at any time. 
 
But if it's the properties under their management, obviously they are the 
trustee for that child's property and have the legal responsibilities of a 
trust relationship and that of a trustee, as does one appointed by the 
court, who may not be the Public Trustee.  And those tend to be . . . but I 
can't think of a circumstance where the estate is of a fairly large amount 
that it requires more technical professional people to manage it -- maybe a 
business, maybe something of that nature. 
 
So again, that's subject to the override of the court in those 
circumstances, and the individual trustee again is a trustee of the child's 
property.  If there's a dissipation of that, that leads to certain legal 
recompense by the child. 
 
So I would ask the hon. member to separate the property, because of all the 
people we talked to, and we talked to a lot of groups, that was not a 
concern raised, that the way the Public Trustee operates now has been 
accepted as satisfactory. 
 
Come back then to the question of a child advocate, you know, giving the 
child the right to be heard.  And we do come to some technical matters of 
the question of counsel in hearings.  So if again I can separate that 



 

 

component from the procedural one, from the overall question of an 
advocate. 
 
Obviously it's the law in our province that it is for the judge to make the 
order as to custody.  And the sole consideration will be the best interests 
of the child.  B.C. has a family advocate.  Alberta uses an amicus curiae.  
Neither are required to represent the wishes of the child, okay? -- not the 
wishes of the child.  And no province has established an office to 
represent the wishes of the child.  The convention doesn't require the 
establishment of such an office. 
 
In our view, all of the parties before the court will make the 
representations to the court and provide evidence to the court from which 
the judge can determine the best interests of the child. 
 
We're not convinced that there's a need to add another person to assess 
what's in the child's best interests when we have the court to do it and 
the judicial process.  The court always has the right during this to name 
counsel if it feels that it should, for the child, and paid for not by the 
child but as the court may order.  So that flexibility is there to make 
sure that the child's interests are protected as opposed to the argument 
representing the child's wishes, because that takes us down a very 
dangerous and perhaps an unwise direction. 
 
So if we stick with the argument as to the interests of the child, I 
believe that the processes, the changes to the legislation that we put in, 
make sure that that fundamental objective is being met. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I'm not prepared to accept that latter 
explanation.  I don't dispute the fact that the court has the right to 
appoint counsel for a child where it thinks that that is advisable.  And 
you'll notice that I distinguish between the notion . . . I think one of 
the advantages of having a children's advocate, Mr. Minister, is that the 
advocate can sit down with the child, assess the circumstances, and 
determine when in fact the child's wishes are a reflection of the child's 
best interests, Mr. Minister, and then when it is in the best interests of 
the child, ensure that the child's voice is heard before the courts. 
 
At this point in time, there's no guarantee that that'll happen.  It's true 
that the court has the flexibility to appoint legal counsel for the child.  
Again there's no assurance that that will happen, Mr. Minister.  In my 
judgement, Mr. Minister, a child, if that child is 13 years of age or more, 
should have a right to legal counsel before the courts. 
 
And so I'm very interested in your reply on that.  I don't think, Mr. 
Minister, that you have presented adequate arguments against the children's 
advocate.  And as you pointed out yourself, you know, we've seen in Alberta 
and in British Columbia, and I think in Ontario, the establishment of such 
services.  I don't understand why we can't have them here in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
(1700) 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I call the hon. member's attention, sections 8 and 9 of 
the legislation.  Section 8(a)(vii), the court shall take into account -- 
it's mandatory: 
 

 the wishes of the child, to the extent the court considers appropriate . . 
. 

 
So, the court can't ignore that.  The same thing applies to a variation or 
a rescission application, variation or rescission of the order of access.  
Take into account, in clause 9(1)(a)(iv): 
 

 the wishes of the child, to the extent (that) the court considers 
appropriate . . . 

 
So we have put in the Act the requirement that the court must take this 
into account where it deems it to be appropriate.  Again we go through the 
procedural provisions of the legislation, whereby the, you know, the court 
can appoint counsel.  The court has an inherent jurisdiction as a protector 
of the child, always has had.  And so it has the flexibility to -- if it 
has any doubt -- to make sure.  And it's been used in Saskatchewan. 
 
It's not uncommon for the court to make an order that there be counsel for 
the children or the child.  And the fact that the court . . . The 
legislation requires that the judge take this into account -- not an 
option, it's mandatory  
_- where the judge deems it to be appropriate. 
 
I just believe that the protections are more than adequate and that the 
convention doesn't require an advocate and that the procedures we've set 
out and the law that it operates here is more than adequate protection. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Being 5 p.m the committee will recess until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


