





























































Hansard: April 09, 1990


 

 

April 9/90 
 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to introduce to you, 
and through you to this Assembly, 39 grade 8 students from St. Henry School 
in Melville, Saskatchewan, who are here visiting.  They're seated in the 
west gallery.  They are here today with their teachers, Garth Gleisinger 
and Crystal Exner; their bus drivers, Don Hanishewsky and Wesley Dohms. 
 
These students annually visit the legislature when they are in grade 8.  I 
hope they have a pleasant stay and an educational experience.  I will be 
meeting with them at 2:30 in the members' dining room, at which time I look 
forward to answering their questions that may arise from this question 
period.  I ask the members to welcome these students from Melville. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure this 
afternoon to introduce to you, and through you to the members of the 
Assembly, 45 students from grades 3, 4, 5, and 6 from Bushell Park School 
at Canadian Forces Base, Moose Jaw.  I have the privilege of representing 
the air base, the largest town that I have in my constituency, if you will. 
 
These students, Mr. Speaker, some of whom have had the opportunity to live 
in other parts of Canada and indeed around the world, I think, have a very 
good perspective on our country as a whole.  And I'm very glad that they've 
had the opportunity to come to the legislature this afternoon along with 
their teachers, Mrs. Anderson, Mr. Bertsch; chaperons, Mrs. Meikle, Mrs. 
Materi, Mrs. McKeen, Mrs. Kaye, and Mrs. Lecompte, and view the proceedings 
of this particular legislature. 
 
I hope your visit is enjoyable, and I very much look forward to the visit 
afterwards where we can discuss some of the things that you've seen today.  
I'd ask all members to welcome the students. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, just given the vital role that CFB (Canadian 
Forces Base) plays in the community of Moose Jaw, and given that I'm sure 
many of the students in the gallery here today consider Moose Jaw to be 
their home as well, I want to also welcome the students here and their 
teachers and chaperons, and hope that you have an enjoyable visit this 
afternoon and a good, safe trip home. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 



 

 

 
Investment Agreement with Cargill 

 
Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to the Premier, but 
in his absence I direct it to the minister responsible for the Crown 
investments corporation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, my question concerns your government's 
massive investment in Cargill's fertilizer plant to be built in Belle 
Plaine.  One of the parts of the deal which the Premier has mentioned but 
never elaborated on, is the marketing agreement with Cargill.  In fact the 
Premier has on occasion called it an excellent agreement, a state of the 
art agreement. 
 
Will you table that state of the art agreement in this legislature today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- Mr. Speaker, in view of the absence of the chairman of 
Crown management and the Premier, we will take notice of the hon. member's 
question and bring the information back to him at a later date. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Deputy Premier.  We're 
not certain whether you're going to table that agreement or not.  But is 
the reason for the reluctance of the government to date for tabling this 
agreement with Cargill a set marketing fee of between $2 and $3 per tonne 
of fertilizer produced regardless of what the fertilizer sells for, or even 
if the full production sells.  What that means, Madam Deputy Premier, is 
that Cargill will receive revenues of between 7,000 and $10,000 each day 
whether the business makes money or not.  Are you too embarrassed by your 
sweetheart deal with Cargill to elaborate and table that document in this 
House? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- Mr. Speaker, let's be clear about a couple of things.  
First of all, the project is good for Saskatchewan, good for Saskatchewan 
farmers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- That's point one, Mr. Speaker.  Point two, there is 
absolutely no embarrassment within this province when it comes to the need 
for diversification and the issue of our farmers being able to buy some of 
their input at home in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is good for Saskatchewan.  In due course, Mr. Speaker, the 
information will be forthcoming from the chairman of the Crown management. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Mr. Speaker, another new question to the Deputy Premier.  
Madam Minister, not only has there being rumours and suggestions about a 



 

 

sweetheart deal with respect to the marketing agreement for Cargill, but 
there is also a persistent rumour within the industry and other quarters 
that Cargill is receiving a guaranteed rate of return on their equity 
investment.  If that is true, then it would be totally unfair to 
Saskatchewan people who are putting up as much money as Cargill is and are 
exposed for a greater risk but have no guarantees. 
 
Madam Minister, we're not about to take your word on this or the word of 
your government to answer the question one way or another if there is a 
guaranteed rate of return.  Will you table that full deal so the people of 
this province can determine whether this is an excellent deal for Cargill 
or whether it's an excellent deal for the people of this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- Mr. Speaker, if it's details of the agreement that the 
hon. member is looking for, I will refer the question to the Minister of 
Economic Diversification and Trade. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite says, "rumours."  
Rumours, rumours, rumours.  The members opposite have been spreading too 
many rumours about this plant and not enough fact. 
 
First of all, they have rumours the government is giving money to Cargill.   
That is not true.  Not one cent will be given to Cargill.  The government 
is investing $65 million.   What's wrong with that?  The members opposite 
would invest 100 per cent in a plant like that because they believe the 
government should own it.  We are in a joint venture with a world-wide 
producer and marketer who knows how to make a plant run and who can market 
this properly. 
 
Then they say there are rumours of a guarantee.  There are no rumours of a 
guarantee; there is a guarantee.  The Government of Saskatchewan is 
guaranteeing the loan for a fee of three-quarters per cent.  There can be 
no sweetheart deal because if there would be a sweetheart deal it would be 
against the anti-dumping laws of the United States, and you couldn't market 
into the United States.  This has to be a straight business deal, nothing 
else. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Mr. Speaker, a supplementary question to the minister.  Mr. 
Minister, I ask you to end, and answer, the charges and the rumours of the 
industry and the people of this province by tabling today the document, the 
sweetheart agreement that we referred to. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The question's out of order.  The minister 
has noted earlier she would take notice of that question and bring back the 
information. 



 

 

 
Environmental Impact Statement for Cargill Fertilizer Plant 

 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct my question to the 
Minister of the Environment, and it involves the matter of the failure of 
this government and this minister to require . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Again let me indicate that my 
question is to the Minister of the Environment, and it's concerning the 
refusal of the government opposite to require an environmental impact 
statement before approving the construction of the Cargill fertilizer plant 
at Belle Plaine. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, in view of the fact that this plant will use a great 
deal of demineralized water, and the effluent from the demineralization 
plant will be high in dissolved solids, will you inform this House, and 
therefore the public, whether the plant will dispose of this effluent 
through evaporation, which will result in quantities of ammonia, relatively 
high levels of dissolved solids, and possible heavy metal additives which 
will be discharged into the atmosphere? Or will they be injected into deep 
wells which may impact on the ground water and therefore the supply that is 
provided to water users in possibly the cities of Moose Jaw and Regina. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'd like to 
respond to the member's question by first correcting some of the 
implications of what the hon. member is saying.  The hon. member would lead 
the public of Saskatchewan to believe that there has not been any 
environmental study of this project, or any environmental review of the 
project. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say to you today that this project has undergone a 
good amount of study; I would say to you probably 12 to 18 months of 
internal government studies.  I could list you a whole handful, a whole 
handful, Mr. Speaker, of government departments that have analysed this 
project, looked at it, and abided by the rules of the land. 
 
Now I'm not here, Mr. Speaker, to say that those rules are perfect.  They 
were designed by the members opposite, but we have abided by the rules of 
the land, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to also make a further point that the company has 
permission to go ahead and build the project, and I will guarantee you, Mr. 
Speaker, the company does not have permission to operate that project.  I 
will bring to you, if you like, a list of probably 50 to 100 different 
permits, licences, regulations that that company must abide by, or it will 
not operate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, supplementary.  Since the minister would 
not answer the specifics of my earlier question, let me ask him another 
specific question.  Mr. Minister, since ammonia and urea plants each 
produce process condensate streams containing significant quantities of 
ammonia, methyl amines and urea, my question to you is what will be done to 
eliminate the impact of these streams, which your study has said; and since 
the plant will use a wide variety of chemicals and catalysts, what will be 
in place to contain accidental leaks and to dispose of the hazardous 
materials?  And finally, Mr. Minister, have the people in the area been 
told that if there is an uncontrolled release of ammonia from the plant, 
the health of those in this area may be affected in a detrimental way? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to say to the hon. member 
that the technology associated with this plant -- and it is a world scale, 
world class plant, Mr. Speaker -- but the technology associated with this 
plant is of a proven type.  The technology associated with this plant is in 
place in many other parts of the world.  And I'm not saying that it is 
completely foolproof.  The hon. member may well have brought up some 
detailed questions that need to be answered. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will supply to the hon. member a complete briefing package 
on all the details of the questions that he has answered.  I don't want to 
go into them here today, Mr. Speaker.  I'm not, frankly, qualified to do 
that, and I don't think the member opposite, from his mispronunciation of a 
number of the technical merits, is qualified either. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I will bring you all of the information.i 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, a new question to the minister who, if he 
had known anything about what he was approving, would be able to have 
answered some of those questions today. 
 
My new question to the minister is this.  Mr. Minister, according to the 
people who are involved with the industry, all ammonia plants are subject 
to uncontrolled emissions of ammonia and other chemicals, and all urea 
plants emit some level of ammonia into the atmosphere.  And even in your 
own report, Mr. Minister, a report called Farm Report entitled "Anhydrous 
Ammonia Can Be Dangerous" dated March 1 of this year, you said this: 
 

 Even small amounts of ammonia gas as low as 25 parts per million in air 
can irritate eyes, skin and respiratory tract. 

 
We've already seen an example of uncontrolled emissions from the upgrader 
settling on a schoolyard making children ill, Mr. Minister. 
 
So I ask you this question:  since you have been making all these 
assurances, will you table in this House the studies that you have made 
that show that there is safety involved here without any question or any 
other empirical proof that such low level emissions will never happen in 



 

 

this particular plant, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, what I will be very happy to table for 
the hon. member is a Bill that was passed in this very legislature last 
summer -- point number one -- which is entitled The Clean Air Act. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it was under the Progressive Conservative government, 
under this administration, that new rules, new laws were passed respecting 
the preservation of the air quality, of the integrity of the air quality in 
this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I remind the member opposite, who is oh, so worried about 
air quality, that the laws of the land as they stand today, if those laws 
are violated, a million dollar fine, and up to three years in jail are the 
penalties involved if there are air emissions that are wilfully against the 
law.  And, Mr. Speaker, those laws will be abided by. 
 
Point number two, Mr. Speaker.  All of the rules and all the regulations, 
all of the permits, all of the permits with respect to air emissions will 
be in order, and I will commit to the member and the people of 
Saskatchewan, that unless the plant can meet the stringent air quality 
guide-lines and the regulations and the permits, the plant will not 
operate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- A new question to the minister, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 
Minister, law enforcement after health has been hurt or death has resulted 
is too late. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Minister, so I ask you this question, and I give 
you this information before I do.  In the province of Alberta the approvals 
for all industrial projects, including fertilizer projects, are subject to 
a full public review.  Mr. Minister, it is obvious from the answers you 
have given here today that you are not able to answer the questions on 
those specific concerns which ought to have been addressed before you 
issued the licence. 
 
All over Canada fertilizer plants . . . In view of the fact, Mr. Speaker, 
that all over Canada fertilizer plants are subject to a full public review, 
and in this case you have not even required an environmental impact 
statement, will you take your responsibility once and for all seriously, 
and will you establish, first of all, an environmental impact statement to 
be prepared, and secondly, a public review process so that the public can 
be assured that all of the concerns regarding health and environmental 
safety are addressed in this plant, Mr. Speaker?  Will you commit today to 
establish that public review process? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member would know that that 
decision has already been fundamentally made.  That decision was made some 
time ago, and the decision was made to, number one, conduct a major review 
internally, not only through the Department of the Environment, but through 
the water corporation . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Now the hon. member is attempting to answer 
the question.  Unfortunately, there are too many other members who are also 
attempting to answer a question or make their own comments or ask new 
questions from their seats, impeding his progress -- if I may put it that 
way -- in answering the question.  I would like to ask the hon. members to 
allow him to continue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The hon. member would know 
that that decision has fundamentally been made, that an internal review 
involving probably half a dozen government departments and agencies all 
reviewed this project proposal.  It was subject to a number of guide-lines 
that were issued by the department.  I will certainly make those reviews 
public.  I have no problem with that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The decision was fundamentally made that by the very nature of this 
project, by the fact that the technology is proven, it is in place in other 
jurisdictions throughout the world; the fact that the project is subject to 
a wide number of permits and regulations . . . otherwise it doesn't get 
built or operate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that decision was fundamentally made that no formal, official, 
environmental assessment review would be needed on this project.  Now, Mr. 
Speaker, I'm not so certain that all of those rules are the way they should 
be, and I have committed to this Assembly and I've committed to the public 
of  Saskatchewan that that whole environmental process, all of the rules in 
that process, must be changed.  And, Mr. Speaker, you will be seeing 
announcements very soon to do exactly that, to change that process.  But 
for the hon. members now to come back, after a major decision has been 
taken . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

SEDCO Investment in Supercart 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have a question today for 
the minister responsible for SEDCO.  Mr. Minister, now that the Supercart 
court case is over and you no longer have an excuse to hide behind, an 
excuse for holding back the details surrounding Supercart, will you tell 
this House today how much money the Government of Saskatchewan sunk in and 
lost?  Will you tell this House today how much in tax credits given out 
through venture capital corporations were put in?  And will you tell this 
House today how much private investors lost in the Supercart fiasco? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As the member opposite has 



 

 

said, the Supercart issue has been before the courts, and I have just 
realized that the issue has been settled and haven't had time to review 
that court settlement.  I know that SEDCO no longer has any involvement 
with Supercart International at all, and once reviewing that would be 
pleased to bring back any answers the member might have. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- New question to the same minister.  Mr. Minister, this 
has happened days ago.  I'm wondering if you have any interest in your 
department at all. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Minister, it appears that Mr. Silzer has landed on 
his feet and he's about to relocate in the Maritimes.  And if you aren't 
aware of this, I'll make you aware of it today.  And I want to know what 
steps you're going to take to recover taxpayers money for this flagship of 
economic diversification that your government was so proud of in 1986. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, it's my understanding that the gentleman 
in question was cleared of all fraud charges that were brought against him 
in court.  The fact that that individual may wish to relocate to the 
Maritimes, I suppose, is his right as a Canadian business man to go 
wherever he wishes to set up business.  All I know, Mr. Speaker, is that 
this gentleman does not have any involvement with SEDCO any more. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well, Mr. Minister, perhaps the only involvement he has 
with SEDCO is that a former company that went broke that he was running, 
owes the people of Saskatchewan through SEDCO a whole pile of money. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Now, Mr. Minister, you may not be aware of it, but let 
me make you aware.  SEDCO is involved in that.  And I want to ask you today 
if you will table the market analysis and all other pertinent documents 
used by your government in making the decision to throw money into 
Supercart. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, I would suggest to the hon. member that 
if he wishes to pursue this line of questioning, that Crown corporations 
would probably be a better venue for it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, a new question to the same minister.  Mr. 
Minister, don't make a sham of this place like you do of the Crown 
corporation estimates.  You refuse to answer questions in that forum and 
now you are refusing in this forum. 



 

 

 
Mr. Speaker, I want to ask the minister the question, and I'm going to 
quote from a Star-Phoenix article of April 9.  And I'm quoting a Mr. Chuck 
Furey, Newfoundland Development Minister.  And I quote: 
 

 This province has had its share of people wandering in and saying, I can 
do this for you and I can work magic for you.  He says, well, the magic 
days are over. 

 
Mr. Minister, I want to know if you who are seen to be so on top of your 
department are going to ensure the people of this province that the magic 
days are over for Peter Pocklington and for Guy Montpetit and for the 
Supercarts and for the Joytecs of this world.  Will you ensure the House 
that those magic days are over for those people? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite claims that Crown 
corporations are a sham.  I, as a minister, have never had the opportunity 
to appear before Crown corporations before, so I would suggest to the 
member that he hold his judgement until I have that opportunity. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I have one more question to the minister, 
and I want to ask this minister if he is telling this House that Supercart 
International has no liability with respect of SEDCO, the Saskatchewan 
Economic Development Corporation, if there are no outstanding debts to 
SEDCO from this corporation.  Is that what you're telling this House today, 
Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- It is my information, Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned 
before, that SEDCO is no longer involved with this individual. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Hiring of Consulting Groups 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 
the Minister of Finance, and is based upon the Public Accounts which your 
government finally tabled a few days ago.  It shows, Mr. Minister, that 
your government paid a half a million dollars to a company called the 
Corporate Strategy Group.  The Corporate Strategy Group is an image 
consulting firm. 
 
Mr. Minister, no one would deny that your government's image could use a 
bit of refurbishing.  Having said that, however, we do question the 
priorities of spending half a million dollars on image refurbishing when 
you're raising taxes and when services are deteriorating.  How do you 
justify an expenditure of that sort? 
 



 

 

Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well, Mr. Chairman . . . or Mr. Speaker, rather.  
First of all, I don't accept the hon. member's observations about what 
Corporate Strategy Group, I think was the name of the company, may or may 
not do for the government.  Obviously I don't accept his observation about 
image . . . whatever. 
 
But certainly if the hon. member wants to supply the House or the Public 
Accounts Committee with more details as to what department made those 
payments, perhaps we could give him a relevant answer. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Well let me supply the information.  The minister may 
have had some passing familiarity with the Department of Education.  That 
was your portfolio, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, the Department of 
Education was one of the departments that hired them.  Surely you as a 
minister will know what you paid this money for, Mr. Minister. 
 
The Department of Health, the Premier's office, and the Department of 
Education hired them.  What did you, as minister of Education, hire these 
people to do? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- It may well be, and I'd probably want to verify this 
or have the present minister verify it, but it may well be that what you're 
talking about is some of the work that went on in conjunction with the 
introduction of the core curriculum, specifically things like in September 
of 1988, I think, was the very first year that the 200,000 school children 
across this province were introduced to that new core curriculum. 
 
I know, as part of that exercise, letters were sent to all teachers as well 
as to all parents outlining what these changes were to be and why we were 
making them, as well as response cards for us, for them to provide feedback 
to us; as well, a chance for them to write to us asking for one of three or 
four booklets, including How I can Help my Child at Home.  And that kind of 
information exercise, I believe that company was involved in, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- New question, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, the Corporate 
Strategy Group is in fact Nancy McLean's group.  I shall wait with bated 
breath to find out what Nancy McLean contributed to the core studies.  I 
really will. 
 
Mr. Premier, if you're unfamiliar with the work of Nancy McLean, then let 
me refer you to another expenditure in public accounts, and it shows, Mr. 
Finance Minister, that you are spending taxpayers' dollars doing political 
polling. 
 
In 1988-89 your government spent $475,000 to the PC Party's polling 
company, Decima Research.  Once again, Mr. Minister, before you claim 
blessed ignorance, let me remind you that the Department of Education was 



 

 

one of the groups which hired Decima polling. 
 
Mr. Minister, this totals a million dollars.  How do you justify spending a 
million dollars on polling and image refurbishing when you don't have any 
money to feed 64,000 hungry children? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, first of all I don't accept all of 
his observations.  I may not accept even all of his numbers, except to say 
that as it relates to what work was done in education, certainly a 
substantial amount of work was done with the introduction of the core 
curriculum, not only in terms of what we thought should happen there, but I 
can tell the hon. member that research work that was done was shared as 
well with the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association president and 
executive director; it was shared with the president of the Saskatchewan 
Teachers' Federation and their executive director, shared with the 
president to LEADS (League of Educational Administrators, Directors and 
Superintendents), the administrative group and their executive director.  
Because, Mr. Speaker, this undertaking that education is involved in over 
this next  
 D10 years is one of the most important that our children and their parents 
have witnessed in some 50 years in education in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motions for Interim Supply 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Minister, I have a question as it relates to your 
revenues for last year and then I will relate it to the revenues under 
consideration.  Last year, Mr. Minister, you showed as a receipt from 
government enterprises and other funds on page 10; last year you showed the 
receipt of $200 million from the Crown investments corporation.  Mr. 
Minister, my question is: was the full amount of that money actually 
received? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Yes, that was received. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Since, Mr. Minister, the Crown investments corporation 
didn't have profits of 200 million, where did that money come from? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well I think my understanding, and I don't pretend to 
be an accountant, but I'm advised that you have to have the retained 
earnings before you can make payments of that sort.  So I'm presuming, 
because of normal accounting procedures, that there were retained earnings 
of that magnitude, and perhaps more, to provide us with that kind of 
receipt of funds. 



 

 

 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Minister, in light of the fact that you did not 
have . . . Your profits in the Crown investments corporation last year came 
to $183 million.  Mr. Minister, there was an extraordinary item as well of 
some $250 million involving the sale of assets between SPC (Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation) and SaskEnergy.  Will you admit that what you in fact 
did in last year, you brought into general revenue the receipts from the 
sale of assets between SPC and SaskEnergy?  Will you admit that that is how 
you made up the 200 million? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- No, that wasn't part of the consideration at all. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I'm not asking you what you 
considered; I'm asking you what you did.  What you did was bring into the 
general revenue the sale, the proceeds from the sale of assets between 
SaskPower and SaskEnergy.  That is where the figure came from. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, no we did not. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Minister, this year you show receipts from the 
Crown investments corporation, of $310 million.  It is inconceivable, Mr. 
Minister, that the Crown investments corporation is going to make $310 
million.  In fact it is reasonable to suppose that they might make 60 to 
$80 million. 
 
I remind the minister that in the figure of $183 million last year was the 
profits from the potash corporation which we no longer have.  Without that 
figure it's probably reasonable to assume Crown investments corporation 
might have a profit of 60 to 80 million. 
 
Mr. Minister, where do you get a dividend from the Crown investments 
corporation of 310 million when you didn't make that much money? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- I can't speak for what the process was last year, but 
I can tell you what the process was this year.  Crown Management Board, the 
management there, has provided Crown Management Board and cabinet, 
ultimately for finances purposes, with their best estimate of what the 
dividend this year could be. 
 
And last year's number was 200.  In fact, I think the dividend that we 
received was slightly higher than that, something in the order of 275.  
This year's number is 310, and that's what we have put in as our 
expectation and estimate of revenue from that source. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Are you suggesting to his Assembly, Mr. Minister, that 
before the inclusion of any extraordinary items you expect the Crown 
investments corporation to make $310 million out of which to pay a 
dividend. Is that what you're telling this Assembly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm saying that last year the estimate 
was for 200. I think ultimately what came over was $275 million.  This year 
we're estimating 310. 
 



 

 

Mr. Shillington: -- Did you say that . . . This gets stranger and stranger.  
Did you say that what you got, what actually came over, was $370 million. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- No, 270. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- . . . 270?  You estimated 210 but you took 270.  Is 
that what you're telling us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, we estimated 200.  Ultimately 275 was 
received.  This year we're estimating 310. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Minister, you made 183 million last year, before 
extraordinary items, and you had the potash corporation.  You don't have 
the potash corporation this year.  That means that two-thirds of your 
profits are lost to you.  How on earth can you expect anyone to believe 
that before extraordinary items you are going to make 310 million? 
 
Mr. Minister, how on earth can you expect that to happen?  What has 
suddenly turned around?  Would you tell me, would you just give me some 
idea of where you're going to get $310 million from the Crown corporations 
you've got left. 
 
I remind you, Mr. Minister, you don't have a single resource Crown 
corporation left.  You've sold them all.  And those were the Crown 
corporations which made your money for you.  Utilities have not heretofore 
been a source of enormous profits.  Where on earth, Mr. Minister, do you 
expect to get $310 billion from profits in Crown investments corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, members of the committee, as I 
said earlier, the estimate for last year was 200.  Ultimately we received 
275.  This year the estimate is 310.  And we're of the view that, or 
presumably CMB (Crown Management Board) is of the view that that can be 
accomplished. 
 
I have no reason to particularly doubt their word.  And as to the mix of 
how that comes over, it will be a decision of Crown management, and 
ultimately the board. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- If you take . . . Mr. Minister, you have every reason 
to doubt such a figure.  No sane person would believe that you're going to 
make 310 million from the Crown corporations you got left.  Mr. Minister, I 
refer you to page 25 of the annual report of the Crown investments 
corporation of Saskatchewan for '88. 
 
You made $183 million, but that included 106 million from the potash 
corporation.  You don't have that.  Without the potash corporation, last 
year you would have made some 75 million. 
 
How, Mr. Minister, do you expect us to believe that the profits of the 
Crown corporations are going to increase fivefold?  That's what you're 
telling us; you expect they're going to increase fivefold. Or are you 
prepared to admit, Mr. Minister, that the only way that you're going to get 
$310 million profit is to include the extraordinary items.  Will you not 



 

 

admit, Mr. Minister, you are including extraordinary items to make up the 
$310 million? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well all I can tell the hon. member at this point is 
that our budget estimates which we have presented to this House, we make 
provision for $310 million revenue for CIC (Crown investments corporation 
of Saskatchewan).  It was presented to us as an estimate of revenues that 
we might be able to expect from that source; and based on presentations and 
analysis by management at the Crown Management Board and Crown management. 
And that's what we pencilled in, and we fully expect that that will be the 
number. 
 
I don't know if it should be all that . . . I don't know, I mean, I guess 
if I look at this way: last year we pencilled in 200; as I understand it, 
275 was received.  This year it's up another 10 per cent or so to 310.  You 
find that phenomenal.  I'm not so sure I do. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Minister, I just want to take this one step at a 
time, since you seem to be having some problem with it.  Are you telling me 
that you expect CIC to have profits of at least equal to $310 million? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well I can only go over this one more time for the 
hon. member.  Last year we received . . . we estimated $200 million from 
that source, received 275.  This year we're estimating 310. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Minister, you're patently avoiding the question.  
It is crystal clear that you don't want to answer the question.  Do you 
expect the Crown investments corporation to have a profit of $310 million, 
Mr. Minister, yes or no? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, members of the committee, we estimate 
from that source and our revenues this year, $310 million, and I don't know 
how many more times or ways I can say it.  Over the course of the year, and 
by the end of next year, I guess we'll find out if we're right or we're 
wrong.  I'd like to see the same pattern occur this year as last year where 
they estimated 200 and received 275. 
 
Whether things like extraordinary income, or whatever it is that you've 
referred to, are factored in, obviously that's part of the consideration of 
Crown investments corporation and their returned earnings, and how they do, 
etc., etc. 
 
I don't pretend to be an accounting wizard.  All I know is that the 
estimate this year is $310 million, and I hope we get surprised like we did 
last year. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Minister, there's no surprises about what happened 
last year.  You've just finished telling me that you took into revenue 100 
million that was received as an extraordinary item.  That was the sale of 
the assets between SPC and SaskEnergy. 
 



 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, I'm looking at your own statement.  You say you made 
183 million.  You just finished telling me you took in 275 million.  That 
means you must have taken in part of the extraordinary profit -- 
extraordinary profit was the sale of the assets. 
 
Mr. Minister, I'm going to ask you again.  Do you expect . . . I can read, 
Mr. Minister.  I know what you say you're going to take in.  I don't need a 
great deal of assistance in that.  Mr. Minister, I ask you: do you expect 
Crown investments corporation to make a profit of $310 million? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- The first point of clarification, Mr. Chairman, is 
that the extraordinary gain or whatever it is you're referring to between 
SaskPower and SaskEnergy was not at all a factor in the year ended March 
31, 1990.  I can say that absolutely and unequivocally.  And just secondly, 
all I can say to you is that the revenue we expect from that source for the 
upcoming year is $310 million. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Chairman, this is just pathetic.  We have the 
province's chief financial officer who's taking $310 million from Crown 
investments corporation and doesn't know what a fiscal year is.  This is 
just pathetic. 
 
Mr. Minister, these are not trifling sums.  This is not an insignificant 
item.  You're claiming to take $310 million from the Crown investments 
corporation.  I'm asking you, do you expect them to have that much profit?  
And you are avoiding the question. 
 
Mr. Minister, you owe the public an answer.  You owe the public something 
besides the inane evasions which you have treated us to this afternoon.  Do 
you expect the Crown investments corporation to make a profit of $310 
million? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, hon. members, all I can do is repeat 
what I said before.  Last year we estimated 200 million, ended up getting 
275.  This year estimating 310 revenue from that source. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Minister, that's not all you can do.  You can do 
much better than that.  You can try answering the question.  You can try 
answering the question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Minister, if you don't know whether or not the 
Crown investments corporation is expected to make $310 million, would you 
ask some of the august gentlemen sitting with you.  I suspect some of them 
have an opinion on the subject. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, all I can do is repeat what I've said.  
And I mean, I don't know how much more I can do on this point.  I'm giving 
you my best view of exactly what we're saying here: estimated income from 
that source for the upcoming year, $310 million. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- And I take it, Mr. Minister, that's what you estimate 



 

 

their profit to be too. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- I outlined to you the process earlier.  Management 
and the board at Crown management is of the view, in conjunction with 
Finance and cabinet, that $310 million is a reasonable estimation of what 
we can expect from that source this upcoming year, just as last year it was 
a different number.  And I guess in a year from now, time will tell whether 
you are right or we are wrong or . . . I hope we're wrong and it's like 
last year -- we get more, not less. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Well you got more, not less, because you took into 
revenue an extraordinary item.  The Crown investments corporation didn't 
make $275 million in the . . . Mr. Minister, just for your benefit, the 
Crown investments corporation has a year end of December 31, not March 31, 
just so we have some idea of what we're talking about. 
 
Mr. Minister, your Crown investments corporation for the year ending 
December 31, 1988 did not make 275 million, unless you include an 
extraordinary item which was the sale of the shares between SPC and 
SaskEnergy. 
 
I'm saying, Mr. Minister, that if you took in $275 million, it is a 
straight matter of fact which can admit of no argument that you took into 
revenue not only the profit but part of the extraordinary revenue which was 
the sale of those shares.  That's what you took in.  So you took in, Mr. 
Minister, last year into revenue, about $100 million from the sale of the 
assets, because apart from the sale of those assets, you didn't have, Mr. 
Minister, $275 million in profit. 
 
Mr. Minister, since you seem to be unfamiliar with the subject, I've asked 
the page to take to you a copy of the document, issued under your name I 
might add, Saskatchewan Economic and Financial Position, November 1989.  It 
shows on page 25 that the Crown investments corporation for the year ending 
December 31, 1988 had earnings of 183 million plus an extraordinary item of 
$253 million -- the sale of the assets.  If you took in . . . Mr. Minister, 
I ask you to look at this and tell me if it isn't obvious.  If you took in 
$275 million, then you took in $100 million, which was in fact the proceeds 
of the sale of the assets as between SaskEnergy and SPC.  Is that not 
patently obvious in the statement I've just given you a copy of? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- The extraordinary transaction you're referring to may 
be the sale of natural gas; if that's what you're referring to, then that 
may well be what it is. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- All right, we are making some progress.  I take that to 
be an admission that that was . . . you took $100 million out of the sale 
of those assets. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you think of any other extraordinary item this year in 
CIC's . . . any other extraordinary item of -- let's eliminate trifling 
sums of less than 100 million.  Mr. Minister, can you think of any other 
extraordinary item which might be included in the Crown investments 
corporation's financial statement for 1989, except the sale of the potash 



 

 

shares?  Is there any other major significant extraordinary item?  I say 
there isn't. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, members of the committee, I don't 
believe the 19 . . . for the year ended December 31, 1989 statement is out 
yet. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Minister, you must have had something on which to 
work because you think there's going to be $310 million profit, so I'm 
asking you, Mr. Minister, would you share with us whatever interim, 
temporary, or other financial statements you had from CIC?  You must have 
been working from something. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well as I said earlier, what we worked on there was 
CIC's management, their presentation to CMB, treasury board, cabinet, as to 
their estimate of revenue sources, and that's what's been plugged in. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Minister, will you give me those estimates?  I 
don't want the whole treasury board documents.  All I want is the estimate 
of how much they hope they're going to make. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well the revenue from the . . . the estimate of 
revenue from that source, as I've said several times now, is $310 million. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Minister, the only reason you've said it is because 
you're trying to avoid the question.  Mr. Minister, will you give us a copy 
of the estimate of the revenue from CIC?  This is very key, Mr. Minister.  
This is $310 million.  Mr. Minister, will you give us a copy of that 
estimate so that we may know for ourselves whether or not that's a 
reasonable estimate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, what I will provide you with is the 
description, as I've just given you, of last year the estimate was $200 
million, ultimately received 275, and this year the estimate is for $310 
million.  And I suspect the annual statements and audited statements of 
appropriate and relevant jurisdictions will all be tabled in due course, if 
they haven't already been tabled. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Minister, due course happens to be about three or 
four days away.  That's when those documents are supposed to be here.  To 
be very precise, they're supposed to be here by Friday of this week.  So I 
assume if the report is going to be tabled by Friday of this week, you must 
have available to you the financial statements.  You must know how much 
profit they're going to make. 
 
Mr. Minister, you're stonewalling.  There's just no other kind of way to 
describe your behaviour here.  This is a major item and we, before we vote 
on this issue, we are entitled to know where the $310 million comes from.  
Mr. Minister, will you provide us with a copy of their estimate of their 
revenue? 
 
I say, Mr. Minister, I believe that right now you have the financial 
statements, the audited financial statements.  If they're going to be 



 

 

tabled on Friday, I assume you've probably got them now.  What is going on 
now, probably you're stalling with them until the last possible moment.  
But, Mr. Minister, I believe you've got the audited financial statements, 
but you admitted you have the estimated revenue.  Will you give us that?  
Will you give us the breakdown and will you stop stonewalling? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- The '89 report, as I said, I suspect will be out and 
tabled shortly, although I don't know precisely when, not being the 
minister in charge, number one. 
 
Number two, that's a useful document obviously to show us where we have 
come from, and I think it would be more relevant, say, than the '88 
document. 
 
But thirdly, the business plan, I guess, on which estimates are based for 
profits and losses and retained earnings, is just like every other business 
-- an estimate of how that business is going to do over the next year.  And 
a year from now we may look at yet another statement to see if in fact it 
met expectations. 
 
So I don't know as what you're asking for is an odd statement for the year 
ending, the year ahead, because we can't have that yet.  But they're 
obviously working from business plans and making their best estimates based 
on those. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- It's called pro forma statements, Mr. Minister, and 
that's not what I'm asking you for.  What I'm asking you for is the 
estimate, which you said they gave to treasury board, of their revenue.  
I'm asking you, Mr. Minister, for a breakdown.  You've said you have it.  
Why won't you give it to us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well I've said that the estimate they gave us, of 
revenue from that source, was $310 million. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Minister, I flatly disbelieve that.  I flatly 
disbelieve the accuracy of the statement you just finished making. 
 
I believe they gave you a touch more detail than that.  I believe they gave 
you a breakdown as to where they thought that revenue was coming from.  
That's why, Mr. Minister, I think you're not coming clean with the House.  
I think you are concealing information from this Assembly and from this 
committee because it's damaging to you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well I'm not so sure how I understand that revenue 
from that source being up 10 per cent or 110 million, if you look at last 
year's estimates, can particularly be damaging, Mr. Chairman, but I stand 
by my earlier remarks, that we estimate revenue from that source for the 
upcoming year to be $310 million. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have some questions for the 
minister regarding retained earnings from the Saskatchewan Liquor Board. 
And in the financial . . . the annual report dated '88-89, it indicates 
that the net income for the year 1989 was $122 million.  It also indicates 



 

 

that the retained earnings at the beginning of the year were $251 million, 
just over a quarter of a billion dollars. 
 
Further on in the statement it indicates the retained earnings, as of the 
end of the year, at $180 million.  I would like to know, Mr. Minister, if 
taking the profits from the Liquor Board and moving them in, has not 
reduced your deficit, that would have been, in the amount of some $71 
million, almost $72 million. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Just to give you some sense of Saskatchewan Liquor 
Board as a revenue source, '89-90 -- and some of these may well be 
estimates because the books aren't totally closed yet -- net earnings 
'89-90 is 118.6 million.  The dividend in the blue book was 215.  After the 
dividend was drawn down they had 83.8 million in retained earnings. 
 
This year we're looking at 1990-91, 121.7 net earnings, dividend of 190, 
which should leave them a retained earnings of 15.5, and as I said yet 
these are still starred as estimates.  Obviously the '90-91 would be an 
estimate, and '89 
_90 is still not a hard number because we're about a month away from having 
the books closed out. 
 
As it relates to the treatment of dividends and retained earnings from the 
Liquor Board, the process we're following is one that has been followed for 
a decade and more, so there's nothing new here particularly. 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well, Mr. Minister, isn't it true that this being an 
election year you're willing to decrease the retained earnings to show this 
new era of fiscal management, similar to what you've done with the sale of 
the assets of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan.  Isn't it true that 
what you're doing is you're pulling money out of every conceivable corner 
and every little pocket that government has, in order to reduce the amount 
of expenditure over revenue, the amount of mismanagement that your 
government clearly has a very clear track record of.  Isn't that true, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- I think, Mr. Chairman, and members of the committee, 
what is true is that historically the revenues from this source have been, 
as I've said, historically used as an economic stabilizer and economic 
shock absorber.  It's a practice of this administration as well as other 
administrations, and what we're doing is propagating what has been a 
management practice of more than one administration. 
 
So you can draw your own conclusions about whether that's a good 
administrative practice or a bad administrative practice.  I think using it 
as an economic stabilizer seems to have made sense over the years. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well, Mr. Minister, isn't it sort of ironic that last 
year you would leave some $80 million and this year you've drained it down 
to some 15.  Doesn't this lead the people of this province to perhaps 
believe that you may in fact be trying to pull the budget number down, as I 



 

 

said, similar to what you're doing with the sale of the potash corporation 
assets. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to indicate to you a comment in a report from the 
chairman and the chief executive officer, and he indicates that in '88-89 
the sales volume of absolute alcohol declined for the seventh consecutive 
year.  Now I would want to say, Mr. Minister, do you feel that your 
forecast for this particular year is accurate in light of those comments? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well the estimates that I read into the record 
before, I would just repeat.  The net earnings, '89-90 was 118.6 million; 
estimated '90-91 is 121.7 million.  So I suspect the Liquor Board is -- 
well I don't suspect; their estimate here is of a modest increase in net 
earnings year over. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Will that modest increase of net earnings be as the 
result of increased sales volume? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- I'm advised that the increase is more likely due to 
internal efficiency measures.  We've asked agencies, as well as Crowns, to 
join with the government initiatives I announced a month ago and more, and 
that the Premier as well announced. 
 
So internal efficiencies would be your major reason as to why net earnings 
are up.  And I say that because for the most part, and although the 
minister in charge may have more exacting numbers than I have, our 
understanding is that for the most part consumption is either flat or 
declining. 
 
Consumers are switching to different products, for example, maybe away from 
what's commonly known as hard liquor, into things like the beers and the 
wines And as well, some switching away from what we might call the premium 
brands to plain, high quality brands.  Those would be a couple of 
additional factors that led to the coming up with the estimate. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you're not too clear in terms of 
whether it's a total increase in profits because of internal 
inefficiencies; and on the other hand, Mr. Minister, you increased, or you 
made changes for the regulations regarding the sale of alcohol in this 
province and changes to some taxations.  You've indicated to the hoteliers 
and the Saskatchewan Hotels' Association that you would not be taking any 
extra revenue with these changes in regulations, but that it would all be 
passed on to the special vendors and to the retailers in the beverage rooms 
and the off-sales. 
 
But I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, if there isn't an increase in 
taxation, which I believe there are and which a number of hoteliers that I 
have talked with believe there is, could you explain to me in some kind of 
detail where you're saving this $3.1 million through internal efficiencies? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, I can't give you a detailed breakdown 
of how they propose to save that except to say, as I said earlier, that it 
relates to internal efficiencies.  If it's the same kinds of things that 



 

 

we're looking at across the rest of government, it's travel expenses, 
expense . . . travel, advertising, those kinds of things, perhaps in their 
case tighter inventory control. 
 
I can tell you that just this first part of April, 2 or 3, whatever the 
first Monday was I guess, the increases that the producers applied to their 
products was passed right through; the government did not take their margin 
on that price increase from the manufacturers or the distillers. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Minister, we have here a projected increase in 
revenue of $3.1 million.  You echo the comments of the minister in charge 
of the Liquor Board that in actual fact there have been no increases in 
taxation; you've made a very major commitment in this budget that there 
would be no tax increases, and very proud of the fact that there were no 
tax increases, which you know full well aren't true because there's going 
to be costs passed on to school boards and to municipal governments that is 
going to cost local taxpayers money.  You've removed the gas tax subsidies 
-- some $68 million worth -- which has added taxes to the people of this 
province.  Around the same time you talked about removing the rebate on the 
gasoline tax, the minister in charge of the Liquor Board announces some 
major increases in this province. 
 
So we only have her word and your word that there are in actual fact no 
increases in terms of tax revenue.  If that is the case then, Mr. Minister, 
can you clarify this for the people of this province and explain in a 
little more detail where this $3.1 million is going to come from? 
 
You know full well that the sales have been dropping, partly because of the 
way you've ruined this economy and the fact that people don't have disposal 
income for those kinds of expenditures.  And I say to you today that you 
have as much responsibility to account for this $3.1 million in increased 
revenue as you have for the $200 million that you've taken from the sale of 
the potash corporation.  And I say to you, Mr. Minister, that you've got a 
responsibility to either table the details of this increase or admit that 
you've actually increased your tax revenue.  Will you do that today, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well as I said earlier, Mr. Chairman, and members of 
the committee, my understanding of why the net earnings are forecast to 
have that very modest increase is because of internal efficiency at the 
Liquor Board, which I suspect includes things that's consistent with our 
announcement of some several weeks ago about making government smaller, 
controlling the size of the civil service, including agencies and boards 
and commissions -- those kinds of things that are a part of government -- 
controlling travel and advertising.  I suspect in the case of the Liquor 
Board it could well mean even a tighter inventory management.  Any more 
details than that I'd have to . . . you may well want to bring up with the 
minister when those estimates are before the committee. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Minister, the problem here, the bottom line here, 
is a lack of credibility.  I mean you've talked about internal 
inefficiencies.  In the same breath you talk about smaller government.  In 
the same breath you talk about decreases in travel and advertisement, when 



 

 

Dome Advertising gets millions.  The former Finance minister spends, last 
year, $100,000 on travel.  When you reorganize your government departments 
and you still have . . . you've got four fewer departments, but you still 
have the same number of cabinet ministers.  You had 20 cabinet ministers 
before those four departments disappeared and you still have 20 cabinet 
ministers, Mr. Finance Minister. 
 
Now I want to ask you how you expect the people to believe that your 
government will somehow find new, efficient ways to cut government 
expenditures?  Because, Mr. Minister, you haven't once since 1982 been able 
to balance a budget in this province.  You haven't been able to show the 
people of this province any fiscal restraint or any leadership in that 
regard. 
 
You increase . . . you break your promise in terms of the gas tax and you 
tax the people of this province another $68 million.  But you don't count 
that as added taxes of course because it wasn't in your budget document.  
That was all done by the Premier a couple of weeks previously. 
 
But what I'm saying to you, Mr. Minister, is you know that sales of alcohol 
are going to decline and yet you've projected an increase in profit.  You 
have no credibility in terms of fiscal management, and you know that.  So 
what I'm asking you one more time, Mr. Minister, is to explain to us the 
details of this $3.1 million increase in revenue that you're projecting for 
this year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- As I said earlier, for the most part, the increase in 
net earnings is not particularly due to increased consumption.  In fact 
consumption, for the most part, is either flat or declining.  There's some 
brand switching, some product switching. 
 
The main reason for the increase in the net is because of better 
management, and I think that's a credit to the entire Liquor Board. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Minister, on Friday I raised the issue of what was 
happening to the $234 million from the sale of the shares of the potash 
corporation.  You led a weird chase through various pages of the Estimates, 
including, I think, at one point in time the non-budgetary items, if you 
can fathom that.  Mr. Minister, it's patently obvious from your 
stonewalling today that you are in fact taking the full amount of the 
proceeds from the sale of the shares of the potash corporation into current 
revenue.  That is patently obvious, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, in 1988, the last fiscal year but one, you had earnings of 
$183 million.  You state in the Saskatchewan Economic and Financial 
Position, November, 1989, that the potash corporation had an income of 106 
million . . . a profit of 106 million.  You don't have the potash 
corporation any more, so the Crown corporations, apart from the potash 
corporation, would have had a profit of 77 million.  If you assume that the 
Crown corporations will make about the same this year as they did last 
year, that gives you 77 million for 1989.  Add the 77 million to the 234 
million, the proceeds from the shares of the potash corporation, guess what 
you've got.  A figure that is just about $310 million.  And that's where it 



 

 

comes from, Mr. Minister. 
 
If, Mr. Minister, if that's not accurate, then what you're saying is the 
profits, apart from the sale of the shares, which is an extraordinary item, 
the earnings are going to increase fourfold.  That's very hard to believe, 
that the earnings from the Crown corporations are going to increase 
fourfold.  It is very likely they'll be about the same because what you 
have left is basically utilities. 
 
Mr. Minister, is it not, will you not admit that that is the only way you 
can come up with $310 million profit for the CIC is to include 
extraordinary items with earnings.  The only extraordinary item is the sale 
of the shares of the potash corporation. 
 
If I'm mistaken, Mr. Minister, I would be delighted to have you describe 
the other extraordinary items which might make up such a huge sum. 
 
(1515) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, all I can do is reiterate for you 
and members of the committee that last year the estimate from CIC was for 
200 million.  Ultimately it was 275 million.  And this year that same 
estimate is for 310 million. 
 
I don't know as I can put it any simpler or any plainer or any different 
than that, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Minister, you have entirely avoided the question.  
No part of your response bore any relation to my question. 
 
Mr. Minister, I take your patent stonewalling to be a tacit admission that 
you are in fact taking the full amount of the proceeds of the shares of the 
potash corporation of the revenue.  Mr. Minister, if there's another 
explanation you haven't offered it. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want you to think for a minute about what you've done.  In 
1988 you had profits of 106 million from the potash corporation.  This 
year, I read in the paper that they have profits of about 82 million.  
Those are no longer available to us.  What you've done instead is to take . 
. . they're gone.  What you've done instead is to take the entire proceeds 
in this year, and then next year we have nothing.  And we are much poorer 
for it. 
 
Mr. Minister, it's the rough equivalent of a farmer who's in a bit of 
difficulty, selling a quarter section; instead of paying down the debt -- 
which you said you were going to do; which the Premier said you were going 
to do -- of using that money to buy a new half-ton, television, a VCR 
(Video Cassette Recorder). 
 
In the year in which you spend the proceeds from the sale of the quarter 
section, you live pretty well.  But next year your problems come back, 
compounded many times. 
 



 

 

Mr. Minister, what on earth is it that you're planning in selling off next 
year to provide a $234 million cushion in your budget? 
 
What is it?  Is it SaskEnergy, are you planning on . . . you think you . . 
. Contrary to all expectations, are you expecting to win the election and 
then be in a position to sell SaskEnergy?  SGI?  What is it, Mr. Minister, 
that you're going to sell next year to give you $234 million?  What is it, 
Mr. Minister, that we're going to sell off next year; what quarter section 
is going next? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, members of the committee, first of all 
I want to put on the record again, to suggest that our handling of the 
proceeds from the potash shares, had we not done this, that the deficit 
would have been $200 million higher, that is to say, 563 million instead of 
363 million; that is patently wrong.  As I said last week and I say again 
today, the proceeds will be put against the gross debt of the province.  
And you're the one who used the farm example, so let's use that example. 
 
And I would liken it to this.  You've got a farmer who has $200,000 in farm 
debt, long-term debt; the farm usually tends to be mortgaged over 20 years 
or more.  He also has $50,000 in an operating line that he probably 
revolves yearly, and $100,000 in equipment which might be over a medium 
term, say, five years.  Well that would leave him with $350,000 in gross 
debt.  But the way farming is, shortfall there, 50,000.  So that would put 
him up to 400,000.  Sold off a quarter section, put that against his 
long-term farm debt, which I would have likened to what we did with potash 
proceeds, brings him down to 375,000. 
 
Yes, the gross debt still went up.  If he hadn't sold that quarter or put 
the potash proceeds against it, the gross debt would have even been higher.  
And so what he saves, whether it's the farmer or the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan, is they save interest on the money that they now do not have 
to pay because that land debt or that debt was lower.  And that's maybe as 
good an analogy in a complex area for you and I and others to understand. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Now, Mr. Minister, I won't concede that you put it any 
better, but you said exactly what I said.  Mr. Minister, you have patently 
taken the proceeds of the sale of the potash corporation.  You just 
finished saying this, in fact.  You've taken the proceeds.  You've taken 
that plus whatever profit was made in CIC, and it's all gone into revenue. 
 
Well the minister shakes his head but the minister patently refuses to tell 
us where on earth a figure of $310 million in profit could come from in the 
Crown investments corporation.  We say there's no conceivable way that you 
could have earnings of $310 billion.  The only way you could obtain such a 
figure is to include extraordinary items.  The only extraordinary item is 
the sale of the shares.  There aren't any others last year.  And that, Mr. 
Minister, is the bald fact. 
 
And any suggestion by you that somehow or other it's going to go to pay 
down debt is just simply not accurate, and if I were not in a Legislative 
Assembly, I would put the matter much more accurately and more vividly than 
this.  Mr. Minister, it is clear that you are taking the sale of the 



 

 

proceeds of the potash corporation.  They're going in the general revenue, 
Mr. Minister, and that is a real tragedy. 
 
Mr. Minister, I'm not going to repeat the comments I made last year on the 
Bill which privatized the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, but I say to 
you, Mr. Minister, that we had one of the richest assets, the richest 
deposits of potash in the world.  They yielded some hundreds of millions of 
dollars over the period of time that we had it, Mr. Minister.  We attained, 
as I recall the figure, about $600 million in profits.  We no longer have 
that now, nor do we have the proceeds, a paltry $234 million, applied 
against the debt.  What we have is the whole thing brought into revenue. 
 
If, Mr. Minister, there is any other explanation for the figure of $310 
million, you have clearly refused to give it.  I spent a better part of an 
hour asking you where you got the figure of $310 million.  You spent the 
better part of that hour avoiding the question.  Your answers bore very 
little relation to my questions.  I therefore think I can fairly conclude 
that you cannot justify the figure of $310 million from earnings.  The only 
way you could have that amount is by including extraordinary items, and the 
only extraordinary item is the sale of the shares.  There aren't any 
others. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, it is clearly apparent that you're spending the $234 
million.  You haven't reduced the debt.  If you had have, Mr. Minister, 
you'd be able to demonstrate that, and you've refused to do so. 
 
It is a sad, sad day, Mr. Minister, when we have governments selling off 
assets and using the money in revenue.  It's crystal clear you did it -- 
and don't tell me that that's not a precedent because it did.  It is 
apparent from this statement that that's what you must have done in 1989 -- 
last year.  You must have taken into revenue part of the sale of the 
proceeds of the assets as between SaskEnergy and SaskPower.  I'm not aware 
of any others. 
 
Mr. Minister, you have clearly taken in part of those proceeds in the 1988 
year.  There isn't any place else you could have got the money from.  And 
it's just as clear, Mr. Minister, that this year you're doing the same 
thing. 
 
It is no coincidence, Mr. Minister, that if you take last year's profit on 
the Crown corporations, assume it's going to remain constant this year, and 
include the $234 million, you've got just about the $310 million you're 
taking in.  So it is apparent, Mr. Minister, that you're spending the 
proceeds of the sale of the shares, and that is really most unfortunate. 
 
 DMr. Minister, I ask you what . . . I ask you to respond to the question: 
what are you going to sell off next year?  What are you going to sell off 
next year to make up . . . I don't for a moment believe that this 
government is going to exercise any restraint.  I don't for a moment 
believe that there won't be, in the unhappy event that this government is 
re-elected, I don't for a moment believe that there won't be the kind of 
boondoggles we've had this year.  You will still have . . .  you'll still 
open up legations in Hong Kong for one minister who's defeated, and another 



 

 

in Minneapolis for another; there will be GigaTexts, there will be 
gigabuses, I guess, this year.  There will be other gross wastages of 
money. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I don't believe you're going to exercise any restraint.  
I ask you, Mr. Minister, what are you going to sell off next year to make 
up the $224 million?  How on earth are you going to continue this level of 
spending?  It must be apparent even to a government that's as badly managed 
as this that sooner or later you're going to run out of assets to sell, and 
as you sell each income-earning asset, your revenue position becomes weaker 
and poorer.  That should have been apparent with respect to the potash 
corporation -- when you sold it you wouldn't have the income. 
 
The minister suggests that I say he should own everything.  I'm not 
suggesting you should own everything, Mr. Minister.  I am suggesting that 
before you sell assets which are an income, you ought to give some thought 
to how you're going to replace the income. 
 
And you clearly haven't.  You clearly have given no thought to it at all.  
I ask you, Mr. Minister. what are you going to do next year?  What are you 
going to sell off next year?  Or are you going to take in something less . 
. . or are you going to delete this item and reduce your expenditures? 
 
Mr. Minister, you have brought in and you were spending the proceeds of the 
sale of the potash shares.  If your denial is to have any credence, Mr. 
Minister, then show us a breakdown of the $310 million that you're taking 
from the CIC.  If you won't show me that breakdown, Mr. Minister, then I'm 
going to say that you're selling the proceeds of the shares, and I think 
everybody's going to believe me. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, if your denial is to have any credence, then tell me 
where the $310 million in CIC is coming from.  I spent an hour asking you 
that and you spent an hour avoiding the question.  It's obvious why you're 
avoiding the question because there isn't any answer that you care to give. 
 
If your denial is to have any credence, you have to tell me where the 
earnings of $310 million from CIC are coming from.  I say they don't exist.  
I say you can only make up the figure by passing on the proceeds of the 
sale of the shares, which is an extraordinary item. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well I can only reiterate what I've said earlier 
about the 310 million, Mr. Chairman.  Estimates last year 200; actual 275; 
this year estimated at 310.  And our view is that in terms of looking for 
revenue sources in this province, we'll be looking to the men and women in 
small and large business across this province to help diversify our 
economy, Mr. Chairman, because that ultimately is the answer, getting 
greater breadth and depth in our province so that all of our revenues are 
up -- whether it's royalties, dividends, income tax, and sales tax -- and 
not because the rates are going up but because there is more economic 
activity in the province, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Minister, what did you get from the Crown 
investments corporation, or did you just simply pick up the telephone and 



 

 

phone him and say, hey lads, what do you think it's -- or lasses, as the 
case may be -- what do you think the money's . . . what do you think the 
profit's going to be in '89? 
 
You must have got something a bit more definite than that.  If you won't 
give it to us, Mr. Minister, then I say you've something to hide.  What 
have you got to hide?  Fact, that there wasn't $310 million in earnings.  
The earnings are a lot less than that.  The only way you can make up $310 
million is to include the sale of the potash shares. 
 
There isn't, Mr. Minister, any other way of doing it, and if there is some 
other way of doing it, then I ask you to give it to us.  If you don't want 
to give it to us; if you want to continue these inane answers that what you 
project is $310 million and that's what you think you're going to get; if 
that's your only response, Mr. Minister, then I think we may fairly 
conclude that you are taking into revenue the sale of the potash shares.  
If there's a better answer, Mr. Minister, give it to us.  If not, don't be 
surprised when we draw the conclusions that we have drawn. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well to draw the conclusion, as I said earlier, that 
if we hadn't reduced our debt and that we've put it in . . . that it's 
budgetary and hence our deficit is not really 363 million but 563 million, 
if that's the conclusion you're drawing, not only . . . that's in error and 
it's wrong. 
 
What you could draw, the conclusion that you could draw that would be 
correct is that the gross debt of the province would have been $200 million 
higher.  And hence the interest at 12 per cent, if you like, that we would 
pay on that $200 million is 24 million.  You could conclude that that may 
well have driven our deficit from 363 to, add 24 million, to 387.  Those 
would be right and proper conclusions. 
 
But certainly to conclude that our deficit would be $563 million, if we 
hadn't handled the potash proceeds this way, would be absolutely wrong.  
And I too would have stronger words if we were not . . . Mr. Chairman, to 
describe that. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Minister, it's a very simple thing for you to 
disprove.  Give us the breakdown of the anticipated $310 million in profit 
from CIC. 
 
(1530) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, our estimate this year from revenue 
from that source will be $310 million, just as last year the estimate was 
200, actual was 275.  This year we expect 310. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Where from? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- From CIC, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- CIC conducts no business.  CIC is simply a holding 
company for the Crown corporations.  Their only profit is a profit of other 



 

 

Crown corporations.  Which Crown corporations are going to contribute, and 
how much? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Our estimates this year, based on the process that I 
talked about earlier, are that revenues from that source this year, Mr. 
Chairman, will be $310 million. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Minister, I'll ask you one by one.  What do you 
anticipate the profits of SaskPower to be?  And I include in SaskPower, 
SaskEnergy, since there is no corporate division.  It's just a different 
name given to one Crown corporation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, I couldn't provide that for the 
committee even if I had it in my head.  As I neither have it in writing nor 
in my head, quite frankly, I don't know what those numbers are. 
 
All I can tell you is that what I'm presenting to the committee is our best 
estimate of what that revenue from that source will be.  And that best 
estimate, based on work with officials, cabinet, Crown Management Board, 
treasury board, is $310 million. 
 
I think last year our track record was reasonably successful there, and I'm 
hopeful that we'll show the same kind of accuracy this year, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- And, Mr. Minister, if you show the same type of 
activity you'll have profit of about $77 million.  Mr. Minister, you say 
you don't know how much SaskPower's going to make.  Well you're certainly 
spending it without any difficulty when you're spending $310 million. 
 
Mr. Minister, no one is going to believe you when you say that you do not 
have available a breakdown of the earnings of the Crown corporations.  No 
one is going to believe that, Mr. Minister.  You must have it, otherwise 
you could not have taken into revenue a figure of $310 million.  You must 
have a breakdown.  I ask you, Mr. Minister, to give it to us and to stop 
stonewalling the committee. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, I don't have a breakdown but I can 
provide for the committee . . . All I can say is that our estimate is 
revenue from that source, $310 million, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- In what form did you get the information, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- The process was as I described earlier to the 
committee, Mr. Chairman.  Officials at CIC obviously provide for Crown 
Management Board an estimate.  Treasury board has reviewed those estimates, 
cabinet has reviewed those estimates, and ultimately the document that we 
have before is the estimates for the upcoming year are prepared and 
presented to this committee, and that's what we're doing, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Of course you've got written estimates and those 
written estimates had a breakdown.  Mr. Minister, you admit you got a 
written estimate.  Will you share that with us?  Will you take the simple, 
obvious step to disprove the comment which I have made?  That is, that the 



 

 

figure of $310 million has to include the sale of the . . . the proceeds 
from the sale of the shares, or you couldn't possibly achieve that figure. 
 
You say that's not so.  I say to you in response, there's a simple way to 
prove it's not so; give us the information and stop stonewalling.  Will 
you, Mr. Minister, will you, Mr. Minister, give us the breakdown? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- I'll just repeat again that the proceeds from the 
share of potash went against the gross debt of the province.  It's still a 
very large number and one that nobody can feel comfortable with.  All I can 
say is if we had not done that, the gross debt of the province would have 
even been higher.  And the savings for the taxpayers by paying off . . . by 
handling it that way, as applying it against the debt, means that it may 
well be that we accrue $24 million less in interest charges by doing it 
that way, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Minister, if you didn't get a breakdown of where 
the $310 million is coming from, then, Mr. Minister, you really are a very, 
very sorry excuse for the province's chief financial officer, which is what 
you're supposed to be. 
 
Mr. Minister, you must have got a breakdown of the anticipated profit, 
anticipated earnings.  As profit includes extraordinary items, earnings 
does not.  You must have got a breakdown of the earnings, and they must 
have told you where they're going to get $310 million from. 
 
If you're simply going to borrow it, if you're simply borrowing it from the 
CIC and they don't have earnings of that amount, I doubt very much that the 
Provincial Auditor and your officials would have allowed you to state it in 
this fashion.  If you're borrowing it from CIC, then these documents would 
appear differently. 
 
You say, Mr. Minister, you say it's coming out of the earnings.  How are 
those earnings . . . We say that that presupposes a fourfold increase in 
earnings.  We say that's malarkey. You're going to make about the same out 
of these Crown corporations, and that you're including the sale of the 
proceeds in extraordinary item to make that up. 
 
If that's not the case, Mr. Minister, take a simple, obvious step -- give 
us the breakdown.  Don't stand up and give us this inane answer that you 
project you're going to get $310 million.  That doesn't say a thing.  
That's a complete non sequitur in this context.  Take the obvious step to 
prove your statement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, I can only repeat what I've already 
said. Our estimate of revenue from that source for the upcoming year is 
$310 million.  Last year our estimate there was 200 actual; looks like it's 
going to be 275 million; this year, projected, 310. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Minister, I'm going to give you an opportunity to 
consider your refusal to give us this information.  I'm going to ask you 
some questions on a somewhat different topic. 
 



 

 

This is on page 52 of your budget address, the documents you've provided.  
You've shown, Mr. Minister, you've shown revenue from coal, of fourteen 
million, seven hundred.  I ask you, Mr. Minister, on what basis was that 
projection given?  How and why did you assume revenues of 14.7 million? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, members of the committee, relative to 
revenue on coal, we estimate for the upcoming year that our production will 
be overall 10.3 million tonnes, down slightly from last year's 10.4 million 
tonne estimate.  And the price per tonne in Canadian dollars will be up 6 
cents from last year's estimate, which would put this year's estimate at 
$11.45 Canadian per tonne. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Minister, last year you estimated fourteen million 
four hundred.  What was actually received for coal? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, we don't have those final numbers yet.  
We estimated last year fourteen four.  It looks like we're going to come in 
somewhat off that mark, but final numbers are yet to be determined. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- When you say somewhat off, can you give us a percentage 
figure with a plus or minus attached thereto so we know what you're talking 
about? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- When I said somewhat off, I'm talking about less than 
we'd anticipated, something in the order of perhaps 5 per cent, 7 per cent, 
somewhere in that neighbourhood. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  A touch of progress at last.  
Mr. Minister, you projected natural revenues from natural gas at 48.9 
million.  Would you give us the basis upon which that figure was projected, 
the assumptions upon which that figure was projected. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, members of the committee, relative to 
natural gas.  Last year's budget estimate was $33.2 million.  This year we 
estimate -- in fact I've said on more than one occasion that natural gas 
has become a bit of a very bright spot for us out there -- we estimate this 
year $48.9 million in revenue.  Last year we're estimating production of 
181 bcf (billion cubic feet); this year, 204.  Average price estimate last 
year, dollars per million cubic feet, or thousand cubic feet rather, mcf, 
$1.40.  This year we're estimating slightly higher at one sixty-one. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  With respect to the figure . 
. . your estimated revenues in last year of 33.2 million, can you tell us 
whether or not you were on target, and if you were off, by how much?  As 
closely as you can estimate it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, that number is not unlike your 
other numbers -- it's not final and formulated yet.  But unlike coal, where 
we're estimating to be off, say, 5, 6, 7 per cent, on natural gas we're 
estimating that perhaps our revenues could be up 3 per cent-ish. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Minister, you have projected revenues of $242 
million from oil.  Would you give us the basis upon which those projections 



 

 

were made? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- '89-90 revenues in millions of dollars -- 173.6.  
This year we're estimating 242, production estimated to be down slightly at 
three million barrels.  The price WTI (West Texas intermediate), last year 
estimated sixteen dollars eight; this year, nineteen seventy-nine . . . 
nineteen seventy-nine is the WTI price. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Sorry.  I missed . . . in all that, I missed what you 
estimate the price to be for last year, in fact, I guess. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, last year our estimate for '89-90 was 
$16.08.  This year, we're factoring in a price of -- this is basis WDI 
(Western Diversification Initiative) -- $19.79. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- And once again, Mr. Minister, with respect to oil, you 
have projected revenues of 173,000,600.  Mr. Minister, realizing once again 
final figures may not be available, what do you estimate your projections 
will be -- will be on target? And if off, by how much? 
 
(1545) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- The comment is the same here, that our books are not 
yet closed.  In fact, it'll probably be three weeks or so before we have 
our final numbers in. 
 
But the revised estimate on oil is up substantively, I think, from last 
year's original estimate, the reason being that the price was better than 
the $16.08.  I think it probably averaged or came in closer to the $20 a 
barrel.  So that kind of price increase, factored out over the year, has 
meant increased revenues there. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Revenues from potash are estimated to be 66,000,100.  
On what basis, Mr. Minister, did you make that projection? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- We based that on production slightly off of last 
year's estimates of 6.9 million tonnes to 6.3 million tonnes and an average 
price of Canadian dollars per tonne of K D22O (potassium oxide) at 137. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- That's down very substantially from last year of 120.1 
million.  Mr. Minister, once again I'd like to know whether or not you were 
. . . how close you were to the mark in your estimate for 1990, realizing 
again final figures may not be available. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Our receipts there are going to be substantially off 
for the '89-90 year for reasons:  number one is the U.S. demand weak; 
offshore demand, read: China -- I think the history of what's happened in 
China  
 Dover this last year is well-known to us all -- very low price, down from 
our estimates; and as well some flooding in one of our shafts here that's 
obviously causing ongoing problems. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- How much a tonne were you projecting, Mr. Minister?  



 

 

What was that figure again? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- We're estimating in the upcoming year $137 Canadian 
per tonne K D220. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- And what did you project for last year, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- 163, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Finally, Mr. Minister, there's the item of the uranium.  
Would you tell us what your . . . on what basis your figures are made. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- We're estimating for the upcoming year $20.9 million 
in revenue, based on a price of $8.50 . . . sorry, sales of 8.5 million 
kilograms of U D23O D28 and the average price of kilogram of U D23O D28 at 
forty-seven eighty-four. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Minister, I ask you again: your figure of 
twenty-six million seven hundred which you estimated for the year ending 
March 31, 1990, how close -- again realizing final figures are not in -- 
how close were we to that figure? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- The numbers there look like we're going to be down 
substantively, and I'm talking like half, and the reason we are is because 
the price was substantially less than was anticipated last year, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Minister, could you give us the production and the 
rate for that resource? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- What I have is sales.  Now that may not equate 
directly to production, but I have sales estimated for the upcoming year of 
8.5 million kilograms.  And the price, as I said earlier, at $47.84 
Canadian per kilogram. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Minister, you've given us detail with respect to 
other resource revenue which would do a Swiss jeweller proud, Mr. Minister, 
but you can't give us the simple breakdown of the figure of $310 billion.  
How is it, Mr. Minister, you'd lots of detail with respect to resources and 
none at all with respect to the figure of $310 billion from CIC? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I think, as the hon. member 
knows, it's not that tough to get the exact numbers that are being modelled 
in, whether they're right or wrong, for these various minerals.  We do have 
a close working relationship with the Department of Energy and Mines and 
they are happy to work with Finance officials in determining those numbers.  
And I think for the most part these are sound, solid, and I might say so 
even small "c" conservative estimates. 
 
For example, in oil we're plugging in something below $20; I understand 
Alberta is using $21.  And as it relates to the Crown side, as I said 



 

 

earlier, their estimate is that . . . working here once again with Finance 
officials, is for $310 million for the upcoming year. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- No, Mr. Minister, you say it's not that difficult.  I 
agree it's not that difficult, nor am I challenging your figures.  Equally 
it is not that difficult to get a breakdown of the figure of $310 million.  
If you can do it for resources, Mr. Minister, why can't you do it for the 
Crown corporations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well I've already described the process there.  
Officials, management, Crown Management Board, have provided us . . . we've 
come up with the number of $310 million.  Last year it was 200; actuals are 
going to be 275.  And this year's revenue from the source, 310 million. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- But, Mr. Minister, my question is: how is it that you 
have in considerable detail the basis upon which you estimate revenue from 
the resources, but not any detail whatsoever with respect to your estimate 
of income from CIC? 
 
If, Mr. Minister, you can give me, as you did in great detail, the basis 
upon which you estimated the income for the resources, why is it, Mr. 
Minister, that you suddenly are devoid of any detail when it comes to 
estimating your revenue to be received from CIC?  It's pretty obvious, Mr. 
Minister. The reason is because you don't want to give us the information, 
not because you haven't got it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, once again I would just reiterate 
that Energy and Mines is part of corporate government, and hence we work 
very closely with their officials and they work closely with ours at coming 
up with the models. 
 
Point number one, not that we don't have a good working relationship with 
the Crown sector because we do, but I think, as you would understand, 
perhaps, from sitting on Crown boards -- I don't know in your term, as 
short as it may have been as a cabinet minister, whether you sat on Crown 
boards or Crown management or not -- but all I can say is that government 
officials, at least under this administration, tend not to get involved in 
the day-to-day management of the Crowns.  And it's quite simply an 
administrative relationship that's developed, I think a sound one. 
 
It used to be that we had ministers in your day that were chairmen of the 
board.  We no longer have that relationship.  And I think that's been a 
good one, to have a civilian chairman or chairpersons of the various 
Crowns. 
 
The overall holding company, if you like, a CIC that the Premier is chair 
of, or Eric Berntson is chair of . . . sorry, the member for 
Souris-Cannington.  And what we have come up with for the committee's 
perusal is a recommendation that we think is very reasonable, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Minister, can you tell me who are the current board 
of directors of CIBC . . . CIC? 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- On that board is the Premier, the Deputy Premier, the 
member for Souris-Cannington, the Minister of Economic Diversification and 
Trade, the Minister of Justice, the Minister of Health, the Minister of 
Consumer Affairs, and myself. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Well, how interesting.  How interesting, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, if the financial statements are going to be filed on time, 
which is Friday, then I rather assume that the financial statements have 
gone to the board of directors, been passed by the board of directors.  And 
thus I suggest that the board of directors on which you are a member has 
seen these financial statements. 
 
Mr. Minister, the suggestion . . . Mr. Minister, I have a suggestion for 
you.  Lean over and ask yourself what . . . look yourself in the eye and 
ask yourself what the breakdown of this figure was.  You must have these 
statements.  They've got to be filed in six days.  The board of directors 
must have seen them. 
 
The board of directors, of which you are a member, must have seen these 
statements.  You must have the information, Mr. Minister.  This is just 
ridiculous, your suggestion that you haven't got the information.  You must 
have seen it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well first of all, those statements will be made 
public in due course, number one.  And I think it's worth noting that an 
audited statement with the year end December 31, '89, is only of limited 
and germane value relative to a fiscal year that starts April 1, 1990 and 
finishes March 31, '91, anyways, which gets back to my earlier comments 
about trying to predict, let us say, estimate, the next year's income, as 
opposed to looking backward at what's happened.  Although there is some, it 
probably is relevant to some degree, but certainly the business plan of the 
year ahead is the one that's probably more germane. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Well, Mr. Minister, unless you've changed the format of 
your annual report, your annual report which you must have approved if it's 
going to be here in six days, your annual report contains a breakdown of 
which Crown corporations the profit comes from.  You did in this one.  We 
find here details with respect to all of the Crown corporations. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I say that you clearly have the information.  And your 
suggestion that you don't have it is just nonsense, Mr. Minister.  If you 
don't care about . . . if you have no thought for your responsibility to 
the taxpayer and your responsibility as a member of this Assembly, surely 
you care something about your own image, Mr. Minister.  Your suggestion now 
that you don't have the information is just nonsense.  It's just nonsense, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
Will you give us the information which you must have received as a member 
of the board of directors? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- As I said, Mr. Chairman, those reports will be tabled 
in due course, and are best . . . and once again I think it's worth knowing 



 

 

that that will be for the year ending '89, and that although it may have 
some relevance and be germane to some degree, I think what we're concerned 
about is the $300 million estimate for the year starting April 1, 1990, and 
ending March 31, 1991.  And the revenues from that particular source we 
estimate to be for that fiscal year, $310 million. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- No, Mr. Minister, that's wrong.  If you're going to 
take a dividend of $310 million from Crown investments corporation, that 
must come out of the earnings and profit for the year ending December 31, 
1989.  You must have seen that statement. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to remind you that since time immemorial in the annual 
report, after the letter of transmittal, after the list of the board of 
directors and the officers and senior management and the chairman's report 
and the president's report, on page seven is 1989 financial performance, 
and it breaks down each Crown corporation. 
 
(1600) 
 
So if you're going to file your annual report on time, you must know where 
the profit is coming from, Mr. Minister.  Come on, Mr. Minister, you've got 
it.  You have to have it -- you're on the board on the directors.  Why 
won't you give it to us?  Is there any conceivable explanation for your 
obfuscation, apart from the fact, Mr. Minister, that the information is 
damaging and will in fact prove that you're taking into general revenue an 
extraordinary item, in effect, the sale of the proceeds of the shares of 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, it's probably come to the point where 
we're going to have to agree to disagree with what we're doing with those 
proceeds.  I say again, the proceeds are being put against the gross debt 
of the province.  That gross debt would have been $12.4 million roughly . . 
. billion dollars, if we had not done that.  We can save the taxpayers some 
interest money, interest costs that way.  And we'll just have to agree to 
disagree, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Well I just want to make one observation, Mr. Chairman 
and Mr. Minister.  This has been a disgraceful performance this afternoon.  
You are a member of a board of directors which has information that you 
have refused to give us.  We're not asking for the financial statements; 
we're asking for the breakdown.  You gave us a breakdown of everything else 
but the one item which is of interest to a large segment of the population 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
It's clear, Mr. Minister, you are spending the proceeds.  It's clear, Mr. 
Minister, you know that, and your absolutely disgraceful performance this 
afternoon confirms it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, I have some 



 

 

questions concerning the adequacy of the interim supply for Urban Affairs.  
I might say, Mr. Chairman, that I hope that the minister will be more 
forthcoming in his answers.  Are we to interpret from the previous exchange 
that the answers are not going to be given to members of the Assembly, but 
might be given to Consensus Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to bring you back a few weeks to the budget address 
where you stated 
 

 We could have followed the Government of Canada's example and shifted our 
fiscal problems onto others. 

 
I suppose in some ways I should congratulate you, recognizing, as you are, 
that you have a fiscal problem.  Previous ministers of Finance seemed to 
ignore that there was any problem in Saskatchewan.  Nine deficits were 
always greeted with comments such as: this has got to be the most 
intelligent budget ever, the deficits are manageable, the resolution is 
only just around the corner.  So for you recognize that you have fiscal 
problems is a step forward. 
 
To me, any resolution of a problem begins with a recognition that you have 
a problem to begin with.  I don't want to offer any congratulations, 
however, for in fact accomplishing what you said that you wouldn't do, and 
that is to shift your fiscal problems onto the backs of municipalities.  
And if you did not shift fiscal problems onto the backs of municipalities, 
I want to give you this opportunity to explain how it is that a 31 per cent 
cut in the community planning grants, a $1.8 million cut in the municipal 
transit grants, a 32 per cent cut in the municipal capital program are not 
shifting the fiscal problems from the provincial government onto the 
municipalities.  And I just . . . Well I'll just put that question to you: 
can you explain how that is not shifting fiscal problems? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, members of the committee, 
relative to the Urban Affairs vote, I know that some, and maybe even the 
opposition member here, would try and make the case that this appropriation 
for Urban Affairs somehow represents off-loading.  I would argue that it 
does not.  Why do I say that?  Mr. Deputy Chairman, I say that because the 
substantive grant that the municipalities look to is the urban 
revenue-sharing grant, and yes, it's true that that wasn't increased, nor 
was it decreased.  It was kept the same as last year's level at $67 million 
roughly. 
 
Now it also is true that the municipal transit assistance has been 
eliminated.  The capital program is going to be cash management.  The $100 
million fund, I think it is, over six years still stands, so I don't see 
that as any lessening of our commitment there.  And yes, the municipal 
transit assistance is a substantive enough number.  I think it's $1.2 
million, roughly, overall. 
 
But I would argue, stacked up against the $67 million which is a 
substantive grant, that that is something that . . . or sort of $1.8 
million on the municipal transit assistance, that albeit that's a large 
enough number, I think that it certainly stacked up against the $67 million 



 

 

commitment through revenue sharing, that that's the important commitment 
that the urban municipalities look for. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- So, Mr. Minister, what you meant to say then in your 
budget address is that you could have followed the Government of Canada's 
example and shifted our fiscal problems onto others, but we didn't do it to 
quite the same extent as the federal government did it.  Is that what 
you're trying to tell us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, we're not trying to suggest that 
urban transit assistance isn't a real enough number at 1.8 million.  But as 
I said earlier, I think the major grant that they look to that's the 
important one is the revenue sharing.  It was neither increased nor 
decreased.  And even though we did have a big change in our transfer 
payments from the federal government, we chose not to go that route.  We 
chose not to go that route in municipal affairs.  We chose not to go that 
route in Education, because we've appropriated a 6 per cent increase there 
roughly, and a nearly 10 per cent increase, roughly, in Health. 
 
So I think the examples speak for themselves, that we did not choose the 
same approach as the federal government. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I think that you're taking some 
real liberties with the English language to say that you're not shifting 
your fiscal problems, and then go on to say that we didn't cut the revenue 
sharing although we did make some other cuts in funds to municipalities, 
but that doesn't translate as any shift in fiscal problems, that somehow 
you're not dumping your fiscal problems on the municipalities.  I think 
that you're taking some real liberties with the English language, and I 
think that the people of Saskatchewan are beginning to understand that you 
say one thing but do another. 
 
I want to get a further explanation, Mr. Minister, where you said -- did I 
hear you correctly to say -- that the capital program, the municipal 
capital program, the six-year program -- that your commitment to that 
program is continuing, that there would be no changes there?  Did I hear 
you correctly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Yes, you did hear me correctly.  That it's as I 
understand that, and as I say the minister in charge may have more details, 
but my understanding, clear understanding is that that hundred million 
dollar commitment over six years stands. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Well now I really have some questions, Mr. Minister.  
The government last year announced a $100 million capital program for 
municipalities; 25 million of that was to go to rural municipalities, 75 
million was to go to urban municipalities.  It was supposed to be a 
six-year program of approximately $12.5 million annually which, if you 
multiply it, comes to $75 million. 
 
Now my question is that inasmuch as, last year, one of your first acts was 
to tell the Minister of Urban Affairs to decrease the amount of commitment 
from $12.5 million as budgeted to in fact $7.5 million, and your budget 



 

 

this year indicates an expenditure of, I believe, it's $8.5 million as 
opposed to $12.5 million, how is the integrity of this capital program to 
be maintained?  Are you now saying that in subsequent years that programs 
will be increased?  That is to say, he's opposed to expenditures of twelve 
and a half million, that municipalities might look forward to expenditures 
of 16 million or 18 million, whatever the case might be.  How do you 
explain the integrity of this capital program, given a cut last year and 
given a projected cut this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well as I said, I think the important thing here is 
that the commitment to a hundred million dollars over six years stands.  I 
doubt that there's been a program of this nature where it's been a 
straight-line curve, flat, where they pay out for equal amounts each year.  
I suspect if you looked at them over the years, whether it's during our 
administration or others, it's more likely you've seen bell-shaped curves, 
those kinds of things.  I don't think there's any different . . . As I said 
earlier, I think the important thing is that our commitment is there for a 
hundred million dollars over six years. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Mr. Minister, you talk about bell-shaped curves.  I 
think the municipalities are going to ring your bell this year. 
 
You have a six-year program, a six-year program -- twelve and a half 
million dollars a year.  The first year, without informing municipalities I 
might say, without informing municipalities except to give the line that, 
well we're processing so many that we can't possibly expend all the money 
this year; that we're trying to determine priorities. 
 
Without telling municipalities, you decreased the amount of the commitment 
from 12.5 to 7.5.  This year you've decreased the commitment from 12.5 to 
8.5, and yet you stand here and say, well I'm sure that the six-year 
program is going to be maintained and municipalities don't have to worry; 
that most of the expenditures in the case of these programs takes place in 
one or two years further down the pike. 
 
I'm not sure if that's the case with previous programs, Mr. Minister.  I'm 
not sure that previous governments quite ran things the way you do them 
here, where you have uncontrolled expenditures and you have expenditures 
that you can't estimate and you get a lot of unpleasant surprises.  But 
then no other government that I know of has had deficits the way you do 
them either. 
 
I want to just ask you briefly, Mr. Minister . . . well perhaps I can just 
follow up again.  You gave a commitment that the six-year program would be 
maintained or the $100 million program would be maintained.  Let me just 
ask you, can you assure us that the $75 million, the $75 million which was 
dedicated to urban municipalities, will be maintained? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Deputy Chairman, members of the committee, 
although I may not be as conversant with the details of the program as the 
minister in charge, my understanding is that the $100 million is firm over 
the six years, and if the breakdown is 75-25, I would suspect that it 
follows then that that commitment as well is firm. 



 

 

 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Well I thank the minister for that assurance, although 
assurances by the government are not something that one would want to take 
to the bank and deposit or use for any kind of collateral. 
 
I just want to ask you about the cuts in the transit.  You are in fact 
saying to the cities in Saskatchewan that you want them to discourage 
transit use.  By cutting back on the provincial government's commitment to 
municipalities, to the cities that have used transit, you're saying to 
them, well we want you to cut back on transit use. 
 
To me and to anyone else, that's the natural assumption; that your 
commitment to transit is not as great as it was last year, and that by 
discouraging transit use you are in fact encouraging more use of the 
automobile.  I mean, that's the logical conclusion that if the cuts in the 
municipal transit grant are to be passed on to the transit systems, the 
transit systems will have to either, (a) increase fares, which may and 
likely will discourage transit ridership, may result in cuts in service 
which again will result in a decrease in ridership, and by decreasing 
ridership on transit systems you are encouraging automobile use.  Now it 
seems to most people involved in urban planning that the more people use 
cars the more the urban infrastructure -- streets, roads -- must be 
upgraded to accommodate the additional vehicles. 
 
(1615) 
 
In light of the terrific demand for capital by our cities that is already 
identified to the government . . . and you know that municipalities in 
Saskatchewan are projecting a $1 billion capital expenditure over the next 
five years, about $200 million a year.  You can check with your Minister of 
Urban Affairs, but that's the projection that the officials in the Urban 
Affairs department have. That's the projection that your own officials will 
likely have as to capital expenditures by urban municipalities in 
Saskatchewan over the next five years.  And I might say, about 70 per cent 
of that is projected to come from cities, and you can check those figures 
if you like, but I'm sure you'll find them accurate. 
 
Now in light of that terrific demand for capital, in light of those 
terrific expenditures which again is going to be far more than it has been 
in the last five years, how do you view this cut in the transit grants to 
be a wise decision in the long run?  How do you see that helping 
municipalities cope with the capital demands that they already have when 
you consider the fact that by decreasing your commitment to transit you're 
going to be encouraging them to look at even more improvements in urban 
infrastructure? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, you ought not interpret, the member 
ought not interpret the decrease in municipal transit assistance as 
anything more than part of our thrust in the budget to cut our spending and 
pick areas that were the least painful -- and I'm not trying to suggest for 
a moment that 1.8 million isn't significant, but it is -- but that were 
least painful.  We're of the view, I suspect, that cities will take that 
into their planning and their budget process. 



 

 

 
And I don't know what conclusions you would draw, and I don't want to 
suggest for a minute that this is gospel, but it seems to me . . . You may 
have seen, as I did, an article in this weekend's Leader-Post that showed 
in the face of municipal transit assistance grants, ridership is falling, 
in the article in the paper on that. 
 
So I question your logic and the logic of your observations if we can 
accept the Leader-Post article as somehow good research.  And I suspect 
whoever wrote it is prepared to back up their research with their sources. 
 
So the question really comes down to, which is maybe what we ought to 
debate, is why did we take the approach we took on the budget?  And I know 
this is perhaps anathema to the New Democratic Party.  It's anathema to you 
who represent spenders and big spenders and big government, but this 
government here, this party here, clearly chose to cut back spending.  And 
I know that's a hard word for you to say: cut back spending. 
 
But this party, this government, this Premier, this Finance minister chose 
to cut back spending $300 million over the next two years so we could spend 
more on health and education and things like agriculture, Mr. Chairman.  
And we stand by that budget. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Mr. Chairman, it's so often the case in this 
Legislative Assembly that you ask the government a question about the 
impact of its decisions and you get back a load of rhetoric and a load of 
nonsense. 
 
I just might say to the minister that I'd be more than pleased to put my 
own record of six years on city council in Regina up against your own 
record as to when it comes to controlling spending.  I mean, that's 
something that as a city council I had control over.  That is something as 
a government that you had control over.  I'm prepared to put my record as 
one of those -- as you call it -- high-spending New Democrats, I'm prepared 
to put my record up against your record any day, Mr. Minister, any day. 
 
But even more importantly, Mr. Minister, let's look at your record of 
spending in this government.  Let's look at your deficit year after year 
after year after year.  Let's look at some of your expenditures. 
 
Let's look at the $10 million to Peter Pocklington.  Let's look at the 
hundreds of millions of dollars in tax exemptions that you give to oil 
companies in Saskatchewan.  Let's look at the $5 million or more that you 
gave to a smooth talking financier from Montreal named Guy Montpetit, and 
how he was able to walk in here and take $5 million out of the pockets of 
taxpayers in Saskatchewan, thanks to your sharp eye, thanks to the 
questions that you were able to ask around the cabinet table, Mr. Minister. 
 
Oh, Mr. Minister, there are many, many examples of where spending might 
have been cut by your government but you chose over the years to not do 
that.  So let's not have any little homilies on your part about who the 
spenders are in Saskatchewan.  We know who the spenders are in 
Saskatchewan; the spenders in Saskatchewan are the PCs. 



 

 

 
The PCs when it comes to advertising, they're the spenders in Saskatchewan.  
The PCs are the spenders when it comes to polling in Saskatchewan.  The PCs 
are the spenders when it comes to a bloated political bureaucracy in 
Saskatchewan.  The people of Saskatchewan know that to be the fact. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- So I won't take any lectures, I won't take any 
lectures from any member of the PC government about spending and about 
controlling deficits and about controlling budgets.  I don't need any 
lessons from you.  And I might say that I'm very pleased that I've never 
taken any lessons from you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- And my main concern is that there are too many farmers 
in Saskatchewan who are taking lessons from you.  And that's one of the 
reasons that we have farmers going down because they're taking an example 
from you. They're taking the example from you as to how to run their own 
affairs.  I'm just pleased that there aren't more people in Saskatchewan 
that aren't following your example because we'd all be broke if we followed 
your example. 
 
Maybe that's one of the reasons that bankruptcies in Saskatchewan have gone 
up, is that we have so many businesses that are trying to follow your 
example -- your example of spending more than we bring in -- which anyone 
knows, if you do that you're going to go broke. 
 
But it's something . . . it's a little theorem, it's a little truth that 
seems to have eluded you in this case, given your deficit.  It's a little 
theorem, it's a little truth that seems to have eluded the member from 
Qu'Appelle, who was the previous Finance minister.  And it was sure 
something that seemed to have eluded the former member from Kindersley, Bob 
Andrew, who couldn't balance a budget if he tried, who was too caught up in 
the ethereal and theoretical notions of how to finance, that he forgot that 
if you spend more than you bring in, you're going to have a deficit and 
you're going to have problems. 
 
Boy, it seems to be just impossible to get that simple notion through your 
heads.  You know, you've got great ideas about, oh, we're going to join 
hands in a circle with the people of Saskatchewan in a Consensus 
Saskatchewan and somehow the truth will come out -- the truth will arise as 
to how we're all going to get out of this deficit mess we're in.  Well now 
it all begins, it seems to me, with the simple truth: if you spend more 
than you bring in, you're going to have a deficit and you're going to have 
problems. 
 
If the people of Saskatchewan tried to run their households the way you run 
government, they'd all be in big trouble.  They'd all be in big trouble.  
If more businesses in Saskatchewan tried to run their businesses the way 
that you run government, even more of them would be going bankrupt.  And if 
any farmers tried to run their farm the way you run government, even more 



 

 

farmers in Saskatchewan would be going bankrupt. 
 
So I don't need any lessons, Mr. Chairman, from this Minister of Finance or 
from any PC minister of Finance as to deficits and as to spending. 
 
Mr. Minister, I just want to turn to another aspect of the transit cuts.  
And you can say that, well, these cuts don't signal anything, necessarily.  
These cuts don't signal anything, necessarily.  Well they do to me and to 
many other people . . . I mean, people could have asked, why didn't you cut 
the number of assistants, as an example, to cabinet ministers from three or 
four to one or two, and saved some money that way?  I mean, that's another 
place you could have made cuts.  Why didn't you make that cut, as an 
example, as opposed to a cut in transit? 
 
So where you choose to cut does send out a signal, notwithstanding your 
comments about, well we're just cutting across the board here; it really 
doesn't mean anything and you shouldn't try and read anything into the cuts 
that we're making; it really doesn't signal that we're opposed to transit, 
and all you've got to look at, that transit ridership is decreasing, 
notwithstanding the fact that we have been supporting transit over the 
years.  I might add to that, there's a very good chance that by decreasing 
your commitment even further, that that ridership will tail off even more 
dramatically than it has in the past. 
 
But I just want to go into a slightly different area, and that is that I 
have a concern, as many others in urban government do have a concern, that 
by cutting the support for urban transit you are encouraging the use of the 
automobile; that one of the concerns about that is an environmental one, 
that the more you can encourage people to use transit as opposed to 
automobile, the less pollution we will have, the less we will need to be 
making use of limited and finite, non-renewable resources such as oil. 
 
And my question is: was this matter of cutting the municipal transit grant 
discussed with the Minister of Environment before you took this action?  
Did you obtain his input into this decision? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, as part of the budget-making process, 
cabinet reviews the recommendations of treasury board in so far as what the 
upcoming budget year should look like, and the Minister of the Environment 
is part of cabinet and in that way he has input on that and everything 
else, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Well he may have or he may not have, and it all 
depended on which meeting he attended on any one day.  And "I'm not sure of 
a specific answer to your specific question," suggests to me that the 
Minister of Environment wasn't asked.  And I say shame on you; shame on 
your government. 
 
On the one hand, you say that the environment is going to be a priority for 
you, as all of the people in Saskatchewan want it to be a priority.  On the 
other hand, you make foolish decisions which implicate the environment, in 
this case, in our cities.  But obviously, this is another case of where you 
say something about trying to protect the environment and on the other hand 



 

 

your actions belie your words, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to move from that to the other side of the coin.  And 
I want to quote to you and to the Assembly from a document, Mr. Chairman, 
and I'm sure that you'll be interested in this. 
 
This is a document which was given to the mayor and members of city council 
in the city of Regina by the city manager.  It is dated April 2.  And it 
discusses the impact of the provincial budget on the 1990 city of Regina 
budget. 
 
And the city manager states in this report, in part, in discussing the cut 
to the municipal transit program, he states that: 
 

 This equates to a .57 mills or .94 per cent increase in a municipal mill 
rate if taken by itself and no other adjustments are made. 

 
And I assume that by the other adjustments, he means reductions in service 
levels, which of course at that point had not yet been determined by the 
city of Regina, because they had no warning that any such cut of this 
magnitude was to be coming. 
 
And so my question is now about taxes.  I am concerned about the impact of 
your decision on property taxes.  Saskatchewan, as you know, in 1985, if 
you will reference your own Local Government Finance Commission, indicated 
that the people of Saskatchewan, by their reckoning and not by mine, Mr. 
Minister -- this is a committee comprised of people appointed by your 
government -- by their reckoning, Saskatchewan people had the second . . . 
third highest net property tax level in all of Canada.  The third highest 
net property tax level in all of Canada. 
 
(1630) 
 
Now you stated a couple of nights ago, you stated a few nights ago, and I 
want to make sure I'm getting this right, Mr. Chairman.  I don't want to 
misinterpret anything that the minister might have said in this House.  I 
don't want to take liberties with his statements and I want to make sure 
I've got it correct here.  And I want to refer to the night of April 5, 
where the minister spoke in this House on the budget and the minister said: 
 

 So the question becomes: who speaks for the taxpayer and on behalf of the 
taxpayer? 

 
And he goes on to say: 
 

 . . . but this Premier and this government and this caucus, they stand 
behind the taxpayer, Mr. Speaker, and the taxpayer's spending priorities. 

 
Well I think the taxpayers of Saskatchewan know that you've been standing 
behind them and kind of lifting their wallets over the years.  That's what 
they know. 
 
Now my question is: by making this cut and by, as in the case of the city 



 

 

of Regina, where they're looking at an increase in taxes, how can you 
possibly say that you're a friend of the taxpayer? 
 
 DAnd going on in that vein, I just, you know, I just want to review the 
history in Saskatchewan.  You say that you stand up for the taxpayers, but 
in 1985 the PC government eliminated the property improvement grant which 
was an integral part of the tax system in Saskatchewan.  They implemented a 
used car tax which was subsequently withdrawn because it was found not to 
be a very popular tax, and they established a flat tax at 8.5 per cent 
level. 
 
That 1985 budget, by the way, came from Bob Andrew, who described that 
budget in these modest terms, that it was the most intelligent budget we'd 
ever seen in Saskatchewan history.  I think this bit of intelligence might 
be debated by the taxpayers. 
 
In 1986, the flat tax was increased to 1 per cent.  In 1987, the flat tax 
increased to 1.5 per cent; the sales tax was increased to 7 per cent from 5 
per cent.  That was a tax that you said you were going to take off, never 
mind increasing it, and you reimposed the gasoline tax of 7 cents per 
litre. 
 
Now you might say there was a rebate for that but that rebate didn't extend 
fully to everyone in Saskatchewan, and I might say, to transit systems in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister.  But anyway that's what you had in '87. 
 
In 1988, the flat tax was increased to 2 per cent.  In 1989, the gasoline 
tax increased to 10 per cent per litre for unleaded, 12 per cent per litre 
for leaded, and a lottery tax at 10 per cent which we also all know was 
withdrawn because of its great unpopularity with the people. 
 
You say in 1990, and that the reason that you're standing up for the 
taxpayers now, is that you didn't announce any tax increases, 
notwithstanding the fact that you did take a little bit of revenue back 
from the folks that they had the previous year, which was a rebate on the 
gas tax which they will no longer now be receiving.  So it might be argued 
that, no, maybe you didn't increase the gas tax, but certainly they're 
going to have to pay all of the gas tax now as opposed to getting a rebate. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, you might argue about, I'm standing up for the taxpayers; 
you are not, in fact, standing up for the taxpayers.  Your record doesn't 
suggest that, Mr. Minister, and equally this year there will be . . . if 
there's no increase certainly there will be some adjustments for the 
taxpayers, Mr. Speaker, as a result of your budget, to use the world 
mildly. 
 
Now my question comes around to taxes.  Last year, Mr. Minister, or the 
year before, your predecessor announced that there was going to be dialogue 
on Saskatchewan income tax reform.  He said that in '85 tax reform was 
announced.  We were going to see tax reform in Saskatchewan because the 
major objective was to reduce the personal income tax.  Well it quite 
didn't work out that way as we saw with this new flat tax and increases in 
the flax tax.  But anyway in 1988 I guess he felt concerned enough to say 



 

 

that, you know, something's got to be done here, and he announced a 
dialogue on Saskatchewan income tax reform. 
 
Now this is a welcome thing.  This is a very welcome thing, given the fact 
that Saskatchewan taxes are . . . personal income tax or provincial income 
tax is the highest in the country for those families with a $40,000 total 
income, and is the second highest in the country for the single parent with 
a $25,000 total income.  So I would say that this tax reform would be very 
welcome.  And my question to you is, can you apprise the House as to the 
status of this dialogue on Saskatchewan income tax reform? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Where is our tax reform initiative?  I would refer 
the hon. member to the budget address, page 25.  We have a paper there on 
Saskatchewan's tax system: Challenges for the '90s.  It starts on page 22, 
and part of what it says, and I would just read into the record, on page 
25: 
 

 Regrettably, the federal government has chosen to virtually ignore the 
request of several provinces for flexibility to undertake meaningful 
reform of the Personal Income Tax.  As a result, the Government of 
Saskatchewan is not in a position to implement such reform at this time. 

 
And additionally I can advise the members of the committee that obviously 
negotiations haven't stopped from our standpoint, and we'll continue to 
press for changes, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Am I to assume then that on top of the fact that 
Saskatchewan taxpayers who five years ago, by your reckoning, paid the 
third . . . or experienced the third highest net property tax load in the 
country, that Saskatchewan taxpayers will continue to enjoy, for a family 
of 40,000, will continue to enjoy the highest provincial income tax in all 
of Canada. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, I would refer you to the budget address 
once again, page 28, family of $40,000 total income.  Yes, if you simply 
look at provincial income tax, Saskatchewan is the highest.  However, if 
you want to do the fair and reasonable assessment and look at provincial 
income, all taxes and charges, which includes things like car insurance and 
telephone and heating and electricity, tax credits and rebates and health 
premiums and those kinds of things, does Saskatchewan come in at the 
highest?  No, Mr. Chairman, we're in at third lowest then, and I think 
that's an enviable position.  Other provinces would like to be in the same 
place, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Well I want to do the fair and reasonable thing, Mr. 
Minister, but your tables are anything but fair and reasonable.  In fact 
your tables are misleading to an absurd degree.  How can you stand in this 
House and say that people don't have the highest income taxes, because 
we've got to look at a number of other factors here.  We've got to look at 
how much they might pay for car insurance and how much they might pay for 
telephone.  We've got to add that to the taxes to get a reasonable 
assessment of their taxes and charges. 
 



 

 

And then you go on to say, but because some of those other things are so 
much lower than they are in other provinces, so people's taxes really 
aren't the highest, but they're the lowest in the land.  But then you 
forget one of the biggest taxes of them all, the property tax.  And you 
don't have in addition here for a net property tax load which might again, 
and I have no doubt would, put you into the highest in the whole land.  
Don't come on to me, Mr. Minister, about talking about fair and reasonable 
and looking at all these other charges. 
 
Now I ask you, where does property taxes, which is a significant tax, and 
for many people in Saskatchewan, for many people in Saskatchewan will be 
higher than the taxes that they paid to the provincial government, which 
will be higher than the taxes they to pay provincial government -- where 
does the property taxes come into this, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, members of the committee, we don't 
assess the property tax.  I guess in some other provinces it's perhaps a 
different system, but here we do not.  Local governments do. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you're not responsible for all the 
car insurance either. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, I find this absurd that in computing the personal taxes 
and charges that people pay in Saskatchewan, and notwithstanding the very 
significant role that the provincial government plays in property taxes in 
Saskatchewan -- because let's recognize, and that's part of the discussion 
we've had, that the provincial government makes grants to municipalities, 
which has an impact in the property taxes -- that in computing these 
personal taxes and charges you exclude property taxes from the chart, and 
therefore give a very misleading, very misleading idea of just what the 
taxes and charges are. 
 
I think we have to come back to the basic figure as an indication of where 
this government stands -- that's the personal income tax.  It's the highest 
in the land, Mr. Speaker, the highest in the land, and it's not something 
that your predecessors can be proud of. 
 
I just want to quickly turn to one other small item if I might.  Can I ask 
you, Mr. Minister, how much of the interim supply will be dedicated towards 
Consensus Saskatchewan, and where might one find the proposed expenditures 
in the Estimates on which this interim supply is based? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Consensus Saskatchewan, Mr. Chairman, has no separate 
line item for its budget.  The view there is that those costs will be 
absorbed by given departments. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Well here we go again, Mr. Minister.  You know, it's 
just no wonder that your fiscal record has got to be the most dismal in the 
whole Commonwealth. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- You know, you've got deficits nine years running, in 



 

 

the bad years admitted, but also in the good years -- deficits every year 
and a deficit this year, even though you say we're going to join hands in 
the circle in this Consensus Saskatchewan.  And we're all going to levitate 
or meditate or find some way out of this fiscal mess. 
 
Now you say that there's no budget item for Consensus Saskatchewan.  Even 
though Consensus Saskatchewan is supposedly going to be a very large part 
of your plans for the coming year, you haven't budgeted for it.  My 
question is like, well the advertising that you've been doing about this 
Consensus Saskatchewan, where would that money come from?  Like, where 
would one find it in the budget?  Where would . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- It's as I explained, Mr. Chairman, members of the 
committee.  The expenditures will be made from various departments across 
government.  We don't anticipate this to be a particularly large cost.  In 
fact it will not be a large cost, and that's how it's going to be handled. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairperson.  I have a few questions to the 
Minister of Finance on two areas: one, the whole process of consultation 
that led to his budget, that leads to this Appropriation Bill; and then a 
question regarding priorities. 
 
Mr. Minister, in your consultation process which you like to talk about a 
fair bit, will you tell the committee who it was with whom you consulted of 
the member agencies for SCIC (Saskatchewan Council for International 
Co-operation) before you decided on their budget allocation.  Who was it 
that you consulted with in that regard? 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- The members . . . I think some of the management 
staff of the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation were in the treasury 
board and made a presentation as part of the regular process of treasury 
board analysis of their various budgets, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order.  I'd ask the member for Saskatoon Nutana to rise 
and apologize to the House for using unparliamentary language. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Chairperson, I apologize for using unparliamentary 
language. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairperson, I will readdress my question to the 
Minister of Finance, and I'll be as charitable as I can and believe that he 
did not hear my question.  I will repeat the question. 
 
Mr. Minister, who was it of the member agencies of SCIC that you consulted 
with before you drafted your budget documents? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- If you're referring to . . . I mean SCIC can refer to 
probably a couple of things, now that I think about it.  One is 
Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation and the other would be Saskatchewan 
Council for International Co-operation, I suspect. 
 



 

 

Annually the government members of cabinet, perhaps members of caucus, 
members of Agriculture caucus, have met with some of those member 
organizations.  I missed the last meeting, but I think annually we have met  
 Dwith them, as I recall, but my memory may well be wrong on that, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Yes, Mr. Minister, I'm talking about the Saskatchewan 
Council for International Co-operation, which of the two groups, I believe, 
is the only one that would have what can be described as member agencies. 
 
Now that the minister understands what we're talking about here, Mr. 
Minister, it's my understanding that the executive of the member agencies 
represented in SCIC met with your cabinet in December of last year as part 
of the budget consultation.  Mr. Minister, were you there?  If you weren't 
there for that meeting, who was there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, I don't know. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Well then, Mr. Minister, perhaps you can ask some of your 
cabinet colleagues around the table, those who were there.  And perhaps 
while you're asking them who was there, why it is those members of your 
cabinet said at that meeting to the member agencies of SCIC that they 
should not expect an increase in funding for the matching grants program 
this year, but neither should they expect any decrease or substantial 
decrease. 
 
Mr. Minister, who in your cabinet, who of your colleagues in cabinet were 
telling the member agencies of SCIC in December not to expect any kind of a 
substantial decrease in this year's funding? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, members of the committee, as I said, I 
wasn't at that meeting.  I think it's one of the first that I've missed.  
And I don't know who all was there. 
 
But let's cut past the political fencing here and get back to the basis of 
this question and the others.  Whether it's the member from . . . that just 
asked about urban affairs or your questions relative the SCIC, Saskatchewan 
Council for International Co-operation.  Are any of these cuts in funding 
easy ones?  The answer is no.  Are they necessary if we're going to cut 
some spending, Mr. Chairman, and not look constantly to the taxpayers for 
tax increases?  I say yes. 
 
I have never tried to suggest that any of these cut-backs, these savings 
that we're trying to make on behalf of the taxpayers, are easy.  I have 
never said that.  Are they necessary?  The answer there is yes, if we're 
going to make way for spending in agriculture, health, and education.  
That's the course we chose in this budget. 
 
I know that you're a party of big spenders and big government and all those 
kinds of things.  We are a government that believes in responsible and 
responsive budgets.  This is what this is all about.  We can cut past the 
political two-step here.  Either you agree with this budget process or you 
don't.  We agree with it, the people of Saskatchewan agree with it.  And 



 

 

I'll tell you why: because it's exactly what we heard across Saskatchewan 
-- cut back on these grants and rebates and paper shuffling programs. And 
that's what we've done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I'm happy to hear members of your 
caucus clapping for grants to the poorest of the poor of this world.  Mr. 
Minister, this is not political fencing; this is not political 
two-stepping.  This is core to what's wrong with your government.  It's the 
question of credibility. 
 
Members of your cabinet are going to people in Saskatchewan, in what you 
describe as a process of consultation, saying to those people, do not 
expect a major cut in funding.  It's a question of credibility. 
 
They come and listen to this budget debate and find that their funding has 
been cut by 50 per cent, Mr. Minister.  I want to know who in your cabinet 
was making those commitments in December.  I want to know why those 
commitments were being made, and then we'll start talking about why they 
weren't honoured. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you tell this House, this committee, and the people of 
Saskatchewan, why members of your government were going around in December 
telling member agencies not to expect any kind of a funding cut in any 
substantial way. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- To review what happened from December till April 3.  
Members, maybe this would enlighten you as to sort of how we got to where 
we got. 
 
You may recall that one of the things that shook the budget process this 
year to its very foundations was the cut in the federal transfer payments. 
That along with interest rates that defied every economist's best 
predictions; that plus the lingering drought; that plus low commodity 
prices; that plus a Bush budget that came out and added another half 
billion dollars to the international agri-food trade war chest.  All of 
that happened since December, for the hon. member's edification. 
 
There were a lot of factors that impact on this budget, things that we 
didn't know last year that we now know.  Certainly the interest rate defied 
every economist's best predictions, except perhaps for the economic gurus 
over in the NDP Party. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Well, Mr. Minister, perhaps for your information you should 
know something else that happened since December.  Understanding that your 
budget consultation process was happening all over the province, the member 
agencies of SCIC requested another meeting, requested another meeting with 
one of these associate ministers of Agriculture that you have and were 
turned down, were not granted that meeting. 
 
The reason being, the reason given: we met in December and everything was 
said in December that needs to be said.  In December, Mr. Minister, these 



 

 

agencies were told not to expect a major cut.  That's what's wrong with 
your government; there is no credibility.  People cannot trust even the 
highest officers of your government, Mr. Minister. 
 
Then let's move along.  Mr. Minister, earlier this afternoon you said in 
this House, you said that you made cuts, you made cuts which would be the 
least painful.  Mr. Minister, I would like you to stand in the House this 
afternoon and explain to this committee and to the people of Saskatchewan 
why it is you chose to cut, why it is that you chose to cut this specific 
item in the budget which, as you well know, represents one-tenth of one per 
cent of the entire provincial budget.  Why did you chose to cut the poorest 
of the poor? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, members of the committee, as I said 
earlier, this budget was largely the reflection of what we heard across 
Saskatchewan.  Saskatchewan people do care about the poor, whether it's 
here or in other countries.  I think many, many donations are made without 
the involvement of government to many, many worthwhile projects across the 
world. And that can go on with or without the role of the government, as it 
always has been.  I know that your philosophy dictates that government must 
do everything, that it must be the be-all and the end-all.  That's not the 
view of the Saskatchewan people.  That's not our view. 
 
That doesn't mean to say that this cut was a difficult one because it was, 
as were all the others.  I've never tried to suggest otherwise.  And the 
reason that we made this cut-back is the same reason that we made the 
others.  We said to the people of Saskatchewan, because this is what they 
told us -- cut internal government spending before you come to us and 
before you raise taxes, and that's exactly what we did. We're cutting 
government spending, not raising taxes, giving the taxpayers a break, and 
giving good government to the people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Minister, in question period today we learned that you 
people spent $500,000 last year alone on image something, called image 
consulting, something to try to beef up your image.  We hear today in the 
House that you spent another $500,000 on Decima Research, political 
polling.  Mr. Minister, that's a million bucks. That's the kind of 
expenditure people in Saskatchewan were telling you to cut back on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- And I tell you the people of Saskatchewan were not saying, 
cut back on the poorest of the poor in this world.  That's not the nature 
of Saskatchewan people.  Mr. Minister, that's demonstrated, that is 
demonstrated that even in these hard times, givings to international aid in 
this province have tripled in this decade, from 2 million to well over $6 
million, donations from individual Saskatchewan people. 
 
This program was a partnership and you like to talk about partnership.  
Well in this case, one partner has pulled out, and pulled out and broke a 
promise, broke a commitment in doing so.  Mr. Minister, I think it would be 



 

 

appropriate, as the minister who has cut the funding by 50 per cent to 
$425,000, is it your advice then to the member agencies that they should 
cut programming in the Third World: is that your advice, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- No, not at all, Mr. Chairman.  I have a lot of faith 
-- I don't know how many member organizations there are now, probably 27 or 
so, something in that neighbourhood -- I've every faith that they'll 
continue to do in the future just what they have done in the past, a lot of 
fine projects that go on without government involvement.  Certainly they 
enjoyed the leverage of government funds, but I've got a lot of faith in 
the volunteers and the members of those church organizations and other 
organizations who do a lot of good work across the world. 
 
And I have no doubt that they don't need the big hand of government, big 
brother, leading them along and saying, oh no, without this money you can't 
go on.  They will go on; they will go on and do bigger and better things 
across the world.  I have every confidence in that, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairperson, Mr. Minister, I have every confidence in 
those groups as well.  But I'll tell you, they have absolutely no 
confidence in you any longer -- absolutely no confidence in what they've 
been told by members of your government, members of your cabinet, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Perhaps you can then explain to the House why it is more important in your 
scheme of priorities that there should be $500,000 for image consulting, 
while you cut $400,000 from the charitable organizations of the province.  
Why is that set of priorities in existence here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well the reason, Mr. Chairman, is that I'm not 
familiar with all of those accounts that the hon. member refers to of the 
year past.  But I can tell you what I do know of them.  Why those 
expenditures would be made is because this government has the view that 
things like standards and evaluation are important in education because 
things like the core curriculum, probably the largest undertaking in terms 
of educational reform ever in the last half century in this province, is 
important to the 200,000 young people in our schools and their parents and 
the taxpayers of this province. 
 
Because things like the Everyone Wins campaign that speaks to healthy 
life-styles is important in terms of how we address health costs down the 
road.  That's why we would make that expenditure.  And I know that you're 
going to attach the glib phrases to it as you will and as you were wanting 
to.  All I'm saying to you is that that's why those expenditures were made, 
or at least in part why those expenditures were made, because they're 
important to the people of this province, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Minister, I don't really think many people in 
Saskatchewan believe that the money that you've been paying out to 



 

 

consulting firms or to polling firms is benefitting Saskatchewan people.  
It's spent to benefit members of your caucus and your political party. 
 
Perhaps, Mr. Minister, then you could say a word about why your priorities 
would have you paying $400,000 to two former members of your cabinet.  Why 
is that a priority of your government when you cut $400,000 from 
international aid and the member agencies? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm not sure what the hon. member is 
referring to there with that $400,000 number. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Well, Mr. Minister, let's do a little addition here about 
two members of your cabinet who are now, one in Minneapolis and one in Hong 
Kong.  I understand their annual salary is now in the neighbourhood of 
$100,000 each. That adds up to 200,000 we've spent. 
 
I understand there's a hefty severance package was paid out to each of 
them.  I understand that their living accommodations are being paid for 
where they live.  I understand that the former cabinet minister, Mr. 
Taylor, who is now in Hong Kong, is having air flights paid home to 
Saskatchewan. 
 
These are the reports I have from the media, Mr. Minister.  It doesn't take 
long to add up $400,000.  Precisely the kind of money that you're cutting, 
that you've cut in this budget from the member agencies of SC . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . What is the member from Lloydminster saying 
from his seat?  The dull roar from the front seat there makes it difficult. 
 
Mr. Minister, it's a question of priority.  You people have money for 
cabinet ministers galore, for legislative secretaries galore, but no money 
for international aid. That's the issue.  You need to stand up in this 
House and defend those kind of priorities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, members of the committee, I mean 
we could engage in this cute by half politics, if you like.  You know, it's 
interesting the members that you don't cite when you talk about severance 
payments. 
 
And I'll say that is cowardly politics; it's hiding behind legislation that 
you voted on and you, sir, are going to have your chance presumably, 
through your members at the board of internal economy, and in this 
legislature, to vote your soul on severance payments.  And I look forward 
to seeing your view in print on that one. 
 
Because you can play this cute by half politics but you voted with every 
other member in this legislature on that legislation, every one.  So you 
too must look into your soul, you too must look into your soul and tell the 
public of Saskatchewan who was the first person to take advantage of that 
severance payment clause.  Who was the very first person? 
 
I'll tell you, Mr. Chairman, I've had it with the hypocrisy of this kind of 



 

 

politics, hiding behind the cloak of indignation.  It's nothing more than 
that, Mr. Chairman.  Come clean with the public of Saskatchewan and put it 
on the record. 
 
And Mr. Chairman, I have absolutely no difficulty with who that first 
payment went to for severance payment, because it was a long-time member 
and premier of this province who I have lots of respect for.  I may not be 
akin to his kind of politics, but I've got lots of respect for him as an 
individual, Mr. Chairman, and I have no shame in saying that.  I'll tell 
you he stands head and shoulders above that kind of cute by half, cowardly 
politics we've just seen in this legislature, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Being 5 o'clock the committee is recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


