





























































Hansard: May 08, 1990


 

 

May 8/90 
 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce to you, and 
through you to all members of the Legislative Assembly, some 72 visitors, 
some 72 students in your gallery, sir.  These are grade 8 students from 
Weyburn Junior High School, and they're accompanied today by Janice Bernard 
and Gary Kruger, their teachers, and as well, Vance Peterson and Gary 
McKenzie who are the bus drivers. 
 
This is an annual visit for the junior high from Weyburn, Mr. Speaker, who 
each year about this time of the year they make the journey to the 
legislature.  And I just want to commend all the students and their parents 
and the bus drivers, and in particular the teachers, for making this annual 
trip and including as part of the students' education the trip to the 
legislature to get some sense of what parliamentary democracy is all about. 
 
And I'll be meeting with these students, Mr. Speaker, after question period 
in room 218 to field some of their questions and to have pictures and a 
refreshment with them, and I would ask all members of the Legislative 
Assembly to join with me in welcoming these guests from Weyburn, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Tendering Process for WESTBRIDGE 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, my question will be directed to the 
minister in charge of privatization.  Not being present, I would direct it 
to the acting minister, and it deals with one of your government's main 
privatization that has taken place over the last while. 
 
I'm sure the minister will realize that the outstanding shares in 
WESTBRIDGE Corporation held by private investors would amount to a very, 
very low percentage of outstanding shares.  I'm sure the minister would 
also know that WESTBRIDGE does about 75 per cent of the work for the 
province of Saskatchewan or about $90 million worth of work for the 
province.  That is about three times what the computer corporation of 
Saskatchewan used to get by way of revenue in terms of the computer work 
they used to do; and about three times the value of work that the Manitoba 
Crown corporation gets for doing all the corporation work and the 
department work in Manitoba, including health care. 
 
Now I would like to ask the minister: what is the process of tendering for 
that $90 million?  That work, has it been tendered?  What is the tendering 



 

 

policy for WESTBRIDGE?  And will you table that tendering process at this 
time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the minister in charge of 
the privatization initiatives, I'll take notice of that question. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I direct my question then to the 
Minister of Finance who appears to be taking the question, and I guess that 
the minister who is in charge is not in the Assembly today, but I would 
then direct this question to the associate minister of privatization. 
 
And the question to you, Mr. Minister, is this:  When WESTBRIDGE was 
formed, the provincial government assets from SaskTel and SaskCOMP were 
transferred to the new corporation at book value.  You will remember that 
when you sold off the assets of Sask Minerals, you said that you sold them 
off at less than book value because that was how things were sold in the 
industry.  And the same was true of the potash corporation. 
 
Mr. Minister, considering those two situations, can you explain why 
WESTBRIDGE acquired the assets of Mercury Group for $4.9 million, more than 
twice the valuation of the firm at that time?  How does that work? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, I'll take notice on that question as 
well and bring the details back to the hon. member. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I really would like the associate 
minister, who gets the salary of a minister, to answer these questions 
because they're very pertinent and important to the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan, especially the question that I'm going to ask now because it 
reflects directly on the government's administration abilities. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you will know that the business wizards on your side of 
the House paid $5.25 million to acquire Leascorp Western, a company with a 
valuation of 276,000.  You paid 2.25 million for Lease Corp. Systems which 
had a valuation of minus $231,000.  You went on to pay 13 million to 
acquire Lease Corporation Limited which had a valuation of $59,000. 
 
Why did you pay this Toronto entrepreneur, Leonard McCurdey, a total of 
$20.5 million to obtain his assets in Lease Corp. Group which had a value 
at the time of $104,000?  Why did you pay 200 times the valuation in order 
to get this company set up?  Why did you have to do that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well first of all, I don't necessarily accept at all 
at face value what the hon. member has said, Mr. Speaker.  Certainly we'll 
want to get and provide what details we can relative to that question. 
 
But I would just make this general observation about valuations relative to 



 

 

privatization initiatives, Mr. Speaker, and ones that I recall in this 
House and recall quite clearly.  Some several years ago now we privatized 
the Sask Oil and Gas Crown Corporation, Mr. Speaker.  And I remember at the 
time members opposite saying, oh yes, you underpriced that so it'll be a 
popular issue just to make your privatization look good.  I remember it 
clearly; that's what they said, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what happened of course was the market is always right.  You can't fool 
the market.  And not only was that at the time it was a fair price, but it 
went down, Mr. Speaker, not up.  So I would suggest that the NDP track 
record when it came to predicting or having some sense of what the value 
was for Sask Oil and Gas, they were no more right then than they were when 
it came to the potash issue this last year when the member for Fairview 
thought he had a better idea as to what the value of that corporation was 
worth .  And once again the market-place was right and it'll always be 
right, Mr. Speaker.  And that is the determining factor of the day, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- New question to the minister.  This is very much a 
similar manner in which the government started out defending Guy Montpetit 
and GigaText when that issue was raised in the House. 
 
But I want to ask the minister, and repeat the question to you: does it 
make any sense that you paid Leonard McCurdey $20.5 million for assets that 
were values at 104,000?  That was the question.  I ask you to answer it 
right now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- I'll take notice, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to ask a question to 
the Associate Minister of Economic Development, as long as the Finance 
minister doesn't have his tongue, I'd like to ask the minister in light 
that Leonard McCurdey through another company which he owned -- Lanek 
Limited, a company in Mississauga, Ontario -- he had leased to Lease Corp. 
for $6,000 a month just months before WESTBRIDGE bought out Lease Corp.  
Now WESTBRIDGE assumed that lease with the take-over and is now paying Mr. 
McCurdey, a major shareholder in the corporation, $6,000 a month for the 
lease on the property. 
 
Now just prior to the acquisition, Mr. McCurdey mortgaged the property for 
$425,000 which the WESTBRIDGE lease covers.  In essence, you gave Mr. 
McCurdey $425,000 in free money. 
 
Mr. Minister, when are you going to demonstrate some competence in your 
government and be accountable for taxpayers' dollars in the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, I think it's fair to say that at all 
times one endeavours to be accountable to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan.  
That's the approach of this government and will continue to be the approach 
of this government and of this party.  And relative to specific questions 
that you may have, I'll have to take notice and see if we can't provide you 
with any details relative to these rather detailed questions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- A new question, Mr. Speaker, to the associate minister of 
economic development who should have some knowledge about this issue since 
he's the minister responsible in the House today. 
 
Just prior to the acquisition, Mr. McCurdey had Lease Corp. take out a loan 
for some $500,000 with Canadian Pension Capital Limited and with the 
take-over this loan became a liability for WESTBRIDGE, Mr. Minister.  Since 
Canadian Pension Capital Corporation now holds WESTBRIDGE shares, could you 
confirm that this was to retire that loan and that Mr. McCurdey benefitted 
to the tune of another $500,000 paid for by WESTBRIDGE.  It would appear, 
Mr. Minister, that he got $925,000 out of this property which he purchased 
for $155,000, and he still owns the property and WESTBRIDGE is paying the 
bill. 
 
Is that the kind of expertise that you as a new minister are demonstrating, 
bringing to this Government of Saskatchewan a blatant disregard for 
taxpayers' dollars in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm not sure what our residual holdings 
are in WESTBRIDGE.  I know that it's become a very successful national, if 
not international, company.  I guess my question would be, has the hon. 
member raised these questions with the board and/or management of this 
private company for some answers? 
 
Certainly I'm prepared to take notice and see what I can do about providing 
details, or we can continue this very good -- I guess in their minds -- 
very good political exercise, or if you like and we can expedite this and 
perhaps move on to some other issues.  You could give me a list of all the 
questions you have and certainly we can look at getting some answers for 
you, or you can continue to go through this theatrics.  It's up to the hon. 
member. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I've been listening to the line of 
questioning very closely and it's fair to say that the questions are 
closely interrelated.  They're closely interrelated.  Obviously the 
minister has tried to take notice.  The hon. members keep raising 
questions, so if I'm going to rule strictly on it, I would have to say that 
you cannot ask questions . . . of questions that are further information 
for a question that the minister has already taken notice.  Now these 
questions seem to be interrelated, and I'd like to bring that to the 
attention of the hon. member from Battlefords. 
 
Order, order.  I don't think this is a case for any problems.  Hon. members 
are quite aware of the rules of the House, and they're aware that when the 



 

 

minister has taken notice of a question, other questions should simply be 
seeking further information, not eliciting a response. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- A new question, not related, Mr. Speaker, and I would 
direct this question to the minister who refuses to answer so far today.  I 
direct my question to the associate minister of economic development who 
sits in his seat and doesn't show any accountability for taxpayers' dollars 
in Saskatchewan.  Mr. Minister, these are the same kinds of deals that made 
your government famous, like GigaText and Supercart and other issues in the 
province. 
 
Once again we see an operator coming in from central Canada, and the 
Saskatchewan taxpayers foot the bill, and you people delude yourselves by 
thinking you're major wheelers and dealers in Saskatchewan's economy.  
There are winners and losers.  The winners certainly aren't the people in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
My question to you is, this fits very well for Mr. Guy Montpetit.  He got 
$2.9 million for his Lambda computers, and now you have Mr. McCurdey 
getting $925,000 for his property.  When are you going to, Mr. Minister, 
start treating taxpayers' dollars with some respect in this province so 
that Saskatchewan people are finally the winners, not your incompetence to 
big-business friends, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- The hon. member, quite within his rights, can 
continue to drag a WESTBRIDGE Computer Corporation through the mud if he 
wishes. He can continue cast aspersions and create innuendoes and talk 
about things like GigaText, try and paint them with the same brush.  But he 
chooses to ignore, Mr. Speaker, the fundamental issue because the NDP can't 
stand success.  They can't stand the fact that after privatization we have 
a group of people here  
_- 98 per cent of the employees bought in, Mr. Speaker.  They can't stand 
the fact that 98 per cent of the employers bought shares; 80 per cent of 
those shares are held in this province, Mr. Speaker, that they have offices 
in 10 major cities across this country, as well as a U.S. base, and that 
they were the fastest growing company in Saskatchewan.  They can't stand 
that kind of success.  They just want to drag them through the mud, Mr. 
Speaker.  That's all this is about. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Cost of Office Facilities in Hong Kong 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to try another question for the 
Associate Minister of Economic Diversification and see if we can get him up 
on his feet. 
 
Mr. Minister, CBC radio today did a report on the opulent office space your 
government has acquired in Hong Kong for Graham Taylor.  The suite of 
offices are on the 19th floor of Exchange Square, described in the report 
as one of the most opulent office buildings in downtown Hong Kong where 



 

 

rents are said to be the third highest in the world.  This exquisitely 
furnished and finished office has a view of Victoria Harbour through curved 
glass windows.  There's a private office for Mr. Taylor, an open office 
area for secretaries, a reception area, a boardroom, and several private 
offices, all for three staff members. 
 
Can you tell us, Minister, can you tell this House how much it's costing 
the people of Saskatchewan to have Graham Taylor work in this kind of 
luxurious surroundings? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Gerich: -- Mr. Speaker, I don't readily have the information at my 
fingertips, but I would think that the cost of renting an office in Hong 
Kong would be comparable to Alberta, British Columbia, Ontario, or Quebec. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- A new question to the same minister.  We're talking here 
about office space to accommodate three staff people.  And we know from an 
answer to a written question that was given by your government that in 1988 
the monthly cost of that office was $23,500 or an annual cost of $282,000.  
And that was before Graham Taylor went there.  And that's in 1988 dollars, 
so I assume it cost more today. 
 
Can you tell us, has the actual office space expanded since 1988?  And 
while you're on your feet, Minister, can you tell this House what other 
benefits such as housing, vehicle, travel, golf club dues, social club dues 
are being paid by the people of Saskatchewan on behalf of Mr. Taylor? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Gerich: -- Mr. Speaker, I indicated to the member opposite I 
didn't have the information on my fingertips.  But the cost of renting 
offices in Hong Kong is comparably higher than what it is in Saskatchewan, 
Alberta, or British Columbia.  And I think that the cost of renting an 
office over there would be in line with what these province have to pay. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- That's an absurd answer, Mr. Speaker.  I'm talking here 
about a former minister of this Crown who single-handedly practically 
ruined the efforts of Saskatchewan on account of privatization, the 
interests of Saskatchewan . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Practically ruined this province with some of his 
programs.  Where are your priorities, Minister?  That's the question that I 
have for you now.  Where are your priorities? 
 
On the one hand, here we are in Saskatchewan with a poverty rate which 
Statistics Canada said is the highest in the country.  We got the worst 
record for population out-migration in the country.  Farm business 
bankruptcies, personal bankruptcies continue to climb; young people are 



 

 

losing hope for a future. 
 
And on the other hand, we see the winners such as Graham Taylor ensconced 
in his office overlooking Victoria Harbour at a huge cost to Saskatchewan 
taxpayer.  What kind of priorities are you showing to the people of this 
province, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Gerich: -- Mr. Speaker, I think the NDP are on a witch hunt here.  
To promote trade and economic development in Saskatchewan, we have to have 
sales offices located around the world, one being in Hong Kong.  What do 
the NDP want to do, build up a wall around Saskatchewan, not have any 
trade?  They're tearing walls down in Europe right now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Report on Environmental Impact of Cargill Plant 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question, to relieve some of 
the pressure from the obviously incompetent replies so far, is now to the 
Minister of the Environment.  My question, Mr. Speaker, to the minister 
pertains to a letter, a recent letter that I have a copy of here to the 
U.S. trade representative, Carla Hills, from none other than Fredric 
Corrigan, who's president of the fertilizer division of Cargill.  And, Mr. 
Minister, the letter says, and I quote: 
 

 Detailed information on the safeguards I have cited, as well as all other 
environmental aspects of the project, were thoroughly reviewed by the 
provincial environmental authorities in 1989.  Saferco provided a 70 page 
final project proposal, which was reviewed by at least seven different 
branches or sections of the government acting as members of an 
environmental review panel. 

 
Mr. Minister, my question is this: since it was on the basis of that 
70-page report that you decided the project needed no public environmental 
review, will you today table that 70-page report? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, the letter that the member refers to I am 
not familiar with.  That is an internal document that has been sent by 
Cargill to someone else.  I would firstly respectfully request, Mr. 
Speaker, that the hon. member table this letter so I can look at the 
letter. 
 
I will confirm, Mr. Speaker, that indeed seven or more government 
departments have thoroughly analysed the whole proposal.  It did not go 
through an official environmental impact assessment in some terms.  But, 
Mr. Speaker, bureaucrat after bureaucrat, official after official, expert 
after expert, reviewed thoroughly the whole submission that was made by the 
Saferco proponent of this project. 
 



 

 

After thorough review, Mr. Speaker, after thorough review, Mr. Speaker, and 
for some very good reasons, some very good reasons, Mr. Speaker, it was 
decided that this proposal could go forth if and providing all of the 
regulations were conformed to.  And, Mr. Speaker, I will commit to the hon. 
member that every regulation that this province has with respect to the 
quality of our air, the quality of any discharges, the safety of the 
public, will be adhered to before that plant is given operating approval. 
 
Now the member has specifically asked, will you release all of the 
confidential documents and figures and items put forth by this proponent.  
I'm not so sure, Mr. Speaker, that that would be wise, fair, or in fact 
legal. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I will undertake to review the matter.  If there are 
information that would be acceptable to the member and will not jeopardize 
the position of a major international corporation, yes, I will release 
them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Mr. Speaker, a new question to the same minister.  Mr. 
Minister, it seems that either you don't have the answers to questions 
we're asking today and yesterday, or the matters are before the courts. 
 
Now what we want to know, Mr. Minister, is that according to the president 
of Cargill fertilizer division, based out of Minnesota, it was seven 
government branches or sections which served as the environmental review 
panel to which they submitted a 70-page report on the environmental impact. 
 
That was done instead of a full public inquiry, so surely there's no 
problem from our perspective with making that process public.  Your 
government says, and Cargill says it's a substitute for a public process, 
so surely you can let the people of Saskatchewan know what safeguards are 
in place with respect to this project and what environmental concerns were 
looked at before the project was approved. 
 
And my question, Mr. Minister, is this: why not display some of the 
co-operation and openness you always talk about by letting the public in on 
this process and tabling that 70-page report? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member talks about involving the 
public.  I'd like to remind the hon. member that approximately three weeks 
or a month ago, or thereabouts, there was a very large-scale and widely 
attended public meeting.  I believe the meeting took place in Moose Jaw.  
Mr. Speaker, I'll bet there was a thousand or 1,500 people there, and, Mr. 
Speaker, I'll bet you a thousand or 1,500 people said yes to this project. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would ask the question today in my mind: how many NDP 
were there?  Was the member for Moose Jaw there, the two members for Moose 
Jaw who publicly have stated, yes, we agree with this project? 
 



 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, can we have it once and for all, straight and clear, is 
the opposition in favour of developing our natural resources and making 
fertilizer out of our natural gas or are they against it?  I would like a 
clear position from the NDP because so far it's been a flip-flop -- yes, 
we're in favour of it when we're in Moose Jaw talking to the local folks; 
when we're in Regina, well maybe we're not. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a good project.  It has gone through thorough review 
and, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan want to develop our natural 
resources and they want to make fertilizer, and I'd like to know what 
position does the NDP have on that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Now, Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Minister of 
Environment.  Mr. Minister, Cargill Incorporated sent this letter to the 
U.S. trade representative in Washington, Carla Hills.  The president carbon 
copied seven or eight U.S. senators.  Mr. Corrigan says in this letter at 
the end: please let me know if I can provide you with any additional 
information.  Mr. Minister, if this information is good enough for the U.S. 
Senate and the U.S. trade representative, why isn't the information on the 
environment in Saskatchewan good enough for the people of the province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we will provide . . . Mr. 
Speaker, there has already been, there has already been a tremendous amount 
of information on this subject put forth to the public in Saskatchewan 
through the media, through public meetings, through briefing sessions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if that is unsatisfactory, I will undertake to provide all of 
the information I can, but, Mr. Speaker, let me make it clear, let me make 
it abundantly clear, when the members of the opposite want to know the 
intricate details of a major corporation, there are such things as legal 
contracts; there are such things as prejudicing that corporation's position 
in respect to the market-place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, do we want this plant to succeed, or do we want this plant to 
fail?  That is the question that we have to ask.  Do we want to jeopardize 
the position of this corporation, or do we want to make this corporation a 
good, sound, taxpaying corporation for the benefit of all Saskatchewan 
people?  I'd like to know the NDP response to that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 23 -- An Act to amend The Corporation Capital Tax Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill to amend 
The Corporation Capital Tax Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next 



 

 

sitting. 
 

Bill No. 24 -- An Act to amend The Municipal Revenue Sharing Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill to amend The 
Municipal Revenue Sharing Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next 
sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 16 
 

Government's Economic Development Policies 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I guess 
today the motion that I'm about to enter under rule 16 is as appropriate as 
any motion that's ever been before this House.  Because what it deals with, 
Mr. Speaker, is the economic mismanagement that this government has thrust 
upon the province since 1982.  And I want to say, when you look at the 
performance of the new second string ministers that this Premier has put in 
place, it's no wonder they've got problems answering for the results of 
what the first string did.  Mr. Speaker, this government is out of control; 
it's incompetent, and it doesn't deserve to govern any longer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, since 1982 day after day, session after 
session, and year after year, this government has been making decisions 
that are destroying the fabric and the base of this province. 
 
The priorities, Mr. Speaker, are totally askew.  They're totally misplaced.  
They've got millions of dollars for the Guy Montpetits from Quebec.  
They've got a million dollars for a Leonard McCurdey in a two-month period, 
with the new revelations in WESTBRIDGE today.  They've got $370 million to 
put at risk for Cargill.  And they stand up in this House today and tell us 
that they won't even table an environmental impact study, an internal 
impact study that should have been made public. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it wasn't long ago in this House, it was shown to the 
people of this province that they had three and a half million dollars to 
Chuck Childers on a no-cut contract that will have to be paid out by 
profits from a corporation, that should be going into the hands of the 
people of this province to deliver health care and education and to build 
highways. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, never before, I believe, in the history of 
this legislature have we seen such a weak-kneed display.  This government 



 

 

in the last few days in this legislature has either refused to answer 
questions or they've taken notice or they've said it's before the courts. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that that's not the kind of consensus and 
accountability that they were promising in this budget speech.  And I want 
to say, Mr. Speaker, that this government is going to pay dearly if ever 
that Premier has the guts to call an election so that the people of this 
province can pass judgement on them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, you can go through every economic 
indicator you want, whether it's published by this government as a 
provincial government document or whether you look at what the federal 
government publishes, in terms of the record of the economic performance of 
all of the provinces, in Saskatchewan. 
 
We lead, and I want to tell you we lead.  We lead in business bankruptcies 
-- number one we are in business bankruptcies.  And what a record, I say to 
you, Mr. Speaker, what a record. 
 
Do you know the economic performance of this province when it starts 
turning to a negative figure?  I would say to you, Mr. Speaker, that 
clearly this government should start reassessing its position and turn its 
agenda to fixing the damage that they've done instead of condoning the 
actions that their former ministers have placed upon the people of this 
province in the last few years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last year, 1989 in this province we had 556 small-business 
bankruptcies.  Well is there any wonder why, Mr. Speaker?  Not to the minds 
of the people of this province; they understand clearly why.  A $40,000 
income family pays the highest rate of income tax of any province in this 
country.  There's no disposable income out there, Mr. Speaker.  We see 
family after family after family packing their belongings and leaving this 
province. 
 
And this government, this PC government hasn't got the intelligence to 
understand why it's happening.  They stand in here daily and they'll talk 
in their speeches about how tough things have been for them.  But you know 
something, they never sit down and analyse why things have been tough for 
them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they don't realize that you can't give Chuck Childers three 
and a half million dollars and you can't give Guy Montpetit $4 million.  
And now you can't give Mr. Leonard McCurdey from Ontario, an Ontario 
business man, a million dollars in a short-time transaction and still 
expect to balance your budgets, to put money into the hands of working men 
and women in this province to keep our economy buoyant.  They don't 
understand these things, Mr. Speaker.  And I would have thought after eight 
or nine years of government that they would learn from their errors, but 
not this Premier.  No not this Premier, Mr. Speaker.  Not that Finance 
minister, any more than his predecessors.  Mr. Speaker, they either don't 
understand or they don't want to understand. 



 

 

 
And I want to say to you that the corruption and the mismanagement of this 
government is unparalleled.  I don't believe that anywhere, anywhere in 
this country we have ever seen a government that has mismanaged and has 
misplaced priorities like this particular government has done since 1982. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, if you compare what's happened to our small-business 
community, which is the backbone of employment opportunities in any 
jurisdiction I would say to you, if you compare what's been happening to 
our small-business community it becomes really evident that the priorities 
of the large megaprojects, the Cargills and the Peter Pocklingtons and 
those kinds of ventures, have created the problems that we're facing in 
this province. 
 
You know, all you have to do, Mr. Speaker, is have a look at the number of 
business bankruptcies in our neighbouring provinces in the years 1987 and 
1988 and compare them to ours.  And it tells you whether it's a PC 
government in these provinces -- which it isn't, it's a different kind of a 
Tory government -- it tells you that we've got more problems than just the 
agricultural problem.  I will agree that we've had drought and that we've 
got low commodity prices, and clearly that hasn't helped in terms of being 
able to balance our budgets.  I would agree that that's the case. 
 
But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that if you compare the percentage in 
change of business bankruptcies in Saskatchewan with Alberta and Manitoba, 
it's clear that there's more problems than just agriculture. 
 
You know, our business bankruptcies in 1988 from '87 were up some 27.7 per 
cent.  And I think it interesting to note that in Alberta and Manitoba, our 
two neighbouring provinces, both of those figures were down.  In 1987 they 
had fewer bankruptcies than they did in . . . or in 1988 they had fewer 
bankruptcies than they did in '87.  Manitoba was down 3.8 per cent; Alberta 
was down 2.4 per cent in terms of the number of bankruptcies.  But what do 
we have in Saskatchewan?  Our business bankruptcies from '87 to '88 
increased by 27.7 per cent, almost 28 per cent, Mr. Speaker -- almost one 
in three. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is no doubt, there is no doubt what's happened in this 
province and there is no doubt that this government is out of control.  
Today's question period I think showed very, very clearly why we've got 
these kinds of problems.  You've got ministers who either refuse to answer 
or who can't answer.  When they get in trouble, the first thing they do is 
put something before the courts so they have an excuse not to answer. 
 
And why, Mr. Speaker, why this closed and inward-turned government?  Why is 
this?  I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, it's because they're ashamed of 
what they've done. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, I'm going to read . . . before I continue I'm going 
to read my motion into the record, and I want to say that it's going to be 
seconded by the member from Saskatoon Eastview.  It deals with what's been 
happening to Saskatchewan business men and women.  It deals with the 
families who have had to leave our province.  It deals with youth 



 

 

unemployment and it deals with, in general, what's happened to this 
provincial economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it's new what's happened to the people of Saskatchewan, and I 
want to say to you that I believe it's going to be the last time, because I 
don't believe that there could be a more incompetent government than this 
PC government.  And I would suggest to you, after an election when this 
Premier and his cabinet and his back-benchers are defeated, you aren't ever 
going to see a PC government in this province for another 50 years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, this is the motion that I intend to move, 
seconded by the member from Saskatoon Eastview.  And I ask the people who 
are watching, and I ask the members on the other side of the House to look 
into their hearts and really see if it doesn't describe what's happened to 
this government.  I'll read the motion, Mr. Speaker.  It says: 
 

 That this Assembly condemns the Government of Saskatchewan for the failed 
economic policies of the past eight years, which have resulted in a 
dramatic downturn in the provincial economy, increased youth unemployment, 
unprecedented out-migration, and small business bankruptcies. 

 
Mr. Speaker, clearly that's the legacy of this Premier and his cabinet and 
of his back-benchers and of those few who in this province still blindly 
support them.  And I say few, Mr. Speaker, because the polling results that 
they're doing and that independent people are doing, are telling you that 
they're around 10 to 14 to 15 per cent in these polls, and they know it.  
And that's why they refuse to answer questions, because, Mr. Speaker, 
they're afraid that they can still go lower in the polls, although I don't 
see how. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this motion I suggest to you, aptly describes what's 
happened to the people of Saskatchewan.  I would want to say, Mr. Speaker, 
that they've destroyed the hope of Saskatchewan young men and women, and 
that's why, Mr. Speaker, I move this motion, seconded by the member from 
Saskatoon Eastview.  I thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I am 
pleased to second this very important motion, and I heartily endorse the 
comments as made by my colleague from P.A.-Duck Lake.  And he painted a 
very accurate picture of this government's dismal record, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I endorse the motion that rightly condemns the Government of Saskatchewan 
for failed economic policies which resulted in a dramatic downturn in the 
provincial economy, resulted in increased youth unemployment, in the 
increased out-migration -- a record level out-migration, I might add -- and 
unprecedented small-business bankruptcies. 
 



 

 

Put plainly, Mr. Speaker, the economic situation in Saskatchewan today is a 
crisis.  And, Mr. Speaker, this crisis has been looming for quite some 
time.  It's not new. 
 
The performance of this PC government, like the one in Ottawa, is a 
national disgrace, Mr. Speaker.  And many people are getting hurt by a lack 
of positive actions and by the mismanagement of both the federal and 
provincial governments. 
 
Many groups, Mr. Speaker, have suffered under this provincial government's 
mismanagement -- small-business people, as my colleague pointed out; the 
family farm sector certainly has suffered; the northern citizens have 
certainly suffered as they're in third-world status on many occasions; 
seniors, the poor people, minority groups, and, Mr. Speaker, families 
generally have suffered the results of the failed economic policies of this 
government. 
 
Given the short time I have to speak on this motion though, I would like to 
focus my comments particularly on the impact of this government's failed 
economic policies on young people with regard to job creation or the lack 
thereof and out-migration, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the statistics on these are a matter of public record, Mr. Speaker.  
And they are very serious when applied to young people.  Remember, Mr. 
Speaker, 1982 and 1984 when the Premier of the province wanted to bring the 
children home.  He talked about there's so much more that we can be, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Well as youth and family critic, Mr. Speaker, for the opposition, I've been 
across Saskatchewan over the last couple of years.  I've received many 
calls from many communities.  I've received many letters from young people 
from across Saskatchewan.  And, Mr. Speaker, in 15 years as a social 
worker, many of them spent, most of them spent in this province, I would 
say that I have never seen such a sense of uncertainty, a sense of concern, 
and a sense of despair and desperation in the eyes of young people that I 
see today, and I've worked with young people for many years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Red Cross study of two or three weeks ago confirms this by indicating 
that the spirit of Saskatchewan, which has a proud tradition, is almost 
broken.  And I would concur, Mr. Speaker, in my 15 years in working with 
families and young people, that that's my sense of the situation in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I met with a group of young people last night in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, 
and they were concerned about how to prepare for their future.  They're 
very worried about that.  They're concerned about the economy.  They're 
concerned about the lack of employment options for them.  They're concerned 
about their inability to access post-secondary education.  They're 
concerned about the environment, very concerned about the environment.  
They're concerned about the debt, and they're concerned about the loss of 
their assets, Mr. Speaker.  Young people view the assets that this 
government has been giving away as their assets, their future, and, Mr. 
Speaker, they're not very happy about seeing these assets being given away. 



 

 

 
They're worried about have to leave the province -- young people, 15 and 19 
and 24, worried about having to uproot and leave Saskatchewan, leave their 
families and look for opportunities elsewhere.  And it's a very scary 
proposition for them, Mr. Speaker, very scary, the thought of leaving their 
families, going to some uncertain future in another province.  But they see 
themselves as not having very much choice. 
 
And I would say, Mr. Speaker, young people have told me that more than 
anything they're worried about a lack of sensitivity by this government 
about the situation and the worry and the challenges facing them, the lack 
of acknowledgement that in fact they have a right to be concerned. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the PC government's failed economic  
 Dpolicies are a great worry to young people, and it's not surprising when 
you take a look at the job creation record.  As my colleague said, we have 
the worst job creation record in all of Canada, of any province, Mr. 
Speaker.  And this is magnified when you look at the picture for young 
people. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I'm sure you'll agree that the social and economic costs 
of young people not being employed, the whole generation of 20- to 
25-year-olds not having any work experience, are devastating.  Mr. Speaker, 
you can hardly calculate the costs of this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, from 1981 to 1988 we've seen for young people under the age of 
25, a net reduction of 20,000 jobs in that period, Mr. Speaker, jobs lost 
to young people, jobs lost in the labour force. 
 
In February, 1990 youth unemployment rate in Saskatchewan was 17.5 per 
cent, almost twice as high as the very disgraceful overall average which 
was 9.1 per cent in the province of Saskatchewan.  When you take a look at 
the North, Mr. Speaker, for youth unemployment it's 90 per cent. 
 
The Opportunities program, Mr. Speaker, we've had a $7.5 million cut in the 
Opportunities program since 1986-87 which happened to be the election year.  
Mr. Speaker, what did we see in the last budget?  Another $500 million cut 
there . . . or 500,000, I'm sorry.  Another 1 million cut from youth 
unemployment generally, Mr. Speaker.  So, Mr. Speaker, young people see 
that as an irresponsible approach in response to the lack of employment 
options that they already have available to them. 
 
So we have increased cuts to job creation; we have increased tuition fees 
to university so they can't access post-secondary education.  When you add 
there's little hope of taking over the family farm, Mr. Speaker, we can see 
that there's a sense of despair in the eyes of young people and we can see 
why we're driving them away from Saskatchewan, why this PC government is 
driving them away in record numbers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, looking at out-migration for a moment, in the last five years 
we've had increases every year in the level of out-migration -- some 62,000 
net out-migration in the last five years, Mr. Speaker.  And again youth 
have borne the brunt of that situation -- 60 per cent of that 62,000 



 

 

number, 60 per cent of those are under the age of 34 years.  Almost 20 per 
cent of those people who left are under the age of 25, Mr. Speaker, or 24 
actually. 
 
In 1989 we had a net loss of 23,700 people and young people under 24 
represented 6,000, Mr. Speaker, 6,000 of those. 
 
This is, Mr. Speaker, this is exporting our future.  Our brightest and our 
best are leaving, Mr. Speaker.  They won't come back.  The minister and the 
Premier says, they'll flow out; they'll flow back.  These people will not 
come back, Mr. Speaker.  This government's policies are tearing families 
apart.  The province cannot afford this long-term economic and social cost, 
Mr. Speaker.  The situation is serious and it requires emergency job 
creation action by the government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, young people hear about a government, hear the government 
talking about valuing them and valuing their families, but they see quite a 
different picture in reality, Mr. Speaker.  Youth know that cuts to job 
creation programs, that waste and mismanagement, that privatization, that 
record-level debt and taxes and record-level business bankruptcies, and 
that ongoing underfunding of education, spells continued hardship for them. 
 
Young people are trusting, they're positive, they have good ideas and 
energy, Mr. Speaker.  All they need is a chance.  We need young people to 
build the future, Mr. Speaker, all they need is a chance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Young people want a government that is capable of managing 
wisely; they want a government that is willing to invest in them; they want 
a government that values them.  Youth wants some security, Mr. Speaker, 
they want some opportunities and they want a sense of hope.  This is not 
too much to ask, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In eight years this government has failed to meet these expectations and 
these desires, Mr. Speaker.  And it is for this reason, Mr. Speaker, that I 
proudly second the motion by my colleague from P.A.-Duck Lake: 
 

 That this Assembly condemns the government of Saskatchewan for the failed 
economic development policies of the past eight years which have resulted 
in a dramatic downturn in the provincial economy, increased youth 
unemployment, unprecedented out-migration and small business bankruptcies. 

 
Mr. Speaker, thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'm proud to rise and 
I'm also proud to speak on behalf of my riding of the Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster.  I will no doubt be opposing this motion, Mr. Speaker, 
brought forward by the NDP opposition. 
 
I want to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, that again we hear the same 



 

 

rhetoric and the same tape recordings and overall rehashed speeches of the 
NDP, and I want to indicate to you that they said nothing but the same 
thing.  They've offered no alternatives to the people of Saskatchewan, and 
I want to just lay to you, sir, outline to you, sir, a bit of what our 
government has done.  I want to indicate to you, sir, though, that I'm not 
going to stand in my place here to hardly react to any of the comments 
because there was very few of them made by members of the opposition. 
 
I want to say, sir, that I've heard members of the opposition know, say and 
state that it was because of the Gainers plant in North Battleford or 
because of the pulp and paper industry in Prince Albert or because of the 
upgraders in Regina and Lloydminster and because of the fertilizer plant 
over here in Balgonie, that these were the reasons . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Belle Plaine. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- Or Belle Plaine, I'm sorry . . . that these were the 
reasons that people were leaving the province of Saskatchewan.  Well, it 
just doesn't make sense.  I want to indicate to you, sir, that these 
projects are going to be bringing new people into this province.  I don't 
see them driving people out of the province.  And they talk about the 
fiscal mismanagement of this government for bringing those particular 
projects into this province.  I want to indicate to you, sir, that I think 
they are a little bit backwards on their way of thinking. 
 
I just want to press upon you, Mr. Speaker, that members of the opposition 
are definitely blaming some of the economic downturns on the provincial 
government.  Well I suppose, sir, that if any reasonable thinking man or 
woman would believe that, that I would suggest that they should tend to 
take a look at the overall picture.  I would say that are they blaming the 
provincial government for the high interest rates?  I would think not. 
 
I would think, sir, that everybody realizes that the interest rates are set 
at the national level and not at a provincial level.  I would indicate to 
you, sir, that they've been indicating to you and through you to this 
Assembly that the greatest problems to small business and the bankruptcies 
in Saskatchewan here were due to this government's actions. 
 
Well I would say to you that I would think that high interest rates in farm 
problems have a great impact on the small business here in the province of 
Saskatchewan.  I would say that high interest rates back in 1981 when the 
NDP, the now Leader of the Opposition, where the interest rates were 24 per 
cent, and the NDP had turned the backs on the farmer in those days. 
 
I would tend to say that that was the beginning of the agricultural 
problems as well as small-business problems here in the province of 
Saskatchewan.  I remember well that the farmers and small-business people 
were asking the Leader of the Opposition back when he was in government in 
1981 to help, but he turned the back on the people.  He said you must help 
yourself.  You must do as good a job as you possibly can to meet your 
payments because it is a federal responsibility. 
 
Well I say to you, Mr. Speaker, what we in this Tory government here in the 



 

 

province of Saskatchewan did not say that to the people in the province.  
We brought in a home mortgage protection program for the people in this 
province.  We brought in small-business programs for the small-business 
people in this province, and we brought in help for the farmers in this 
province that would also have a spin-off to shore up the small business in 
this province. 
 
I want to indicate to you, sir, that it is the federal responsibility to do 
a lot of the things that we've done as a provincial body.  But I want to 
say that we should not be trying to make political games through the 
problems that are of a national basis here on a provincial level.  But the 
members of the NDP opposition should be joining with this government here 
in the province and help us in our initiatives to get more moneys into 
agriculture and into small-business men's hands from the federal 
administration, from the federal government. 
 
And I would say that if we stayed our course and we kept pressuring the 
federal government that it is possible that we could help our farmer 
friends and our small-business people here in the province.  We must 
continue our fight for lower interest rates.  We must continue in our fight 
for help in the farming communities.  Well do the small-business man 
understand that the success of farmers in this province are also the 
success of their particular businesses. 
 
(1500) 
 
I want to indicate to you, sir, that there is going to be an amendment that 
I'm going to put forward, if I could get the copy of that, please.  And I 
want to indicate to you, sir, that I'm going to read to you and through you 
to this Assembly, an amendment, basically because I do not know how much 
time I have left. 
 
So if you will indulge with me, I will read into the record an amendment.  
I would like to move: 
 

 That all the words after the words "that this Assembly" be deleted and the 
following substituted therefor: 

 
 commend the Government of Saskatchewan for strengthening and diversifying 

the Saskatchewan economy and stimulating an unprecedented growth of 600 
per cent in our manufacturing sector during times of drought and low 
commodity prices through programs and projects like the Buy Saskatchewan 
policy, the small business loans association program, SEDCO participating 
loans, community development bonds, the community economic development 
program, the small business tax assistance program, rural development 
corporations, the rural economic development program, the Agricultural 
Development Fund, rural individual line telephone service, rural 
underground power line service, rural natural gas distribution, the 
Northern Economic Development Fund, the business resource centres, the 
young entrepreneurs of Saskatchewan program, the small business investment 
incentives program, the Co-op upgrader in Regina, the Husky upgrader in 
Lloydminster, the fine paper mill in Prince Albert, the fertilizer plant 
at Belle Plaine, and for allowing public investment in enterprises like 



 

 

WESTBRIDGE Computer Corporation, Saskoil, SaskPower, SaskTel, and the 
Saskatchewan potash industry. 

 
 And noting the current economic pressures facing Saskatchewan agriculture, 

be it further resolved that all members of this Assembly put aside 
political differences and send a unified request to the Government of 
Canada that it fulfil its responsibility for international trade wars and 
national agricultural policy, particularly exchange rates, prices for 
grains and oil-seeds, interest rates, and grain freight transportation 
rates, and further that the Government of Canada immediately provide a 
$500 million cash pay-out to Saskatchewan farmers. 

 
An Hon. Member: -- Are you moving your speech? 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- Sir, the member from Moose Jaw has indicated that am I 
going to move my speech.  Well, sir, that was the intent of my speech, was 
to move such an amendment.  And, Mr. Speaker, it's with pride that I take 
this opportunity to stand in my place here and commend the government and 
move such an amendment.  I want to take this opportunity to thank the 
Assembly for allowing me to speak to this, and I will so move.  Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- I've taken a careful look at the amendment as proposed by 
the hon. member for Cut Knife-Lloydminster.  The motion itself under 
consideration is a motion which is dealing with a failed economic policy of 
the Saskatchewan government. 
 
The hon. member, in his amendment, at the end of his amendment has included 
the following: 
 

 And further, that the Government of Canada immediately provide a $500 
million cash pay-out to Saskatchewan farmers. 

 
That portion of the amendment is distinct from the motion under 
consideration.  That portion of the amendment is out of order.  And 
therefore as a result, if any portion of an amendment is out of order, the 
entire amendment is out of order.  Therefore I must rule the amendment out 
of order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Mr. Speaker, do I have any time left? 
 
The Speaker: -- No, there's no time for the hon. member. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure to 
enter this debate.  It's our view on this side of the Assembly that the 
Government of Saskatchewan, in their economic policies over the last eight 
years, have failed dismally.  We've had eight years, Mr. Speaker, of 
records that they've broken, that they said they were going to break in 
1982. 
 



 

 

I remember distinctly the Premier of this province, Grant Devine . . . I'm 
sorry, the Premier, the member from Estevan, stand up in this House and he 
talked about being number one.  He said, if you elect me premier of this 
province, we will make Saskatchewan number one. 
 
And you know what, Mr. Speaker?  He's made Saskatchewan number one in a 
number of areas, which will confirm the resolution that we put forward 
today that they failed in every economic indicator that has been monitored 
by the people of this province and by the Government of Canada. 
 
We are number one in poverty, Mr. Speaker.  The Conservative government 
opposite has made the people of this province the poorest province in all 
of the dominion.  He's made Saskatchewan, and this government, Mr. Speaker, 
has made Saskatchewan number one in unemployment. 
 
They've made Saskatchewan number one in terms of the fastest growing 
deficit in not only all of Canada, but all of North America.  They've made 
us number one, Mr. Speaker, in per capita debt.  We've gone from the lowest 
per capita debt in 1982 to the highest per capita debt in all of the 
country. 
 
They've made us number one in terms of personal bankruptcies.  We have the 
highest personal bankruptcies per capita of any province.  They've made us 
the highest business bankruptcy province on a per capita basis in all of 
the dominion; and they've made us the highest bankruptcy province when it 
comes to a per capita measurement of farmers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We've seen, Mr. Speaker, as a result of these economic programs of 
privatization and mismanagement and corruption and patronage being number 
one in chasing our people out of this province.  We are number one in 
out-migration; we've had references to the numbers already, Mr. Speaker.  
And all I want to do in respect to my remarks is to underline once again 
the seriousness of the impact of the out-migration of our people, in 
particular our young people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, part of being in government and spending money on education is 
to educate our young people to ensure that when they go through the 
education system in Saskatchewan, they have something to contribute with 
the skills and knowledge they've obtained through the education system.  
Taxpayers are spending hundreds of millions of dollars annually in this 
province, far less than they should, but still hundreds of millions of 
dollars, even after their cut-backs over the last eight years, on educating 
our young people, equipping them to meet the challenges of the future, 
equipping our young people to be productive citizens of Saskatchewan. 
 
And part of that education is not only to make them knowledgeable and 
skilful and able to meet the world head on, but it's also to encourage them 
and provide them skills to work in the province, stay in the province after 
their education has been completed, and contribute back to the society that 
helped pay for their education. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what we're seeing is, we're seeing an investment of 
hundreds of millions of dollars annually in our education system to train 



 

 

our young people, to educate our young people, yet we're not getting any 
return on these young people because most of them are being exported 
outside of Saskatchewan.  They're leaving this province because this 
government's economic policies have provided no hope for these young 
people; they've provided nothing in respect to the future of this province 
that these young people can look toward to try and contribute and remain a 
part of the Saskatchewan economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have seen as well this privatization folly, as we call it, 
of the government opposite, injure our  
 Dsmall-business community beyond recognition.  We have seen, Mr. Speaker, 
the small-business community be ignored by this province.  And I want to 
just confirm some of that by the number of businesses . . . statistics 
we've received with regard to the number of businesses that have been 
formed in this province over the last number of years. 
 
The highest growth rate in businesses during the PC government 
administration was 4.5 per cent, which was substantially less that 10 or 11 
per cent of the '70s, which was the average annual increase in the number 
of businesses in Saskatchewan. 
 
(1515) 
 
We have seen, Mr. Speaker, in 1979 over 1978, an increase of 13.2 per cent 
in business growth in Saskatchewan. That was the year of an NDP government. 
We have seen in 1980 over 1979, an increase of 11.2 per cent, and that was 
the year of an NDP government in Saskatchewan.  We see an increase, Mr. 
Speaker, of 1981 over 1980, of 10.7 per cent in that same area, in the 
growth of number of businesses. 
 
We can compare the records, Mr. Speaker. What we've seen in 1982, '83, '84, 
'85, '86, and '87 was a marginal growth in the number of businesses 
operating in this province not averaging 10 or 11 or 9 or 8 or 6 per cent 
every year, but averaging about 2.5 to 3 per cent.  But in 1988, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we've seen an alarming statistic when it comes to business growth.  
We didn't see an increase, we saw a decline for the first time, of about 
six-tenths of one per cent. 
 
In 1989 we saw a decline in businesses as well, Mr. Speaker.  So between 
1986 and 1989 the number of new business incorporations declined from 3,500 
to 2,400 businesses.  As well the number of corporate disappearances has 
shown a disturbing increase since 1981 and has remained over 2,000 per year 
and rose to over 3,000 in 1988. 
 
So on the one hand we've seen fewer businesses being incorporated and on 
the other we've seen a large, increasing number of corporations 
disappearing from this province for a number of reasons, including 
bankruptcies and just closing their doors and saying, this economic policy 
of this government is a complete failure. 
 
We've seen a commitment on the other hand, rather than to resolve some of 
the business concerns in this province and resolve some of the economic 
concerns and social concerns, we've seen them commit themselves and commit 



 

 

the taxpayers of Saskatchewan to hundreds of millions of dollars to 
megaprojects which they believe will do something for this province. 
 
We have seen in terms of their privatization initiatives the selling off of 
assets in the Crown corporation sector at rates that are unparalleled in 
any jurisdiction in the Commonwealth.  We have seen coal-mines be sold at 
half their value; we've seen Sask Minerals be sold off at a portion of 
their value. We've seen SaskCOMP -- we heard about in question period today 
some of the wonderful deals with respect to SaskCOMP, which is now 
WESTBRIDGE -- we've seen that company disappear. 
 
We've seen Saskatchewan Mining and Development Corporation disappear -- 
privatized.  It was an asset-rich, profitable corporation which contributed 
to the revenues of this province so that taxpayers would not have to pay 
the increasingly higher taxes that are necessary to run a government.  They 
were subsidized by this Crown corporation and it was merged with a dog 
called Eldorado.  It was a dog of a corporation: high in debt, losing 
money, a lot of future liabilities that this province will be accounted for 
in the next number of years to come.  So we've lost SMDC (Saskatchewan 
mining and development corporation). 
 
We've heard the Minister of Finance talk about Saskoil, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  
Saskoil was given away to the people outside of this province.  We've lost 
37 per cent of the equity of Saskoil, 37 per cent of the equity of Saskoil 
was given away for not one penny in return.  The government's equity has 
dropped from 60 per cent to 23 per cent for not one penny in return to the 
taxpayers and the treasury of this province. 
 
Any other merger or any other leveraged buy-out or take-over on the 
stock-market in Canada or in the United States will show clearly that a 
leveraged buy-out or a sale of equity in a corporation is sold at a 
premium.  And it's usually sold between 40 per cent and 100 per cent higher 
than what the thing was purchased for.  And here we've seen Saskoil not 
sell . . . or the Government of Saskatchewan not sell their 37 per cent or 
150 per cent or 200 per cent of the value of the shares, that they're smart 
business people.  They've sold them for zero, nothing, nothing in return.  
Take our money, take our assets. 
 
And what's going to happen is that all the people that now own the shares 
in Saskoil, if you take away the government's 23 per cent, 98 per cent of 
the shares are held by people outside of this province.  So if the 
corporation does pay any dividends, who's going to get the revenues?  Not 
the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, it'll be the people living outside this 
province -- 2 per cent of the shares of Saskoil when you exclude the 
government's 23 per cent are held by Saskatchewan people.  One of the 
purposes of creating Saskoil in the first place was to share in the 
revenues and the profits so that taxpayers wouldn't have to pay the extra 
tax burden. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the privatization of all these companies that I've 
referred, in particular that of Saskoil, has created an economic climate in 
this province that will be irrecoverable by any government unless we have a 
government that's honest and committed to integrity and committed to a plan 



 

 

of economic development, working with the people of this province, not 
against them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Along with the sell-off of these corporations and the 
give-away of these assets, we've seen the debt of the Crown corporation 
sector rise from 2.3 billion to $9 billion. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- The member's time has elapsed. 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I count it an 
honour again to rise in this Assembly to speak, and speak to this motion 
presented by the member from P.A.-Duck Lake.  When I look at the motion, 
Mr. Speaker, it just amazes me to a fair degree; as you look at the motion 
you see a very sense of negativism displayed by the motion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the past number of weeks, I've had the privilege and the 
pleasure of talking with individuals in my constituency and outside of my 
constituency who have brought up the question of the unemployment, the 
question of job creation, the question of the economy.  And I'm certain 
that it really doesn't matter which day you run into, whether it was 
yesterday or it's today or tomorrow, we will face the fact that the 
difficult economic times we are facing, especially in the area of 
agriculture, are certainly a detriment to the growth of this province. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, I also believe that if we continue to portray a 
negative attitude there will never be any economic growth.  Mr. Speaker, 
I've been dealing with a couple of small businesses in my area trying to 
give them a hand to establish the finances they would need to put their 
businesses in place.  When the individuals I've talked to, Mr. Speaker, 
talk about developing their business plan and developing the business, the 
continual argument they continually raised with me is, well you know, if we 
can ever get this business going, if we can put it in place and implement 
our business plan, get our manufacturing and processing rolling . . . Mr. 
Speaker, it's job creations in our local communities.  It's a positive 
thing for our economy.  And I can't agree with them more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe we do need to exercise some positive goals and 
positive modes and have a positive attitude.  But it seems to me that if we 
continually show a negative attitude, I'm not sure how we in the province 
can expect to progress or to even continue to achieve and see economic 
growth. 
 
However, I would have to ask the opposition members what they perceive the 
600 per cent increase to mean when we look at manufacturing in this 
province since the year 1982.  Mr. Speaker, there's been a 600 per cent 
increase in manufacturing in this province despite the fact that we have 
had some difficult times in the agricultural sector.  We have had a major 
increase in manufacturing and processing. 
 
I think we don't have to look that far, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to see where 
some of that manufacturing is taking place, some of that processing.  We 



 

 

can look just to the east side of Regina in the new upgrader that is 
presently operating and coming on stream into full production.  We look 
back to about four years ago when this project was implemented and 
suggested and that the negative attitudes that there were at the time, and 
the fact that people questioning whether this upgrader would ever get on 
its feet; whether we would ever get to the process of upgrading our heavy 
oil into a finer crude.  Today we can look at that as a positive investment 
for the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it is certainly one of the avenues of a positive 
investment that we've seen in this province of job creation.  At the time 
there was a major inflow of people coming to work on the project, looking 
for a job.The opposition today talk about out-migration, and I would 
venture to say that there isn't a time in history when there are periods of 
out-migration and in-migration.  Back in the '70s when the economy was 
supposedly booming, you can look at the record of the then government and 
there were times of significant out-migration in the 1970s.  There were 
times when people moved into the province. 
 
Through the period of the '80s, yes there's been out-migration.  But I 
think we have to be careful what we talk about when we talk about 
out-migration too.  There are people who leave the province simply because 
their job has been transferred to another location, and so they become a 
statistic in the out-migration figures.  There are people who have moved 
into the province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So I believe if we want to see our province grow, we must start to think on 
a positive venue.  We must begin to promote what we of Saskatchewan can do.  
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the member from Moose Jaw North talked about doing 
something positive.  I believe the plant at Belle Plaine is something 
positive.  It's going to be job creation, not only for the people of this 
province, but I would venture to argue with the member from Moose Jaw North 
that it possibly should have been a lot closer to my area of the province 
so that the young people in my area would have maybe a better chance of 
getting the job, but I will acknowledge the fact that he has the 
opportunity to have the jobs or create jobs in his area. 
 
An article in the Moose Jaw Times-Herald indicates that the member from 
Moose Jaw North and the member from Moose Jaw South have both indicated 
that they are not against economic expansion.  And certainly we need 
economic expansion, and the Belle Plaine plant, the Saferco plant, is 
economic expansion.  When you look at a thousand jobs on site and the 
construction of the plant, I don't think those are jobs we can sneeze at, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker.  And I just quote from the member from Moose Jaw North.  
He says: "I've said it before and I say it again, I welcome the opportunity 
for employment and economic activity for Moose Jaw." 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are looking at not only just the area of Moose 
Jaw, but all across the province.  And even in my constituency as I work, 
in particular right now, two small manufacturing plants that want to get 
off the ground.  And the attitude I find from the individuals who are 
trying to put their plan together is, it just seems to be a very difficult 
situation to work with it. 



 

 

 
And we talk about government helping people get on their feet.  I've sat in 
Crown corporations for the last couple of weeks and I can see why many 
people really are reluctant to put taxpayers' dollars on the line to help 
people get involved, because if they happen to fail then the government's 
responsible. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we must work together with individuals to help 
build up our province.  And I believe that if we continue to have the 
negative attitudes we have seen at many occasions, we will never develop 
our province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I'd also like to move an amendment to the motion 
presented by the member from P.A.-Duck Lake.  Moved: 
 

 That all words after the words "That this Assembly" be deleted and that 
the following be substituted therefor: 

 
 commend the Government of Saskatchewan for strengthening and diversifying 

the Saskatchewan economy and stimulating an unprecedented growth of 600 
per cent in our manufacturing sector during times of drought and low 
commodity prices, through programs and projects like the Buy Saskatchewan 
policy, the small business loans association program, SEDCO participating 
loans, Community Development Bonds, the community economic development 
program, the small business tax assistance program, rural development 
corporations, the rural economic development program, the Agriculture 
Development Fund, rural individual line telephone service, rural 
underground power line service, rural natural gas distribution, the 
Northern Economic Development Fund, business resource centres, the young 
entrepreneurs of Saskatchewan program, the small business investment 
incentives program, the Co-op upgrader in Regina, the Husky upgrader in 
Lloydminster, the fine paper mill in Prince Albert, the fertilizer plant 
at Belle Plaine, and for allowing public investment in enterprises like 
WESTBRIDGE Computer Corporation, Saskoil, SaskPower, SaskTel, and 
Saskatchewan potash industry. 

 
 And noting the current economic pressures facing Saskatchewan agriculture, 

be it further resolved that all members of this Assembly put aside (their) 
political differences and send a unified request to the Government of 
Canada that it fulfil its responsibility for international trade wars and 
national agricultural policy, particularly exchange rates, prices for 
grains and oil-seeds, interest rates, and grain freight transportation 
rates . . . 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I so move, seconded by the member from Shellbrook-Torch 
River. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Gardner: -- Before we deal with the member from Moosomin's amendment, I 
wonder if the Assembly would give me permission to introduce some students 



 

 

that have entered the gallery. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Gardner: -- To members on both sides of the House I'd like to introduce 
some students that are in visiting us today from the constituency of Pelly.  
These students I think number approximately 36, and I think they're from 
the grades 6, 8, and 12, if I'm not mistaken. 
 
These . . . or this school I should say, has a tradition of coming to visit 
the legislature on an annual basis, and they have some governmental history 
I think that stems back to that constituency, or to that part of the 
constituency.  Fort Livingstone is -- some of you students I'm sure will 
know as most of the members will know -- was in fact the first seat of 
government for the province.  And also the first woman MLA ever to be 
elected in this province comes from that constituency. 
 
And so we're glad to have the students from Fort Livingstone with us here 
today.  They're accompanied by teachers Gwen Shankowsky and Murray Bruce 
and chaperons Glenn Thompson and Derek Smith along with their bus driver 
Art Johnson.  I hope that they find what they're viewing here this 
afternoon both educational and entertaining, and I'll meet them in about 10 
minutes out in front for some pictures and take some questions they might 
have, and have a few refreshments.  So with that, I would ask members on 
both sides of the House if they would welcome these students from Fort 
Livingstone to the Assembly today, in our usual fashion. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 16 
 

Government's Economic Development Policies (continued) 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- With regard to the amendment made by the member from 
Moosomin, I'm informed by the Clerks that what he actually read into the 
record exceeded what was written in the amendment.  And I would like to ask 
the member if it was his intention to have that as a part of the motion or 
the amendment, I should say, or if the amendment was meant to be submitted 
as documented. 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, just in response to your question, yes, 
the amendment was meant as presented.  I had stroked out a number of lines 
on the document I had in front of me, and I had read just a couple more. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- That being the case, I find the amendment to the 
main motion in order.  Is the amendment agreed? 
 
Mr. Muller: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, I'm very glad to have this opportunity 
to second the amendment to this motion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the original motion presented by the members opposite is pure 



 

 

nonsense.  The members opposite give no consideration to difficult economic 
times and pressures facing the farming community.  The NDP give no 
consideration to the fact that farmers currently carry an estimated $5.25 
billion in debt, that farmers are . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, please.  Order, order.  The Clerk has 
informed me that the proper procedure at this point in time will be that we 
will have to read into the record, the content of the amendment as it was 
proposed and submitted by the member from Moosomin to eliminate any 
misunderstanding. 
 
Order.  Order, please.  At the time the misunderstanding occurred, it was 
the Deputy Speaker's position to clarify the situation and read the 
intended motion into the record, which I neglected to do at the time.  So 
with that in mind, and having the motion as it was intended now, I ask the 
Assembly if they'll take the amendment as submitted. 
 
I shall now read the amendment into the record.  Moved by the member from 
Moosomin, seconded by the member from Shellbrook-Torch River, moved: 
 

 That all the words after the words "That this Assembly" be deleted, and 
that the following be substituted therefor: 

 
 commend the Government of Saskatchewan for strengthening and diversifying 

the Saskatchewan economy and stimulating an unprecedented growth of 600 
per cent . . . 

 
Order please.  If we could have a little co-operation we'll get this done a 
little quicker. 
 

 an unprecedented growth of 600 per cent in our manufacturing sector during 
times of drought and low commodity prices, through programs and projects 
like the Buy Saskatchewan policy, the small business loans association 
program, SEDCO participating loans, Community Development Bonds, the  
community economic development program, the small business tax assistance 
program, community economic development programs, rural development 
corporations, the rural economic development program, Agriculture 
Development . . . 

 
Order please.  Would the member from Battlefords please bear with us for a 
few minutes so we could have this dispensed with . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . yes, you.  Thank you. 
 

 Agriculture Development Fund, rural individual line telephone service, 
rural underground power line service, rural natural gas distribution, the 
Northern Economic Development Fund, Business Resource Centres, the young 
entrepreneurs of Saskatchewan program, the small business investment 
incentives program . . . 

 
I'm going to remind the members of the opposition one more time and if they 
don't like the proceedings, maybe they'd rather leave the House.  Member 
from Saskatoon South also, please, if you would. 
 



 

 

 the Co-op upgrader in Regina, the Husky upgrader in Lloydminster, the fine 
paper mill in Prince Albert, the fertilizer plant at Belle Plaine, and for 
allowing public investment in enterprises like WESTBRIDGE Computer 
Corporation, Saskoil, SaskPower, SaskTel, and the Saskatchewan Potash 
industry. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Mr. Muller: -- Thank you.  Thank you again, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  The NDP 
give no consideration to the fact that farmers currently carry an estimated 
$5.25 billion in debt and that farmers are currently feeling the effects of 
three or four years of drought.  No, the members opposite have given no 
consideration to that or the fact that farmers are caught with heavy debt 
loads and have no production options to fall back on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all know when our farmers are hurting we all suffer.  Our 
towns, our communities, our businesses, we all feel the pinch.  And to make 
things worse, Saskatchewan has had to deal with high interest rates, 
inflated land prices, federal cut-backs, international subsidy wars, low 
oil and uranium prices, and increased debt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I won't deny that these pressures have taken their toll on 
this province.  I won't deny that farmers and business people are 
experiencing tough times, and I won't deny that some of the people have 
even left our province. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, in spite of the many challenges we've had to face in the 
past few years, in spite of the hardships we've had to endure, this 
province has had 600 per cent increase in manufacturing -- 600 per cent 
increase, Mr. Speaker, in some of the worst economic times since the Dirty 
Thirties.  If that doesn't prove that our economic development programs are 
working, I honestly don't know what will. 
 
This government has done more to ease the hardships.  We have given more 
support to economic development initiatives.  We have done more to protect 
Saskatchewan families than any other government before us.  Mr. Speaker, 
this government has always been a strong advocate of economic 
diversification for this province.  We have emphasized the importance of 
diversification for Saskatchewan because we know that through 
diversification this province will have a solid economic foundation. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  I would ask the members to allow the member 
from Shellbrook-Torch River to continue his speech. 
 
Mr. Muller: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  By diversifying Saskatchewan we'll 
be less vulnerable to cyclical nature of agriculture, and so we have built 
a paper mill in Prince Albert; we've built cable factory in Moose Jaw; 
we're processing our own oil and gas; we're producing our bacon; we're 
producing tractors, recreational vehicles, turbines, computers, and the 
list could go on and on, and soon, Mr. Speaker, we'll be producing our very 
own fertilizer in Belle Plaine. 
 
I'd just like to stop there for a second, you know, and just let's analyse 



 

 

this.  How many more people would have left Saskatchewan if the NDP would 
have been in power and none of this would have been done?  The two members 
from Prince Albert said that the paper mill would never be built.  They 
were opposed to the paper mill, and if anybody knows anything about the 
forest industry in northern Saskatchewan, they'll know when the NDP had it 
under PAPCO, 40 per cent of the timber, 40 per cent of the timber . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muller: -- I'm glad to hear the opposition clapping for me, because I 
wanted to tell them that 40 per cent of the timber that was going through 
that mill was saw timber.  Since Weyerhaeuser has taken over, they're 
running that mill on strictly residue; there is no saw timber going through 
that pulp mill today.  And we're making pulp and paper out of residual 
products out of the forest, and the saw timber has been made into 
two-by-fours and dimension lumber that's being exported . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . And the sheeter is doing quite fine; it will be up and 
running very soon. 
 
But that's . . . the members from Moose Jaw laugh because they hate to see 
diversification and jobs in Prince Albert and they certainly . . . but 
they're against Saferco in Regina, but they're in favour of Saferco when 
they're in Moose Jaw.  I mean they want the jobs in Moose Jaw but when 
they're in Prince Albert, they talk against the Belle Plaine fertilizer 
plant; when they're in Prince Albert, they talk in favour of the pulp mill.  
I mean, when they reverse themselves . . . in Moose Jaw they talk against 
the pulp and paper mill, but they talk in favour of Saferco.  So they don't 
know where they're at. 
 
So if the NDP were in power, the out-migration from Saskatchewan would be 
far more than what it is today because we've increased the manufacturing 
jobs by 600 per cent since we took office in 1982. 
 
I'm sure that the member from The Battlefords is opposed to the bacon plant 
when he's in Regina.  In fact I've heard him say and talk about the waste 
and the bacon plant, and we should have never went in with . . . 
 
(1545) 
 
An Hon. Member: -- A point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  What is the hon. member's point of order? 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Well my point of order is quite simply that the member's 
information is inaccurate -- what he says about the bacon plant is totally 
inaccurate. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The hon. member realizes it's not a point of 
order.  It's a dispute of information between two members. 
 
Mr. Muller: -- The member from The Battlefords is certainly opposed to the 
bacon plant when he's in Regina, but when he's in The Battlefords, of 
course, he's in favour of it.  That's the way they work their whole 



 

 

political game.  They flip-flop all over the place.  I see the members from 
Moose Jaw scratching their head because they don't know whether they're in 
favour or opposed.  I must say the member from Moose Jaw doesn't have a lot 
up there to scratch. 
 
Imagine, Mr. Speaker, for years Saskatchewan has shipped our resources to 
other provinces and other countries for processing, and then we've had to 
pay to get those resources back.  So I think in the economic development 
side, we're doing quite well, Mr. Speaker.  I certainly am disappointed in 
what's happening in the agricultural side, but some of that is beyond our 
control. 
 
Now we're processing our natural resources here in Saskatchewan and we're 
preserving for this province the benefits of those resources, benefits like 
economic growth and prosperity, community strength and stability, and 
perhaps most importantly, job opportunities. 
 
Even the members from Moose Jaw North and Moose Jaw South now agree that 
processing our resources at home, like making our fertilizer, may be a very 
good idea. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has also done a great deal to foster growth in 
our small-business community even during difficult times.  Through the Buy 
Saskatchewan agency, we are helping Saskatchewan business and firms secure 
contracts and joint venture opportunities.  We have implemented an average 
of 25 per cent reduction in business taxes through the business tax 
assistance program.  We have provided a wide range of financial services to 
new and existing businesses in the province through the Saskatchewan 
Economic Development Corporation, better known as SEDCO.  Mr. Speaker, the 
SEDCO loan programs have been very successful and have helped maintain many 
jobs.  They have resulted in many new jobs and new investment. 
 
This government is also giving our young people a helping hand.  Through 
the young entrepreneurs program offered through SEDCO, we have loaned over 
$2.5 million to the young entrepreneurs of this province and created some 
500 jobs.  I mean they can't even understand that across the way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have just gone over a few of the programs available in 
Saskatchewan's small-business sector because time prevents me from naming 
all of them.  But there are many, many more just like we have many other 
programs that provide protection for Saskatchewan family -- programs like 
the mortgage protection plan, rural underground power line service, and 
rural natural gas distribution, programs that provide quality education and 
health care services.  Mr. Speaker, we will be spending $888 million in 
education, and $1.5 billion on health care, just this year alone. 
 
And we have protected our farm families.  We installed a safety net for 
specific programs and policies targeted to agriculture.  We have paid 
millions to Saskatchewan farmers to help them through this crisis.  We 
created the agricultural credit corporation.  We introduced the guaranteed 
vendor mortgage program.  We established the farm security Act, and more 
recently we announced the spring seeding program. 
 



 

 

Just to go back a few sentences in my speech to the vendor mortgage 
program.  And I'm sure that there's nobody over there even understands it, 
but you know, that's the way I bought my farm.  I bought my farm by vendor 
mortgage, but it was no guarantee by them when they were government.  I 
just wrote out an agreement of sale from the person I purchased the land 
from, agreed on an interest rate, and I made my payments to them.  That's 
what a vendor mortgage program means.  They held the title until I finished 
paying for it.  It took me a number of years. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- They don't understand it.  You might as well explain it 
to them.  They just don't understand it. 
 
Mr. Muller: -- I know; they don't understand.  They don't understand vendor 
mortgage.  They can't see anybody trading property unless they involve 
three or four lawyers, another financial institution or a land bank, or 
something that is run by government, something that they have their fingers 
in.  They can't believe that two people can sit down, make a deal, and both 
people come out winners. 
 
The Speaker: -- Time is expired. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to oppose the amendment that was 
passed by the previous speaker, but also put support on our original 
motion, which said the following: 
 

 That this Assembly condemns the Government of Saskatchewan for the failed 
economic development policies of the past eight years which have resulted 
in a dramatic downturn in the provincial economy, increased youth 
unemployment, unprecedented out-migration and small-business bankruptcies. 

 
Mr. Speaker, when you look at the eight year history of Tory government 
rule, we definitely see some aspects that are indeed very positive for the 
big corporations and very dismal for the rest of the people of the 
province. 
 
When I look at that history, Mr. Speaker, first of all, we had an 
open-for-business strategy which then went on to a strategy of 
privatization and now we're at a different level of development.  We're at 
the stage of ConSask, which is Consensus Saskatchewan, and the only thing I 
hear so far from them, is, be positive. 
 
And when I look at the record of the government, of course one has to be 
very wary of the Tory statements, because they indeed were not very 
positive to the people of Saskatchewan as the records show.  When I look at 
the record in regards to the PC government as it relates to big 
corporations, of course there were extremely positive. 
 
When the other speaker talked about introducing an amendment in rural 
Saskatchewan, one has to therefore take into consideration also the 
tremendous and dismal record of this government in relation to the farm 
crisis out there. 



 

 

 
We have to just look at the 10,000 foreclosures in this province and tie it 
down not only as a problem with this government, but also to the Premier 
himself, who is the Minister of Agriculture, and who's also the Premier at 
the same time.  He can have an effect in regards to the agricultural credit 
corporation and also talk with the federal level in regards to the 
corporation at that level, and do something in regards to the farm crisis.  
But they definitely won't have a helping hand to the farmers of this 
province. 
 
So the foreclosures continue as he spends a lot of time meeting with the 
bankers and so on, but he will not meet positively with the farmers in 
relation to resolving the farm crisis problem. 
 
Now when you look at the record, I mentioned the 10,000 foreclosures in 
regards to the farms.  But when you look at the aspect of economic growth, 
one recognizes the dismal record there as well. 
 
From '78 to '86 for example, the . . . no, pardon me.  On the records from 
Saskatchewan consumer and corporate affairs, from '75 to '81 the growth 
rate was approximately 10 per cent.  Ever since this Tory government took 
over, Mr. Speaker, it's dropped down 3.2 per cent.  As a matter of fact, 
the highest growth rate for the Tories was 4.5 per cent, and when the NDP 
was in power, it was averaging about 10 to 11 per cent.  This past year 
prior to '89, the growth rate has dropped down to a minus, which we haven't 
seen in the modern history of Saskatchewan.  It's gone down to a minus .6 
per cent. 
 
The other thing that's important to look at in regards to the record is in 
regards to corporate disappearances.  How many new corporations are formed 
and how many corporations disappear?  And when you look at that rate, I 
looked at the record for 1978, and I found out during the NDP year, 10 
years prior to '88.  I saw the records on new corporations were 3,346 new 
corporations and the amount that disappeared that year was 1,627.  And 
during that time the average was fairly similar throughout. 
 
Then I looked at the 1988 record for the Tories and the new corporations 
were 2,624 and the amount that disappeared was 3,063.  In other words, in 
1978 the number of corporations, the number of new corporations superseded 
the numbers who disappeared by 1,719. 
 
When the Tories came into power 10 years later, we have a minus figure in 
regards to the corporations disappearing.  Now there's a greater number of 
corporations disappearing than new corporations forming.  And the figure 
there is it's a minus 1,439.  In other words, close to 1,500 corporations 
disappeared when the Tories were in rule in 1988.  I might add, Mr. 
Speaker, that it's probably a lot higher since 1989 and '90 period. 
 
When we look at the business bankruptcies of course between 1974 to 1981, 
the number of bankruptcies were 713 in total.  When I looked at a 
comparative period 1982 to 1989, there was 2,654 bankruptcies.  
Approximately 2,000 more bankruptcies in an eight-year period during Tory 
rule than during an NDP rule. 



 

 

 
So when the Tories talk about this great economic development in this 
province, they are not dealing with the truth.  The fact is that it's been 
a disastrous policy.  I might add that when I talk with small business 
people in my home area and they're looking to try and get benefits from 
mining, they're being bypassed from this government.  All they're dealing 
with is the big corporations and trying to get Cameco and the privatization 
of Cameco to go forth, but they will not deal with the small businesses of 
northern Saskatchewan in helping them get mining contracts and for the 
townspeople from La Ronge to be able to get the services as an offshoot 
from that mining development.  They're being bypassed in that regard. 
 
So when I also listen to the farm policy of this government, they give 
Cargill Grain, a chemical farm company, $370 million; and when we look at 
different companies, one from Saskatchewan wanting a share on part of the 
chemical businesses, they said no to the farm communities of Saskatchewan 
and yes to the big corporation of Cargill -- $370 million worth. 
 
And when you look at the fact of salaries even, Chuck Childers gets paid 
$740,000.  A lot of the communities would be pleased with $740,000 in 
northern Saskatchewan, where this government bypassed them in regards to a 
lot of the jobs. 
 
When we look at the question of jobs, we have to look at the record again, 
Mr. Speaker.  In 1971 to 1981, we had 9,100 new jobs a year.  During Tory 
rule, from '81 to '88, it was 3,714.  In other words, we lost over 5,000 
jobs per year -- over 5,000 jobs per year were lost during Tory rule.  No 
wonder a lot of our youth are moving out of the province.  No wonder a lot 
of our youth, the majority of the 50,000 people who left this province 
since 1985 can't find jobs here.  We're losing 5,000 of them. 
 
(1600) 
 
A lot of parents come to me; they say, look, we spend a lot of money 
getting our children to school, our youth to school, but they can't stay in 
this province because the Tory government chases them out of this province.  
So the economic policy has been . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Time has elapsed. 
 
Mr. McLaren: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's a pleasure to enter this 
debate on the out-migration of people from Saskatchewan.  Let's look at the 
record, Mr. Speaker, and go back to 1970 and 1971 when the NDP got elected 
in Saskatchewan.  Let's look at what the population was at that time. 
 
In 1970 there was 941,000 people in the province of Saskatchewan.  The NDP 
come in 1971 and the population of Saskatchewan drops down to 926,000 
people -- 15,000 people in one year.  In 1972 it dropped again down to 
914,000 -- 12,000 people gone from the province of Saskatchewan.  In 1973 
it dropped to 904,000 people -- another drop of 10,000 of them in one year.  
And then in 1974, it drops below 900,000 -- another 5,000.  So let's see -- 
15, 12, 27, 37 -- 42,000 people in four years with the NDP government. 
 



 

 

Certainly it starts to rise after that, but we're looking at the 1970s when 
the economic conditions in Saskatchewan were a little different than what 
we've been facing for the last eight years. 
 
By 1981 it got to 968,000.  But in 1982 a Tory government came into 
Saskatchewan and it climbed 9,000 people in one year, to 977,000.  Then in 
1983 it goes to 989 until we reached over a million people by 1988.  So the 
population of Saskatchewan was climbing.  And certainly it has gone down a 
little bit because of the economic conditions in our province. 
 
And I can remember, Mr. Speaker, when we were trying to hire people in the 
1970s.  You could walk down the streets of Calgary and Edmonton and every 
second person on the streets would be from Saskatchewan.  In the 1970s when 
it was really good, I had to hire people from England to come and work in 
our plant because there was none left in Saskatchewan.  And that's the 
truth. 
 
Diversification and all this sort of thing that we've been bringing into 
the province in the last eight years has increased manufacturing in this 
province by 600 per cent -- a 600 per cent increase.  Certainly the 
agricultural side has suffered, and we admit that. 
 
I had the opportunity to officially participate in the opening of Harvest 
Meats in Yorkton last week . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Time has elapsed.  Order, order. 
 

PRIVATE BILLS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
Bill No. 01 -- An Act to amend An Act to incorporate Mennonite Brethren 
Church of Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Swan: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 01, An Act to amend An Act 
to incorporate Mennonite Brethren Church of Saskatchewan be now read a 
second time and referred to the Standing Committee on Private Members' 
Bills. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the Standing 
Committee on Private Members' Bills. 
 
Bill No. 02 -- An Act to amend An Act to incorporate the Millar Memorial 
Bible Institute 
 
Mr. Gleim: -- I move that Bill No. 02, An Act to amend An Act to 
incorporate the Millar Memorial Bible Institute be now read the second time 
and referred to the Standing Committee on Private Members' Bills. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the Standing 
Committee on Private Members' Bills. 
 
Bill No. 03 -- An Act to amend An Act to incorporate Grey Sisters of the 



 

 

Immaculate Conception of Pembroke 
 
Mr. Johnson: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 03, An Act to amend An 
Act to incorporate Grey Sisters of the Immaculate Conception of Pembroke be 
now read the second time and referred to the Standing Committee on Private 
Members' Bills. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the Standing 
Committee on Private Members' Bills. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Resolution No. 5 -- Alleviating the Farm Debt Crisis 
 
Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it gives me pleasure 
to rise in the House today and make a motion.  At the end of my remarks, 
Mr. Speaker, I will be moving a resolution: 
 

 That this Assembly, noting the overall hurt resulting from domestic 
interest rates, foreign subsidies, and weather related incidents, demand 
immediate comprehensive action from the banks and other primary lending 
institutions to alleviate the extremely pressing financial situation faced 
by agricultural communities in Saskatchewan, call upon lending 
institutions to rewrite farm debt to reflect realistic land values. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I am honoured today to move this motion, seconded by the hon. 
member from Shaunavon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the motion gets right to the source of agriculture's problem 
right here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  Low prices caused by subsidy 
wars, droughts, high interest rates, and debt have all combined to threaten 
what was once a very enjoyable, profitable way of life in this province. 
 
Faced with declining returns for their efforts, young farmers are losing 
land, and even established farmers with little or no debt are finding 
themselves in trouble paying their debts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the international grain subsidy wars are in my mind a major 
factor in this dilemma.  Saskatchewan farmers are caught in a cross-fire 
between the United States and Europe.  The end result is that they are not 
receiving enough money for their grain to cover the cost of production. 
 
And of course, as we all know, there have been droughts to add to the 
hardships our farmers have had to endure.  Not only have farmers received 
very low prices for their grain, but they have had precious little to sell, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And add to this the one thing that an economy in recession does not need, 
Mr. Speaker, and that's high interest rates.  Not only must farmers face 
drought and low grain prices, but they must also shoulder the burden of 
high interest rates on their debt, a burden imposed on them by a federal 
government that is more concerned about an overheated economy in Toronto 
than they are about the rest of the country, Mr. Speaker. 



 

 

 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan farmers are not alone in this predicament.  High 
interest rates set with only Toronto in mind are causing hardships for 
farmers, business people, fishermen, and wage earners throughout Canada, 
Mr. Speaker.  It is not fair nor is it economically prudent to ignore 
almost the entire country when setting interest rates.  There is no great 
inflation crisis here, Mr. Speaker.  We are in a recession, and we cannot 
survive such high interest rates for very much longer.  The burden of debt 
that farmers are carrying are heavy enough already without high interest 
rates. 
 
Which brings me to the problem of farm debt, Mr. Speaker.  Now I could 
stand here today and point fingers and go through a long list of reasons 
for farm debt, but that's not really the issue any more.  What's important 
now is that we work together and find ways to effectively deal with the 
problem.  Some have suggested debt moratoriums as the best way to deal with 
the problem, and I cannot agree with that at all, Mr. Speaker.  On the 
surface it appears to be a wonderful idea, but on closer examination it is 
easy to see the impact such a move would have on the lending institutions, 
particularly on the small ones all through the province. 
 
Saskatchewan credit unions do enormous amount of business with farmers, and 
it is our understanding that they would be devastated, Mr. Speaker.  And 
relations between farmers and their banks, which are already strained in 
many cases, would be destroyed.  In the future, farmers would find it 
difficult if not impossible to obtain financing from Saskatchewan banks, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think about how you would react as a bank manager to a government who 
imposed a moratorium on farm debt.  I am sure you would agree that you 
would be very reluctant to loan money to farmers in the future. So I think 
it's fairly clear that a debt moratorium will do more harm than good for 
both farmers and banks in the long run, even for the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But it is also clear that the situation in rural Saskatchewan is so 
critical that it is time financial institutions began working with farm 
groups and governments to find some solutions to the farm financing 
problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, banks require a healthy economy in order to prosper the same 
as everyone else.  There will be little agricultural business for the banks 
to benefit from if most farmers go broke or bankrupt.  The Premier has 
already started this process by meeting with the country's top banking 
executives in Ottawa.  We must continue to work with all the lending 
institutions and to find some way to lessen the burden of debt Saskatchewan 
farmers are carrying. 
 
As stated in the motion before us today, one way to start that is by 
rewriting farm mortgages to reflect realistic land prices.  Mr. Speaker, 
due to the agricultural recession, land values have fallen significantly 
over the past seven or eight years.  There's a lot of land out there today 
which can be had for about $40,000 a quarter, and in some cases even less.  
Much of that same land was bought for $60,000 or more. 



 

 

 
So we have farmers in Saskatchewan who owe $60,000 or more on land that is 
worth only $40,000 on today's market.  We must do something about this 
discrepancy and rewriting mortgage values would be a good start. 
 
Mr. Speaker, agriculture is still the number one industry in this province.  
When agriculture suffers, the entire province does as well.  Just recently 
all members of this Assembly showed their support for agriculture by voting 
in favour of an emergency agriculture motion.  The federal government's 
response to that motion was far less than favourable.  Ottawa has an 
obligation to protect Saskatchewan and all Canadian farmers from the 
effects of the international grain subsidy wars, Mr. Speaker.  So we will 
continue to lobby the federal government for support it owes to our farm 
families.  And we will continue to lobby for lower interest rates. 
 
Rural Saskatchewan is in a recession and anyone with any economic smarts 
whatever will tell you that the worst thing for an economy in recession is 
high interest rates.  Saskatchewan cannot afford to pay for Toronto's 
booming economy any longer.  I do not know what the solution is to 
Toronto's problems, Mr. Speaker, but I do know that we can no longer afford 
to suffer so that they can prosper and grow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we must also work with the lending institutions to work out 
long-term solutions to the farm debt.  Rewriting mortgage values is a good 
start, but by no means the entire answer.  Farmers and farm groups, banks 
and government must sit down at the same table to work out solutions which 
all parties can live with. 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the solution in agriculture . . . the situation in 
agriculture, Mr. Speaker, is critical.  The motion before us today outlines 
one possible measure that will lessen the difficulties that Saskatchewan 
farm families face.  I call on all members of this House, including the 
hon. members opposite, to do their part in this struggle, Mr. Speaker, by 
voting in favour of this motion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with your permission I would like to move the following 
motion, seconded by the hon. member from Shaunavon: 
 

 That this Assembly, noting the overall hurt resulting from domestic 
interest rates, foreign subsidies and weather related incidents, demand 
immediate comprehensive action from the banks and other primary lending 
institutions to alleviate the extremely pressing financial situation faced 
by agricultural communities in Saskatchewan, call upon lending 
institutions to rewrite farm debt to reflect realistic land values. 

 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gleim: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Let me say that I consider it is an 
honour to speak to this very motion that is put forward by the member from 



 

 

Wilkie, a motion which symbolizes the commitment of this government to the 
farm families of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This province is facing some very difficult times.  We are facing the 
effects of high interest rates, inflation, drought, inflated land prices, 
federal cut-backs, international subsidy wars, and increasing debt, Mr. 
Speaker.  We are facing the harsh reality that many Saskatchewan farmers 
are caught with heavy debt loads, with no production options to fall back 
onto. 
 
Our government recognizes this, Mr. Speaker, and we have installed a safety 
net of specific programs and policies targeted to agriculture.  We have 
paid millions of dollars to Saskatchewan farmers, Mr. Speaker, to help them 
through these tough times to help them try and remedy the situation. 
 
In 1984, Mr. Speaker, we created the Agricultural Credit Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, and since that time, this program has saved farm families 
over $327 million in interest rates alone.  Since its creation, Mr. 
Speaker, we have expanded the ACS (Agricultural Credit Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) mandate so that people, more people can apply so that more 
farms are protected. 
 
We have also made it easier for young farmers to get started by providing 
financing for the home quarter for the first year's start-up costs so that 
young farmers will have land to buy. 
 
We have introduced the guaranteed vendor mortgage program, Mr. Speaker.  
And as I remember, the member from Shellbrook was questioned on the part of 
the vendor from the member from Battleford.  Well I'd like to explain the 
vendor part, Mr. Speaker, to the member from Battleford.  It's a different 
type of vendor that we go into.  This is a mortgage program for farming, 
Mr. Speaker.  I just want you to get that clear. 
 
Through this program retiring farmers can receive government mortgages 
guaranteed up to $2 million.  Retiring farmers no longer need to place 
their retirement savings at risk when selling their land, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government has given increased protection to farm 
homesteads.  Under the farm security Act all mortgages entered into after 
June 24, 1988, are fully protected from foreclosure for as long as the 
homestead remains a homestead.  And mortgages entered into before that date 
are protected for three years. 
 
This legislature also requires financial institutions to wait 150 days 
before foreclosure proceedings can begin, Mr. Speaker.  This gives the 
farmer time to take his case to the Farm Land Security Board for review. 
 
To help farmers, Mr. Speaker, better manage their debt problems we created 
the counselling and assistance for farmers program.  This program helps 
farm families to consolidate loans and provide management and financial 
consultation to help manage the farm through difficult financial 
circumstances, Mr. Speaker.  I'm sure they don't always help everybody but 
it is saving many, many farmers. 



 

 

 
More recently this government, along with the representative of 
Saskatchewan key farming organizations argued in Geneva for changes to the 
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade to eliminate unfair advantages for 
small grain producing countries. 
 
And just a few days ago we introduced the spring seeding program, Mr. 
Speaker, that program which provides $525 million to farmers in the form of 
an operating loan.  Mr. Speaker, this is an operating loan.  This program 
will equip our farmers with short-term loans of ten and three-quarter per 
cent interest rate.  I know you can argue across the way that this program 
does not help, but ten  
 Dand three-quarters is much better than 17 and 18 per cent, and much 
better than 20 and 22 per cent, which I remember very distinctly. 
 
It will entitle them to borrow twelve and one-half dollars per acre, per 
cultivated acre for seed, for fertilizer, for fuel, for chemicals, and for 
the repairs of whatever they need for spring seeding.  This program will 
give farmers the money to go . . . that they so desperately need to get 
their crop into the ground.  This program is targeted, Mr. Speaker, to get 
the seed into the ground, Mr. Speaker, which is very important; you've got 
to put the seed in the ground before you can harvest.  And you have to take 
the first step before you take the second one, Mr. Speaker.  I know the 
people across the way don't agree with the program, but I know the farmers 
out there are welcoming it. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this year's budget contains an additional $400 million in 
spending and tax assistance to our farm sector, Mr. Speaker.  That is 
almost one million dollars for 1991, 1990 and '91.  Money that is dedicated 
to protecting farm families and to building the farm industry so that it 
may compete successfully in the world market, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These programs and initiatives have worked to help solve the farm debt 
problem, but that is not enough.  Saskatchewan farmers currently carry an 
estimate $5.25 million of debt, Mr. Speaker.  And Saskatchewan farmers are 
currently feeling the effect of a 3 and a 4-year drought, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan farmers are in a very bad crisis.  These are 
tough times like you said, Mr. Speaker, these are tough times.  And tough 
times demand tough-minded action.  It requires joint action -- action on 
the part of the federal government, the provincial government, and the part 
of the banks and lending institutions.  As a province and as a country, we 
cannot allow our farming industry to disappear.  And if Saskatchewan 
agriculture is going to continue to exist, then immediate action must be 
taken. 
 
I know there are some people out there that say we should impose a 
moratorium on farm foreclosures.  But, Mr. Speaker, a moratorium would do 
more harm than it would do good.  Many farm families do business with 
Saskatchewan credit unions, and since these institutions are small, a 
moratorium would simply devastate the credit unions.  Mr. Speaker, 
moratoriums are not the answer to today's farm crisis, so we must look 
elsewhere for solutions. 



 

 

 
I know that people across the way, and the member that is talking from 
Quill Lakes, agrees with moratoriums.  He wants to have moratoriums.  I'd 
like to just say a few things about moratoriums.  What would a moratorium 
do to the farming industry out there?  Well I'll tell you right now, the 
place where I get my money from, where they lend me money, I'll tell you, 
it would do them under.  And they have told me this. 
 
And they have questioned me on what the consensus here in the legislature 
is on moratorium.  Well I told them.  I told them on this side of the 
House, we know what the consensus is over here.  We don't want moratoriums. 
But the consensus across the way is a little different, is a little 
different, Mr. Speaker.  They agree with moratoriums.  They agree with the 
moratoriums. 
 
The member over there talked about tough times, farm programs.  The 1970s 
-- any of you people over there remember 1970s, farming?  I know there's 
not too many people over that way who were farming in 1970.  I was farming 
in 1970, Mr. Speaker. I know what the times were like in 1970.  They were 
good times.  They were good times. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gleim: -- Thank you very much.  They were good times in agriculture, 
Mr. Speaker, and that shows you, Mr. Speaker, that when times are good in 
agriculture, the times are good in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know what happened in 1970?  The member from Yorkton just 
read off a sheet of paper here what happened in the first four years of 
1970.  People left this province, Mr. Speaker, in the good times they left.  
By the end of 1970, those same people started coming back.  And that's the 
way this province is, they go and they come. 
 
But I just want to repeat again about the good times in 1970.  In the good 
times when the interest rates were high in the late 1970s, what did this 
government do with their extra cash that they were supposed to have had 
with their balanced budgets?  The government across the way at that time, 
they didn't help the farmers in high interest rates, Mr. Speaker.  Even 
though the price of wheat was high, the commodities or the production was 
still up there, they didn't come out and say, we'll protect you against 
high interest rates. 
 
No, sir, Mr. Speaker, they didn't come out and say, we're going to protect 
you against inflated land.  No, they didn't.  They went out and bid against 
us, Mr. Speaker.  They bid against us in the land, Mr. Speaker.  That was 
the land bank program which nobody has forgot out there yet, Mr. Speaker.  
I'm talking to the people that are farmers, I'm sure some of you, the rest 
of you don't remember.  But I remember it very plainly, Mr. Speaker, and 
I'm telling you the truth, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- That would be the first Tory. 
 
Mr. Gleim: -- I like telling the truth.  That's the only way I know how to 



 

 

talk. 
 
They talk about, I heard some of the people over there talk about 
diversification.  Mr. Speaker, in the good times that was the time to 
diversify, to build.  What did they build?  They didn't build anything.  
All they did was buy, Mr. Speaker.  I don't call that diversifying, Mr. 
Speaker.  When you go out and buy something that exists already, you don't 
create any new jobs, Mr. Speaker.  The jobs were there, Mr. Speaker.  Why 
didn't you go out and spend your $800 million on your potash mines and your 
oil companies and all this and diversify, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I heard the member from Regina North talk about Saskoil 
shares, that most of the shares were owned outside the province.  I thought 
in Canada we were all Canadians.  I didn't think we were a foreigner just 
because you didn't live in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  What is wrong with 
Manitoba and Alberta or Ontario owning a piece of Saskatchewan or whatever, 
or us owning a piece of Ontario? 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is so terribly wrong with that?  I think we're all living 
here in Canada.  I think just because my dad come over here, immigrated 
over here, we're not foreigners no more, Mr. Speaker, we're all Canadians.  
And I think we should share that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gleim: -- Mr. Speaker, the population, like the member from Yorkton 
said, has never been as high as it had been in Tory times.  Just remember 
that.  Tory times have had the highest population in Saskatchewan. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Tory times are tough times. 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Gleim: -- Right, you're darned right.  And Tory times, we don't control 
the weatherman, Mr. Speaker.  And it just proves, Mr. Speaker, when the 
farmer hasn't got a dollar, the rest of the people in Saskatchewan feel it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the farmer gets a dollar, he spends it.  And, Mr. 
Speaker, when the commodity prices go down and the production prices go up, 
any of you people realize what that means?  That means the farmer has less 
money when your production is up but the cost of your commodity is down. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Well you couldn't tell by the way you spend. 
 
Mr. Gleim: -- I'm talking about spending money, the farmer spends his 
money.  He spends it wisely, Mr. Speaker.  Is that what the member from 
Battleford was saying, the farmer don't spend his money wisely?  The farmer 
does spend his money wisely.  When the farmer spends his money, he 
distributes it.  Everybody gets a share of it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I just thought I'd bring that up to remind those people across the way 
about the good '70s managing.  Who could manage?  Anybody could manage in 
the '70s.  Anybody could manage in the '70s, in good times, good times, Mr. 



 

 

Speaker.  What did you do to balance your budgets?  You didn't pay off any 
debts.  You took the profits from SaskPower; you took the profits from them 
and put it in to balance the budget, Mr. Speaker.  Well I'll tell you what.  
I don't classify myself as an accountant, Mr. Speaker, but I tell you what.  
I at least have a business that I do my own books, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those are just some of the things I thought I would like to 
mention.  And these tough times, Mr. Speaker . . . I want to get back.  The 
member from Battleford told me to get back to my script; I'm going to go 
back to my script for a little bit here, and I'll tell you what.  These 
tough times require joint action, Mr. Speaker, action on the part of the 
federal government, provincial government, and part of the banks and 
lending institutes, just like I said before, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I'm going to go back on that.  Mr. Speaker, many farmers today have land.  
I don't know if anybody over across the way knows what land is worth.  If 
they do, I wish they would tell me.  And that land no longer is worth the 
amount that is owing on it.  A lot of that land out there, there's more 
owing on that land than what it's worth today, Mr. Speaker.  The simple 
fact is if they were forced to sell that land today, they wouldn't even get 
enough to pay off the mortgage on that land. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there's where our problem lies, Mr. Speaker.  That's our 
problem, Mr. Speaker, that the assets out there are declining.  Mr. 
Speaker, banks and lending institutions must take this land value 
discrepancy into consideration when rewriting farm mortgages.  That is very 
important, Mr. Speaker.  Our Premier has met with Canada's top banking 
officials to convince them that they must do their part to solve farm debt 
crisis in Saskatchewan.  We are asking the federal government to instruct 
farm credit . . . to instruct Farm Credit Corporation to rewrite mortgages 
at realistic land prices, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are also demanding that the Government of Canada apply its 
constitutional authority over the banks and lending institutions to solve 
the farm cash flow and debt crisis.  The federal government policy of high 
interest rates only aggravates the farm debt problem, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I'd like to just say a few things on interest rates, Mr. Speaker.  When you 
start paying 14 and 15 and 16 per cent, Mr. Speaker, that return is not 
there on the family farm today, if you want to call it family farm.  I 
would like to call it a business.  That return is not there today, Mr. 
Speaker, with the low prices of wheat, low prices of barley, and low prices 
of the commodity that we are growing. 
 
Federal interest rate policies and its effect on the province of 
Saskatchewan is a federal government responsibility, Mr. Speaker.  And we 
are asking that Ottawa live up to that responsibility.  Mr. Speaker, this 
government is committed to working with the Government of Canada and the 
banks to address Saskatchewan farm crisis. 
 
We are expanding the mandate of ACS even more to extend the debt 
refinancing, Mr. Speaker.  We are implementing the loan guarantees for 
refinancing of existing debt.  We are expanding the guaranteed vendor 



 

 

mortgage program, Mr. Speaker, to include land held by lenders and 
currently leased to farmers.  And we are considering legislation changes to 
reduce the farm debt. 
 
We are also doing our part, Mr. Speaker, but the federal government and the 
lending institutions must also fulfil their responsibilities.  They must 
fulfil their responsibilities to this province and to the farmers of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Our farmers not only need short-term help but they need also long-term 
solutions.  Saskatchewan farmers need a resolution to the international 
grain subsidy wars.  They need a resolution to the farm debt crisis.  They 
want fair access to markets.  They want a chance to compete fairly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are solutions that not only federal government and the 
banks can implement.  And the Saskatchewan government, I say, Mr. Speaker, 
the Saskatchewan government cannot do it alone.  Saskatchewan cannot take 
on the treasury of United States, the European Economic Community all by 
itself, Mr. Speaker.  The Saskatchewan treasury cannot take on the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we cannot do this alone.  We have to work in a joint effort.  
We have to be talking to these countries, Mr. Speaker.  We have to be 
talking to them to work out something that is different from the way it is 
today. 
 
We need the help of the banks, Mr. Speaker, to protect our farmers from 
things that are beyond their control.  Together maybe we can solve this 
farm debt program, maybe not on a short time, but on a long-term solution, 
with long-term solutions, Mr. Speaker.  Together we will protect 
Saskatchewan farmers.  Maybe we can protect them from the high debt loan 
that they are facing today, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, together we will 
continue to consult with Saskatchewan farmers to develop long-term 
solutions for farm financing. 
 
Together we will stand by the farmers of this province.  Agriculture is 
what Saskatchewan is all about and this government is dedicated to 
protecting farm families and to building the farm industry so that it may 
compete successfully in the world market. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, I call on the opposition to support this motion.  
I would like to say to them that this is not a time for partisan politics, 
Mr. Speaker.  It is not a time for self-serving . . . (inaudible) . . . 
Rather, it is a time to work together to find long-term solutions to the 
farm debt crisis in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, to bring greater long-term 
stability to this province's farming communities.  It is time that the 
opposition stop being part of the problem and become part of the solution, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is time to take the politics out of farming, Mr. Speaker.  
I know myself the farmers out there, not only farmers, Mr. Speaker, small 
business that are connecting with agriculture, which out in rural 
Saskatchewan everybody is, I call, farm family oriented.  They are saying, 
politics is no place . . . there's no place for the politics in 



 

 

Saskatchewan in this type of crisis, with the crisis we are into right now, 
Mr. Speaker.  They say, get together, let's work together. 
 
They are appreciating what the government is doing.  They know there is no 
solution out there to help everybody, but let's try and help the ones that 
need the help.  Mr. Speaker, I so support the motion that the member from 
Wilkie presented.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to take part in the 
debate on the motion put forward by the member from Wilkie this afternoon.  
And I appreciate the member from Shaunavon outlining the vendor mortgage 
program.  I hope that all Saskatchewan people who listened to his speech 
this afternoon are as clear on the details of that program as I am after 
the briefing that he's offered to me this afternoon through the remarks on 
this motion. 
 
He also talked, Mr. Speaker, about the 1970s being good times in 
Saskatchewan for farmers.  Well they were good times.  They were good times 
because there was a government in place that was compassionate and ran a 
sound economy in the province of Saskatchewan so that farms in Saskatchewan 
could prosper. 
 
Because now during the 1980s that we've just passed through, Mr. Speaker, 
farms in Saskatchewan have been devastated mainly by policies or lack of 
policies from the government under the leadership of the Minister of 
Agriculture and the Premier of this province.  They say about all the good 
things they've done for farmers in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would ask though, why then have we got the highest rate of foreclosures 
of any time in the history of the province -- farm families being driven 
off the land, going into transition programs to move to other lines of 
work.  They support equity financing, having a system of going back almost 
to the serf system where the people who should be the good custodians of 
the land are removed from the land, corporate entities are allowed to come 
in, and you end up hiring those that should be the actual farmers to do the 
work and someone else reaps the benefits from it. 
 
And I think it's ludicrous for the member from Shaunavon to point out that 
the opposition under the leadership of the member for Riversdale would be 
playing politics on farming and agriculture in Saskatchewan, because that's 
just not so.  If any politics is being played at all it's being played by 
the Premier and the federal government where they can't decide whose 
responsibility it is to put up some money for spring seeding when farmers 
are struggling.  Farmers are having difficult times in terms of finding 
that money to get the crop into the ground so that we can have a bountiful 
harvest in the fall. 
 
The federal government says, well we're putting up half a billion dollars 
but it has to be matched by the provinces.  The province here under the 
Minister of Agriculture and the Premier says we haven't got the money, we 
can't put it up.  While they bicker back and forth and play politics with 



 

 

their federal cousins in Ottawa, Mr. Speaker, farmers are being driven off 
the land in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So there's where the politics is being played, Mr. Speaker.  The politics 
isn't being played in this legislature, certainly not by the official 
opposition.  The politics is being played, the very cruel politics is being 
played by government members who stand up in this Assembly and give some 
hypocritical rhetoric about problems being problems that are caused by 
someone else. 
 
They will blame the New Democrats for problems, they'll blame the farmers 
for problems.  Oh yes, they clap when they say they blame farmers for their 
own problems.  They clap at something like that, Mr. Speaker, but that is 
not the case.  That's just another example of how this uncaring, lack of 
compassion government is treating farmers in the province.  But again I 
repeat, they'll blame the NDP, they blame farmers, they blame the federal 
government, they blame the world. 
 
In the Speech from the Throne, there is reference made to the world 
declaring economic war on the province of Saskatchewan.  What a foolish, 
foolish statement to be put forward.  No one's declaring economic war on 
the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  They blame, blame, blame, 
blame, while at the same time not taking any responsibility for the sad 
state of affairs in which Saskatchewan's economy finds itself, and a big 
part of that problem is that farmers in Saskatchewan are not in very good 
economic times right now, and of course we know that has a very serious 
ripple effect across our whole economy. 
 
I would like to spend a little while talking about Ron and Nancy Farmer, 
Mr. Speaker.  Ron and Nancy Farmer are not untypical of many farm families 
in the province of Saskatchewan.  Ron and Nancy both grew up in a small 
family farm in north-western Saskatchewan.  Nancy's parents lived on a 
half-section farm and Ron's parents lived on a half-section farm.  They had 
fairly large families and both Ron's family and Nancy's family worked hard 
all their lives. 
 
In fact, Ron and Nancy's parents were first generation farmers on that 
particular homestead.  Their parents would have been second generation 
farmers in terms of being in Canada and in particular in Saskatchewan.  And 
Ron and Nancy went to their little country school and they were a vital 
part of the community.  And finally they got married and they started out 
on their own.  They couldn't expect much help from either their parents 
because in fact they had a difficult enough time supporting their own 
families. 
 
And so in the '60s, they got set up on their own farm and as they had grown 
up to expect the strong work ethic through their parents, they continued on 
with the very strong work ethic and toiled and put their labours into a 
farm and raised a family, and then coming into the 1970s they were starting 
to do very well.  Their children were growing up; they were in a fairly 
buoyant economy.  The agricultural outlook was good and they were actually 
being able to reap some of the benefits of the labours of their parents and 
their grandparents and in this case, themselves. 



 

 

 
And so as the farm was being paid out they were able to acquire a few more 
luxuries than they had known at home.  They were able to have some running 
water on the farm.  They were able to update their machinery.  They were 
able to have a vehicle that they didn't have to worry about breaking down 
on them on a regular basis.  And they were fairly happy during the 1970s 
with their lot in life. 
 
(1645) 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, by the end of the 1970s they had basically paid off 
their farming operation and their farming operation had grown to a 
considerable size.  Because of the conditions, many people were encouraged 
by the federal government of the day to go into more and more production 
because you couldn't have an economic unit like their parents had had on a 
half section of land.  You just could not make a good sound living off that 
so they expanded their farming operation through the 1970s, and they had 
acquired quite a substantial holding of land and a full complement of 
machinery to be able to seed and to harvest the crops that they were 
growing.  And like their families before them, they had some mixed farming 
involved in it.  They had some chickens and they had some cattle. 
 
But then in the 1980s, Mr. Speaker, some of their children were getting to 
the age that they wanted to get into their own farming operation.  And Ron 
and Nancy Farmer thought rather than farming on their own unit, they wanted 
to give their children some degree of independence where the children would 
go out and have their own farm, and so Ron and Nancy Farmer ended up 
mortgaging some of their own land to set up one of their children in a 
farming operation in the 1980s. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, even more and more production could not keep them 
ahead of the lending institutions and the devastating policies of the 
federal Tory government and the provincial Tory government of the 1980s.  
And finally, they not only had their children's farm, the fourth generation 
farmers in Saskatchewan, but their own farm in a good deal of financial 
difficulty. 
 
Now towards the end of the 1980s, Mr. Speaker, Ron and Nancy Farmer 
actually ended up being grandparents.  And the sad state of affairs was 
that the grandchild became sick and the grandchild ended up at the 
University Hospital in Saskatoon.  And the grandparents and the parents, of 
course, were devastated by this situation -- happy to have the medical 
coverage but nevertheless, a very heart-wrenching experience to have a 
young child, your grandchild, being ill and in the hospital. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I would want to say that what happened was that when the 
grandparents, Ron and Nancy Farmer, went into Saskatoon to visit the 
grandchild who is sick in the hospital, the lending institution moved in 
and seized their equipment.  They seized their equipment, and part of that 
debt that was foreclosed on, Mr. Speaker, was through the Agricultural 
Credit Corporation of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now when this happened, Mr. Speaker, we know that what comes about is that 



 

 

it drives the family out of farming.  So not only Ron and Nancy Farmer but 
also the children of Ron and Nancy Farmer are no longer involved in farming 
in the province of Saskatchewan because they have been driven off the land.  
Not by a major five chartered bank; they've been driven off the land by the 
Agricultural Credit Corporation of the province of Saskatchewan and the 
Farm Credit Corporation, which is the federal lending institution. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are supposed to be the farmers' banks -- those 
institutions that are supposed to have the vested and the best interests of 
farmers to make sure that farmers can get financing when financing is 
needed.  But no, they're unsympathetic.  Agriculture credit corporation 
holds a great deal of debt in the province of Saskatchewan; an equal share, 
Mr. Speaker, is held by the Farm Credit Corporation.  And those people 
sitting opposite on the government benches, Mr. Speaker, are the biggest 
foreclosers on farmers of anybody in the history of the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, they can talk all they want about helping farmers through 
various programs, but any program that's been brought in since 1982 has 
been collected back either in changes to crop insurance, higher premiums, 
or increased freight rates when they helped do away with the Crow rate that 
protected freight rates for western Canadian producers.  They collect more 
money back by higher interest rates through the Farm Credit Corporation.  
And the list goes on and on and on whereby anything that's been given to 
farmers in the 1980s under this government has been taken back by their 
federal cousins in Ottawa. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we see that Premier Devine is at the western premiers' . 
. . the Premier of Saskatchewan . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  I'd like to remind you that we cannot use hon. 
members' names in the House. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Well I'm sorry, Mr. Speaker, I got a little carried away.  
I wouldn't want to use the name of that individual in any event, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But the Premier of the province is right now at a western premiers' 
meeting, and he's going off tomorrow to Ottawa to again meet with the 
federal cousins to try and get some money for Saskatchewan farmers in their 
time of need.  And that time of need is now, Mr. Speaker -- not yesterday 
or not tomorrow.  The time is now, that they've been promised money.  There 
was a commitment in the Speech from the Throne that the commitment was 
there.  There obviously is no commitment, or else the federal government on 
the other hand is backing away from this government. And I think it's 
obvious that the party's over because even the losers are leaving the 
sinking ship now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the federal government does not want to put up their share of 
the money into agriculture in Saskatchewan.  In fact they take from 
agriculture to support other areas of Canada, and they've written off this 
particular government as a hopeless cause, a cause that does not represent 
Saskatchewan farming families, a cause that does not represent Saskatchewan 



 

 

people, a cause that Saskatchewan people will drive out of office at the 
very first opportunity when the Premier and his colleagues muster up the 
courage to call a general election in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, they do have money though; this government seems to have 
money.  In spite of very high deficits, Mr. Speaker, deficits to the extent 
that we now pay in excess of $490 million a year in interest on the debt, 
they still seem to be finding money for some sectors. 
 
And the member from Shaunavon indicated the spring seeding program where 
there is a half a billion dollars there.  Well I suspect that not many 
Saskatchewan farmers will take advantage of that program because it means 
so little that it's just throwing insult into the face of Saskatchewan 
farmers when you say you're helping with the spring seeding program. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- They're sure taking it fast. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Well one member says they're taking it fast; another member 
says $40 million.  Let's break that down.  The federal government says it's 
$20 million, because you're expected to match the money that the federal 
government puts up, and they say your contribution in that program is $20 
million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'd also point out that to the average Saskatchewan farm, it 
means less than $400, because you're subsidizing an interest rate down to 
ten and three-quarters per cent, but it has to paid back in January 1990, 
Mr. Speaker.  The farmers in Saskatchewan are not asking for more debt, Mr. 
Speaker.  This government has already driven farmers into far too much debt 
with the agricultural production loan that they put out a few years ago 
that many farmers are still struggling to try and repay. 
 
What farmers want is not more debt, Mr. Speaker.  Farmers in Saskatchewan 
want stability in agriculture.  They want money back for their toils and 
their labours in production of food, and not more debt from an uncaring, 
unorganized, unplanned government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- As I was saying, Mr. Speaker, they do seem to have money in 
some situations.  They could let GigaText and Guy Montpetit have $5.5 
million, Mr. Speaker.  It appears now that they can let Leonard McCurdey 
who heads up WESTBRIDGE Computer, they can let him have $20.5 million from 
companies he sold to WESTBRIDGE, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They can let Cargill, Mr. Speaker, have $369 million; that's where they can 
give money to, Mr. Speaker.  They can give Chuck Childers a salary of 
$748,000 a year, Mr. Speaker. But they can't give the farmers any more than 
$300 in loan subsidies and more debt, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they have money for some people.  One of the members is 
saying, tell the truth.  The member said he always tells the truth.  I tell 
the truth too, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan people know that we tell the 



 

 

truth, and the proof is in the pudding when your smiling faces go to the 
polls in the next provincial election, Mr. Speaker. That's when the truth 
will be told by the people of the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Speaker, some of our other members would like to 
participate in this debate, but before I take my seat and add any other 
comments to the record on this hypocritical motion by the member from 
Wilkie, where they take no responsibility themselves but try and lay blame 
everywhere else where they think that they can lay blame, except taking 
responsibility themselves, Mr. Speaker, I would move, seconded by the hon. 
member from Quill Lakes, that the motion be amended by adding  
 Dthe following: 
 

 And further, that this Assembly calls on the Government of Saskatchewan to 
direct the Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan to rewrite farm 
debt to reflect realistic land values. 

 
I so move, Mr. Speaker, seconded by the hon. member from Quill Lakes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I read with interest and I listen 
to some of the members on the government side, and I said to myself can you 
believe the motion that they have presented to this House?  How can the 
government, the Tory government here and the Tory government in Ottawa have 
any credibility left? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- They don't have. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- None.  And that's what the people of Saskatchewan are saying 
-- no credibility whatsoever. 
 
Just imagine them standing up and saying they're concerned in respect to 
interest rates.   When the Liberals were in, interest rates were high.  Now 
we have a Tory government in the province and a Tory government in Ottawa, 
and we have the highest interest rates since the 1981 period and not a 
thing being done. 
 
And they stand up here, worse still, worse still.  What does the Farm 
Credit Corporation, a federal, Tory-run Crown bank of farmers, what do they 
do?  They increase the interest rate to hard-pressed farmers four times 
within six weeks and not even a squeak out of the members opposite. 
 
What kind of credibility do they have, coming in here and saying that this 
Assembly, noting the overall hurt resulting from domestic interest rates, 
foreign subsidies, weather related incidents, demand immediate 
comprehensive action from the banks.  What a joke.  And here we have a 
federal Tory government sticking it to the farmers in farm credit loan 
rates, interest rates going up 2 per cent in six weeks.  You have the 
federal Tory government increasing the freight rate; will cost more this 
year.  And not a squeak out of the Tories provincially. 



 

 

 
This is hypocrisy at its height.  We have a Tory government here 
provincially, we have a Tory government in Ottawa, and the people of 
Saskatchewan are taking this motion and their representations in that vein.  
They ask the lending institutions to take the lead.  And who is foreclosing 
the most on farmers across this nation?  Farm Credit Corporation, run by 
federal Tories, and ACS, run by the Premier of this province. 
 
And they have the audacity to stand up and say to lending institutions, 
take the lead.  And they lead the race in foreclosures.  Can you possibly 
feature the hypocrisy and the indecency of a party, Tories provincially and 
Tories federally. 
 
You know, they stand up and they say things; they're doing so much for the 
farmers.  And then if you look at the record of the situation of the 
crisis, the truth of the matter is that the Tories federally have no plan 
for agriculture, the Tories provincially have no plan for agriculture, and 
as a consequence we have a crisis in Saskatchewan. 
 
Do you realize, Mr. Speaker, that in The Western Producer the other day 
they outlined the crisis in agriculture compared to the year before.  And 
they painted in different colours as to the degree of the severity of the 
problem.  And in that article they indicated that there will be 10,000 
farmers in Saskatchewan are facing foreclosure or have quitclaim on land 
that they owned and the banks now own it.  Over a million acres are now 
held by financial institutions, by banks.  And when the government owned it 
on a voluntary program, they were crop sharers.  And when I asked the 
minister of rural affairs, have you got rid of those crop sharers under the 
land bank, and he said no, we've got 2,700 of them holding a million acres.  
That's what he said. 
 
The truth of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, that this government has no 
credibility; the federal government has no credibility.  What they have 
done over the period of time is to play politics with agriculture -- play 
politics with agriculture when the crisis exists across this province. 
 
(1700) 
 
And what is happening today?  We got the federal government with $225 
million, laying on the table, available to hard-pressed farmers across 
Saskatchewan.  And you know what?  The Premier of this province is not 
quite ready to call an election because he's down in the polls.  And so 
what is he doing now?  He's decided to shadow-box with the federal 
government and pretend that he's having to fight to get this money. 
 
And you know what they're waiting for?  They're playing with the lives of 
the people, the Saskatchewan farmers.  And you know, they know exactly the 
deal that's going to come out, but they're holding back that money which 
the federal government is prepared to put up, which they're prepared to put 
up, because it isn't opportune. 
 
What they want to do is to go in and be able to make that payment if they 
can buy an election.  And today they can't buy an election.  And there's no 



 

 

credibility and the people of Saskatchewan and the farmers know that 
they're playing politics with their lives and the future of agriculture.  
And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, never have I seen so much hypocrisy, so much 
lack of credibility as the members opposite; that they would have the nerve 
to stand before this legislature and ask the banks and the credit unions 
and the financial institutions to take the lead when they themselves are 
going the opposite way, increasing the farm credit loan rate, increasing 
the freight rate, cutting back on the initial grain prices.  Every 
individual step that has been taken by the federal government has cost 
millions of dollars to the provincial coffers . . . farmers.  That's what 
has happened. 
 
And these boys across the way, they said, put us in, elect Tories.  A Tory 
provincial government and a Tory federal government, why we will be able to 
deal and we'll solve the problem.  In 1985 the Premier, the great Minister 
of Agriculture said, well in 1985 he said we need a long-term agricultural 
program.  And where is it, is the question to ask.  Where is the long-term 
agricultural? 
 
Well I'll tell you when it's going to come.  It will be instituted when we 
don't need it, because unless we get a comprehensive agricultural program 
immediately, at least 10,000 farmers are going to be driven off the land 
this year.  No doubt about it.  And can you feature a member opposite 
getting up and saying, look what we have done.  We are putting up $525 
million for a seed loan program. 
 
And in 1986, '85-86, they put in a production loan.  Remember that?  And 
they said, everybody's eligible.  No question about it.  And I'll tell you 
the problem in 1985 and '86 was not the magnitude of the problem that it is 
today. 
 
And what do they do?  They got 10,000 to 20,000 farmers on their knees.  
And you know what they do?  They say, well now we have to protect the 
taxpayers' money.  They didn't protect the taxpayers' money in 1985-86 when 
they were buying the election.  And that's what they're doing now.  They're 
saying to those people that are in the most severe stress under debt, you 
can't sow your crop because either you're being foreclosed, you have a 
demand on your note, bankruptcy or arrears in any payments to governments. 
 
They're saying to 10,000 farmers across this province, you are not going to 
qualify, you are not going to seed, you are finished, farmer.  You're 
finished farming.  What a program.  Now you should be proud of whoever 
thought that one up.  They have no direction; they have no intention of a 
comprehensive long-term program.  It's obvious. 
 
And I'll tell you, no amount of hypocrisy from the member from Shaunavon, 
who won't be around here next time I can assure you, because he won't even 
fight for the rural hospitals in his own constituency.  He hides in the 
back of the hall and runs when the people try to talk to him. 
 
And that's what Tories are doing across this province.  They're hiding and 
running because they can't face the people who are out there.  Sitting at 
15 per cent in the polls, I know it must be discouraging to go back and try 



 

 

to justify your existence.  I'll tell you, wrong priorities, as the member 
from Battleford said.  You got bucks and megabucks for megaprojects, but 
you don't have the dollars to save agriculture and small business and main 
street in rural Saskatchewan.  That's the problem and I'll tell you the 
people of Saskatchewan are on to you guys and no amount of your hypocrisy 
and soft selling will save you this time around. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a tremendous lot more to say on this subject matter, 
and I'll tell you it's one of the most serious one, too.  And the member 
from Cut Knife-Lloyd, he thinks he can laugh at it.  But it's no laughing 
matter when tens of thousands of farmers, their livelihood, their hard work 
. . . 
 
Do you know the human suffering that's out there?  And you stand in this 
House and give to Cargill $370 million and you give $20 million to 60,000 
farmers -- credibility.  Boy you should be proud of that.  That is a great 
record -- 20 million to 60,000 farmers and they disqualify 10,000 of them.  
That's the best they could come forward.  That's the contribution.  That's 
putting the treasury behind agriculture. 
 
I'll tell you the treasury is in the back pocket of Chuck Childers.  That's 
who's got into the treasury.  Cargill got into the treasury of this 
province.  Pocklington got into the treasury, not the farmers, not the 
small-business men, not the people that built Saskatchewan. 
 
And I say this is hypocrisy -- asking the banks and the financial 
institutions to formulate a policy when at the same time their Farm Credit 
Corporation run by the federal Tories are assaulting the farmers, 
foreclosing on them, increasing interest rates, and the same thing is 
happening under the direction of the Premier.  This is intolerable.  The 
people of Saskatchewan will not tolerate it.  And I say, Mr. Speaker, as I 
was going to say before, I have a lot more to say on this.  I beg leave to 
adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I think after listening to that 
dissertation, I think it's abundantly clear that agriculture deserves 
better than that.  Agriculture deserves more than that and, Mr. Speaker, 
I'd like to move that we now adjourn this House. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:08 p.m. 
 


