





























































Hansard: March 29, 1990


 

 

March 29/90 
EVENING SITTING 

 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 
TABLING OF ESTIMATES AND SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 

 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- I have a message from Her Honour the Lieutenant 
Governor, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: -- The message from Her Honour reads as follows: 
 

 The Lieutenant Governor transmits estimates of certain sums required for 
the service of the province for the 12 months ending March 31, 1991, and 
supplementary estimates of certain sums required for the service of the 
province for the 12 months ending March 31, 1990, and recommends the same 
to the Legislative Assembly.  (Signed) Sylvia O. Fedoruk, Lieutenant 
Governor, province of Saskatchewan. 

 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

 That Her Honour's message, the estimates and supplementary estimates be 
referred to the Committee of Finance. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, I am proud to stand before the people of 
Saskatchewan to present this government's first budget of the 1990s. 
 
The past year has to be regarded as a turning point in world history.  The 
tearing down of the Berlin Wall, the student movement in China, and the 
massive political change in the Soviet Union reflect one of the greatest 
political reform movements ever witnessed. 
 
At the same time dramatic events are taking place in the world's economy.  
More and more the global economy is based on trade and information and 
technology rather than just the production of goods.  The horizons of local 
markets are broadening into a world market-place.  Clearly in this changing 
world a new economy is before us. 
 
However, while people around the world struggle for political freedom, the 
impacts of drought, high interest rates, and international grain trade wars 
threaten our prosperity.  It is a time when there are more questions than 
answers.  It is a time of uncertainty and harsh reality, but also a time of 
opportunity.  It is a time of hope but also a time of distress.  Simply 
put, we are at a crossroads. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are indeed difficult economic times for our farmers, our 



 

 

families, and our communities.  But in difficult times Saskatchewan people 
have a tradition of working together.  We set aside our differences and 
persevere.  We overcome the difficulties and build a better future by 
finding common cause with one another.  We find the best ideas, the ideas 
that work, and we implement them. 
 
In preparing this budget, we have renewed our commitment to working 
together.  We asked the people to be part of the process.  We asked for 
their ideas, comments, and suggestions and they responded.  At town hall 
meetings, in caf p√©s, at grain elevators, and on shop floors, people told 
us how we should deal with change and how we should build for the future.  
I thank all of those who came to our meetings and shared their views with 
us.  I see some of them sitting here tonight, Mr. Speaker, and I say to you 
and to all who participated, thank you; your input helped shape this 
budget. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, what did these people tell us?  They told us to 
eliminate waste and inefficiency in government.  They told us that 
education and health and agriculture must be protected.  They said they did 
not want tax increases.  People told us that governments must learn to live 
within their means.  People said that they were concerned about the future 
of their communities.  Most importantly, people told us that we must work 
together. 
 
I stressed that the pre-budget consultations were only the beginning for 
building a new consensus.  Under the leadership of our Premier, this 
government will work with the people of Saskatchewan to enhance our 
Saskatchewan way of life, to stabilize our communities, to build and 
diversify our economy, and to manage our financial resources. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget addresses the concerns of the people.  They focus 
on three areas: first, financial management; second, taxes; and third, the 
spending priorities that we should pursue. 
 
On the issue of financial management the messages from the people are loud 
and clear.  Time and time again at the pre-budget public meetings I heard 
about waste and mismanagement in government.  People raised concerns about 
the salaries of ministers, about severance payments, about travel expenses, 
and about the size of government.  Have we responded, Mr. Speaker?  I say 
yes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have undertaken significant measures to control internal 
government spending.  We have rolled back the salaries of cabinet ministers 
and legislative secretaries.  We have eliminated severance payments for 
government MLAs going to government jobs.  We have restricted government 
and Crown corporation travel and advertising.  We have amalgamated several 
government departments to provide for more efficient operation, and we have 
frozen the size of the civil service -- management measures, Mr. Speaker, 
that will add up to $60 million in savings to the taxpayers over the next 
two years. 
 
The belt tightening had to start with us -- it did.  It was an important 
and necessary first step but it was not enough.  Larger spending programs 



 

 

needed to be reassessed if we were to find taxpayers' savings in blocks of 
30 or 40 or $50 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well to that end, Mr. Speaker, what else did we hear at these meetings?  At 
every meeting I heard phrases like: forget about grants and rebates; get 
rid of the election gimmicks and get rid of the paper-pushing programs; get 
out of these programs and get your priorities straight; that our spending 
priorities should be education, health, and agriculture. 
 
So earlier this month, Mr. Speaker, our Premier reaffirmed this 
government's commitment to these, the priorities of the people, and to meet 
this commitment it was necessary to terminate the home program, phase out 
the fuel tax rebate program, and modify the mortgage protection plan -- 
further spending reductions of nearly $200 million over the next two years, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Tough decisions, but necessary ones, Mr. Speaker.  Unfortunately, they too 
were not enough.  They were not enough to offset the high interest rate 
policy of the federal government, the off-loading of the federal budget, 
and the worsening crisis in agriculture.  More had to be done.  And so, Mr. 
Speaker, tonight I am announcing further measures to control and restrain 
government spending.  These include: terminating the fossil fuel and energy 
research program; eliminating Regina rail relocation assistance; 
eliminating the grant for the Saskatoon Centennial Auditorium; reducing 
highway capital construction by $12 million to the $109 million level; 
restricting new government construction projects; eliminating the 
Saskatchewan stock savings plan; eliminating the municipal transit 
assistance program; and we will be reducing grants for international aid. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, in this budget, funding for 21 government departments 
and agencies is frozen or reduced; and of these, eight will have their 
budgets cut by more than 10 per cent.  We also expect our partners -- the 
municipalities, the universities, the school boards, and the hospitals -- 
to join with us to achieve real savings as we have done.  Combined, all 
these measures taken to date by this government will provide over $300 
million in savings to the Saskatchewan taxpayers over the next two years, 
Mr. Speaker.  Let me repeat that, Mr. Speaker.  These measures, yes, these 
cuts, will provide over $300 million in savings to the Saskatchewan 
taxpayer. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, those who are looking to this budget tonight for new 
programs and new initiatives and new money, they will be disappointed.  The 
times dictate otherwise, Mr. Speaker.  Rather, we have acted responsibly.  
We have strengthened our commitment to education, health care, and 
agriculture -- the priorities of the people.  This government has listened 
to the people; this government has responded. 
 
Turning now to education, Mr. Speaker.  At public meetings more people 
spoke about education than any other issue.  They may not have talked about 
the service economy, the knowledge economy, the technological era, or the 
information age.  But people did talk about how the world is changing.  
They instinctively know that in the face of global change, education is the 
key to our children's future and the future of our communities and of our 



 

 

province, Mr. Speaker.  More than ever our children need a re-emphasis on 
those things we have always considered important in a well-educated person, 
a solid grounding in oral and written communication skills; a firm 
foundation in history, geography, mathematics and science; and the new 
requirements of computer and technological literacy.  As well, we must 
foster the creative and analytical dimensions of our children's keen young 
minds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is what the core curriculum agenda is all all about, an 
agenda for a changing world, and that is why this budget will provide 
almost $10 million for the funding of the core curriculum initiatives in 
1990-91. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- When people think about our education system, their 
thoughts are often of the 200,000 children in our schools across the 
province or the students at our universities and technical institutes.  
There are others, however, who do not immediately come to mind, those who, 
through no fault of their own, can neither read nor write. 
 
It is important to reach out to these people.  That is why, together with 
IBM, we introduced the Principles of the Alphabet Literacy System or PALS, 
as it is commonly known.  PALS, a talking computer system, is teaching 
people to read and write.  Individuals advancing two grade levels in 20 
weeks is not uncommon.  PALS is exceeding our expectation in improving 
literacy levels, and I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that this program is a fine 
example of business working with its partners in education to provide 
opportunities for the less fortunate, a particularly notable initiative in 
1990, the International Literacy Year.  Mr. Speaker, in this day and age 
when we hear so much about rights and freedoms, one that is absolutely 
fundamental is the right to read, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- There is another group that is deserving of extra 
help.  These are the children who go to school hungry, an issue that was 
poignantly articulated by a young fellow here at the Regina pre-budget 
meeting.  Hungry children do not achieve their full learning potential.  
Church groups, schools, parents, volunteers, and governments recognize that 
the problem of hunger is a shared responsibility.  The Minister of the 
Family, together in partnership with these groups, will continue to seek 
long-term solutions to eliminate child hunger.  Tonight I am announcing 
that this budget provides 740,000 to help meet the immediate needs of these 
children, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, I would now like to turn to the subject 
of our regional colleges.  When cabinet ministers or MLAs visit communities 
across the province, whether it be Swift Current or Nipawin or North 
Battleford or Weyburn, they are told that young people must have access to 
high quality, post-secondary education right in their own communities.  



 

 

Regional colleges, fibre optic networks, satellite technology, and other 
distance education initiatives, Mr. Speaker, are providing these 
opportunities. 
 
And so that more and more university and technical institute courses can be 
offered in more and more places across rural Saskatchewan to more and more 
of our young people, I am pleased to announce tonight additional funding of 
$2.6 million for our regional colleges, bringing their total funding to 
$8.1 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(1915) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- As well, our commitment to assist students in 
obtaining access to post-secondary education, whether it be to our 
universities, the Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology, 
or our regional colleges, student aid funding in this budget will nearly 
double to $47 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- High quality education, Mr. Speaker, is important, 
but it requires a substantial amount of money.  That is why this budget 
provides increases of 5.6 million for the Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology, bringing their total budget allocation to 56.9 
million.  That is why this budget provides for an increase of $6 million 
for our universities, bringing their total budget to $162.3 million.  And 
that is why this budget provides for an increase of ten and a half million 
to school boards, bringing their total budget to 360.3 million, Mr. 
Speaker.  In total we are providing a 5.6 per cent increase for education, 
a budget which now totals $888 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, this is a significant amount of money.  
This $888 million education budget represents almost one-fifth of our total 
spending.  This $888 million, Mr. Speaker, represents an expenditure of 
over $2,600 for every elementary and secondary school student.  And it 
represents, Mr. Speaker, $8,500 for every university student in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I would like to emphasize that over three-quarters of our education budget 
goes to school boards, universities, and technical institutes -- our 
education partners.  Our education budget is a large expenditure, but more 
importantly, a necessary investment.  However this investment raises a 
number of questions. 
 
Who should pay and how much?  Do we have the right governing system for the 
1990s and beyond?  Will the standards of our education system allow our 
children to meet the challenges of international competitions?  These are 
not new questions but questions that have eluded the consensus in the past.  
There is a need to examine these and other issues so that we can continue 



 

 

to have an education system that meets our changing requirements and 
expectations. 
 
Well, what did we hear from the people on health, Mr. Speaker?  The people 
of Saskatchewan have told us that health care must remain a top priority.  
This government has maintained and enhanced Saskatchewan's reputation as a 
world leader in the delivery of health care services. 
 
Despite significant cutbacks in federal government transfer payments to the 
province, tonight I am announcing a funding increase of almost 10 per cent 
for health, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- This $136 million increase will bring the budget for 
health care spending to $1.5 billion. 
 
And Mr. Speaker, I could describe in detail how health dollars will be 
spent this year.  I could describe how these dollars are providing the 
latest in health care technologies, how these dollars are being used to 
increase personal awareness about the need for healthy lifestyles, and how 
the increases in funding of 9 and a half per cent for home care, 8.7 per 
cent for nursing homes, and 6 per cent for hospitals will be used. 
 
But rather, Mr. Speaker, I believe it is important to put this one and a 
half billion dollars in perspective for the taxpayers of Saskatchewan.  For 
example, nearly one out of every three dollars the government spends on 
behalf of you, the taxpayer, goes to the health budget.  It means that if 
we took all the money you pay in income tax and sales tax, major revenue 
sources, that still wouldn't cover the health budget.  We'd still be short 
by $80 million.  Or to put it another way, the increase alone, the $136 
million increase in health spending, is the equivalent of raising the sales 
tax by two percentage points, from 7 to 9 per cent, or the equivalent of 
raising the personal income tax that we all pay by 15 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government, on behalf of you, the taxpayer, will spend on 
health over $172,000 per hour -- $4.1 million a day, every day of the year, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now we are all proud of our health care system; we want it protected and 
the health of our people improved.  We must however, though, Mr. Speaker, 
ask fundamental questions about health care.  Can we as taxpayers and users 
of the system sustain double digit growth in health care spending year 
after year?  How can we make health care services more responsive and more 
sensitive to local needs and priorities?  What do we do to ensure the 
appropriate supply, distribution, and training of health care 
professionals?  And finally, Mr. Speaker, how do we deal with the many 
ethical and technological issues in health care? 
 
To answer these and other questions, this government established the 
Saskatchewan Commission on Directions in Health Care -- the Murray 
commission.  They have canvassed the people of Saskatchewan on these and 
other issues.  We look forward to their recommendations.  And importantly, 



 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan look forward to having an 
opportunity to comment on the commission's recommendations.  I urge 
everyone to get involved. We must build a province-wide consensus so that 
our health care system remains the finest in the world, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I now want to spend a few minutes on agriculture, Mr. Speaker.  I spoke 
earlier about global political and economic change, and if ever there was a 
group that knows the meaning of change, it has to be Saskatchewan's 
farmers.  Today's farmers can tell you about European farm policy, the 
impact of the recent United States budget, and the high interest rate 
policy of the Bank of Canada just as readily as they can tell you about a 
new variety of lentils, the side-banding of fertilizer, or embryo 
transfers.  Farmers also know that the international agri-food arena has 
erupted into an economic war, financed by the treasuries of some of the 
world's largest and wealthiest nations.  It hurts not only our farmers but 
also our farm service sector and all the jobs that it represents in all the 
communities across this province, Mr. Speaker.  Our entire province is 
caught in the global cross-fire. 
 
Foreign agri-food policies -- that's quite a mouthful, Mr. Speaker, foreign 
agri-food policies.  And I'm going to digress from my budget text for a 
moment, Mr. Speaker, and explain exactly what I am talking about here.  And 
I'll use a couple of examples to do so.  For example, Japan buys grain on 
the world markets, grain from Saskatchewan farmers, for something in the 
order of 4 to $5 a bushel.  It then sells that bushel of grain to its own 
flour mills in Japan for $25 a bushel, taking the profits to subsidize its 
farmers to grow their wheat at $50 a bushel.  You can see who's making the 
money on our wheat, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Or consider this example: Saudi Arabia takes the salt out of the sea water 
to irrigate and grow wheat on the sand dunes at a final cost of nearly $100 
a bushel.  Now, Mr. Speaker, I say to you, you pay our farmers $100 a 
bushel and they'll grow wheat on the steps of this legislature.  These 
bizarre, market-distorting, foreign agri-food policies, combined with the 
albatross of farm debt, continued high interest rates and repeated 
droughts, have had a devastating effect on Saskatchewan farmers, Mr. 
Speaker.  It is no wonder we have reached a crisis situation. 
 
Realized net farm income is forecast to be negative $9 million for 1990.  
This is the lowest level since the 1930s.  Everyone has tried hard to avoid 
this crisis.  Farmers have tightened and tightened their belts.  
Governments have responded with drought and deficiency payments.  Crop 
insurance and grain stabilization have provided major pay-outs as these 
safety nets responded to low prices and low production.  Given a choice, do 
farmers want more deficiency payments and more ad hoc programs and more 
subsidies?  I say they do not, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Our farmers ask only for fair access to markets.  They are only asking for 
a price for their bushel of wheat, determined not by the size of an 
nation's treasury but by the quality of the product.  They ask only for a 
chance to compete fairly, Mr. Speaker, that is all they ask. 
 
The crisis in agriculture has placed an unbearable economic and emotional 



 

 

strain on rural Saskatchewan.  It is having a serious effect on all our 
communities both large and small.  The casualty in all of this may well be 
the Saskatchewan way of life.  I say to you, Mr. Speaker, this Premier and 
this government will stand by our farmers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- We know our farmers need money and they need it now 
to get the crop in.  So tonight I am pleased to announce the Saskatchewan 
spring seeding program.  This $525 million initiative will ensure that 
money is available to allow farmers to seed their crops this spring.  It 
will provide farmers with short-term operating loans at ten and 
three-quarters per cent.  Farmers will be entitled to borrow $12 per 
cultivated acre for inputs such as seed, fertilizer, fuel, chemicals and 
repairs.  This program will be administered through the Agricultural Credit 
Corporation of Saskatchewan, and further details will be announced by the 
Premier and the Minister of Agriculture and Food. 
 
Mr. Speaker, providing $525 million of operating loans to farmers strains 
the provincial treasury.  Some people may say that the government should 
not charge interest on these loans, or that we should provide grants.  Mr. 
Speaker, the provincial treasury cannot afford $525 million in grants.  
Saskatchewan cannot take on the treasuries of the United States or the 
European Economic Community by itself -- we cannot go alone.  We have 
responded.  We have responded in what we believe is a fair and reasonable 
way, fair and reasonable to taxpayers and farmers alike. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the federal government must also keep its commitment.  
The government of Canada has a responsibility to our farmers.  All members 
of this Assembly have called upon the federal government to assist farmers 
with the cost of spring seeding and to provide compensation for current 
unfair prices.  We fully expect the federal government to honour its 
commitment to Saskatchewan farmers and provide assistance. 
 
The government of Saskatchewan must also establish a contingency fund to 
fight the agri-food trade wars.  Canada must respond to the United States 
export enhancement program.  The government of Saskatchewan has called upon 
the federal government to provide $1 billion to maintain Canada's share of 
international grain markets. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, the issue of farm debt must be addressed to bring 
greater long-term stability to farming.  As part of this solution, lending 
institutions, the banks and credit unions must play a larger role in 
resolving the farm debt and cash flow problems.  This is no time for 
fair-weather friends, Mr. Speaker. 
 
At the initiative of our Premier, this government in co-operation with 
lending institutions is reviewing all options to ease the farm finance 
situation, including farm debt restructuring.  The Premier is also asking 
the help of farm leaders and rural municipalities to redefine the role of 
the Agriculture Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government's commitment to agriculture has been 



 

 

unprecedented.  Our commitment has been demonstrated by programs like the 
production loan program, livestock cash advances and drought assistance.  
As well, our commitment to a quality of life in rural Saskatchewan has been 
shown by taking natural gas service to farmers to heat farm homes and 
machine shops and hog barns -- a service many in the city have enjoyed for 
some several years -- and by replacing party lines with individual 
telephone line service and by building schools and hospitals and nursing 
homes across rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget continues the commitment to rural Saskatchewan and 
agriculture through programs such as crop insurance, insurance programs for 
beef and pork producers, by providing for tax-exempt farm fuels, and money 
for food and agriculture research to ensure we continue to seek out answers 
for the long term. 
 
This budget contains over $400 million in spending and tax assistance to 
our agriculture sector, Mr. Speaker, and that is in addition to the $525 
million in loans to the Saskatchewan . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(1930) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- These are large numbers, Mr. Speaker; however these 
sums pale in comparison with the farm budgets of the United States and the 
European Economic Community.  Mr. Speaker, simply put, Saskatchewan farmers 
need a resolution to the international grain trade wars.  And our 
government, by working with farmers, the federal government and lending 
institutions, will enable the rural economy to meet the immediate 
challenges and those of the '90s and beyond. 
 
That brings me to the issue of economic diversification.  Mr. Speaker, 
although a strong farm sector is essential for our future, we must also 
continue to diversify and develop our economy.  Through diversification, we 
can provide job opportunities at home, strengthen our communities, and 
provide the means to pay for and enhance priority programs.  The best way 
to do this is to create a climate conducive to business development and 
investment.  We must promote diversification of the economy through 
building on our natural resources.  This is especially important in food 
production.  The problems of today must not blind us to the realities of 
tomorrow.  Fundamental change is occurring. 
 
During my remarks tonight the world's population will have grown by nearly 
5,000 people -- 5,000 more people to be fed.  And this day 15,000 acres of 
food-producing land across the world were jeopardized by erosion or covered 
with concrete. 
 
What are the implications for food-producing countries?  There are many 
changes and we must be prepared to take advantage of them.  There are new 
food markets in Asia and eastern Europe.  We applaud the Government of 
Canada's role, along with Canadian and Saskatchewan pork producers, in a 
recent substantial shipment of pork to the Soviet Union. 
 



 

 

There are potential new markets here in North America, Mr. Speaker.  People 
are changing their life-styles and looking for healthier foods.  Canadian 
canola oil is recognized by the American College of Nutrition as a health 
food.  Our canola oil is now being used by a major Canadian restaurant 
chain. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we must not miss the opportunity presented by these and other 
market changes.  More food products, more table-ready foods must be part of 
our province's long-term response to a changing world. 
 
Well this government has worked not only with those in the agricultural 
sector but also with individuals, labour organization, and businesses that 
believe in the future of our province and in diversifying our economy.  We 
join hands with the members of the co-operative movement to build Canada's 
first heavy oil upgrader here in Saskatchewan. 
 
We were the first province in Canada to join hands with the Canadian 
Federation of Labour to involve labour in business development in 
Saskatchewan.  We joined hands with 10 Indian bands to assist them to 
purchase the saw mill in Meadow Lake.  And we joined hands with 
Weyerhaeuser Canada to develop a paper mill in Prince Albert, with Cargill 
to build a fertilizer plant in Belle Plaine, and with the Saskatchewan 
Wheat Pool and Schreier Malting Company to expand the malt plant in Biggar. 
 
These investments create much more than individual success stories for 
Saskatchewan.  They increase the value added to our natural resources.  
They also provide jobs, build our communities and anchor our economy. 
 
Megaprojects receive all the headlines, but investments in community 
projects and small businesses are equally important for growth and 
development.  Men and women in business all over this province deserve 
headlines, too, Mr. Speaker.  Through good times and bad they are there 
creating jobs, looking at new opportunities, a vital part in all of our 
communities. 
 
Delsa Food Processors in Delisle, L & M Wood Products in Glaslyn, and the 
Austrak tractor plant in Weyburn -- I just thought I'd throw that one in -- 
are just as important to those communities as the heavy oil upgrader is to 
Lloydminster, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of this province want to be directly involved in 
building a better future.  For example, over 73,000 Saskatchewan residents 
purchased province of Saskatchewan potash ownership bonds last fall.  Since 
1984, this government has provided Saskatchewan residents with the 
opportunity to invest over $1 billion in bond and share offerings.  This 
money has been put to work by SaskPower, SaskTel, Saskoil and other 
Saskatchewan corporations. 
 
And now to further strengthen and build Saskatchewan's communities, this 
government will introduce Community Development Bonds.  These bonds, 
guaranteed by the province, will allow people additional opportunities to 
invest in community, economic development, small businesses, and local 
projects.  This innovative approach will provide Saskatchewan people and 



 

 

their children with greater opportunity to live and work in their 
communities.  In the weeks ahead, we will be working with local people and 
business to build a consensus on how Community Development Bonds can best 
be implemented. 
 
People have told us too, Mr. Speaker, that we should reduce the number of 
grants to business.  We are moving in the direction of eliminating business 
grant programs, and our focus will now be a partnership approach through 
equity positions and joint ventures. 
 
The environment: Mr. Speaker, it is important to continue to build and 
diversify our economy, but at the same time, we must also protect the 
environment.  This government will conduct a review of our environmental 
assessment process.  We will also strengthen our government's role in 
protecting the environment by establishing an enforcement unit within the 
Department of Environment and Public Safety.  Urban, rural, and northern 
residents all recognize that our generation has a responsibility both to 
diversify the economy and to preserve the environment for our children. 
 
I note, Mr. Speaker, Community Development Bonds have the potential to 
involve people in financing local environmental projects.  The people must 
have a say on how to create jobs today, protect the environment, and build 
for the future. 
 
Fiscal responsibility: Mr. Speaker, the people have said it is time for 
governments to start learning to live within their means.  In Saskatchewan 
our financial flexibility has been restricted by a number of external 
factors that have placed pressure on the government treasury.  Low prices 
for our wheat and oil and potash have restrained the province's revenues 
over the past few years.  Interest rates are more than 50 per cent higher 
than they were three years ago.  The federal government in its latest 
budget reduced its commitment to education and health care in Saskatchewan 
by almost $100 million over the next two years. 
 
Faced with these pressures, as I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, we first 
tightened our belt.  We reduced inefficiency and waste in internal 
government spending.  We then called upon the people to help.  The fuel tax 
rebate is being phased out, the home program eliminated, the mortgage 
protection plan was adjusted, and we have eliminated other government 
programs, as I announced earlier, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I could stand here tonight and announce large reductions in government 
funding to hospitals, school boards, and universities.  We could have 
followed the Government of Canada's example and shifted our fiscal problems 
onto others.  We could have said that the federal budget, by cutting 
transfer payments for health care and education, forced us to reduce our 
support to these areas.  But, Mr. Speaker, this government consults and 
co-operates and works with its partners -- the hospitals, the school 
boards, and universities. 
 
We recognize that shifting costs from one government to another does 
nothing to relieve the burden on taxpayers, who is one and the same person.  
And what are these taxpayers saying, Mr. Speaker?  Loudly and clearly, 



 

 

taxpayers across Saskatchewan are saying that tax increases are not 
acceptable.  The tax on lotteries was rejected even though the money was 
destined for the province's hospitals. 
 
People are outraged by the federal government's goods and services tax, and 
with good reason.  It is unfair.  It is too complex.  Simply put, the goods 
and services tax is unacceptable. 
 
When it comes to taxes, the people have said they have no more to give -- 
enough is enough.  And so, Mr. Speaker, I say to you and to all the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan, this government has listened.  There are no tax 
increases in this budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- No increase in personal income tax, no sales tax 
increase, no other tax increases.  The people have spoken -- enough is 
enough.  Tax increases would have been the easy way out. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Tax increases would have been the easy way out.  
Rather, this government focused its attention on controlling spending.  Our 
efforts will save taxpayers over $300 million in the next two years.  Mr. 
Speaker, people are not prepared to pay more taxes.  There are no tax 
increases in this budget. 
 
People want spending in the priority areas of education, health care, and 
agriculture.  Spending has been increased.  Everyone wants government to 
reduce waste and inefficiency.  It has been reduced. 
 
The end result, Mr. Speaker, is that our spending will exceed our projected 
income by $363 million.  Our revenues for 1991 will be 4.278 billion and 
our spending will be 4.641 billion -- as I said, Mr. Speaker, a deficit 
this year of $363 million.  But, Mr. Speaker, we all want a lower deficit.  
We want no deficit, because deficits add to the provincial debt, which in 
turn leads to higher interest costs, and in the upcoming year interest on 
the public debt will be $493 million.  Debt and the cost of servicing it, 
especially in times of high interest rates, reduces our financial 
flexibility, but more importantly it imposes a burden on our children. 
 
The consequences of debt deeply concern me, Mr. Speaker.  I am sure they 
concern everyone.  We cannot continue to mortgage our children's future.  
With this in mind, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to announce that the proceeds 
from the sale of the shares of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan will 
be used to reduce the provincial debt, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- People want lower deficits.  People want lower taxes.  
People want more spending in priority areas.  But, Mr. Speaker, lower 
deficits, lower taxes, and more spending are not compatible.  How can you 
have a lower deficit if you don't raise taxes or cut spending even further?  



 

 

This is the challenge; this is the dilemma.  A workable and real solution 
must be found.  We must find that consensus on managing our financial 
resources.  And so the government, in conjunction with Consensus 
Saskatchewan, will draw on the people's ideas and develop them into a new 
financial blueprint to deal effectively with the deficit. 
 
Some of the ideas that we heard at the pre-budget public meetings, Mr. 
Speaker, some of the ideas we heard to date include legislation that 
requires the government to balance the budget, that makes it illegal to 
have deficits.  Others have suggested taxes specifically earmarked for debt 
reduction.  At one pre-budget meeting, one person suggested an independent 
people's board to monitor government spending, and still others suggest 
more frequent reporting of government finances. 
 
This important process must have the support of the people of the province.  
There is no kidding ourselves about the enormity nor the difficulty of this 
task.  But a plan developed and supported by the people will succeed.  We 
must find that consensus for our children's sake.  And, Mr. Speaker, I 
invite every person in the province to contribute to that process. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan want to be involved and must be involved in 
developing solutions to the challenges of the '90s.  In a world that is 
changing rapidly, there are a few areas where the public is in full 
agreement, where a broad consensus has emerged.  Saskatchewan will achieve 
its goals if we all work together.  We will succeed if we avoid a narrow, 
partisan agenda. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is a time for education policy, not education politics.  It 
is a time for health care policy, not health care politics.  It is a time 
for farm policy, not farm politics, Mr. Speaker.  We must develop and 
implement policies that are good for all people for today and for tomorrow. 
 
We are at a crossroads, Mr. Speaker.  The Saskatchewan people have faced 
difficult times before; we have overcome them and thrived.  We will do so 
again if we work together.  The Premier and this government have set in 
motion a process whereby a consensus will be achieved.  Mr. Speaker, I say 
to you and to all the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, we will succeed. 
 
(1945) 
 
I want to tell you why, if I might to digress for a moment again, Mr. 
Speaker.  I want to tell you why I believe we'll succeed.  In so doing, I'm 
going to close by relating the following story.  At the pre-budget meeting 
in Saskatoon a man came forward to the microphone.  It was towards the end 
of the evening.  He was a regular looking person; in fact, after he gave 
his name to the crowd, he added, I'm just a regular citizen of Saskatoon, 
lived here for a number of years.  He made the point that he was a regular 
citizen because many others before him had been representing particular 
groups and associations, but he wanted to let it be known that he was just 
a regular citizen. 
 
He went on to talk about change and technology, the 1990s, the year 2000.  
He talked very lucidly about how we have to think of new ways to create 



 

 

jobs.  He gave some thoughts on health and education.  He talked 
articulately about the European farm policy and what it was doing to 
Saskatchewan. 
 
All in all he was very insightful in his commentary.  He was not a 
practised public speaker, I suspect.  But I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, he 
had my attention, and he had that crowd's attention that night in 
Saskatoon, 100 per cent.  You could have heard a pin drop in that room the 
whole time he spoke.   
 
He particularly surprised everyone when he mentioned, at one point in his 
remarks, that he himself only had a grade four education -- that he was 
largely self-taught.  I say surprised, Mr. Speaker, because if he'd have 
told us he had three university degrees, by the depth of his remarks it 
wouldn't have surprised us.  And when he was done he got an applause that 
was instantaneous and unanimous.  Everyone knew there that he had captured 
in words the essence of what many were thinking.  So I want to close by 
reading a few of his remarks from a transcript of that evening's 
proceedings. I quote: 
 

 Saskatchewan is a great province.  We have a lot we should be proud of.  
Of course there's problems.  The world wouldn't be a world without 
problems.  That's why we have politicians to try and solve them, and we 
shouldn't expect politicians to solve all our problems.  A lot of us are 
going to have to get together and really think what we want as a province, 
as a country.  I think a lot of us -- I don't mean to be critical of any 
individual or group -- we're going to have to really stop and think where 
our priorities are, what should happen, and especially towards the 90's 
and the year 2000. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that's why I believe we will succeed in the project ahead of 
us because people like this want to help, Mr. Speaker.  That's why we will 
succeed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- And with that, Mr. Speaker, I move that this Assembly 
now resolve itself into the Committee of Finance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I think my first 
words will be addressed for the Premier's benefit.  Mr. Premier, and Mr. 
Speaker, about three weeks ago you went on television in a province-wide 
address clearly attempting to portray the image of someone who, at a very 
late hour, was finally going to take command. 
 
Mr. Premier, there were those of us who entered the Chamber tonight with 
some hope and perhaps even some expectation that perhaps at this late hour 
you were finally going to show some leadership.  Mr. Premier, those hopes 
and expectations lie shattered with this budget.  Mr. Premier, this budget 
is a disaster for the Saskatchewan economy, and it is a betrayal of the 
Saskatchewan people. 



 

 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- And nowhere, Mr. Speaker, is the betrayal clearer than 
it is in agriculture.  Mr. Premier, and Mr. Finance Minister, and Mr. 
Speaker, the public of Saskatchewan, farm leaders and farmers are tired of 
you people playing games with their farms and their lives. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- It is clear to all, and you have agreed, that $500 
million is needed this year to help get a crop in.  Mr. Finance Minister, 
they need the money now.  They don't need it announced just before an 
election to be payable just afterwards, which is the timing which you and 
the federal government apparently are setting up.  They need it now. 
 
I beseech you to stop playing games with farmers and farmers' lives and 
make that money payable. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- The only thing announced tonight, Mr. Speaker, is a 
$500 million loan program. 
 
Mr. Minister, Mr. Premier, Mr. Speaker, one of the main problems which 
farms in this province and farmers in this province have is, they're 
carrying far more debt than they can manage.  The last thing on earth 
Saskatchewan farmers need is another half billion dollars in debt, and 
that's what you've given them at a very high interest rate.  Mr. Minister, 
Mr. Premier, that's a betrayal and a disaster for rural Saskatchewan. 
 
If there's been one constant refrain over the fall and winter since we 
adjourned last year, it is that the Saskatchewan public want an end to the 
waste, the mismanagement, and the patronage.  Once again, you people don't 
deal with the problems.  You simply play games with it.  You've announced a 
reduction by four, I believe, in the number of departments, but no 
reduction in ministers, which is where the cost is.  The Saskatchewan 
public are still going to be paying for 20 cabinet ministers, 10 
legislative secretaries, and some of the highest paid assistants of any 
provincial government in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you talked about the elimination of severance pay for those 
who had taken government jobs.  That's after the fact and after the horse 
is out of the barn, Mr. Minister.  If I heard one thing over the last fall 
and winter throughout this province, it was anger that two ministers had 
retired from this Assembly, as one person in Assiniboia put it, at a 
pension in excess of $30,000, with severance pay in excess of $60,000, 
while continuing to work for the same employer at a salary in excess of 
$100,000 -- that's obscene, Mr. Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- The deficit.  Someone -- some members opposite may help 



 

 

me identifying the author of this comment -- once said that deficits are 
deferred taxes.  Mr. Premier, you may remember those words from a different 
era.  Well for the ninth straight year you have a deficit budget and for 
almost the ninth year you've missed your target.  I remind you, Mr. 
Minister, something that you didn't bother to tell the Assembly tonight -- 
that was that last year your budgetary deficit projection was $226 million.  
Well, Mr. Minister, you missed it by 72 per cent -- 72 per cent.  Mr. 
Minister, the public of Saskatchewan demand -- they don't just ask -- they 
demand better management.  Mr. Minister, that's not better management, 
that's completely irresponsible. 
 
Mr. Minister, I noted in going through the Estimates, and I have not had a 
. . . And the minister will know that unlike virtually every other Assembly 
in Canada, we do not get these in advance from the minister; we deal with 
them as we get them.  Mr. Minister, I note in going through this that there 
is a 30 per cent increase in the expenditure on interest.  That is almost 
the highest of anything in government.  The only one I could find which 
went up any more was the gaming commission.  It's certainly a lot higher 
than the increase in education -- I'm going to get to that in a moment.  
It's a lot higher than the percentage increase in health, and it's a lot 
higher than the percentage increase in any other major department. 
 
Taxes -- once again you people don't deal with the problem, you play games 
with it.  You said there were no new taxes.  Well, Mr. Minister, you know 
that's not so.  Once again you have betrayed the public.  This budget first 
of all freezes operating grants for urban and rural municipalities.  That 
will almost certainly result, Mr. Minister, in an increase in property 
taxes, pure and simple. 
 
Mr. Minister, there was one line in this speech which is just a jewel of 
unmitigated gall.  It was the following comment.  You said, with a note of 
moral righteousness in your voice: 
 

 We could have followed the Government of Canada's example and shifted our 
fiscal problems onto others.  We could have said that the federal Budget, 
by cutting transfer payments for health care and education, forced us to 
reduce our support to these areas, (we could have done that) . . . 

 
Well, Mr. Minister, you did.  That's exactly what you did. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- It's interesting, Mr. Minister, that the budget speech 
quickly trails off to a different subject after that. 
 
Mr. Minister, the elimination of the gas tax is the equivalent of a 
five-point increase in income taxes.  That's the equivalent of a five-point 
increase in income taxes.  That is an increase in taxes. 
 
Mr. Minister, am I going to be all negative?  No, Mr. Minister, I'll give 
you some credit.  I'll give you credit for being consistent.  Broken 
promises are one area where you've been consistent in virtually every 
budget you've brought down. 



 

 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Minister, in 1985 you promised no new taxes; then 
you introduced a flat tax at one-half of 1 per cent; the next year you 
increased it to 1 per cent; the next year you increased it to one and a 
half per cent and now it's 2 per cent.  You promised to eliminate the sales 
tax back in 1982 and now it is a full 40 per cent higher than it was when 
you came to office.  You promised to eliminate the gas tax for ever and 
then reintroduced a 10 cent per litre tax for every driver in Saskatchewan.  
I don't know, Mr. Minister, whether you want to be reminded of the lottery 
tax.  I don't know whether you need assistance in remembering the used car 
tax.  Those are all, Mr. Minister, broken promises. 
 
The public of Saskatchewan well know that they're now paying.  Each family 
is paying an additional $1,500 more in taxes than when you took office.  
Your own document, Mr. Minister, points out that middle income Saskatchewan 
people pay the highest level of personal income taxes in Canada -- the 
highest level of personal income taxes in Canada. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to spend a moment on education, since you did.  People 
hoped, Mr. Minister, that you'd finally make good on your comment which you 
were fond of repeating as the minister of Education, that education is an 
investment in the future. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Hear, hear. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Once again . . . well I wish you'd said hear, hear in a 
louder voice to the Minister of Finance when he was drafting this budget, 
because he hasn't in fact done that. 
 
I hope the educators who are watching take a moment to review to figures 
set out -- as you did not -- take a moment to review the figures that are 
set out on page 33.  They'll find that operating grants to universities are 
up by only 2.7 per cent.  The operating grant is only up by 2.7 per cent.  
That's with all the problems that universities have.  Operating grants to 
schools are only up by 3.1 per cent, far less than the rate of inflation. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to remind you that you don't pay for those schools.  
It's the trustees of the universities and the schools who pay for them, and 
you're giving them, in real dollars, less money this year than they had in 
previous years. 
 
Mr. Premier, Mr. Speaker, if I may perhaps address a comment to you, 
because I think the phrase is often associated with you.  One of the tests 
of the integrity of a political party is whether or not it would like to 
run on one of the slogans it used in a past election.  So I'd ask you, Mr. 
Premier, just to think about whether or not you want to run on the motto, 
there's so much more we can be.  How would you like to use that in the next 
election, Mr. Premier? 
 
Mr. Premier, the disheartening part of it is that this province has so much 
potential.  These are the people in this province who pioneered health and 



 

 

social legislation for the entire continent.  We have a wealth of resources 
in potash, one of the most efficient farming industries in the world, and 
you, Mr. Premier, have brought them from a period of relative prosperity in 
1982 to near disaster.  Mr. Premier, and Mr. Minister, this province has 
real potential; if only it had some leadership. 
 
(2000) 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- I want to make one other comment as well, and that's 
about the lack of any vision in this budget.  People had hoped for new 
ideas, new solutions, new leadership.  This budget let them down; it is 
barren of any ideas.  Instead of offering them, Mr. Minister, a plan of 
attack, you offered them a blank sheet of paper and said, here, give us a 
hand, fill it in.  Mr. Minister, that's not leadership.  That is an 
abdication of leadership. 
 
In your budget address you talked about this being a turning point in 
history.  You also said this is a period of time in which there are some 
critical questions being . . . and there are more critical questions than 
answers.  Well, Mr. Minister, you've added to the list of critical 
questions. 
 
One of them is, what is this province going to do about the fact that we're 
losing a thousand farm families a year?  Your budget does nothing to 
address that.  What are we going to do about the fact that this province 
has the worst job creation record in Canada?  What is the answer of your 
budget?  It's, I believe at a moment's glance, to reduce the funding for 
job creation -- actually reduce it. 
 
What are we going to do, Mr. Minister, about . . . One of the questions is, 
what are we going to do about the fact that bankruptcies are the highest in 
this province's history, and I believe on a per capita basis the highest in 
Canada.  Not a word was mentioned about that.  One of the questions is, 
what we are going to about the fact that thousands of able, talented young 
people are denied access to schools and universities?  What have we done?  
Well we've cut the funding in real dollars. 
 
What are we going to do about the fact that 60,000 people have left this 
province since 1985, most of them young people?  We are, Mr. Minister, 
losing an entire generation.  Apparently nothing, Mr. Minister.  They want 
to know, Mr. Minister, what this government is going to do about the fact 
that we have the fastest growing rate of family poverty in Canada.  Over an 
incredible 16 per cent of Saskatchewan families live on a yearly income 
below the Statistics Canada poverty line. 
 
That may as well, Mr. Minister, have something to do with the fact that out 
of every hundred students -- this is a most disturbing fact -- out of every 
hundred students in grade 8, 45 will not complete grade 12.  That is a 50 
per cent increase since you people took office, and it's one of the worst 
such records in this country, Mr. Minister. 
 



 

 

Over 64,000 children are growing up in poverty.  Mr. Minister, there 
weren't any food banks when you took office, there wasn't any need for 
them.  In recent weeks, Mr. Minister, one of your colleagues has been 
creating the impression that something was going to be done about family 
poverty.  Mr. Minister, you've announced $740,000 to help 64,000 children.  
That works out, Mr. Minister, to about $12 per child per year -- $12 per 
year. 
 
Mr. Minister, I'll bet your colleagues don't submit expense accounts for 
breakfasts which are under that amount.  That's a dollar per month per 
child, Mr. Minister.  That's 3 cents a day.  How on earth can your 
government claim to be compassionate when you have 3 cents per hungry child 
per day, and you've got $370 million to give to one of the wealthiest 
private corporations in the world, Cargill? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Minister, I want to say in conclusion, as I said at 
the beginning of my remarks, that this budget is a disaster for the 
Saskatchewan economy, and when I say economy, I mean the farmers who were 
expecting some relief; I mean the business people on Main Street whose 
balance sheets are in many cases just as bad as the farmers' that they're 
trying to serve; I mean, as well, the workers who are without jobs. 
 
I note with a quick glance at the Department of Labour, you seem to have 
cut the funding in some key areas in that department, Mr. Minister.  It's a 
betrayal of the Saskatchewan people who had hoped and who were led to 
expect so much more. 
 
Tonight, Mr. Minister, your speech talks about the need for consensus.  It 
would be laughable if it weren't so tragic.  You're the crew who didn't 
consult with the public when you decimated the drug plan; when you 
eliminated the children's dental program; when your privatized hundreds of 
highway workers; when you imposed a used car tax; when you imposed a 
lottery tax; when you increased the sales tax; when you tried last year to 
sell off a part of SaskPower. 
 
And now you say as you're facing an angry electorate, we're sorry and we're 
ready to listen.  That isn't leadership, Mr. Minister, that's the politics 
of desperation.  The public of Saskatchewan aren't buying it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Minister, there was one jewel which I suspect will 
long survive you.  It was your comment: the people have said enough is 
enough.  Well, Mr. Minister, I suspect that that is going to be your 
political epitaph: enough is enough. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Minister, you said that we lived in a world which 
was changing.  Well I'll tell you, Mr. Minister, there are no people on the 
face of the earth as ready for change as the public of this province. 



 

 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- I beg leave to adjourn debate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Resumption of Budget Debate 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

 That debate on the motion that this Assembly do now resolve itself into 
the Committee of Finance be resumed on Friday, March 30, 1990. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 8:09 p.m. 
 


