





























































Hansard: March 28, 1990


 

 

March 28/90 
 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on Friday next move: 
 

 That this Assembly calls on the Government of Saskatchewan to implement a 
comprehensive plan to address the root causes of the growing poverty and 
hunger problems in Saskatchewan, and in particular to address the need for 
school lunch programs, full employment strategies, special housing and 
health care needs, improved income support programs, and the unique 
problems of northern Saskatchewan. 

 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to introduce to you, 
and through you to all members of the Assembly, a couple of honoured guests 
-- my aunt and uncle, Dr. Bernard Wolfe and Elene Wolfe from London, 
Ontario.  Dr. Wolfe is an endocrinologist at Western, and his wife Elene is 
a microbiologist.  I'd like to ask all members of the House to welcome 
these guests of mine. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Funding for Education 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- My question today is to the Minister of Education.  Mr. 
Minister, you will know that there has been a clear consensus developed 
around the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association proposal calling on 
your government to implement a 60 per cent-40 per cent cost-shared funding 
of education by 1992. 
 
Mr. Minister, these are letters from school trustees from across the 
province, calling on your government to start paying its fair share.  
Obviously, Mr. Minister, a consensus has been developed around 60 per cent 
funding on the part of the provincial government.  Can you say today, and 
can you tell the trustees, parents, and taxpayers today, that you are going 
to implement this particular recommendation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Speaker, I have as well received many letters 
and I've had discussions with the president of the Saskatchewan School 
Trustees Association with regard to changing the formula.  The fact of the 
matter is, Mr. Speaker, that this government is paying about the same 
portion of the operating costs of school boards in this province that has 
been in place for many, many years, in fact going back into the 1970s. 
 
So I have indicated, Mr. Speaker, that we are willing to look at the 
formula.  If in fact we take a look at all of the expenditures or all of 
the moneys that go to school boards in the province, if we include the 
payments that go for teacher pensions and dental programs and so on, the 
fact of the matter is that we are paying approximately 57 per cent of the 
total bill today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- New question to the minister.  Mr. Minister, it is a well 
documented fact that your government has cut your share of educational 
funding from an average of 55 per cent in 1982 to less than 50 per cent in 
1989.  These letters talk about the importance of your government's cuts or 
the effects of your government's cuts on students, teachers, communities, 
and taxpayers all across this province. 
 
School trustees want to know, Mr. Minister, whether your government will 
commit itself to funding 60 per cent of the cost of education in this 
province by 1992. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Speaker, as I've indicated to the hon. member, 
I have passed on word to the president of the school trustees association 
that we're willing to take a look at this.  Obviously there's a lot of 
discussion that will have to take place.  There are a lot of different 
factors that have to be taken into consideration.  If we consider teacher 
pensions, dental programs, and group insurance programs, we are paying much 
more than 50 per cent today. 
 
I could also point out, Mr. Speaker, that when the trustees talk about a 
60-40 formula that we have to take into consideration if they also mean 
that we should be moving to a 60-40 formula for capital construction of 
which the government now pays 80 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Minister, the SSTA's (Saskatchewan School Trustees 
Association) position is supported by school divisions in Wakaw, Kamsack, 
Shaunavon, Moosomin, Potashville, Buffalo Plains, Hudson Bay, Saskatoon, 
Canora, Meadow Lake, Turtleford, Thunder Creek, Weyburn, Blaine Lake, and 
the list goes on and on and on and on.  This is a consensus, Mr. Minister.  
This is a consensus, and I want to know, are you going to listen to the 
school trustees in this province or aren't you? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Speaker, I don't think it's only a matter of 
whether I'm listening to the trustees.  I don't think the member has been 
listening to what I have been saying.  I've indicated twice that we are 
going to be discussing this with the trustees and with those 
representatives from SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) and SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association), 
but there are a lot of details that have to looked at in this. 
 
It's not a simple matter to say that we are going to change the formula.  I 
think that if people want to consider changing the formula, then we have to 
consider where is the money going to come from.  Do people want to see the 
gas tax increased, for example, 3 cents a litre, to make up the difference?  
Or would they like to see income taxes go up by 10 per cent?  Mr. Speaker, 
it's an easy thing for the member to stand in her place and suggest that 
this is the direction in which we should be going.  We will work with the 
trustees and the other representatives in the future to look at this. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- New question to the Minister of Education.  Mr. Minister, 
some of these documents and letters that have been sent to MLAs from across 
this province outline the impact of your program cuts and your funding cuts 
on education in this province.  For instance, in Yorkton they had to reduce 
17 professional staff in the 1988 school year because of a lack of 
provincial funding.  For instance, in Herbert school division they had to 
cut seven teachers who no longer contribute to the local provincial economy 
or local economies because of your government's cuts in educational 
spending. 
 
Mr. Minister, you have received a press release from the Saskatchewan 
School Trustees Association, the Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation, and 
LEADS (League of Educational Administrators) outlining very clearly that 
they want to see the Government of Saskatchewan move to a 60 per cent 
financing of education in this province by 1992.  That is a tremendous 
consensus, Mr. Minister.  And I want to know today: will you or will you 
not move towards a 60 per cent funding of education in this province by 
1992? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, for the fourth time, I will 
indicate again that we will be discussing this with the trustees and the 
other representatives in the province to look at moving towards a 
difference in the formula.  But it is not a very, very simple matter to 
deal with. 
 
With regard to cuts in education that the member is talking about, that's 
totally untrue, Mr. Speaker.  Over the last eight years of this government 
in power we have increased the budgets, the operating grants to school 
boards, every year, Mr. Speaker.  We are adding more and more money to the 
school budgets through the educational development fund as well as other 
specialized funding for special education.  So for her to stand in her 



 

 

place and say that we have had cut-backs is just total nonsense. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Regulation of Private Vocational Schools 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is also to the Minister 
of Education.  And Mr. Minister, my subject refers to the private 
vocational schools and the lack of action that your government has taken in 
the last three years which has developed, in our educational system, a 
deplorable, and simply an intolerable situation as far as private 
vocational schools are concerned. 
 
Mr. Minister, about three years ago we asked on this side of the House, did 
you develop some guide-lines for private vocational schools?  And you 
simply have not done that. 
 
These private vocational schools are charging large tuition fees.  The 
product that they are delivering is simply not acceptable out by the 
business industry.  And, Mr. Minister, the students who graduate from the 
schools' so-called graduation do not have any enhanced skills to get into 
the work-force. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question to you is simply this: when are you going to stop 
the victimizing of these students by some of the private vocational 
schools, and when can the public out there expect some stringent 
guide-lines and regulations pertaining to private vocational schools?  When 
can they hear that from you, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the hon. member's 
question with regard to private vocational schools because there have been 
some concerns raised in the last few months.  The fact of the matter is 
that action was taken by my predecessor back in February of 1989 to set up 
a special committee to look into the operation of vocational schools.  This 
committee that has been set up has broad representation on it.  They have 
now come forward with recommendations.  There are new regulations that are 
being drafted and, Mr. Speaker, they will be out very shortly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Speaker, new question to the minister.  Mr. Minister, 
may I remind you that the member from Prince Albert, when he was the critic 
for post-secondary education in 1987, almost three years ago, asked the 
then minister of Education to do something about the victimizing of 
students by private vocational schools.  It's almost three years. 
 
Mr. Minister, while you are procrastinating there are students out there 
that are being saddled with large student loans -- large student loans.  
The certificates that they are getting are worthless because they are not 
recognized by the industry.  And, Mr. Minister, they don't have any way of 
paying off those student loans.  Mr. Minister, many of those individuals 



 

 

are people who you have forced off the welfare rolls, and now you let them 
out there to fend for themselves. 
 
I'm asking you again, Mr. Minister, what are you going to do to help those 
students who have no way of paying off those student loans?  What are you 
going to do to help those students renegotiate their loans and have a way 
of paying off those loans.  What are you going to do about it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Speaker, it's unfortunate that the member 
opposite generalizes with regard to discussion of the private vocational 
schools.  There have been some problems in the past; I readily admit that.  
I will also suggest to the member opposite he's fully aware of the fact 
that one of the private vocational schools was shut down last fall because 
they were not following all of the criteria.  And we have looked at others 
in the province. 
 
But the fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, that with all of the private 
vocational schools that there are in this province, that there are very, 
very few complaints coming forward from students that are attending those 
courses. 
 
Now I certainly, as the member opposite, am also concerned with the fact 
that there are students, number one, that are getting into some of the 
colleges that should not be getting in because they do not meet the 
criteria, do not have the proper qualifications. 
 
I am also concerned about the courses that are being offered, that they be 
quality programs. 
 
And the third area that I am concerned about is the fact that we have 
quality instructors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those problems are being addressed.  There are new regulations 
that will be out very, very shortly.  We're also looking at new criteria 
with regard to the qualifications or criteria that private vocational 
schools have to meet before students can be eligible for student loans.  
They will be in place by the August 1 this summer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- A new question to the minister.  I want to remind the 
minister again that Bridge City College was closed after much protestation 
on this side of the House.  I also remind the minister that Bridge City 
College got $1 million in student loans last year from your department. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, let me remind you, while you're saying to my colleague 
there is no money for education, private vocational schools last year got 
$22.2 million -- $22.2 million in student loans from your department.  And 
many of those students have certificates today which aren't recognized by 
the business industry.  They are saddled with huge student loans and you 
are doing nothing, Mr. Minister, to help those students. 



 

 

 
Mr. Minister, I have indicated to you that some of those private vocational 
schools are simply not putting out a program that is worthwhile.  My 
question to you, Mr. Minister, is this . . . My question to you, Mr. 
Minister, is this: will your committee also look into the possibility of 
restructuring those loans for students who were on welfare and have no way 
of paying back those loans?  And also those students who have received 
worthless certificates -- is that committee going to make some 
recommendations for restructuring of those loans who were victimized 
because of your inaction, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Speaker, we have one of the best student loan 
programs in this country, and I don't think that for the member to stand in 
his place and suggest that it's in any way unfair, that's just not accurate 
at all.  Many of the loans that these particular students are getting are 
not ones that they have to pay back; there's a lot of forgiveness with 
regard to them.  And certainly there are concerns in some cases where maybe 
they have not been able to complete programs. 
 
At the same time, Mr. Speaker, I don't think that in all cases that we can 
stand beside the students and ensure that they are taking a good look at 
the courses that are being offered.  I think they have a responsibility in 
that regard too. 
 
So we are looking at them as I suggested.  There are new regulations that 
are coming down, and we are clamping down on some of the colleges.  The 
colleges themselves are very, very anxious to ensure that they are 
providing good programs and they have improved, I think in many ways, some 
of the systems or the ways in which they've been operating. 
 
But for the most part, Mr. Speaker, the private vocational schools that are 
operating in this province have excellent programs, they are meeting the 
needs that are out there, and when the students are finished they are 
getting jobs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Dispute at Northlands Regional College 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of Education.  
Mr. Minister, you will know that the Northlands . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Minister, you will know that the Northlands Career 
College, located throughout northern Saskatchewan, has had rotating work 
stoppages for the past seven weeks.  Students have also been locked out of 
classes. 
 
The central issue in this dispute is wage parity for the administration 
support staff who work there.  For instance, a clerk typist in Creighton is 



 

 

paid $l,266 for doing the same job as an employee in La Ronge, who is paid 
$l,382.  This is a difference over $l00.  This doesn't sound like an 
insurmountable problem.  What is your department doing to correct this 
situation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Speaker, it's not up to my department to be 
taking any steps with regard to this situation.  The negotiations that are 
going on are between the Northlands regional college and its staff.  And I 
think if the member would check, I would think that he would find that the 
parity issue has already been agreed to by both parties. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- A new question, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, students at 
Northlands have lost valuable class time as a result of this dispute.  
Given the terrible job situation in the North, they cannot afford to have 
anything interfere further on with their education. 
 
Mr. Minister, the students are very, very concerned about their classes and 
their job prospects.  What arrangements have you made for catch-up or 
extensions to the missed classes? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, we haven't made any arrangements 
with regard to lost time, in the same way that we didn't make any 
arrangements with regard to lost time when the SIAST (Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology) instructors were out.  But I 
understand that that has gone very well, that those students have now made 
up the time, and they will be finishing their programs on schedule. 
 
I would assume that the same thing might be possible in Northlands, but I 
would also point out to the minister that it takes two sides to negotiate.  
So I think that it's important that both sides do get back to the table and 
get a resolve to this dispute, because it's unfortunate that the students 
are caught in the middle and are missing out on their courses. 
 

Sexual Assault Case at Swift Current 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of Justice.  Mr. 
Minister, you'll know the circumstances surrounding the young woman in 
Swift Current who, after lodging a complaint of sexual assault against two 
local hockey players, was herself charged with mischief and the charge 
against the two hockey players was dropped.  She was later acquitted of 
mischief charges and it appears to have ended there.  But I think, Mr. 
Minister, most Saskatchewan people feel this case has very serious 
ramifications, and we are wondering whether you're looking into the matter? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- The answer is yes. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Minister, whether it was intended or not, this case 



 

 

sends a very serious and very regrettable message to women in our society.  
And that message is, is that if you've been a victim of sexual assault, you 
had best not bring charges because it might be you rather than your 
attackers who are charged or who face a criminal charge. 
 
We know that many women who have been victimized in a sexual assault 
charge, Mr. Minister, have a lack of faith in our legal system, and 
instances such as this just cause to reinforce that lack of faith, Mr. 
Minister.  To show women that the justice system does work, we ask you to 
open up a full public inquiry into the Swift Current events, and we are 
wondering whether you are prepared to do that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Well I share the hon. member's concern as to how women, 
in particular, but others deal and how they feel about the justice system 
and whether they have confidence in the justice system.  I may remind the 
hon. member that it was this government that changed the policies on 
prosecution with regard to, for example, battered women, so that the 
charges would be proceeded with. 
 
I do indicate to the hon. member that there is another principle involved, 
and in no way to demean what you have raised, and that is the independence 
of the prosecutors and prosecutorial judgement, and that is obviously a 
matter of concern, I would think, shared by the hon. member. 
 
We are looking at the situation that did arise in Swift Current; I'm not 
unsympathetic to the general points you make.  I do have to balance the 
other side of a difficult question on the independence of the prosecutors 
and the ability of them to exercise their judgement. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Minister, you said that you . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I must interrupt the hon. member because 
there have been several members now that have done this.  We know that all 
the remarks to the Assembly should be directed through the Speaker, and in 
the last days or two some members have been forgetting that.  I just bring 
that to your attention so that we don't get into a general debate between 
members. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, new question.  Mr. Minister, you indicated that 
you were looking into the matter.  I'm just wondering if you can tell us 
the extent of your investigation and when you will have made a decision as 
to whether or not you're going to take any action and whether or not you'll 
be reporting to the House. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I cannot answer that.  I'll wait for . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I have just mentioned to the hon. member 
from Regina Lakeview, and I'm now drawing it to your attention, sir. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I apologize, Mr. Speaker.  If I may respond to the hon. 
member, I have asked for a report from my officials.  I will not commit.  
If the advice from the prosecutors is that that is not a matter to be made 
public, then I would be persuaded by that. 



 

 

 
I do want to indicate as well that we do have a policy in the province of 
the prosecutorial independence. And I do want to raise with you in response 
to your question about a full public inquiry, I have some concerns, and 
I'll be quite candid, whether the particular individual charged should go 
back through any type of an adversarial process or whether she has to go 
through interrogations again in terms of questioning.  I may have to make a 
decision ultimately that that may of itself not be a wise approach.  So the 
question of a full public inquiry, I think, is fraught with some potential 
unfairness, particularly to the one that was charged. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- New question, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, the lawyer for the 
particular woman involved has called for a public inquiry.  Mr. Minister, 
you've received a full report on the case from the defence lawyer, and I 
believe his letter and the statements of the presiding judge open up a 
number of areas of question which are not addressed, such as: who decided 
to bring the mischief charge?  What was it based on?  Why were the other 
charges dropped and never pursued?  And was a double standard shown in the 
handling of the case?  And yes, the independence of prosecutors is also an 
issue, as raised by the lawyer for the woman. 
 
All these questions, Mr. Minister, have to do with possibility of holding 
our justice system up to disrepute -- up to disrepute -- and therefore they 
must be answered, Mr. Minister, in the fullest possible manner.  And that's 
why it is important that we have a public inquiry and that you come to the 
House and report on your findings with respect to your investigation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I'm fully aware, Mr. Speaker, of the requirement of 
confidence and the need for all of us to have confidence in the justice 
system.  I also, in my role as Attorney General of the province of 
Saskatchewan, have to take into account some other principles involved, 
including the matter of prosecutorial independence and prosecutorial 
judgement.  I have to take into account whether in some cases individuals 
may in fact be hurt by an inquiry, as to whether it's necessarily the best 
approach. 
 
I prefaced my remarks today by sharing the concern of the hon. member that 
certainly the justice system must be seen in a way that people have 
confidence in it.  It's a difficult situation that arose in Swift Current, 
but I'm also not prepared, and I don't think it advisable, to make it a 
matter of some political debate -- a difficult question, and I have asked 
for a report from my officials, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 
Bill No. 1 -- An Act to amend The Environmental Management and Protection 
Act with respect to Ozone 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill to amend 
The Environmental Management and Protection Act with respect to Ozone. 
 



 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next 
sitting. 
 

Bill No. 2 -- An Act respecting Family and Community Services 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill respecting 
Family and Community Services. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next 
sitting. 
 
Bill No. 3 -- An Act respecting Custody of, Access to and Guardianship of 
Property of Children, Child Status and Parentage and Related Matters 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill respecting 
Custody of, Access to and Guardianship of Property of Children, Child 
Status and Parentage and Related Matters. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next 
sitting. 
 
Bill No. 4 -- An Act respecting the Consequential Amendments to Certain 
Acts resulting from the enactment of The Child and Family Services Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill respecting 
the Consequential Amendments to Certain Acts resulting from the enactment 
of The Child and Family Services Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next 
sitting. 
 
Bill No. 5 -- An Act respecting Child and Spousal Maintenance and 
Consequential Amendments resulting therefrom 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill respecting 
Child and Spousal Maintenance and Consequential Amendments resulting 
therefrom. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next 
sitting. 
 

Bill No. 6 -- An Act to amend The Dependants' Relief Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I move first reading of a Bill 
to amend The Dependants' Relief Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next 
sitting. 
 

Bill No. 7 -- An Act to amend The Intestate Succession Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill to amend The 
Intestate Succession Act. 



 

 

 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next 
sitting. 
 
Bill No. 8 -- An Act respecting the Survival of Certain Causes of Action 

 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I move first reading of a Bill 
respecting the Survival of Certain Causes of Action. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next 
sitting. 
 

Bill No. 9 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Housing Corporation Act 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill to amend 
The Saskatchewan Housing Corporation Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next 
sitting. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, prior to orders of the day, I'd seek 
leave of the House to introduce a couple of motions that would change or 
substitute the government members on the committees of public accounts and 
Crown corporations. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Substitution of Names on Standing Committee on Public Accounts 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to move, with leave, 
seconded by the member for Yorkton: 
 

 That the names of Mr. Swan, Mr. Britton, Mr. Baker, Mr. Muller, and Mr. 
Sauder be substituted for the names of Mr. Muirhead, Mr. Neudorf, Mr. 
Martin, Mr. Martens, and Mr. Wolfe on the Standing Committee on Public 
Accounts. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Substitution of Names on Standing Committee on Crown Corporations 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I would also like to move, seconded by 
the member for Yorkton: 
 

 That the names of Mr. Gerich, Mr. McLaren, Mr. Muirhead, Mr. Petersen, and 
Mrs. Duncan be substituted for the names of Mr. Baker, Mr. Britton, Mr. 
Muller, Mr. Sauder, and Mr. Swenson on the Standing Committee on Crown 
Corporations. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 



 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in reply which was 
moved by Mr. Toth. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Yesterday I rose to begin my 
remarks on the throne speech, and in all sincerity, I complimented the 
member from Turtleford in the speech that he had given prior to my rising.  
Therein rises an inconsistency, Mr. Speaker, and it has to do with the 
actions of the Premier of this province. 
 
The Premier last year brought about the lottery and bingo tax, which was a 
straight money grab.  The consequential impact of that new tax which the 
Premier brought in was swift and direct.  It was swift and direct on Sask 
Sport.  Sask Sport this year has a 20 per cent cut in their budget, and 
1200 students that would normally attend the summer school of the arts, a 
program which has been in effect for about 20 years, have been cut.  That 
program's been cut. 
 
So the question for the people of Saskatchewan is: are we to believe the 
fine speeches given by the member for Turtleford or are we to believe the 
harsh actions of the Premier of this province -- a member of the same 
Executive Council as the member for Turtleford -- whose harsh actions had a 
direct and drastic impact on Sask Sport, the body which funds the very 
cultural things that the minister from Turtleford was referring to and 
expounding on in his comments? 
 
That is a not a difficult question for the people of Saskatchewan to 
answer, and I believe they have the answer now.  They believe the harsh 
actions of this Premier, in implementing the lottery tax, the lottery and 
bingo tax grab, and having the direct impact on Sask Sport and the results 
thereof. 
 
I wanted to say a few words about the constituency of Saskatoon Westmount, 
Mr. Speaker.  It's been a great pleasure for me to represent that 
constituency in this legislature for many years now, with one short 
interruption.  And when I wasn't representing that area of the city in this 
legislature, I had the honour to represent those people in the council in 
the city of Saskatoon, and I don't want to let the opportunity pass to be 
able to say to those people that I've appreciated their support over the 
many years that they've given me the support, and I also want to comment 
that I think they have a fine sense of political judgement. 
 
I cannot let this opportunity pass, Mr. Speaker, without making some 
comments about the Mulroney PCs at Ottawa, the Mulroney PC government at 
Ottawa -- the serious and costly impact on our Saskatchewan way of life 
economically and culturally, the disquiet of the GST (goods and services 



 

 

tax), Meech Lake, exceeded only by the negative impact of the Mulroney free 
trade deal and the Saskatchewan farm crisis.  As if that were not enough, 
Mr. Speaker, and I repeat from last evening, Saskatchewan people are 
bedevilled by the terrible Tory twin MPs from Ottawa -- Benoi pît and 
Lucien Bouchard. 
 
Benoi pît Bouchard perpetrated the great VIA Rail train robbery on the 
province of Saskatchewan.  The full impact of the loss of VIA passenger 
service to Saskatchewan is not known yet on increased unemployment, on 
increased personal travel costs for people in Saskatchewan, on increased 
provincial highway costs for the province of Saskatchewan, and on 
inconvenience to the travelling public in Saskatchewan, especially seniors 
and people on lower income. 
 
Some may remember how the PC MPs, I might say, while in opposition in 
Ottawa protested the VIA Rail cuts by the Liberal government in 1981.  The 
PC Party started up a task force at that time.  And the task force was 
called, "The Last Straw."  I have a copy of the task force here.  It was 
headed up by none other than the hon. chairman, Don Mazankowski, privy 
counsellor, Member of Parliament, chairman of the task force on rail 
passenger service, of the Conservative Party, October 1981. 
 
The recommendations of that task force are quite interesting and 
enlightening, I'm sure, to the people of Saskatchewan who are interested in 
rail passenger transportation in Saskatchewan.  The second recommendation 
in the task force report reads: 
 

 The task force believes the federal government has a responsibility to 
ensure that rail passenger service in Canada be retained, modernized, and 
expanded as part of our national transportation system. 

 
And in fact the Conservative Party in Ottawa went into the election 
campaign with that on their mast-head.  They were going to improve and 
expand passenger service, specifically VIA Rail.  Further on, the report 
reads: 
 

 The government's current policy of increasing the level of subsidization . 
. . 

 
Of course the Tories here in opposition are talking about the Liberal 
government when they say: 
 

 The government's current policy of increasing the level of subsidization 
for other modes of transportation while decreasing the support for rail 
passenger service is extremely short-sighted and totally out of tune with 
Canadian transportation needs and concerns regarding energy conservation, 
urban sprawl, pollution and safety. 

 
The Conservatives of this day only need to look at their own charts in the 
report to get some leads on energy conservation, for example -- one of the 
points they mention in their recommendation.  If you check the chart that 
they enclosed in the task force report, you will find that they've rated 
the energy requirements in BTUs (British thermal units) per seat-mile on 



 

 

different forms of transportation. 
 
The three lowest are electric train, diesel train, and current train 
equipment, and they refer to the Rapido.  The next one, the next most 
efficient is inter-city bus, and then the fourth most efficient is a 
Volkswagen Rabbit diesel car with four people in it. 
 
You might be interested in noting, Mr. Speaker, that that same Volkswagen 
diesel car with only the driver in it is more than triple the inefficiency 
of the Volkswagen with four people in it.  So the Progressive Conservative 
government, when it got into power, completely ignored its own task force 
report. 
 
It goes on to say, it recommends the development of a national 
transportation policy which favours not only continued federal support, but 
indeed a stronger commitment for VIA Rail, and in particular increased 
funding for their capital investment and infrastructure -- exactly 
diametrically opposed to what the Conservative government did when they got 
into power. 
 

 The task force recommends the establishment of a special parliamentary 
committee with power to conduct hearings across Canada as it deems 
necessary.  Without restricting the generality of this mandate, the 
committee should be empowered to -- and it lists a number of things, Mr. 
Speaker -- examine all aspects of VIA Rail's existing passenger routes in 
all regions of Canada to determine the relationship in terms of support 
and priority with all other modes of transportation; hear all witnesses 
necessary to determine the rail passenger policy consistent with the needs 
of the travelling public, including transcontinental, inter-city and 
commuter services; call upon all necessary legal, regulatory, technical 
and financial expertise for the committee to carry out its duties. 

 
And this task force report goes on with further recommendations. 
 
(1445) 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, the shoe is on the other foot.  The PCs are the Ottawa 
government and the Liberals are in opposition.  Last year the PC government 
rammed through the VIA Rail passenger cuts without consultation, contrary 
to its recommendations in the task force report; without consensus, 
contrary to its recommendations in its own task force report. 
 
The Ottawa PCs completely forgot or ignored or both, their 1981 task force 
report, "The Last Straw." 
 
Meanwhile, right here in the province of Saskatchewan, the Saskatchewan 
Tory government was so compliant that their federal cousins acted on VIA 
Rail abandonment without fear of interruption from them -- not a word out 
of the Saskatchewan Tories. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the irony of the Ottawa Tory government now ignoring their own 
task force recommendation is only exceeded by them establishing a royal 
commission on national passenger transportation after, Mr. Speaker -- and I 



 

 

said after, Mr. Speaker -- after they have sacked VIA passenger service. 
 
Soon, on April 11 of this year, that royal commission will be here for -- 
dare I say it? -- consultation.  Ottawa Tories, in power since 1984, 
finally moving six years later.  Maybe we should be thankful for small 
mercies such as consultation, late, and after VIA's abandonment.  Maybe, 
maybe we should be thankful. 
 
The other terrible Tory twin was Lucien Bouchard, has stumbled all over his 
feet -- and indeed Saskatchewan feet too -- on environmental matters.  The 
on-again, off-again Rafferty-Alameda environmental hearings will be 
recorded in history as a a classic Conservative bungle.  Again, 
Conservatives at Ottawa and Regina are causing endless frustration, 
millions of wasted taxpayer dollars, regardless of what happens from this 
point onward on the Rafferty-Alameda situation.  Again, Mr. Speaker, yet 
another example of PC governments at Ottawa and Regina proceeding without 
consultation and without consensus. 
 
Mr. Speaker, could one conclude that Tory twins are terrible twins?  
Possibly.  Could we also conclude that twin Tory governments at Ottawa and 
Regina are terrible for Saskatchewan?  Well, I suppose we'll find out about 
that.  Massive federal neglect or adverse decision making cannot be 
ignored; however, in due course, in due course, Mr. Speaker, we must turn 
our attention directly to Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, following closely on the heels of the GigaText scandal in 1989 
is an altogether new development.  Before I get into that GigaText Tory 
scandal, I note that the GigaText scandal has made it into the "Believe it 
or Not" column on the Report on Business magazine in March 1990. 
 
This Globe and Mail magazine has a page called Spectrum, and I have that 
page out of The Globe and Mail.  I am sure the members will be interested 
in hearing about it.  It's headed up "Spectrum: Statistical Lore for 
Everyday Living".  What these are, Mr. Speaker, is astounding facts and 
figures to confound the minds of the people. 
 
I'll give you an example of one.  Did you know that the combined military 
budget in 1987 of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the Warsaw 
Pact was $957 billion?  Interesting figure. 
 
Let me go on to another one.  The price paid at a London auction for a red 
1962 Ferrari, 250 GTO, was $18.8 million.  Another interesting fact. 
 
The third one I want to refer to.  The cost to the Ontario government for a 
10-minute video tape produced to promote Ontario as a good place to invest 
is $300,000.  There's a supplementary to that, Mr. Speaker. The cost to 
re-edit the 10-minute tape down to an eight and a half minute tape cost 
$450,000.  Another interesting statistic that will boggle the minds of the 
taxpayers of Canada. 
 
And here's one that boggles the minds of the taxpayers of Saskatchewan.  
Investment by the Saskatchewan government in 1988 and 1989 in GigaText 
translation systems inc., whose computers were supposed to translate the 



 

 

province's laws into French, $5.3 million.  And I don't think that's the 
final price.  I don't think that's the bottom line. There's more to come on 
that one. 
 
There's a supplementary to that one, Mr. Speaker, and it's this.  The 
number of laws translated before the government shut down the firm in 
November 1989, the answer is zero.  Zero. 
 
The new development that I referred to earlier, Mr. Speaker, will again put 
Saskatchewan in the headlines.  This particular development concerns the 
STC Eagle bus manufacturing caper.  Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that a 
tender and purchase of a few buses would be a relatively simple, 
straightforward procedure.  It follows, Mr. Speaker, I must ask: why are 
there at least five separate national and international investigations or 
inquiries under way at the same time on this matter?  Simple little matter 
about purchasing a few buses for Saskatchewan. 
 
There are an FBI investigation, Royal Canadian Mounted Police 
investigation, a Sask transportation internal inquiry, a Sask 
government-ordered audit of STC, and a judicial inquiry.  There are 
probably internal investigations under way at Eagle bus manufacturing co. 
and Greyhound as well.  Of course, those, Mr. Speaker, are tangential to 
the main Saskatchewan issue, and I don't want to digress from the subject. 
 
It seems that the grand jury in Texas believe that there was sufficient 
evidence to proceed to court trial.  Some evidence suggests that a kickback 
was paid on the bus purchase which may have found its way into political 
pockets right here in Saskatchewan.  Right here in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
In GigaText, the Premier, attempting to quiet the . . . I want to say that 
these Tory scandals, as they arise, as each one arises, exposes more 
ironies for the people to comprehend.  In GigaText, the Premier, attempting 
to quietly circumvent the law of the land on a very sensitive issue, namely 
translating Saskatchewan statutes from English to French, succeeded in 
getting loads of publicity for Saskatchewan and himself. 
 
The Eagle bus purchase from the United States caused me to read The Eagle 
Has Landed just last weekend while I was back in Saskatoon.  The Eagle Has 
Landed is a fascinating World War II story about a covert operation.  The 
objective was to kidnap Winston Churchill during the war; lacking that, to 
assassinate him. 
 
Woven into the story are such code phrases for communication purposes as, 
"The Eagle has landed," meaning the specially trained team has been 
successfully parachuted onto the English coast.  That's what "The Eagle has 
landed" means. 
 
"The fledglings are in the nest," meaning the special team had a successful 
rendezvous with their English underground contacts.  And finally, "The 
Eagle is blown," meaning the operation was a failure.  And it was, Mr. 
Speaker.  There were no survivors. 
 



 

 

When consensus Dallas is complete, I believe that the conclusion will be: 
"The Eagle is blown" -- a failure, Mr. Speaker.  Whether there will be any 
survivors will be decided by the Saskatchewan electorate in due course, in 
due course. 
 
I don't believe, Mr. Speaker, in psychics.  However, I couldn't help but 
notice an article in the December 30, 1989, Star-Phoenix. I have it here, 
Mr. Speaker.  It says psychic reader, Santana, and spiritualist, Madam 
Karmine, had made predictions for the coming year.  They predicted 
earthquakes in British Columbia, and both psychics predicted political 
scandals will rock the province of Saskatchewan before 1990 ends. 
 
Now I still don't believe in psychics, Mr. Speaker.  I do believe that 
psychics are people whose reputation, superficial though it may be, depends 
on building a record of accurate predictions.  The successful psychics tend 
to make predictions based on the likelihood of an event occurring. 
 
Example, right out of the psychic's prediction. An earthquake will shake 
B.C. before June 1990.  Mr. Speaker, you see, chances are it will happen 
anyway. 
 
Another example.  Scandals will rock Saskatchewan before the end of 1990.  
Again you see, Mr. Speaker, chances are it's going to happen anyway.  It's 
going to happen anyway. 
 
The disquieting part of the predictions of the psychic is this, and let me 
read it to you: 
 

 Something will surface to embarrass the Devine government after the spring 
of 1990. 

 
You will recall spring only occurred a few days ago.  The STC (Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company) Eagle bus purchase occurred long before that.  Does 
that mean that it's a question of bad timing by the psychics, or is there 
more coming down the tube by way of scandals from this government? 
 
In looking at this particular throne speech, I cannot help but be impressed 
with the gimmicks that this government uses at budget time.  In 1985 they 
had the computer budget game. That former well-known minister of Finance, 
Mr. Andrew, who is now safely ensconsed in Minneapolis, brought in the 
computer budget game.  The minister of Finance, the previous minister of 
Finance had consultations before budget time, just before budget time.  The 
present Minister of Finance had hurried consultation with the public in 
Saskatchewan just before budget time this year. 
 
Now we all know, any of us that have been in government, that budgets are 
starting to be prepared in early summer, and virtually are put together by 
the end of the calendar year.  But I received a letter from the Minister of 
Finance and I have a copy . . . not only one, I got three.  The Minister of 
Finance sent me three, exactly the same -- they're all the same, Mr. 
Speaker; I have them here -- inviting me to come out for consultations 
about the upcoming provincial budget.  Not only that, he ran an ad in the 
Saskatoon Star-Phoenix saying that there would be a meeting in Saskatoon on 



 

 

February 13 at 7 p.m. at the Sheraton Cavalier.  So this goes on and on and 
on about this consultation. 
 
That wasn't quite enough for the Premier.  The Premier says, look, we've 
got to give this thing about consultation more hype.  And here it is in the 
throne speech, Consensus Saskatchewan.  This is the new gimmick of this 
Premier to give a little more hype to consulting the people of Saskatchewan 
for budget preparation. 
 
What is Consensus Saskatchewan, which some people have the temerity to 
shorten to con Saskatchewan?  Well it doesn't say much about who's going to 
be selected or how they're going to be selected; what's the mandate of this 
con Saskatchewan; what's the structure; accountable to whom; meetings, 
public or otherwise; what will be the format of the meetings; budget for 
this con Saskatchewan, how much; recommendations -- will the government 
accept the recommendations of con Saskatchewan? 
 
I thought maybe the Premier -- you know, a long shot, maybe he'll have 
something here that'll get him into shape before his June election, if in 
fact he has a June election in mind. 
 
(1500) 
 
But my hopes were dashed the other day because the Deputy Premier said in a 
press release that, don't expect any results from con Saskatchewan until at 
least the fall of 1990.  So we have to . . . The crisis was yesterday, 
we're here today, the Premier is presenting his solution to the problem, 
which is con Saskatchewan, and the Deputy Premier is saying there'll be no 
results until at least fall. 
 
I think the people of Saskatchewan will recognize this for exactly what it 
is, a clever public relations plan to involve a wide spectrum of the public 
and thereby implicate them in the government's folly to date; in short, 
share the blame with all the citizens.  Makes a lighter load for the 
Premier then. 
 
The Star-Phoenix saw through this immediately.  In their editorial on March 
20, 1990 they have this to say: 
 

 By making this proposal, the government showed that it lacks the essential 
qualities of vision and leadership (and to that I say, amen). 

 
They conclude in the Star-Phoenix editorial: 
 

 But the question remains, why does the government seem reluctant to do 
what it was elected to do: govern? 

 
And I say amen to that. 
 
Now lest the Liberal party be outdone, Mr. Speaker, they jumped on the band 
wagon too, but bigger and better.  Ms. Haverstock of the Liberal Party said 
that she's going to establish a senate in Saskatchewan.  And she said  . . 
. (inaudible interjection) . . . Well I thought the Premier's plan was bad 



 

 

enough, to overlay all the structures we have for decision making in 
Saskatchewan with another hundred people and the associated bureaucratic 
nightmare and expense, but the leader of the Liberal Party says, I'm going 
to set up a senate.  And who is going to be in the senate, Mr. Speaker?  
Well it's going to be the mayors, the reeves, the Indian chiefs, etc. 
 
And I went to the . . . I took the opportunity to go to the Saskatchewan 
Municipal Directory to find out how big will this be, this senate that 
we're instituting in Saskatchewan.  Saskatchewan people have some fairly 
strong feelings about senates, and I would caution the Leader of the 
Liberal Party to be careful when she's foisting this senate upon the 
Saskatchewan people, because of the cities, towns, villages, resort 
villages, northern towns, northern villages, northern hamlets, rural 
municipalities, organized hamlets, and Indian chiefs totals about 1,054 
people.  So the Leader of the Liberal Party is going to have a senate that 
is the Triple E senate.  She's grabbing on that popular phrase that this is 
going to be a Triple E senate: elected, equal, and effective. 
 
Now I don't know what that means, but what the Leader of the Liberal Party 
has done here is one-up the Premier of Saskatchewan which I did not think 
was possible.  She has established a senate which will be 10 times as 
large, 10 times as bureaucratic, and 10 times as expensive.  And she then 
caps if off -- and this must be due to nai pïvety -- the second reform is 
that she'll make it illegal to introduce a budget without going to the 
Lieutenant Governor for special permission. 
 
What does that mean to the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker?  It means 
exactly this.  This government couldn't introduce a deficit budget unless 
they go to Brian Mulroney in Ottawa and get his permission, unless they go 
to the granddaddy of deficits in Ottawa and get his permission to introduce 
yet another deficit budget in Saskatchewan.  They've already got us $4 
billion in the hole through their own ineptitude, and the Liberal leader is 
suggesting that they go to Ottawa and get the permission of Brian Mulroney 
to bring in a deficit budget.  My heavens! 
 
I am sensitive about this because when we were the Government of 
Saskatchewan for 11 years, we never had a deficit, surplus budgets every 
year.  This government has nothing but deficit budgets, nothing but deficit 
budgets.  And they suggest from time to time, well they don't have the kind 
of money to work with that we had.  I did a little bit of checking, Mr. 
Speaker.  You check back in 1981 the revenue from taxation, etc., for our 
government, the New Democratic government, was two billion four -- 2 
billion, 400 thousand dollars.  This government in 1989 had over $4 billion 
of revenue -- double, double the amount of revenue -- and they couldn't 
balance the books.  They could not balance the books. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, this throne speech had some humour in it; it has some 
understatement, some overstatements.  I can't help but refer to some of 
them.  One of the overstatements of course was ". . . the world has 
declared economic war on Saskatchewan."  The world is zeroing in on 
Saskatchewan.  How dramatic.  What an overstatement, Mr. Speaker.  What an 
overstatement.  We want serious attention to the problems of Saskatchewan, 
not rubbish like that by the Premier of the province. 



 

 

 
Some of the humour, here's some of the humour: 
 

 My government proposes to lead this province through the next decade and 
into the next century . . . 

 
Can you believe that?  These people have the temerity to suggest that 
they're going to lead this province for the next 10 years, with their eight 
_year record of destruction in the economic life of Saskatchewan, that the 
people of Saskatchewan are going to give them 10 years more?  Not a chance, 
not a chance, Mr. Speaker.  The people of Saskatchewan are wiser than that, 
I'm sure. 
 
This government says to this group of a hundred they're going to set up -- 
they call it ConSask -- we need ideas about how we're going to run the 
province.  Well some of the ideas . . . and they've been asking the people: 
where can we cut?  Where can we cut costs? 
 
Well I can give them a few suggestions about where they can start cutting 
costs.  I've got a list here that will choke a horse.  Here's one.  These 
are some of the expenses they've made that they could have cut out.  And 
there are probably some that they're making now that they could cut out: 
government payment to PC Party advertising company, Dome Advertising, for 
advertising costs related to a chamber of commerce conference in Saskatoon 
to promote free trade -- $26,800 they spent there; another $61,198 
additional costs to the provincial . . . or from the provincial government 
for the chamber of commerce free trade conference -- the same conference, 
another $61,000.  More money wasted. 
 
Here's some other places.  They paid defeated member of parliament, Stan 
Korchinsky, $45,000 to advise this government -- to advise this government 
-- how to lobby the Mulroney government in Ottawa.  That's their kissing 
cousins in Ottawa and they didn't know how to lobby them.  And they got a 
defeated Tory MP to tell them how to lobby and they paid him $45,000, Mr. 
Speaker.  Utterly ridiculous. 
 
The new cabinet, 146,400 additional salary costs for four extra cabinet 
ministers that the Premier added to his cabinet in October.  Another 86,295 
additional salary costs of 11 PC MLAs that were appointed as legislative 
secretaries.  Agreed there's only 10 now; one has gone off to his reward in 
Hong Kong.  He is not about.  I have $1,524,600 additional staff, office, 
and travel expenses for the four additional cabinet ministers and 11 
legislative secretaries.  Boy, they sure are spending money on that 
cabinet, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another area they could save money.  They paid $638 air fare for Paul 
Schoenhals to travel to the Banff School of Management.  Well I agree Paul 
Schoenhals needed that training but he's gone off to work in Alberta now; 
he's no longer with us. 
 
They also paid additional 2,600 for Paul Schoenhals and Chuck Childers to 
travel to West Virginia.  And they paid 3,930 for air fare for Chuck 
Childers and Mrs. Childers to attend a fertilizer conference in Dallas.  



 

 

Mr. Childers should have stayed right here in Saskatchewan because that 
front bench produces a lot more fertilizer than Dallas does. 
 
Number four, $100,000 salary and benefits for the first full-time chairman 
of the Potash Corporation, defeated PC cabinet minister Paul Schoenhals, 
and as I've remarked he is no longer in that position; $550,000 annual 
salary and potential bonuses for Chuck Childers, the Premier's appointee as 
president of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan.  Lots of room for 
cutting expenses here, Mr. Speaker.  And I could go on.  There's many more 
opportunities. 
 
Let me give you just one of them.  I have the seating plan for this House, 
and we find that the member for Kinistino is the Legislative Secretary for 
the Provincial Secretary, the member for Souris-Cannington.  Now the 
Provincial Secretary is a nothing job, quite frankly.  You know, it's quite 
common for one cabinet minister to have Minister of Justice and a couple of 
other portfolios and also have the Provincial Secretary.  But we have the 
member for Souris-Cannington, a cabinet minister as the Provincial 
Secretary, and he has a Legislative Secretary, the member for Kinistino.  
You could abolish both those positions. 
 
You look at the seating plan here, you see the member for Rosetown-Elrose.  
He's the Legislative Secretary to the member for Regina Wascana . . . this 
government has created a job for.  They've chipped off a little bit here 
and there and given him a job as the Minister of Family.  But he's got a 
Legislative Secretary. 
 
 DYou have the Minister of Justice, the member for Qu'Appelle-Lumsden.  
He's the Minister of Justice and the Minister of Telephones.  He has a 
Legislative Secretary, the member for Arm River.  You have the member for 
Rural Saskatchewan.  He has a Legislative Secretary, the member for 
Saltcoats.  There's another bunch of jobs you could get away with. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, this list of obvious cuts that could be made will not be 
made by this government.  They're going ahead on their wild spending spree 
regardless of the depth of the debt the province is getting into. 
 
The Premier is an economist -- the Premier is an economist -- and the 
Premier gives validity to that old statement, if you laid all the 
economists end to end, you wouldn't get anywhere -- you wouldn't get 
anywhere. 
 
There are only two groups that are proud of this throne speech, that is 
dinosaur Tories in this province and the rats, because they've done away 
with the rat eradication program.  This is a new high because they've got 
this program not even started yet.  It was announced last year, and they've 
done away with it before the starting date.  So the rats are quite happy 
about this throne speech. 
 
Regardless, Mr. Speaker, regardless of what I've said, I am optimistic 
about Saskatchewan's long-term outlook.  Given that there is a change in 
leadership and a change in direction, I cannot support this throne speech.  
It will not answer the problems that are facing Saskatchewan today.  It's a 



 

 

con job on Saskatchewan people and I cannot support it.  Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  First of all, I would like to 
pass on my compliments to Her Honour in the eloquent address which she gave 
to this legislature last week in presenting the Speech from the Throne.  I 
think that Her Honour is certainly growing into the position most admirably 
and does a fine job as Her Majesty's representative for the province of 
Saskatchewan.  I'm sure, Mr. Speaker, in the various venues that you have 
the opportunity in being with Her Honour, you certainly can see that that 
progress is there. 
 
I also would like to compliment the mover and seconder from the government 
side.  I think these two individuals in their service in the legislature, 
one individual for some eight years and the other for coming up to four, do 
a fine job as representatives of what is rural Saskatchewan.  We know that 
rural Saskatchewan is made up of farmers, individual farmers and their 
families, spread out across the vast potential of our province in mostly 
small towns and villages. 
 
And I think these two representatives, the member from Moosomin and the 
member from Nipawin, are a good cross-section of the type of people who 
make up our province from the near-city size of Moosomin, the little, 
smaller area of Nipawin, down to some of the very small towns and villages 
and, if you will, elevator stops which are commonplace in our province.  
And I just want to commend both of them on the excellent job that they did 
in representing their ridings and also in representing the thoughts and 
aspirations which are common to a throne speech, and particularly to this 
one. 
 
(1515) 
 
I'd like to address, Mr. Speaker, some of the areas that I saw, some of the 
pillars of Saskatchewan which were in that throne speech.  And irregardless 
of what we've heard from some of the members opposite, I think if they had 
listened they would have seen certain areas that we in this province have 
always considered to be pillars of strength. 
 
That throne speech talked about the growth of human potential in our 
province, about developing our people to meet challenges into the future 
and into the next century.  That throne speech talked about the stability 
and the growth of our communities; some of the things that we can do to add 
to those strengths.  It talked about the diversification of our economy and 
the development of our resources. 
 
All of those areas, Mr. Speaker, impact, I believe, in certain parts of the 
various portfolios which I have the honour of handling in the cabinet of 
this government.  And I wish to comment on them individually and how they 
tie together and interact with people in our province. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to talk about the growth of human 



 

 

potential that was talked about in the throne speech, and some of the 
things that I see both for my constituency and my province, and certainly 
those areas that I represent. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, all of us who sit in this legislature believe that 
the people in this province are of strong character.  They have a fibre, a 
moral fibre that is without parallel in our country.  And I think last 
night that the member from Turtleford, the Minister of Culture, 
Multiculturalism, very eloquently explained some of those things that make 
Saskatchewan people so special and so strong.  And I think all members of 
the legislature appreciated that address and some of the points that that 
member touched upon last night. 
 
As that member said, all people in this province come from somewhere, 
either in their recent memory, in the recent memory of their grandparents, 
other than the native people who were here for thousands of years, and 
certainly bring a cultural fabric to our province that is mixed in with 
those that have come afterwards.  My own family is no different, Mr. 
Speaker, and you've heard me talk about it in past addresses to this 
legislature, people who came from Sweden, from Great Britain, from Ireland, 
obviously a diverse mix, as many in this legislature would experience in 
their families. 
 
One of the things that has stood out about all those people that came here 
and people of Saskatchewan was the fact that they throughout their history, 
because of climate and other things, economic conditions that have been 
imposed upon them by climate and world events, have always had the ability 
to draw together and reach a consensus about things that would affect their 
community. 
 
And I have heard a great deal of derision by people across the way on the 
word consensus.  They have used many different forms of that word to 
denigrate the Speech from the Throne.  And I think that's unfortunate, Mr. 
Speaker, because I know in every community in this province when anybody 
got together, whether it was putting up a new backstop for the ball diamond 
or fixing the boards on the hockey rink or talking about improvements in 
the school, there was always that ability for the people in that community 
to sit down together and reach some form of consensus. 
 
And you saw that really be strengthened, Mr. Speaker, when there was a 
difficulty, either difficult economic times or a tragedy within the 
community.  And I think of things like the curling rink or the skating rink 
burning down, perhaps a problem in the school or the church when people 
would gather together and know that because that particular circumstance 
was inordinate or more difficult than we had seen in the past, they would 
draw together.  There would be some very harsh words said sometimes and 
difficult arguments carried forth, but at the end of the day usually there 
was a consensus in that community as to the solution. 
 
And I think particularly of my own community, the day that the one-room 
school was to be shut down.  I was in grade 5 at the time, and I remember 
it was held in the winter-time and we had one of those winters we had lots 
of snow.  And the snow banks had piled up so that you could look in the 



 

 

windows of the hall. 
 
And the people in my community had drawn together to discuss the closing of 
the one-room school and the potential busing of people into the city.  And 
I remember it so well that day because as the children outside were playing 
on the snow banks, one of us got a little over-zealous and went through the 
window and ended up in somebody's lap in this discussion. 
 
But this discussion was heated.  It was no holds barred because people 
talked about the store and the community going down because the school 
wasn't there.  They talked about the elevator disappearing because the 
school wasn't there.  They talked about all the things that they felt so 
strongly about that had been developed in that community over a space of 50 
or 60 years. 
 
At the end of the day, the decision was made that for the good of the 
children of that community, for the ability for them to access what their 
parents considered would be a better education -- and they were the 
taxpayers who would be involved in this new school -- the decision was made 
to close the school and bus the children in. 
 
And it was felt after that meeting, Mr. Speaker, that some people in that 
community probably would never speak to one another again.  And I suppose 
for a while that was the case, because there were very deep feelings there. 
 
But I think in retrospect, Mr. Speaker, that that school that I started 
attending in 1962 where children were bused in from all over Thunder Creek 
School Division, in which my son now attends as a grade 1, has been a 
benefit to the people of those communities, because certainly the ability 
for me to access a good and advanced education was there.  And even though 
many of us, in our hearts, think fondly of the one-room schoolhouse and the 
store and the elevator in my community, for it to exist some 12 miles from 
the city of Moose Jaw perhaps was a little foolish, in not only economic 
terms but in the ability of us to move on into the decades. 
 
And I think when we talk about Consensus Saskatchewan, as the Deputy 
Premier, I think, put it so rightly: Saskatchewan is in a phase of 
transition.  We've had very difficult economic times because of 
international conditions in both economics, trade wars, and also Mother 
Nature has been most unkind as far as the weather goes in our province.  
People know that we're moving into an age when the transmission of thoughts 
and ideas is almost instantaneous.  Those decisions about busing kids 25 
years ago are now the decisions of whether the ratepayers of a particular 
school unit can afford the computers and the satellite dishes and the 
technology to keep their students in tune with a world that absolutely 
moves at the speed of light. 
 
And I think that Consensus Saskatchewan is a fair and honest attempt in 
these times to draw people together who have the ability to take the best 
interests of their community and meld them together and give advice to all 
levels of government.  And I certainly don't take that, Mr. Speaker, as a 
personal slight on myself as an elected representative in this legislature.  
Anyone in this legislature who serves here that feels, Mr. Speaker, that 



 

 

they know all the answers to the problems in our province, I would suggest, 
had better think about leaving this particular institution, because 
obviously you're stuck in a rut and can't allow your mind to expand and 
bring in new thoughts.  And I'm afraid, Mr. Speaker, from what I've seen 
from some of the members opposite, that they should seriously think, when 
the next election rolls around, about perhaps going on to other venues, 
because obviously they have said to the people of Saskatchewan, we know it 
all, and there is no room for anyone else. 
 
And I had hoped, Mr. Speaker, that minds would be more open than that, that 
the Leader of the Opposition in his new-found ways that I will talk about a 
little later, vis-a-vis the energy sector, perhaps had allowed his members 
to expand their minds a little bit.  But we certainly haven't seen it to 
this date in the replies that have come from members opposite. 
 
I think it's fair-minded if these people sitting together facilitating 
ideas and perhaps paid by the taxpayer in this province for their gas 
mileage, if they do come up with ideas that make some sense in the '90s 
into the 21st century, that we, as elected politicians, would have the 
consideration to look at those ideas and see how we could implement them. 
 
Obviously, ultimately, the members who sit in this Chamber have the ability 
to make into law the things that are deemed necessary by our citizens.  And 
only the people in this legislature will have to take that ultimate 
responsibility upon their shoulders, because they're the ones that stand in 
their place and vote.  But I do believe that any time that we would not 
seek advice from the public, in whatever manner, that we would do a 
disservice to this institution. 
 
Moving on a bit, Mr. Speaker, in talking about stability and growth of our 
communities, I think it's something that is really on the minds of people 
out there because of the economic conditions that we've gone through.  And 
it's primarily to do with the grain economy, which has been a stand-by of 
this province, which indeed has been the foundation of our province.  And 
it was based upon the fact that elevators were spaced on rail lines every 
nine or 11 miles because that's as far as a horse could draw a wagon. 
 
And we've all known that that process has been consolidating for some time, 
that we have seen rail line abandonment, we have seen the grain companies 
consolidating their handling facilities.  And I think our towns and 
villages and the people from the rural communities that go in and support 
those towns and villages were accepting a lot of this transition, providing 
that the flow of money in the rural community stayed strong.  And because 
of the things that I mentioned earlier, that flow of money, because the 
grain economy was in such trouble, has virtually dried up.  It has really 
pointed out to people in our smaller communities that there have to be 
other alternatives to the grain dollar flowing through those communities to 
make themselves viable. 
 
I've been very fortunate, Mr. Speaker, to be a part of that process as we 
work with those communities to try and build stability and growth into 
them.  As minister of SEDCO, I have a number of programs which are very 
active with people in Saskatchewan right now.  And I'd like to say to 



 

 

start, Mr. Speaker, as we talk about SEDCO, the previous speaker also 
talked about SEDCO and had some very unkind remarks for that particular 
institution. 
 
And I'd just like to say to people in this province that the GigaText 
affair, as the opposition talks about, I think did a great disservice to 
the institution of SEDCO which has been an integral part of our province 
for some 27 years.  It was started by the Liberal government of Ross 
Thatcher back in the 1960s, was carried on by the NDP government during the 
1970s, and of course has been part of this Conservative government since 
1982. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think since taking over this portfolio it has been freely 
admitted by myself and by this government that the GigaText venture in 
translation of French was not perhaps the wisest decision, given the 
economic times and the mood of the people in this province.  And I think 
it's been freely admitted, Mr. Speaker, that yes, there was a loss 
associated with that endeavour to translate from English to French with 
computers.  It was looked upon as having some very real possibilities in 
the high tech field; another diversification tool, if you will, which could 
have added to the economic well-being of our province. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, the fact that any time we get into an R&D (research 
and development) situation with something like this and you set stringent 
time lines upon it, that is not the wisest thing to do.  And certainly the 
GigaText business proved that out to us, because those time lines became 
unrealistic and those losses were incurred. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, we've been very open and above-board with that 
process, the public advertising of the SEDCO assets.  And certainly, Mr. 
Speaker, there is nothing there, nothing there to hide, as far as SEDCO 
goes. 
 
I can't help but wonder, Mr. Speaker, in this whole process, if the 
GigaText translation thing had been from English to Japanese or Mandarin, 
if the reaction of the members opposite would have been quite the same.  I 
find that when we hear such strong representations today in keeping our 
country whole and talking about the French/English entity in our country, I 
can't help but wonder, Mr. Speaker, if it wasn't the French part about it 
that made the members opposite so owly in their chasing of the GigaText 
affair. 
 
(1530) 
 
Because I see, Mr. Speaker, a school out here at White City, Saskatchewan, 
where they have a Mandarin Chinese class being taught now where children 
will go through their entire school system learning Mandarin Chinese, and I 
just know that the ways of the world are that we must have the ability to 
communicate with each other and translate various documents.  And I know 
that at some point down the road that it will be done by computer, that 
there'll be great wealth created by that, and whoever has the tool at their 
disposal will certainly have an advantage over others in this world trading 
economy which we have.  And I think that down the road that thing will be 



 

 

so commonplace that everyone will accept it. 
 
In the SEDCO portfolio, Mr. Speaker, we have a couple of programs that I 
would really like to talk about.  They are fairly new to the province.  
They've only been up and running for some 10 months, and I think by their 
very success they are things that we should talk about, because they fit 
right into this building and growth of our communities in the 
diversification.  I'm talking about the participating loans division of 
SEDCO which was announced last spring. 
 
I think this particular tool has been tremendously successful.  We have had 
over 3,000 direct inquiries and have generated nearly 800 applications with 
that particular program.  We have seen over $27 million approved in 359 
applications. 
 
And I think that speaks well for a program, Mr. Speaker, whose basic design 
is to go out and lever money from other sources.  We, in effect, with the 
participating loan division, become an equity partner with various 
companies who are into a whole realm of different areas.  It helps that 
company stay viable because it does lever that extra partner, that bank 
financing, perhaps money in the community, that feels very strongly about 
the success of that particular enterprise.  And of course we don't 
participate in the profits, you might say, until that company is viable in 
producing a profit, and then we take a fairly hefty interest rate. 
 
I'd just like to run over some of the areas, Mr. Speaker, that so far 
people have been involved in with this particular loans division.  We've 
had food processing, manufacturing of clothing and household goods, 
products for nursing homes and hospitals.  We've had services which 
included contractors, equipment rentals, custom hauling and waste removal 
-- the environmental side is drawing a great deal of attention from this 
particular loans vehicle.  We've had retail businesses, and it's just 
really covered the piece out there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It, along with another tool which has been the small-business loans 
associations, have been an integral part of the rural development 
organizations which we've seen springing up out there.  These 
small-business loans associations are a vehicle whereby local people get 
together in a community or in an RDC (Rural Development Corporation) and 
they have a $50,000 loan from SEDCO which they in turn then use as seed 
money to promote the establishment of new enterprises and businesses in 
their towns and villages and communities.  And I think that it's important 
that the people on the local level have the ability to supervise this 
money, to have the ability to look at the proposals that come forward and 
analyse them, because oftentimes that we'll have a community that has an 
expertise or a special want or a special niche out there that they know 
what they need to fill.  And the small business loans association, by being 
a local entity with the ability to put that seed money out to a maximum of 
$5,000, I think can make those choices as wisely as anyone out there. 
 
And the fact that it's encouraged communities to draw together into an RDC 
where you may have one or two or three towns and two or three RMs drawn 
together, sharing things like fire protection, EMO (Emergency Measures 



 

 

Organization), and indeed some of the recreational facilities which they 
wish to enjoy in the rural parts of our province.  And the loans 
association is one more tool that they have at their disposal. 
 
But of course, Mr. Speaker, I expect that these particular tools which are 
available from SEDCO to people all across our province will be even further 
enhanced when the community bond idea is drawn to its full structure and we 
know that the people in a community will have the ability to invest money 
that will be guaranteed by the government.  I'm sure that both the small 
loans associations and the participating loans will be important tools 
which will go along with that particular vehicle in stabilizing and 
encouraging growth in many of our rural communities. 
 
Just in parting, Mr. Speaker, before leaving this particular area I just 
wanted to leave some numbers with members of the legislature.  Sixty-four 
per cent of all the loans in these two areas have been in rural 
Saskatchewan.  They have created 1,392 jobs at present and have preserved 
or maintained another 2,244 jobs.  And I think for a program, Mr. Speaker, 
that has only been in existence for some 10 months, those are pretty 
amazing statistics.  It means that people all across our province are 
conversant with them.  It means that people in the business resource 
centres around the province have been doing a good job in talking to local 
folks and encouraging them to set up new businesses and enterprises. 
 
And I think it speaks well for the employees and the people that work 
directly out of SEDCO.  They've obviously been very busy.  They've been on 
the road talking to people, or they could not have had the kind of results 
which we're seeing with these particular programs to date.  And I know as 
we go through 1990 that many other communities and people are going to 
access these programs, and I expect at the end of the year that those 
results will even be more significant. 
 
Another area, Mr. Speaker, I think that certainly fits in with the 
portfolios that I represent and is very important to our province, and that 
is the area of diversification.  It's an area that I certainly feel very 
strongly about, and is definitely one of the reasons that I sought elected 
office. 
 
Many members in this legislature before have heard me talk about things 
such as the potential for Lake Diefenbaker and the dream that was had back 
in the 1930s to place a dam on the south Saskatchewan water and the 
diversification and benefits that could flow through to communities 
throughout this province because of that.  That dream was realized in the 
1960s and has certainly been built upon by this government. 
 
There are many other areas out there, Mr. Speaker, which can be just as 
significant, and certainly we look at the whole value added area of our 
economy and what is possible.  And I've heard many remarks in this 
legislature over the last few days, and I'm sure I will hear into the weeks 
to come, about people leaving our province because of the difficult 
economic times here. 
 
And I think of where the majority of those people go.  And those people, 



 

 

Mr. Speaker, invariably head west.  A great number of my class-mates, the 
people that I went to school and university with, today reside in the 
province of Alberta. 
 
The provinces of Alberta and Saskatchewan have had similar types of 
histories from their inception into confederation in 1905 through the 
opening up of the country to homesteading, the growth that took place in 
the agricultural community up to the 1930s; some of the problems which 
occurred in both Alberta and Saskatchewan, the devastation of that time 
both economically and the destruction which took place to the land base of 
both provinces through erosion and the whims of nature. 
 
And as we know, both of those provinces chose a method, a way that was 
different than the norm in Canada.  Alberta became adherents to the Social 
Credit philosophy and stayed that way for a great number of years, and 
people in Saskatchewan adhered to the CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth 
Federation). 
 
And I think both provinces knew that there were inherent strengths 
available to overcome some of their problems, and certainly in this 
province we had the former CCF government of the '40s and '50s taking on 
the rural electrification program which was something that everyone in this 
province appreciated.  Some of the moves that they made to help farm 
communities consolidate themselves, the people in Alberta basically 
followed the same track under the Social Credit. 
 
We then came to the 1970s and there was quite a divergence, Mr. Speaker, in 
what happened.  The province of Alberta came into some resource wealth that 
was basically precipitated by the OPEC (Organization of Petroleum Exporting 
Countries) oil embargo of the United States.  And that wealth by and large 
was built into an infrastructure of value added industry and potential. 
 
And today when you go to the city of Calgary, you see a boom in housing 
construction.  You see a boom that is not tied to the hydrocarbon sector at 
all.  The price of oil has stabilized to around $20 a barrel.  It certainly 
isn't generating the kind of wealth and excitement which we saw back in the 
1970s, that boom, primarily as a result of the forward-looking Conservative 
government of Peter Lougheed in Alberta in the 1970s. 
 
In Saskatchewan the same choices were presented to people here.  It was 
resource wealth, the likes of which we had never seen before.  It was time 
to make some choices as to what we would do in the province of 
Saskatchewan.  And unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, choice here was, rather than 
build on an infrastructure which would support the tax base of this 
province 10 and 15 and 20 years down the road, the choice was to buy into 
existing enterprises. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can't help but think that some of those choices were made, 
not because they made good economic decisions but because they were rather 
politically expedient.  People in this province were told that it was smart 
to beat upon these bad multinationals because they were robbing us of our 
inheritance.  Mr. Speaker, I've always felt the way to deal with a 
multinational that was being unfair with the particular resource it was 



 

 

associated with, was to tax that particular resource and use the proceeds 
for the health and the education and the social services of the people in 
this province.  It wasn't to get into direct competition as the owner of 
that particular enterprise. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think some of things that we're trying to do in this 
decade of the '80s, and now as we move into the '90s -- and there's some 
very difficult economic times -- are the right decisions, because they add 
value to so many of the products which we have a natural abundance here and 
where we have natural advantage.  We haven't attempted to buy the 
enterprise and run it in direct competition, but rather have often joint 
ventured with people to add value to products in our province, add value 
which will be here for generations down the road.  Anyone that can tell me, 
Mr. Speaker, how to add value to natural gas other than to make it into 
fertilizer, I would certainly like to hear about it. 
 
The province of Alberta certainly figured that out a long time ago.  
They've had as many as six fertilizer plants using their vast natural gas 
reserves to manufacture fertilizer.  Unfortunately for the province of 
Alberta, most of that production is taken in the forest fringe area where 
there simply isn't any farm land.  Most of that production, other than what 
we saw at some smaller plants at Medicine Hat, was removed from the centre 
of agricultural Canada, and indeed the centre of agricultural North 
America. 
 
The very fact that we now have a viable natural gas industry in this 
province, Mr. Speaker, a natural gas industry by the way which is a result 
of this government, means that we would be remiss if we didn't add value to 
that product.  That natural gas industry occurred here because of the 
leadership of this government and my predecessor, the Deputy Premier, who 
was minister of Energy, in the deregulation process, which gave people in 
the exploration and development fields the opportunity to seek markets 
outside of our province. 
 
And I think that was very important, Mr. Speaker because it opened up a 
whole new realm to us.  One of those realms is the manufacture of 
fertilizer.  Nitrogen fertilizer will be without doubt one of the mainstays 
of agriculture in North America in the decades to come.  And it simply 
occurs with . . . as the longer you farm land, the less fibre that is 
associated with it, the more nitrogen fertilizer is needed in order to keep 
up production. 
 
I would hope down the road, Mr. Speaker, that as we recognize some of the 
environmental concerns and soil conservation concerns, that we marry that 
use of fertilizer with some very intelligent agronomics in farming; that we 
use our forages and that type of thing in order to safeguard our soils.  
But let no one kid you, Mr. Speaker, in order for the prairies of North 
America to maintain their productive ability to the limit as we've seen 
them, nitrogen fertilizer will be essential. 
 
(1545) 
 
The fact that we would joint venture with a company to place a fertilizer 



 

 

plant dead smack in the middle of the Regina plain, dead smack in the 
middle of North America in the most productive soils that we have, I think 
is a wise, not only economic decision, but simply one that enhances 
Saskatchewan's ability as a province in Canada. 
 
This will be a state of the art plant which will manufacture and produce 
fertilizer in competition with anyone in the world, Mr. Speaker.  It will 
use a resource that is one of the untold success stories, I think, in our 
province, and it will employ a great number of people. 
 
It will benefit the cities of Regina and Moose Jaw, and it will benefit 
many small communities that are close to that plant.  And certainly, Mr. 
Speaker, it will give the farmer in this province and the northern United 
States the ability to access good nitrogen fertilizer. 
 
And I can go on and on, Mr. Speaker, because the same thing is true in 
timber, in pulp.  The same thing is true in red meat.  And we've seen this 
government all through the 1980s joint venturing, getting in with people 
who are adding value to different products.  And that infrastructure, Mr. 
Speaker, will be there for a long, long time. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think when you contrast that type of approach with what 
we saw in the 1970s, you will know that this throne speech is dead on the 
money with the way that the future of this province should be developed.  
It's joint venturing, it's people being co-operative, it's people working 
together, using the tax dollars of this province along with people in 
private business to build on those strengths which are so natural to us. 
 
And I guess, Mr. Speaker, hindsight's always 20-20, but it would have been 
so nice to have seen those developments when we did have those resource 
dollars that, by the way, were worth a lot more then than they are today.  
Some of those things could have been built rather than buying existing 
institutions.  And they would have been employing all those people today, 
rather than have them go to the province of Alberta, which obviously did 
build them and now employs them. 
 
And I guess, Mr. Speaker, we're getting there.  Economic times are slowing 
us down.  But believe me, the will is there and this government will not 
flag or fail in its opportunity to build those things which we know will 
benefit us for so long in the future. 
 
Another part, Mr. Speaker, that I'm involved in as Minister of Energy and 
Mines, I believe needs to be talked about in this particular address 
because the development of our resources has always been one of the 
strengths and, as I recently said, you always have choices to make in the 
way in which you develop them and how you use the proceeds of those 
resources to enhance the quality of life in our province. 
 
The ministry of Energy and Mines is one that is very broad.  It covers 
everything in this province from gravel to oil to gas to uranium to 
bentonite to potash.  We are a province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, which is 
blessed with all five of the energies known to man.  We are a province that 
is blessed with many of the minerals which are integral to the production 



 

 

and building of things in an industrial society.  We are a province that is 
blessed with a natural fertilizer, potash, which is used all around the 
world to produce food for the growing millions of our world.  So it's a 
portfolio, Mr. Deputy Speaker, which obviously has a great deal of 
importance to our province, and one which contributes so many of the 
dollars which we use in other areas for that quality of life. 
 
And I really wonder, Mr. Speaker, at some of the comments that come from 
members opposite when they talk about this particular sector.  We have the 
case of the Leader of the Opposition who was on province-wide TV a few 
weeks ago talking about the rip-off of over $2 billion by people associated 
with the hydrocarbon industry in our province. 
 
And I know, Mr.Speaker, that in the years that I've been in this 
legislature that particular subject has come up in estimates every year.  
And after an explanation by the Minister of Energy, whoever it was at that 
particular time, and some arguments which were obviously irrefutable by 
members opposite, that discussion quickly died down because they knew the 
truth had been told.  There was no rip-off by the oil companies in the 
province of Saskatchewan, because we've got to remember, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, who we're talking about.  It's no longer the large multinationals.  
Those people have basically pulled out of the western sedimentary basin.  
We're talking about the IPACs (Independent Petroleum Association of Canada) 
and the SEPACs (Small Explorers and Producers Association of Canada) of the 
world.  We're talking about the people like Sceptre Resources, Upton 
Resources, people like some of my friends out at Kindersley who belong to 
SEPAC. 
 
Some of these are small, family-run operations, Mr. Deputy Speaker; others 
are mid-sized public companies, all of them, all of them, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, risking either their own capital or the capital of their 
shareholders to make a profit, definitely, but by doing so, striking oil 
and gas in the province of Saskatchewan and paying the highest royalties in 
North America.  And that is without doubt, Mr. Speaker.   The royalty curve 
in this province is the highest in North America.  Companies doing business 
here pay the most of any jurisdiction that they have the opportunity to do 
business in. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when the arguments are made, and so that members opposite 
clearly understand who they're talking about, they're talking about the 
people in Lloydminster and Kindersley and Swift Current and Shaunavon and 
Estevan and Weyburn.  They are talking about the livelihoods of many 
hundreds of families.  They're talking about the thousands of people 
employed in those areas. 
 
Let it be clear that the members opposite cannot go out of this Chamber, as 
the Leader of the Opposition did a week or so ago, and go before the 
business community of this province, and he did, and there were a number of 
people there from the oil and gas industry, and say that the NDP Party is 
launching out into a brave new world where we won't do those nasty things 
any more, and not talk about, at that particular time, this $2 billion 
rip-off, or as the member from Saskatoon Eastview said in his speech the 
other day in this House, $2.7 billion rip-off, and then come back into this 



 

 

House and talk about it again. 
 
And I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that if that is what you believe, if that 
is what you believe, then you better be honest with the folks in all of 
those communities.  And when you go out and you have dinner with the 
business community, you better be prepared to lay it on the line that you 
folks have ripped this province off for over $2 billion.  And you can't 
hide in the legislature and say those things and not do it out there.  And 
it's in Hansard for everyone to see, but unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, 
sometimes the people in the communities that I mentioned don't get the 
opportunity to read Hansard. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have a great deal of faith in the people involved in 
the oil and gas industry and the mineral development industries in our 
province, that they are going to continue to be an integral part of our 
community, that they are going to generate revenues for our province for a 
long time in the future.  I see a lot of exciting things down the road.  We 
have a natural gas industry which in 1980, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe 
had nine wells drilled.  We had nearly 1,000 wells drilled in this province 
last year, and that particular industry paid over $40 million in royalties 
to the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
And that's a resource, Mr. Deputy Speaker, which either wasn't known or 
wasn't cared to be known about when members opposite formed a government in 
this province for 11 years.  The fact that that natural gas is now being 
developed and paying those kind of royalties and also being able to deliver 
natural gas to the small communities and farmers of this province, rather 
than paying those royalties to the province of Alberta which we were doing 
in the past, tells me that this government has been bang on the mark on our 
development policies. 
 
We've been able to work in co-operation with a lot of junior-sized 
companies in developing that resource.  And the fact that those revenues 
are accruing to us rather than the province of Alberta tells me that that 
is smart resource development, and it'll continue, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for 
generations to come because we are doubling the reserves almost every year 
of known natural gas in this province. 
 
And it's very exciting to go out into those gas fields and talk to the 
people involved in that development process and know what the possibilities 
are down the road.  And I would just hate to return, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 
a system that frowned upon that type of development, that took the 
opportunity away from so many of our citizens to have those jobs, to 
participate in that particular economy. 
 
Even the oil industry, Mr. Deputy Speaker, which as we all know has fallen 
on some difficult times because of international pricing, that oil industry 
is bouncing back.  And I believe that down the road, because of some new 
technology, it's going to become very vibrant in our province again. 
 
As most people involved in the industry would know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan oil fields sometimes present some very difficult problems for 
people wishing to develop them.  By and large our fields are lower 



 

 

producing fields, sometimes more difficult to get at than some of the ones 
in Alberta, and consequently, over time, have been more expensive to 
implement. 
 
We have in this province in the last couple of years, Mr. Speaker, had some 
interesting things happen which I think are going to pay big dividends to 
the taxpayers of this province down in the future.  One of them is 
horizontal drilling.  The province of Saskatchewan was one of the hottest 
spots in North America for horizontal drilling in 1989. We had over a dozen 
wells drilled in all types of formations.  And I expect in this coming 
year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that will double and maybe triple. 
 
Horizontal well technology has the promise of freeing up much of the oil 
reserves which were considered unattainable by companies in this province 
previously with some of the conventional equipment available to them.  It's 
things like horizontal drilling, I think, Mr. Speaker, that mean that 
companies and shareholders and people are going to be committed to this 
province for a long ways in the future. 
 
And because of the resource development policies implemented by this 
government, when we worked with the industry, when the price of oil dropped 
to the bottom, when we've had the ability to move our royalty rates to 
consider some of the EOR (enhanced oil recovery) projects which we know are 
necessary to develop our resources, means that people have confidence in 
this government.  And by having confidence in this government, they'll 
invest their money here.  And well into the future, Mr. Speaker, we will be 
drawing royalties, the highest royalties in North America, back to the 
people of this province to develop our educational and health and social 
services potential, and certainly contribute to the quality of life which 
we in this province have come to expect. 
 
And I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we'd be totally remiss in our policies if 
we did things to drive people out of this province, or as some people in 
the hard rock business have told me as minister, all that has ever held 
Saskatchewan back was this geopolitical fault line which ran down the 
Manitoba and Alberta borders, where people didn't feel confident about 
coming here and investing their money, about bringing their employees to 
our province, because there was always this spectre of a government which 
would step in and seize half of that particular enterprise before they had 
the ability to generate any income from it.  And I think that was 
foolishness because it certainly robbed our province of many jobs and the 
opportunity to access resources which are still hidden out there and which 
we need to open up, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in order to provide those royalties 
and taxes which we as a society need. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to wrap up my speech and talking about the 
throne speech delivered by Her Honour last week, by saying that I believe 
there was a tremendous amount of potential talked about in that speech.  It 
certainly covered the pillars which we in Saskatchewan have known to be our 
strengths for a long, long time. 
 
(1600) 
 



 

 

It talked about the human potential, the stability and the growth of our 
communities.  It talked about the diversification of our economy and the 
development of our resources.  And there is no part of my constituency or 
any constituency that I've ever been in in this province, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, for those things were not absolute pillars, the pillars that those 
communities were built around. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think as long we talk about those, that we involve 
people in the process, that we accept the ideas that'll move us into the 
next century, and that we aren't so hidebound to not accept the ideas of 
others, then this province will continue to grow and be a good place in 
which to raise our families and our children. 
 
I just appreciate the opportunity, Mr. Deputy Speaker to enter into this 
debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, I rise 
and partake in this debate today noting that the members on the other side 
of the House, many of them who are claimed farmers, seem to be avoiding the 
issue of agriculture quite pronouncedly.  Talking about . . . as just the 
last member just stopped talking -- and he's a rural member -- and he 
cautiously avoided the topic of agriculture to any great degree, as do many 
of the other members. 
 
And that doesn't surprise me, you know.  The ones who do talk about 
agriculture sit and talk about all the good things they've done in the 
past, like looking backward, looking backward.  I'm not so sure that 
they're looking backward as much as looking over their shoulder, because 
there is a sentiment out in the country, that they know is there, that they 
have failed agriculture and deceived the people of this province. 
 
But they talk about the eastern bloc and the opening up of the eastern 
bloc, and that's very important in its own right, but I just wished they'd 
spend a little more time, just a bit more, confronting the agricultural 
problems of this province because, as we know, they are in great destitute, 
the farmers and rural communities of this province.  So I'd just ask them 
if they could just focus a little more attention on that. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just want to start off by making a few comparisons 
about where we, as the New Democratic Party opposition, stand on issues, as 
opposed to they, the Tory government. 
 
Now I'm just want to run through a dozen or so of these points just to let 
the people know clearly where we're standing. 
 
On the issue of two-price wheat at $240 million a year coming to western 
Canada, well, we were fighting hard to keep the two-price system because we 
knew the value of having that cash coming to Saskatchewan and Alberta and 
Manitoba.  Yet the Tory government opposite was promoting the free trade 
agreement that was dumping the two-price wheat system.  That's a very clear 
difference as to supporting the agriculture of western Canada. 



 

 

 
And just ask yourself, Mr. Deputy Speaker, has the price of bread gone 
down?  So where is that $240 million going?  These guys promoted the loss 
of $240 million and who did they give it to? -- the corporate mills who 
need just a few more hundred thousand dollars or million dollars profit. 
 
Now let's look at the interest-free cash advance program.  While we on this 
side of the House were fighting tooth and nail saying no, and as our 
counterparts in Ottawa were saying no, do not put it into cash advance -- a 
cost of $27 million a year to the Saskatchewan farmers -- this government 
was quietly endorsing that cash advance interest.  Twenty-seven million 
dollars a year every year.  Great support for agriculture in Saskatchewan. 
 
When we were rejecting the increase of 30 per cent last year to the 
transportation rates, this government was endorsing the federal budget.  In 
fact the Premier was saying that he could live with it.  Well maybe he 
could live with it in his tidy little house with a swimming pool in the 
backyard on Albert Street, but there are many farmers in Saskatchewan who 
won't be able to live with it because that money is coming out of their 
pockets every year.  In fact, on the average-size farm in Saskatchewan, 
another thousand dollars a year is going to be lost to farmers because of 
the increase in transportation rates. 
 
So there's a bit of a difference there too on who's fighting for farmers 
and agricultural prosperity in this province. 
 
Rail line abandonment -- another issue where this government is silent.  
Four hundred million dollars a year it's going to save the federal 
government.  We were fighting to have the federal government retain that 
rail line project, but no, they cut it out.  And these guys were silent on 
the issue.  And that means more money out of the pockets of Saskatchewan 
farmers because, you know, the same arguments prevail.  There's more 
traffic on the roads, there's higher upkeep, costs more to the 
municipalities, therefore more money out of the taxpayers in that RM.  And 
these guys were endorsing that while we rejected it. 
 
The fuel rebates were taken off, a cost of $600 a year to the average 
farmer.  Did this government stand up and say no, leave that fuel rebate 
on?  Not only did they do that, they kind of went on their own and did it 
some here too.  But they weren't standing up for the farmers of the 
province.  Six hundred bucks a year to the average farmer, while we on this 
side of the House were vehemently opposing that.  There was a bit of a 
difference there. 
 
Crop insurance.  Crop insurance rates have gone up double last year, the 
premium rates.  The federal government has reduced its share of the crop 
insurance program.  And continuing on now, the problem that I see and what 
we on this side of the House are saying, that crop insurance must be an 
affordable program.  And if you look at the doubling of the premiums last 
year and then predict this year, if anyone has taken the time to look at 
what their premiums are going to cost them, the last bit of coverage to the 
80 per cent level, or the last two or three bushels an acre, is going to 
cost a phenomenal amount of money.  But that's okay with these guys. 



 

 

 
What we are fighting for is affordable premiums in crop insurance and a 
stable program.  What they are doing is trying to get as much money out of 
the pockets of farmers as they can without giving them that security of 
income.  There's a difference there on this issue. 
 
Interest rates.  This government sat all last year with a motion before 
this Assembly to unanimously send a message to Ottawa to reduce interest 
rates.  And if you just take the increase in last year of 4 per cent on a 
$100,000 loan, that's $4,000 extra a farmer would have to come up with to 
pay the interest.  This government simply refused to do that. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, you see there are some differences on the major issues, 
and I go on.  The method of payment.  Well we on this side of the House are 
supporting that the method of payment of the Crow benefit be paid directly 
to railroads, because we know that the long-term implication of removing 
that will be detrimental to the farmers of Saskatchewan.  Right now on my 
farm I'm paying about $8 a tonne.  The total cost is about $30 a tonne. 
 
So now there's an ingenious program or some thoughts coming forward that 
maybe they're going to pay the whole thing out over a few years.  Well that 
may sound very good in the short term, but I'll tell you, what you would be 
paid out, let's say, in a five year pay-out of this benefit, you will pay 
back in two and a half years because of the increase in the freight rate 
and the fact that you're paying the whole bill.  So that is not very 
forward thinking on the part of this government. 
 
 DSo there's a difference there in the method of payment.  Who's supporting 
farmers in the long term and who isn't?  I think we have to be perfectly 
clear on that. 
 
While we were opposing movement to tripartite on beef stabilization and hog 
stabilization, this government was boldly marching forward to the new 
tomorrow, as they say.  And the results of that have the red meat industry 
complaining about lack of support, about low returns.  And we knew that was 
going to happen.  But there again, this government was saying no, it's 
going to be better.  Better for who?  Better for the feds and better for 
the province, but not better for the farmers. 
 
There are other issues.  The green paper on agriculture, which we totally 
rejected.  This government, the Tory government here and the federal Tory 
government were pushing forward, saying that we have to be more market 
responsive.  It's too bad they didn't think about Cargill when they were 
talking about being market responsive and being more self-sufficient.  It 
seems it works for the farmers, but it doesn't work for Cargill because 
these guys just finished giving them $275 million in loans and guarantees. 
 
So there is a difference.  On free trade, the Premier of this province was 
the little cheer-leader going around for Brian Mulroney, saying how great 
free trade was.  In fact some of the quotes are just incredible.  And what 
we have now, we have problems with the hog industry; we have problems with 
the dairy industry; we have problems with the Canadian Wheat Board; we have 
problems with durum under the wheat board, and poultry, and it's going to 



 

 

go on and on, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  So there is a difference, and that's why 
these people are looking over their shoulders, because the farmers of 
Saskatchewan are telling them, you were wrong when you supported free 
trade, and you were wrong when you supported all these other cuts to 
Saskatchewan agriculture. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- And then there's the GST.  Well we're not sure where they 
stand on that.  It depends which way the wind's blowing, or it depends, 
maybe more, on who they're talking to, Mr. Speaker, because I think when 
they're talking to the people of Saskatchewan they're saying they're 
opposed to the GST, but when they're talking to the people in Ottawa and 
their big, corporate friends, they're saying that they support the GST.  
And I think if the truth were to be known, that would be the case. 
 
All these differences between this side of the House arguing to keep 
dollars in the hands of farmers and that side of the House saying they're 
farmers' friends, but all the while cutting, cutting, cutting, creating 
more and more costs to the agriculture industry, on top of the fact that 
they have not delivered, as promised in 1985, long-term stability program.  
They have not delivered a debt restructuring program that is so badly 
needed in this province to ensure that the farmers that have had large 
debts and can't get out from under them will continue to farm and their 
families will be able to continue to farm.  On top of that, they have added 
costs through all these programs.  The result of that, Mr. Speaker, is a 
crisis in agriculture -- all these added costs. 
 
And I just want to run through quickly some of the numbers in the crisis in 
agriculture, and this comes from a publication from the government.  I 
mean, by their own admission net farm income declined by 11 per cent in '88 
to '89, and in fact in 1990 it's projected it will drop below zero, a 
negative $9 million income. 
 
In a province where we have $6 billion of agricultural debt, in a province 
where the value of assets are down 30 per cent since 1982, in a province 
where Saskatchewan farm families are paying half a billion dollars a year 
interest on their debt, it's sad, Mr. Speaker.  We in this province have 
about one-third of the farmers -- those are the young, ambitious farmers 
with low assets -- carrying about 70 per cent of that $6 billion debt.  And 
that is why we are seeing them leaving the land.  That is why we are seeing 
one in 10 going before debt review boards.  And this is the government 
who's supporting agriculture?  I mean there are answers out there and we 
know there are answers, but they are not being brought forward by this 
government. 
 
The only hope that we have is that there is an election coming up pretty 
soon, and they are so far down the polls that they will actually try to do 
something concrete to help the farmers of Saskatchewan. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Ad hoc. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- It'll be ad hoc, but the only hope we have is that they 



 

 

will try to buy themselves out again.  In Alberta and Manitoba there is a 
reduction of applications before the Farm Debt Review Board, but in 
Saskatchewan it's up 20 per cent. 
 
Now you'd think proportionally if this prairie region which is so similar, 
proportionally there should be some consistency in that.  But no, Alberta 
and Manitoba are much different than Saskatchewan -- ours is driving 
higher. 
 
Agriculture lenders right now own somewhere in the area about 850,000 
acres, and that's a very difficult number to nail down because they're 
always rolling over land.  If you look in the papers, Western Producer and 
other papers, there's pages and pages and pages of land for sale through 
FCC (Farm Credit Corporation) and ACS (Agricultural Credit Corporation of 
Saskatchewan).  That's up 730,000 acres in the last three years.  And they 
say they are supporting and behind in solving the problems of agriculture?  
Incredible. 
 
One in four Farm Credit Corporation accounts in Saskatchewan are in 
arrears, 54,000 accounts in arrears.  ACS capital arrears are up to 33 per 
cent from 26 per cent last year, and the production loans arrears are up to 
18 per cent from 10 per cent last year. 
 
It's escalating, sky-rocketing, in a very short period of time.  And what 
effect has this had -- the fact they have not stopped the drain of funds 
from farmers' hands; the fact that they have not stopped the trend to 
depopulating rural Saskatchewan; the fact that they've done nothing but 
say, well, when you're in a bind, we have an ad hoc program that will give 
you some money? 
 
Well that's the easy out, there's no doubt about that.  The farmers needed 
the money but they needed the long-term stability, predictability, and they 
needed the debt restructuring. 
 
But no, this government says, the easy out is no problems; give them a cash 
pay-out.  We can see that that has simply not worked because what effect 
has that had, what effect has that Tories' policy had on this province? 
 
(1615) 
 
Farm bankruptcies up 32 per cent over 1988.  In 1989 Saskatchewan had 45 
per cent of all bankruptcies in Canada; of all farm bankruptcies in Canada, 
nearly half of all farm bankruptcies in this province.  And the total 
bankruptcies in the first two months of 1990 are up 32 per cent over the 
same time last year. 
 
So what happens?  Net out-migration -- over 23,000 people leaving in 1989; 
3,000 in the first two months of this year.  In fact in rural Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker, 64 per cent of all the towns and villages have lost 
population, a direct result of this government's so-called great 
agricultural policy. 
 
And they talk about managing change.  Well I think when managing change 



 

 

they have failed, and failed dismally. 
 
Other results of this mismanagement of the agriculture and general economy 
of this province is that in 1989 we had the fewest housing starts in 20 
years.  And we're 47 per cent below last year in the first two months of 
1990.  I don't know how you're going to get down to a negative housing 
start. Maybe they'll start tearing them down and it'll be a Tory job 
creation program. 
 
The total labour force dropped by 6,000, Mr. Speaker, and the only province 
in Canada where that happened. 
 
In 1989 Saskatchewan retail sales were slower than any other province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, you see we have, first, the comparisons of policy that 
drain money out of the pockets of farmers. We have, second, the problems 
that created by debt and lower assets and low income, and then we have the 
effect on the general population of this province where they're emptying it 
out.  What a sorry indictment of a government who stands up and says 
there's a better way. 
 
I want to bring it a little closer to home, Mr. Speaker.  This is the 
regional planning profile, the Carlton Trail Regional College, and that is 
in the area in which I am located.  And I want to quote from this book a 
few of the notes that they put in.  And it says: 
 

 Note, considerable rural depopulation has taken place with 2,425 
individuals 15 years of age and over moving off the farms from 1981 to 
1986. 

 
In one area -- a central part of this province, takes in the Quill Lakes 
and Humboldt, in that area -- young people moving off the land.  Another 
note that says, and get this one: 
 

 Over 40,000 people 15 years of age and older live in low income families 
in the Carlton Trail region. 

 
You know, Mr. Speaker, 40,000 people on low income represents 80 per cent 
of the families living in that area living on low-income.  That's the heart 
of, heart of the Saskatchewan, right in the centre of the province; the 
centre of the province that this government, when it came in, said, we're 
the saviour of farmers, we're going to end all your woes, and we're going 
to be here to go to the wall with the treasury for you guys.  They've gone 
to the wall all right.  Talking about the Berlin Wall more than they're 
talking about going to the wall for farmers these days. 
 
And just to capsulize it, Mr. Speaker, we have the anticipated changes in 
agriculture as a headline.  And there's five points: 
 

 Anticipated Changes in Agriculture in the Carlton Trail Region: 
 
 1. Continued depopulation of farms; 
 



 

 

 2. Fewer farms and creation of larger 
farming enterprises; 

 
 3. Increased use of application of 

computer technology; 
 
 4. Additional closures of farm 

machinery dealers; 
 
 5. Continuing trend towards seeking 

off-farm income. 
 

That is the projection in the Carlton Trail Region, in the centre of the 
heart of this province.  A real rosy picture painted by the government 
opposite with its great plans.  But the hypocrisy, the hypocrisy is there 
and the people of this province knows it's there.  That is why they have to 
be looking over their shoulders when they're making their speeches. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to touch briefly on a couple of other 
points.  I want to ask you, and ask yourselves, what does Consensus 
Saskatchewan really mean other than con Saskatchewan?  You know there's the 
obvious; there's the obvious that it's a ploy to make people think that 
they're going to be co-operating and communicating.  In fact they're saying 
they're going to end mismanagement, corruption, that type of thing . . . 
public relations. 
 
But you know what I think con Saskatchewan really is?  I think Consensus 
Saskatchewan is put in place because there's a total breakdown of the Tory 
party.  It's an admission . . . Just think of it this way.  If this is an 
admission simply to pretend that they want to get people on side, what 
depths will they stoop to, to try to do that, try to win government? 
 
But what they have essentially done, they have admitted that the system in 
their party has broke down -- from the Premier, the cabinet, the caucus, 
the president of the party, the elected officials, and the party members.  
They are void of ideas, they have no policy, and they have showed 
frustration and despair.  They are unable to manage the affairs of this 
province.  That's what they're saying.  A total breakdown of the Tory 
policy, Tory machine.  And like I said, if that's simply a ploy to try to 
win the next election, well these guys will go to any depths -- any depths 
-- to maintain power, that all-holy power that they like to have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know when this Mr. Premier was elected last time, he came 
in with great fanfare.  He was going to show this province how things were 
going to be done.  Remember give 'er snoose Bruce; never say whoa in a mud 
hole; bring our children home; you can misspend in Saskatchewan because 
it's got so much and still make money.  You remember all those lines? 
 
But the problem is, Mr. Speaker, the problem was . . . and I know the 
minister . . . the Premier was educated in the United States, got his 
degree in the United States.  And I know that he admires Maggie Thatcher 



 

 

and Ronald Reagan and George Bush.  But the problem is, Mr. Speaker, this 
Premier doesn't understand Saskatchewan.  He's looking all over the world 
but he doesn't understand the economic environment in which we have built 
upon knowledge from people putting themselves together and building Crown 
corporations, building private enterprise, building co-operatives.  He 
doesn't understand that.  And you see what's happened to our province.  He 
just doesn't understand.  And you know what?  He's going to ask to be 
re-elected.  He's going to ask to be re-elected after all the indictments 
that have been placed upon him. 
 
He is a deceptive Premier.  He keeps telling the people that it's the best 
way; it's the only way; you'll see; just, you know, forge on.  He puts on 
his little folksy, well boys it's doable, so we'll go out there and do it.  
And golly gosh gee, you know, all you got to do is go out there and work 
hard and take on the world and all this kind of crap.  Unbelievable.  Give 
the perception that's he doing good for agriculture by pumping out some 
money; perception that he's doing it when in fact it's basically the 
federal government that's doing it. 
 
But look at the litany of cuts, the litany of mismanagement, the 
devastation, and he wants people to trust him.  He wants people to trust 
him and re-elect him after he's done all these things.  Well, you know, I 
can best sum it up, Mr. Speaker, what I feel in rural Saskatchewan when I'm 
out there.  After eight years of Tory government, and it's summed up in the 
lines of a song and it goes something like this: it's hard to keep 
believing when you know you've been deceived.  And that is exactly the 
feeling I get in rural Saskatchewan.  When they've been deceived, they just 
simply can no longer believe in this government. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I just want to go through a couple of quotes here.  This 
is from the throne speech of last year, March 8, 1989.  One paragraph says: 
 

 Legislation for protection and mediation services for farmers was 
consolidated last year in The Saskatchewan Farm Security Act. 

 
Well we all know what happened there.  It did absolutely nothing.  Anyway, 
it goes on to say: 
 

 In this session, (remember this is last year's throne speech) you will be 
asked to consider consolidating farm finance legislation with new and 
innovative farm financing options.  The Farm Finance Act will expand the 
mandate of the Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan to provide 
loans to producers to purchase their home quarter and re-establish viable 
farm operations.  A pilot project of equity financing will also be 
introduced.  These measures will present alternative means of stabilizing 
financial status to many of our young producers. 

 
That's what the throne speech last year said.  You know, you have to ask 
yourself what happened in the meantime. 
 
But it goes on.  I want to give you a couple of quotes from the Premier 
when talking about The Farm Financial Stability Act last year.  Remember 
last July?  He was saying: 



 

 

 
 Now by providing all of this in one place, and the regulations that go 

with it, any individual in Saskatchewan can go down through this 
legislation and say, here is the protective safety net for farmers. 

 
I mean, that's what he was saying last year when introducing Bills in the 
throne speech, in the budget.  And you know what?  I'll bet he's going to 
say the same thing this year.  Wouldn't that be coincidental!  He's going 
to be providing a safety net.  He's going to be doing this and that for 
Saskatchewan farmers. And eight years in a row he's failed to tackle the 
problem in a way that solved the problem. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we in the New Democratic Party have to put forward some 
alternatives to provide stability to farm families.  I'd just like to go 
through this just to lay out what we feel should be done, this announcement 
made today in Ottawa by the Leader of the Opposition and the federal Leader 
of the New Democratic Party, on agriculture. 
 
The New Democratic Party both federally and provincially offers a clear 
alternative to the ad hoc agriculture policies of the PCs.  That 
alternative vision offers stability and predictability from farm families 
and the rural communities who depend on their well-being. 
 
And then it goes into the 1988 federal program that we had, that still 
stands true today, whereby a family farm stabilization program based on -- 
using wheat as the example -- the first 8,000 bushels at the U.S. target 
price, a safety net, an assurance of return for farmers. 
 
They were saying, strengthen the farm marketing boards and supply 
management -- complete reversal of what the free trade agreement is doing 
right now by destroying supply management; revising the mandate of Farm 
Credit Corporation so it becomes a primary provider of long-term financing 
rather than a lender of last resort. 
 
In that program we had $125,000 at 8 per cent interest for everyone.  The 
next $125,000 through farm credit would be a set aside program.  And that's 
the type of stability, long-term program that we need in this country, in 
this province. 
 
And also, in order that we can get to that point, we have to have a 
short-term program because of the short-sightedness and the ad hoc-ery.  So 
we need one more ad hoc.  We need $500 million in the hands of farmers 
prior to seeding.  It has to be there.  I've got people telling me they 
can't get the seed in the ground. 
 
We need a moratorium on Saskatchewan farm foreclosures, at least until July 
1, 1990.  And we believe that the federal and provincial governments should 
set a deadline of July 1, 1990 by which to develop a national consensus for 
the farm groups and financial institutions on a plan to restructure farm 
debt; and also that the federal and provincial governments set a deadline 
of July 1, 1990 to develop an implementation of a national farm income 
stabilization program which would guarantee production and price shortfalls 
on delivery; and that the Government of Saskatchewan introduce a program to 



 

 

assist intergenerational farm land transfer. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is the type of a program that we have needed for 
years and years in this province, and yet these governments . . .  And I 
mean we're not the only ones that come up with decent programs.  I mean, 
the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, National Farmers Union, Grains 2000, some of 
the economists, they are putting forward programs of income stability, but 
this government and the federal government in Ottawa simply does not pick 
it up.  They do not pick it up because, as the Premier wrote when he was a 
professor in university, he thinks that they should get rid of the 80 per 
cent of the unproductive farmers. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House simply are reflecting what 
the people of this province are saying.  They are saying that this 
government has first of all failed to stand up for them when it comes to 
money coming out of their pockets.  Secondly, it has failed to restructure 
the long-term debt to provide predictable long-term income stability 
programs.  And these programs wouldn't cost any more than what they're 
paying out now in their ad hoc-ery.  And it would provide a solution. 
 
And as we come closer to an election, I am sure you'll be hearing the 
rhetoric pumped up and there will be great plans like there were last year 
to solve the problem.  But ask yourself, Mr. Speaker, how can anyone in 
Saskatchewan, how can anyone in Saskatchewan believe that this Tory 
government, after eight years -- eight years higher debt, lower income . . 
. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- According to rule 13(4), which reads as follows: 
 

 On the sixth of the said days, at thirty minutes before the ordinary time 
of daily adjournment, unless the said debate be previously concluded, Mr. 
Speaker shall interrupt the proceedings and forthwith put every question 
necessary to dispose of the main motion. 

 
(1630) 
 
The division bells rang from 4:31 p.m. until 4:34 p.m. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas 
 
 Muller Klein t 
 Schmidt Sauder t 
 McLeod Toth t 
 Hodgins Duncan t 
 Smith Petersen t 
 Lane Wolfe t 
 Hepworth McLaren t 



 

 

 Maxwell Baker t 
 Kopelchuk Swan t 
 Meiklejohn Muirhead t 
 Martin Johnson t 
 Hopfner Gleim t 
 Swenson Britton t 
 Neudorf Gardner t 
 Gerich Saxinger t 
-- 30 R 

Nays 
 
 Prebble Kowalsky t 
 Rolfes Solomon t 
 Shillington Atkinson t 
 Lingenfelter Anguish t 
 Tchorzewski Goulet t 
 Koskie Pringle t 
 Thompson Lyons t 
 Brockelbank Lautermilch t 
 Mitchell Trew t 
 Upshall Van Mulligen t 
 Simard Koenker t 
-- 22 R 

MOTIONS 
 

Address be Engrossed and Presented to Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'd like to 
move, seconded by the Deputy House Leader, the member for Rosthern: 
 

 That the said address be engrossed and presented to Her Honour the 
Lieutenant Governor by such members of the Assembly as are of the 
Executive Council. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Ways and Means 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I would also like to move, seconded by 
the Deputy House Leader, the member for Rosthern: 
 

 That this Assembly, pursuant to rule 84, hereby appoints the Committee of 
Finance to consider the supply to be granted to Her Majesty and to 
consider the ways and means of raising the supply. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:38 p.m. 
 


