





























































Hansard: June 20, 1990


 

 

June 20/90 
 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: -- According to order, I have reviewed the following petition under 
rule 11(7) and it is hereby read and received, of certain residents of the 
province of Saskatchewan humbly praying that your Honourable Assembly may 
be pleased to urge the provincial government to prevent the building of any 
nuclear reactors in Saskatchewan. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Saxinger: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'd like to 
introduce to you, and through you to the members of this Assembly, a group 
of people.  They come from Cudworth. They are in the sheltered workshop, 
the Columbian industry. 
 
There are 13 of them and I want to read off the names because some of them 
come from the North Park Centre that got closed down in 1988:  Darlene 
Leister, Bronia Osolinsky, Shelley Wiebe, Russell Olynuk, Betty Meszaros, 
Albert Detillieux, Daniel Fredericks, Louis Prediger, Max Mazur, Kerry 
King, Henry Pelletier, Russell Barry, and Donna Serblowski.  Would they 
please stand. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Saxinger: -- They are accompanied by five staff members: Martin 
Schofield, Loreen Waldbillig, Lorne Sample, Margarite Gebauer, and Shawn 
Prestupa. 
 
First of all I want to congratulate the staff for a job well done in the 
Columbian industry.  I visited the Columbian industry, Mr. Speaker, and I 
just see a happy group there.  Seven of the people I had introduced come 
from North Park Centre in 1988 when it got closed down.  They live in a 
family-type setting group homes in Cudworth, and they are very much 
involved in the community.  They do fund raising and bingo.  They even are 
involved in singing; they have a choir, and an excellent choir, I must say. 
 
I want to welcome them here.  We have a meeting at 3 o'clock in room 218 
for drinks.  And I also had invited the news media to interview some of 
these people because some of them tell me they really enjoy this 
family-type living and they never, ever want to go back to any institute or 
North Park Centre. 
 
With this, I would like to ask everybody in this Assembly to help welcome 
these people to Regina. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure this 
afternoon to introduce to you and other members of the Assembly, on behalf 
of my seat mate, the minister responsible for the Public Service 
Commission, a number of our hard-working and dedicated civil servants 
seated in your gallery, part of the ongoing process of allowing people 
within our departments to visit the legislature during question period and 
to view some of the proceedings, and to get a better sense, I suppose, as 
to what happens here in the legislature. 
 
The ones that are joining us today are from the Public Service Commission, 
Economic Diversification and Trade, Social Services, Consumer Affairs, 
Health, and Finance.  Mr. Speaker, I would ask you and all members of the 
legislature to give these very special people a hearty welcome here to the 
legislature this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muller: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It gives me a great deal of 
pleasure today to introduce to you and through you, 15 grade 7 students and 
their teachers and chaperon; the teachers: Dawne Braaten, Jim Mireao; 
chaperon, June Schutte; and bus driver, Alvin Pease. 
 
Wildrose is quite a unique community.  They have one of the longest running 
4-H clubs I think in all of Saskatchewan, and certainly one of the most 
famous ones.  One of their 4-H calves brought $5 a pound at the annual fat 
stock show and sale in Prince Albert here a couple of weeks ago.  I didn't 
buy that one but I was certainly there to witness it, and it's always a 
pleasure to see these young people working with their livestock. 
 
I'll be meeting with these students and teachers and chaperon at 2:30 for 
pictures and drinks and I would ask all members to please welcome the 
Wildrose School to Regina. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, allow me to introduce to you and through you to 
the Assembly, on behalf of my colleague, the member from Souris-Cannington, 
a number of students from the Alameda School.  They are 21 in number, Mr. 
Speaker, grade 6 and 7 students who are here touring the Assembly today. 
 
I would like to welcome them, welcome their teacher, Jeff Cameron; 
chaperons, Mary Janke and Nelson Hagarth.  And we welcome you and we trust 
you've had an enjoyable trip, and also I'm sure you'll enjoy viewing the 
science centre as well.  I ask the members to join me in welcoming the 
students. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am pleased to introduce to 
you, and through you to all of the members of this Assembly, some 28 young 
constituents of mine in my constituency of Regina South.  They're sitting 
in your gallery, Mr. Speaker.  They're grade 6 students from Dr. A.E. Perry 



 

 

School and are accompanied here today by their teacher, Miss Dale. 
 
Hopefully they will find their visit to the legislature informational, 
educational, as well as enjoyable, and I look forward to meeting with them 
a little bit later following question period, to see how they enjoyed their 
visit.  I ask all members to join with me in welcoming them to our 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Contracts for Hospital Pharmaceutical Supplies 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Premier.  As the Premier 
knows, his government has been pouring money into Canapharm, the Wolseley 
based firm which manufactures intravenous equipment; and as the public 
knows, you have been looking to sell this firm in order to get out from 
under it.  But what we don't know is how far you're prepared to go in order 
to sell the firm. 
 
Now will the Premier confirm that you have as recently as this spring been 
negotiating with Abbott Pharmaceutical, a Chicago based firm, to purchase 
this plant; and will you confirm that part of the deal would be to 
guarantee that Saskatchewan hospitals will buy exclusively from Abbott for 
a 10-year period? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, this government is very proud of the fact 
that Canapharm is in the province of Saskatchewan, manufacturing 
pharmaceutical products that are used indeed across this province, and 
indeed now in western Canada.  It's a type of manufacturing process that 
was never known to the province of Saskatchewan before and is building a 
good reputation amongst the hospital community in western Canada.  And as I 
told the members in the Crown Corporations Committee, Mr. Speaker, that we 
have had approaches, a number of them over time, about possibilities of 
purchasing Canapharm.  And as I indicated to the members at that time that 
those preliminary discussions had not gone any further, and I don't 
believe, Mr. Speaker, that I have anything further to add at this time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Now since the Premier is refusing to answer the question, 
Mr. Speaker, I will direct it to the minister.  Mr. Minister, will you 
confirm that a deal is in the process of being negotiated, or that it has 
been, to give Abbott a 10-year exclusive sales contract to Saskatchewan 
hospitals which would include such items as infant formula, adult 
nutritional intravenous solutions, irrigation solutions, administration 
sets, small volume parenterals, total parenteral nutrition, dialysis 
solutions, electronic flow-control devices, critical care products, 
disposable suction, diagnostic and venipuncture products -- most of which 
are not even manufactured at the Wolseley plant, and would be supplied from 



 

 

Abbott facilities outside the province, Mr. Minister. 
 
Can you explain why you would be negotiating a 10-year exclusive contract 
to a company to supply our hospitals when the majority of these jobs, the 
majority of these products with the incomes and jobs attached, would be at 
a facility outside this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- I guess what I would be interested in knowing, Mr. 
Speaker, is that the member opposite is against the province of 
Saskatchewan being involved in diversification projects, as particularly in 
the medical industry which was unknown to this province prior to 1982.  And 
I think it's fair to say, Mr. Speaker, in the area that the member is 
talking about that negotiations such as she is intimating would be carried 
on by hospitals on behalf of themselves with pharmaceutical companies, and 
I believe that that process has been the past history in the province of 
Saskatchewan, and certainly would be ongoing on a hospital-by-hospital 
basis, on a board-by-board basis and they would arrive at a negotiated 
settlement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Minister, can you tell us what the estimated worth of 
sales would be annually under this 10-year exclusive sales agreement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- As I said previously, Mr. Speaker, and I don't think 
it needs repeating a third time, that those types of negotiations are 
carried on by hospitals and hospital boards, and they are done on an 
ongoing basis.  And that would be the case of any pharmaceutical company 
dealing with a particular hospital in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
If she has further questions in that line, I would suggest that they 
perhaps be directed to the Minister of Health. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Minister, can you tell us what the anticipated cost of 
the Abbott prices will be in comparison to the current prices? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, as my colleague has said, negotiations for 
whatever products are supplied and whatever products are contracted for, 
for any hospital in the province, large or small, are done by hospital 
boards or their agents, in other words, the administrators of those 
hospitals.  That's the case, that's absolutely the case, Mr. Speaker. 
 
For the members opposite to stand and intimate anything other than that, I 
challenge them to phone the hospitals and ask if we the Government of 
Saskatchewan are negotiating those contracts on behalf of those hospitals.  
The answer to that is clearly no, and they know full well.  They made 
attempts in their time in office to do just that.  It did not come out to 
be the fact, and under this administration the hospitals do their own 
negotiating and are doing their own negotiating. 



 

 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my question is to 
the Premier.  Mr. Premier, your government has pumped about $7 million into 
Canapharm, including one instance where SEDCO made the company a loan of 
$700,000 when it only requested 100,000.  And I think that speaks reams 
about the way you do business, Mr. Premier. 
 
Can you tell this House how much of that $7 million you're hoping to recoup 
with this deal with Abbott? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, as I said to the previous questions in 
dealing with Canapharm, that this whole realm of questioning has been dealt 
with in Crown corporations, in front of the media just in the last few 
weeks.  And the details of the financial arrangements of Canapharm were 
gone into there over a great number of hours, and these things were all 
provided to the member opposite. 
 
There is no question that the Government of Saskatchewan, through SEDCO, 
has been involved in the financing of a diversification project for the 
province of Saskatchewan.  We never made pharmaceutical products in this 
province prior to this government being elected. 
 
We now today have a pharmaceutical farm in Wolseley, Saskatchewan, 
employing a significant amount of people in a very high-tech industry, 
which not only has markets in the province of Saskatchewan but indeed has 
pharmaceutical products across western Canada.  And I think that is a plus 
for this province, for the people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I would once again address my question to 
the Premier, and I think the Premier has a responsibility to stand up in 
this House and answer some questions for once. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Premier, can you explain why you believe it's in 
the interests of the province of Saskatchewan to deprive our hospitals 
access to fair and open tendering, and instead forcing them to purchase all 
of their equipment from one firm.  And with this unilateral end to fair 
tendering, how can you assure the people of this province that our 
hospitals are getting top value for their money despite your strong-arm 
tactics? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, as I explained to the member in Crown 
corporations, any negotiations that Canapharm would enter into with a 
hospital in the province of Saskatchewan would be based on price being 



 

 

equal, product being equal, service being equal.  And that would be the 
basis in all contracts in such situations would be carried on.  There was 
no strong-arming going on by Canapharm with anyone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the product is manufactured in Saskatchewan, it employs people 
in Saskatchewan, and it is establishing a reputation beyond the borders of 
Saskatchewan.  And I think that people in the medical community, both in 
our province and outside of our province, have recognized the quality of 
the Saskatchewan worker.  Mr. Speaker, if there was any interest expressed 
by companies in Canapharm it would be on the basis of the strength of the 
Saskatchewan worker working there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, once again I'll address a question to the 
Premier.  Mr. Premier, I want you to know, in case you're not aware, that 
the only thing that is manufactured at Canapharm are IV (intravenous) 
solutions and that type of equipment, and it doesn't include the other 
things that you're going to be entering into with Abbott, Mr. Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, I want to know and my question is this: if for some reason the 
Canapharm plant closes or relocates, will Abbott keep this 10-year 
contract, this exclusive contract with our hospitals?  And does this 
sweetheart deal with Abbott include any guarantees about jobs of the people 
that are working in that plant should it close or relocate?  Will you 
answer that, Mr. Premier? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, there are no sweetheart deals between the 
government of Saskatchewan and any company interested in purchasing 
Canapharm.  Anyone interested in purchasing Canapharm, as any other 
business that the government is involved in, would have to go through a 
process of a memorandum of understanding, a due diligence process.  And as 
I indicated to the member in Crown corporations that none of that had been 
entered into at the time of our discussions, but if they are entered into, 
that process will be followed out to the end.  And there would certainly be 
no sweetheart deal in this particular operation, as there isn't in 
fertilizer plants or anything else. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Inquiry into GigaText 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier, and it concerns 
the ghost of GigaText, which we thought had actually passed.  But it seems 
that Senator Cogger, who represents your party in the Senate, is in some 
hot water according to some documents filed with the RCMP in the Quebec 
court. 
 
Now, Mr. Premier, I'm wondering if you could tell us whether or not Mr. 
Montpetit or his go-between, Mr. Waschuk, actually did some lobbying and 
influence peddling, as Mr. Cogger is being charged for.  And I'm wondering 
whether or not you can tell us, in your fine recollection of those events, 
Mr. Premier, whether or not the RCMP has been in touch with your government 



 

 

to determine whether or not there's influence peddling against you and your 
colleagues. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Once again, Mr. Speaker, members opposite ask 
questions that have been asked in the recent past, and as everyone in this 
legislature knows, that the RCMP were called in to investigate any 
allegations made vis-a-vis the GigaText company.  There were no criminal 
charges put in that particular instance, and the offer's always been open 
to members opposite that if they have any knowledge of criminality that 
they should be bringing it forward and placing it in the hands of the RCMP. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Well the minister's right to some extent.  There have been 
questions but there's been no answers.  There has been an RCMP 
investigation; nobody knows what they investigated.  You won't tell us that 
information, either.  And I would like to point out to you very clearly, 
it's quoted that Mr. Cogger allegedly accepted or demanded funds for 
benefits from Guy Montpetit for his companies which were seeking grants 
from the governments of Ottawa, Saskatchewan, and Quebec. 
 
Now I want to ask you, Mr. Premier, were you aware, when you were riding 
around in the back seat of Guy Montpetit's limousine, that Mr. Cogger was 
influence peddling with your government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- As I said, I'll only repeat once more, Mr. Speaker, 
that there were no criminal charges laid in the province of Saskatchewan 
after a thorough investigation; that any questions that the member might 
have in regards to allegations of criminality in other parts of Canada 
would best be put to the Attorney General, I believe. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- The Attorney General didn't happen to be here.  I placed 
the question to the Premier and the Premier's responsible for the 
government and its misdeeds by people like Senator Cogger.  The question 
that we put to you is that: were you aware, Mr. Premier, as you rode around 
in Guy Montpetit's limousine, that either Senator Cogger, who's being 
looked at and investigated right now by the RCMP, or his go-between, Ken 
Waschuk, was influence peddling your government, Mr. Premier? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, once again we have seen the member from 
The Battlefords raise unsubstantiated allegations in this House.  Mr. 
Speaker, as I said to the member in a Crown Corporations Committee, perhaps 
if you have a favourite conspiracy theory of the day you should write 
books, but don't raise them in this Chamber.  Because if there is 
criminality involved, the RCMP will handle it.  And if there is criminality 



 

 

alleged in other parts of Canada, then it will be the responsibility of the 
Attorney General to look after it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- The questions that were asked -- a new question to the 
Premier -- the questions that were asked, when the answers came back was 
either: it's under RCMP investigation; it's before the courts; or I don't 
have that information at my fingertips.  You didn't answer the questions in 
Crown corporations. 
 
I go back to the question to the Premier, and I repeat that -- it's a 
quote: 
 

 Mr. Cogger allegedly accepted or demanded funds and other benefits from 
Mr. Montpetit or his firms which were seeking grants from the governments 
of Ottawa, Saskatchewan and Quebec. 

 
I finally put to you, Mr. Premier: were you aware that either Senator 
Cogger or his go-between, Mr. Waschuk, was influence peddling your 
government or some of your cabinet ministers?  Were you aware of that, Mr. 
Premier? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- As I said, Mr. Speaker, in my first response to the 
member opposite, those particular allegations that were made in this House 
last year by that member were referred to the RCMP.  Those very questions 
-- Mr. Speaker, if you remember them, which came from that member day after 
day -- those very allegations were referred.  And obviously, Mr. Speaker, 
there was nothing of basis in those allegations. 
 
Now the allegations that the member talks about have occurred in another 
province concerning other people, and if he has those questions, I have 
referred to the Minister of Justice. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Well, they're being referred to you right now, and I would 
ask the Premier that, although the government is kind of wound up GigaText 
and that it was at a horrendous cost to Saskatchewan taxpayers, nobody is 
taking responsibility for it.  Nobody is taking responsibility for the 
fiasco. 
 
Here we see again the RCMP are investigating, investigating your 
politicians at the Senate in regard to influence peddling.  These are 
serious allegations.  They come based on court evidence, RCMP evidence, and 
the public has a right to know the information in regard to the GigaText 
affair in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Premier: today will you commit to this Assembly and to the 
people of Saskatchewan that you have, once and for all, open up the files 
of GigaText and don't hide behind court.  Don't hide behind RCMP.  Don't 



 

 

hide behind not having the information available.  I ask you today, Mr. 
Premier, will you commit yourself to opening all the files that your 
government has concerning GigaText so the public can scrutinize your 
dealings? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is wrong when he says 
that the details of GigaText have not been revealed to the public.  That 
process has been ongoing since last fall when I, as minister responsible, 
shut down the GigaText corporation.  The investment by Crown Management 
Board, the investment by SEDCO, the wind-down procedure, the sale of assets 
-- all of that, Mr. Speaker, has been in the public purview.  At press 
conferences, in public, Mr. Speaker, that whole process has been before the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And for the member opposite to allege that that has been hidden is entirely 
wrong.  And, Mr. Speaker, I think the member should apologize to the public 
for saying that that process has been hidden from them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Cost of SaskTel Publication 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  In the absence of the minister 
responsible for SaskTel, I'll direct my question to the Premier.  And I 
call the Premier's attention to page 13 of your own Speech from the Throne, 
sir, which states, "restrictions on travel and advertising have been 
implemented."  Now that was one of eight actions that you reported in your 
Speech from the Throne. 
 
That being the case, Mr. Premier, can you explain why SaskTel is now paying 
to have a 20-page, full-colour, glossy magazine, which is little more than 
a propaganda vehicle for the minister responsible for SaskTel, printed and 
distributed free to some 10,000 people four times a year.  And can you tell 
us, Premier, how much it is costing SaskTel to put out the minister's own 
promotional magazine?  Is it $40,000?  Or $50,000? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, let me indicate first of all that the 
hon. member says that it's political propaganda and let me say if it is 
that it's not a very good likeness on the cover, Mr. Speaker.  That is not 
my picture on the cover. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Turn the page. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- That has to do with the Saskatchewan records . . . I'm 
going to turn the page, Mr. Speaker.  We've got ads from Northern Telecom, 
we've got Saskatchewan Roughriders, we've got one, two, three, four, Mr. 
Speaker, on the Saskatchewan Roughriders.  There are two pages on the . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. 



 

 

 
Mr. Trew: -- A new question, Mr. Speaker, to the Minister.  You'll note 
your mug on page 8, and you will notice again your mug on page 9 of this 
glossy thing. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.   I'm not sure whether I should refer to that 
as unparliamentary, but it certainly isn't fitting language.  Order, order.  
Allow the member to continue. 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I was just referring to the photo 
opportunities on those pages, of course.  Minister, let me quote from the 
lead editorial by David Carlin, who's vice-president of marketing and 
corporate development for SaskTel, your employee, sir.  And I quote: 
 

 As you will see, the economic, social and political issues involved in 
delivering telecommunications services are complex, and important to our 
future. 

 
And when talking about the rapid change in the telecommunications industry, 
he says and I quote: "In part it is because of changes taking place in the 
political arena." 
 
Clearly, Minister, this magazine intends to devote time and space to 
political commentary as in fact it did in the first issue with the 
so-called interview with yourself.  How in the world, Minister, can you 
justify having a Crown corporation publish a magazine solely for the 
purpose of spouting your government's political line, and especially in 
light of the Premier's comments in the Speech from the Throne and in light 
of the tens of thousands of hungry children in Saskatchewan?  How do you 
justify this cost? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I'm surprised, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP just put on 
record today that this government's stand against the actions of the 
national government to put SaskTel under CRTC (Canadian Radio-television 
and Telecommunications Commission) regulation is a partisan political issue 
and is the political agenda of this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We oppose that, and it's very interesting that the NDP stand up today and 
say that the government should not fight that particular issue.  We 
believe, Mr. Speaker, that the way SaskTel is regulated now by the people 
of this province and the government of this province, is right for SaskTel 
and it's right for the people of this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That is a political statement.  It's a political decision to allow 
deregulation and national regulation.  It is a political statement for me 
to object to it.  What I'm surprised, that the NDP oppose my fighting and 
this government's fighting against the actions of the federal government to 
protect SaskTel. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

Mr. Trew: -- New question, Mr. Speaker, to the same minister who is 
fighting for his own political survival and nothing more. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Mr. Minister, you did not answer the question as to the cost 
of this 20-page glossy, political propaganda report.  How much did it cost 
and how in the world can you justify it when there are thousands of hungry 
children every day, as we speak, in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Again, Mr. Speaker, I believe I and most people in this 
province would be surprised to hear the NDP say that this government's 
objection to the CRTC regulating SaskTel is political propaganda. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me make it abundantly clear, it is the position of this 
government to oppose the CRTC regulation of SaskTel.  To state that 
argument to the people of this province may be called political propaganda 
by the NDP, but I strongly suspect, Mr. Speaker, that the vast majority of 
the people of this province agree with the government on its opposition to 
CRTC regulation.  And for me to carry that message, Mr. Speaker, is good 
for the people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

New Insurance Compensation Plan 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I wish to call to the attention 
of the Assembly a recent and significant improvement in protection for 
insurance consumers in Saskatchewan.  Some hon. members may be aware that 
in January of this year a new national compensation plan for life and 
health insurance policyholders was established.  Saskatchewan played a 
leading role in the discussions which led to the creation of this 
significant loss protection plan.  Our participation was made possible by 
amendments to The Saskatchewan Insurance Act. 
 
Today I am pleased to inform the Assembly that Saskatchewan will require 
all licensed insurers here to participate in this plan which was previously 
a voluntary matter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what this means is that all Saskatchewan life and health 
insurance policyholders will be protected from loss in the event of the 
insolvency or failure of a life or health insurance company. 
 
I'm also pleased to report that the new compensation plan is entirely 
funded and administered by the Canadian life and health insurance industry, 
a substantial benefit to consumers in terms of improved protection at no 
additional cost to taxpayers.  The benefits under this industry-run 
compensation plan are considerable: guaranteed death benefits up to 
$200,000, annuities guaranteed up to $2,000 per month, and policy cash 



 

 

values covered up to $60,000. 
 
I remind all hon. members that Saskatchewan was also the leader in getting 
a similar plan set up to protect policyholders in the property and casualty 
sector of the insurance industry, a plan that has been up and running 
successfully since December of 1988 at industry expense and to public 
benefit. 
 
For example, the recent failure of Advocate General Insurance Company 
resulted in over 6,000 claims from policyholders, totalling more than $30 
million.  Mr. Speaker, over $2.2 million has already been paid out to 
claimants, including Saskatchewan policyholders.  It's anticipated that all 
$30 million will be returned to every policyholder at 100 cents on the 
dollar under the property and casualty compensation plan.  That, Mr. 
Speaker, is real consumer protection. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the minister for providing me 
a copy of his remarks just a few moments ago during question period.  And 
as I reviewed those remarks, Mr. Speaker, I asked myself the question: why 
in the world are we having a ministerial statement in this House today on 
this matter? 
 
Mr. Speaker, obviously this is an appropriate and appreciated improvement 
in Canada.  But why in the world are we having a statement today in this 
House about something that is relatively old news?  The minister himself 
admits that already $2.2 million has been paid out under this program, so 
it's not news, sir. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I submit that while this is an appropriate program and 
welcomed, the people of Saskatchewan, particularly the 6 to 7,000 people 
who saw their life savings disappear June 29, 1987 and have only to this 
date seen not even two-thirds of those savings returned, would wish that 
that minister and his government would pay attention to their concerns and 
support them, sir. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 50 -- An Act to amend The Teachers' Superannuation Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As a result of the 
successful negotiated agreement yesterday of the CPP (Canada Pension Plan) 
integration for teachers' superannuation, it gives me a great deal of 
pleasure today to give first reading to a Bill to amend The Teachers' 
Superannuation Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next 
sitting. 



 

 

 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 
SECOND READINGS 

 
Bill No. 48 -- An Act to amend The Court of Appeal Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  This Bill contains provisions 
aimed at improving the administration of the Court of Appeal and clarifying 
wording of The Court of Appeal Act.  The amended Act will provide that the 
Court of Appeal shall not be fewer than five in number.  This amendment 
will ensure the continued independence of the court.  The Bill also 
contains a statement of the administrative powers and duties of the Chief 
Justice of the Court of Appeal. 
 
The present Act, unlike The Queen's Bench Act and The Provincial Court Act, 
is silent in this regard. 
 
Provision will now be made for acting chief justices, when the chief 
justice is unable to act, his or her designate will fill in for him or her.  
If both the chief justice and his or her designate are unable to act, the 
senior puisne judge of the court will act. 
 
The Bill also provides for the retirement of chief justices to the status 
of puisne judges.  This will allow them to retain their judicial status 
while relinquishing their substantial administrative duties. 
 
The Act will clearly state the right to appeal final decision of the Court 
of Queen's Bench.  It will set out the requirement for leave to appeal 
interlocutory decisions of that court.  This requirement is meant to 
decrease the unnecessary delays in court. 
 
The Bill also contains amendments setting out the number of judges who may 
hear certain matters.  It provides for appeals of chambers applications, 
except with respect to applications for leave to appeal.  The disposition 
of matters in situations of death or retirement of a judge is provided for.  
This amendment requested by the Saskatchewan bar will facilitate the 
completion of court cases in a fair and timely manner. 
 
The amendments will also clarify the meaning of some provisions with, most 
notably, with respect to the jurisdiction of the court and the principle 
that a judge cannot sit in appeal of himself or herself.  The Act will also 
replace the words "judgement, order, decree, verdict, or finding" with the 
all-encompassing "decision".  I'm confident that these amendments, Mr. 
Speaker, ensuring the efficient administration of the Court of Appeal will 
be welcomed by both the judiciary and the bar.  And I'm pleased to move 
second reading of An Act to amend The Court of Appeal Act. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, I 
don't believe we have any problems with this but I want to get my feedback 
in respect to the changes.  And we'll be prepared certainly to move 



 

 

tomorrow, advance it.  And accordingly, I'd like leave to adjourn debate on 
that Bill. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 49 -- An Act to amend The Queen's Bench Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  This Bill contains provisions to 
enhance the effective administration of the Court of Queen's Bench.  It 
allows for the retirement of the Chief Justice of the Queen's Bench to the 
status of puisne judge without requiring full retirement from the court.  
This will allow the Chief Justice to give up his or her substantial 
administrative duties while retaining his or her judicial status. 
 
The Bill will also provide for an Acting Chief Justice in the absence of 
the Chief Justice.  The efficient administration of the court will be 
facilitated. 
 
The Bill provides that first the designate of the Chief Justice and second 
the senior puisne judge of the court will act in the place of the Chief 
Justice in his or her absence. 
 
Again I'm confident that these amendments will enhance the efficiency of 
the Court of Queen's Bench, and I'm pleased to move second reading of An 
Act to amend The Queen's Bench Act. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- It's the same situation in respect to The Queen's Bench Act.  
We want to have a little time to take a look at the comments of the 
minister. 
 
I beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(1445) 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 45 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the 
Hon. Mr. Lane that An Act to amend The Land Titles Act be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to make just a few comments, 
generally in respect to The Land Titles Act and the amendments.  We are in 
essential agreement with the amendments that have been provided within the 
Bill. 
 
There is one basic concern that I want to raise to the attention of the 
minister, and that is in respect to the provision which in effect gives to 
the SaskEnergy Corporation . . . yes, and to the Provincial Gas Limited the 



 

 

same rights, provides the same rights as SaskPower and SaskTel.  Indeed 
what it does, it provides that a rural land title should be subject to any 
consent, right of way or easement acquired by SaskEnergy or Provincial Gas 
to construct or maintain pipeline on or under land pursuant to programs 
established for that purpose. 
 
What I'm saying is that what the Bill is doing is providing to SaskEnergy 
and to Provincial Gas Limited basic powers that were given to SaskPower and 
SaskTel.  And basically what it does is it is a considerable saving in that 
by granting this easement or right of way, it is not required to register 
and it saves the cost of that registration of those instruments in the Land 
Titles Office. 
 
Now we are not opposed to that being provided to SaskPower and SaskTel, and 
in effect it has been in operation for a long time.  But what is being 
provided here is extending that to SaskEnergy Corporation and Provincial 
Gas Limited.  And the problem that we see is that in providing this, what 
guarantee do we have -- and I'd address this to the minister -- that in the 
event that it is privatized and these amendments are put into The Land 
Titles Act, that in the event that SaskEnergy Corporation is privatized and 
continues to operate under that, because it is now a body corporate, 
incorporated under The Business Corporations Act, and similarly with the 
Provincial Gas Limited. 
 
And certainly we will be opposing, if that's the intention, and we want to 
have some guarantee and an amendment. 
 
I am proposing . . . we're prepared to support the provision as long a 
SaskEnergy is solely a subsidiary to a Crown agent.  But certainly we are 
not prepared to provide it those benefits of not having to register 
easements if, in fact, it becomes privatized.  And those are the concerns 
that we have there.  And otherwise we're prepared to support the 
legislation, and what I intend to do is to move an amendment to that 
extent. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Do you want to send it over? 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- I'll provide it tomorrow to you. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- We can take a look at it. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Yes.  That we have the guarantee that it provides only in 
the event that SaskEnergy and also Provincial Gas Limited are a solely 
owned subsidiary of a Crown agent and not a privatized company.  Then, in 
those circumstances, Mr. Speaker, we would be prepared to support the Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee 
of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 47 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe that Bill No. 47 -- An Act respecting the Saskatchewan 



 

 

Association of Speech-Language Pathologists and Audiologists be now read a 
second time. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, we have met 
with the professional association and we have gone through the legislation.  
We don't have any particular problem with the precise provisions of the 
legislation, but I do want to say that we still remain very concerned about 
the terrible shortage of speech pathologists, speech-language pathologists 
and audiologists in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I've spoken on that at some length in the legislature, that the ratios of 
speech-language pathologists, the national ratio, as I understand, is 1 for 
every 9,587, and in Alberta it's 1 for . . . to 6,503 people.  And here in 
Saskatchewan we have a ratio that is 1 to every 13,416 people. 
 
I mean it's atrocious, Mr. Speaker.  This problem has to be dealt with.  
There's absolutely no question it has to be dealt with, and the Minister of 
Health simply has not been undertaking adequate steps of reimbursement and 
bonus incentives, benefit packages, that meet what is taking place in other 
jurisdictions across Canada, Mr. Minister . . . Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we will be dealing with that in more detail when the Bill gets to 
Committee of the Whole, but at this point I simply wish to say that we are 
prepared to let this Bill go on second reading. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee 
of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 29 -- An Act to amend The Crown Minerals Act 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Would the minister introduce his officials to us, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Today with me I have John 
Reid, deputy minister; Ray Clayton, assistant deputy minister; and Hal 
Sanders, manager of revenue services. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Minister, for 
introducing your officials.  I rise to ask some questions with respect to 
Bill 29 -- An Act to amend The Crown Minerals Act.  I've reviewed the Bill 
and there's a first provision that you've put in there with respect to 
providing the government with authority to enter into agreements with other 
governments on the sharing of information, in order to enforce taxation 
legislation, is something that has been done in the past I believe on two 
occasions.  One I recall in The Mineral Taxation Act which we supported at 
that time -- that element of it anyway. 
 
And I'm asking the minister this afternoon, since this is now the third 
occurrence on a third separate Bill, could you please tell me whether 
there's going to be any other Bills affected in the future with respect to 



 

 

this exchange of information and the confidentiality required with respect 
to that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, as I understand it, that any time one of 
our pieces of legislation of a substantive nature is brought up, we like to 
update it because we have many more people from other jurisdictions coming 
to the province of Saskatchewan who didn't operate here before, and it's 
important that in taxation matters that we be totally current. 
 
And also the question of confidentiality is something that is an absolute 
must to maintain in this particular area because of the risk in the 
undertaking of shareholders all across the world, if you will.  So 
confidentiality is an absolute must in this regard. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- With respect to taxation matters, Minister, as a result of 
previous amendments that have included this clause, can you share with the 
Assembly this afternoon whether you've exercised those particular 
authorities, and have they benefitted the department in collecting these 
taxes, or at least providing the treasury with a little more information 
regarding other companies in other provinces? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, we haven't entered into any formal 
agreements as yet.  We are in discussion with other jurisdictions, but no 
formal arrangement yet with any one of them. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Mr. Minister, part of the Bill ensures that the powers of 
the regulations under a certain clause will supersede any unitized oil and 
gas agreements or Crown leases that specifically identify lease rental 
rates.  And you say that these leases or agreements contain clauses 
outlining royalties that were in effect at the time they were entered into 
without provision for making changes when royalty structures or rates 
changed.  Can you give us an example of how this amendment would affect 
these lease agreements or unitized agreements or Crown leases? 
 
(1500) 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, I think I would put it this way to the 
member: that if you had, say, one of the early unitizations from the early 
1950s, which had a royalty basis of so many cents per barrel in comparison 
with today's new royalty structure which is very price and volume 
sensitive, that it would be necessary to update that and bring it into the 
mainstream of the new royalty process.  And sometimes because these units 
in the past were on a quite small basis, it wasn't felt, I suppose, 
appropriate at the time to go in and change the Act simply to go to one 
small unit. 
 
Since we've come in with our new royalty structure, we feel it appropriate 
to address some of these situations that have been around for quite a 
while. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Will the net effect of this amendment, Mr. Minister, result 
in higher royalty revenues to the province or lower royalty revenues to the 
province? 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- They certainly wouldn't be lower, Mr. Chairman.  If 
anything, the general trend would be to an increase. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- So the reason for this amendment will in effect be to 
increase the royalty revenues from these older wells that have been 
producing over the years.  Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Yes, in some cases, and to put all producers on the 
same playing field with the new royalty structures. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Could you give us an indication, Mr. Minister, what we're 
talking about in terms of dollars?  What do your officials estimate the 
impact of this to be?  Are we talking $100,000 a year?  A couple of million 
dollars a year increase in royalties?  You must have some estimate, that's 
the reason for the amendment.  Could you share that estimate with us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, my officials wouldn't have those figures 
with them today but they'd certainly be prepared to provide them to the 
member in the future. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you, Minister.  I would ask that that be done then 
please, and certainly if the forecasts estimate and confirm your statement 
today, I think that that would be a good approach to take on these older 
wells. 
 
Mr. Minister, another aspect of the Bill places a ceiling on the maximum 
amount of compensation that can be received by a company whose oil and gas 
rates were acquired by the Crown in 1974.  What has prompted this change? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, as everyone is quite aware, that the 
government undertook a fiscal review of all areas of government prior to 
the last budget and that it was felt in the area of fiscal management and 
restraint that all departments do their best.  And this was simply my 
department coming forward with what they felt was a contribution to the 
overall well-being of the province of Saskatchewan and at the same time 
recognizing still some responsibilities that had been around for some time 
that were occurred in other administrations. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- What will be the impact of this change on the government's 
financial position? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- There are savings, Mr. Chairman, of slightly over a 
million dollars. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Does that mean a million dollars . . . a positive gain for 
the treasury?  The minister affirms that. 
 
Mr. Minister, what has been the average compensation that the Department of 
Energy and Mines and the government have paid out over the years and why 
did you pick $50,000 as a figure? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, the average compensation payments over 



 

 

the last couple of years have been in the range of two and a half million 
dollars.  The $50,000 figure was arrived at as a reasonable amount to 
companies that compensation payments were owing to, realizing that many of 
the smaller producers in our oil patch don't have the wherewithal, the 
access to cash flow, that many of the larger multinational-type companies 
do have, and that this particular level would be appropriate in their 
circumstances in that larger companies would have access to other dollars 
that would be forgone under this particular Act. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Well I'm not clear, Mr. Minister, in what you're saying.  
Could you run that by me again and maybe reword it so that I can understand 
it?  I'd appreciate that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, the figure was arrived at being a 
reasonable balance between those companies that operate in our province who 
rely on this compensation income to cash flow their operations, vis-a-vis 
larger companies who have access to cash flows obviously that may be 
generated in other areas of endeavour.  And it was felt that we had struck 
a reasonable balance to the size of the companies that were relying on this 
money for part of their ongoing operations. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you, Minister.  Could you please explain . . . give 
us an example of how one of these transactions would take place. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, a company would be operating a specific 
well and the production from that particular well would be recorded on a 
monthly basis, and then the portion of that production which was due for 
compensation would then be reported to the department and cheques issued 
back to the company on a monthly basis. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you, Minister.  The portion that's due for 
compensation, how is that defined?  Who defines what portion and under what 
circumstances would it be paid out? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- There's a formula, Mr. Chairman, that's been in place, 
and what it did is it reflected the price and the royalty structure at the 
time of the expropriation in 1974.  And that calculation is done on that 
basis and then reported to the department.  The department in turn  
 Dissues a cheque back to the company. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- What representations have you had from the companies as a 
result of this proposed amendment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, some companies have made no 
representation; some have made representation to the government that they 
had wished this had been otherwise, as I suppose they had wished it had 
been otherwise when the expropriation occurred in 1974. 
 
I think, by and large, the industry as a whole appreciates the fiscal 
management of the province and that steps are necessary, given our 
agricultural circumstances, to manage our finances.  By and large, they 
have been appreciative of the regime that they have worked under under this 
administration, and I think they understand these circumstances, by and 



 

 

large. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- How much do we now pay out as a province, Minister, in 
total for the compensation on an annual basis? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- As I said before, Mr. Chairman, the average over the 
last few years has been two and a half million dollars. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Mr. Minister, thank you.  I turn now to the trust interests 
where the Crown owns the rights of certain surrendered lands and would like 
to lease these back to development.  The Bill will allow, I understand, 
that as a role of trustee for the owner of the trust certificates, you'll 
be able to proceed in situations where the owners of the certificates 
cannot be located; and where their agreements to the terms of the leasing 
arrangement cannot be obtained, will be able to work out some solution.  
Can you tell us how many of these parcels of land are currently being held 
in trust by the government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Approximately 2,500, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- How many would be held by individuals as opposed to 
companies? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, there would be approximately 90 per cent 
of them held by individuals. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- And I understand these have been held primarily since the 
'40s and '50s.  Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, the member's correct, that many of those 
dated from the '40s and '50s and were in that state until the province of 
Saskatchewan got into the act in 1974. 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- And have they been sitting somewhere on file as a result of 
these conversions, or I should say transfer of trust?  Has there been no 
initiative on behalf of the department to seek out the title holders? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman.  The department has been very 
vigorous in trying to find the owners of these trust certificates.  But, as 
the member can appreciate, as time goes on, where we're 40 and 50 years 
down the road, it becomes increasingly difficult to locate these 
individuals.  And without this particular Act, these lands would simply sit 
in abeyance for ever and a day.  And that is the reason that it's included 
in the provisions. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- I notice from your second reading speech on May 30 that you 
indicated that when the trust certificates are converted to full legal 
title, the Crown will be free to pursue the leasing of these lands.  How 
much land are we talking about out of the 2,500 leases? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Approximately 600,000 acres, Mr. Chairman, involved 



 

 

with the trust certificates, and the province would probably have about an 
80 per cent interest in those lands. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- How will the trust certificates be converted into full 
title once some of these people are located?  How is that done? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- That'd be just normal fashion, Mr. Chairman, through 
Land Titles Office. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- So is it correct to assume then that these lands will 
become Crown lands if they cannot be searched out in terms of the 
individual owners? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- The process would be as follows, Mr. Chairman: there 
is that ongoing diligent search for the individuals involved, and if they 
are found, then we go through the normal process as I outlined to the 
member.  If a trustholder is not found, then the trust account will be 
established.  And if during that period of 10 years, at any time that 
individual comes forward, the individual would have access to the money, 
plus the title.  And then after the 10-year period, if no title holder is 
found, then the land and the proceeds revert to the Crown. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you.  Where the owners of the trust certificates 
can't be located, the Bill indicates that revenue shares will be held for 
up to 10 years.  This period is to commence after the time of a reasonable 
search has expired.  How do you define reasonable search and has the search 
already begun? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- As I said before, Mr. Chairman, that process has been 
ongoing for a long period of years where we try and locate these people.  
The criteria will have to be evaluated on an ongoing basis I think to set 
appropriate amounts of time.  We have access to different types of 
information.  For instance, if our records show that the family -- and that 
could be the larger family unit -- is still resident of Saskatchewan, 
obviously the period of time that you would allocate to find those 
individuals would be different than someone who, say, had emigrated out of 
country, out of continent, and so you have to evaluate before.  And I think 
those criteria must be evaluated all the time, so that before you start 
that process of the 10-year trust, that you're confident that you've done 
everything you can to do the location. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- You outlined the process, or at least the terminology and 
the reference.  Will the department use existing staff to conduct this 
search, or will you be contracting the search out, or will you be hiring 
people to support your existing staff on a full-time basis to undertake the 
research? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, we'll be adding one person on 
contract for this particular enterprise, and also we will be accessing two 
students from the co-op program at the university to also work on this 
endeavour. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you, Minister.  Final question.  Could you provide a 



 

 

rationale for the establishment of the $50,000 compensation payment.  How 
is this figure arrived at, and do you think it's reasonable? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Well as I said before, Mr. Chairman, it was a level 
that we felt, after looking at all of the people involved, all of the 
companies involved in compensation payments, that was a reasonable, 
rational level, because these companies do depend on these compensation 
payments for income and cash flow in their ongoing operations.  And the 
ability of some companies to cash flow is greater than others because they 
have access to more resources and more areas of cash flow.  And this was 
the area that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Compensation payments 
all go to companies . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That's a legal 
term, Mr. Chairman.  That's either corporate, you know . . . 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Okay, thank you.  And one other question I had -- I guess 
two more left -- section 7, in reference to subsection 23.1, production 
year means that period commencing on February 1, 1990 and ending March 31, 
1991.  Any particular reason for the February date as opposed to another 
date? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, that's because of a two month reporting 
lag that keeps it consistent with the government's fiscal year.  I think 
the member can understand that. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you.  Page 4, subsection 8 of that same clause, and I 
quote: 
 

 On and after the coming into force this section, when a lease described in 
subsection (9) expires, is cancelled or for any other reason is 
terminated: 

 
 (a) the right of any person to 

compensation with respect to the oil and gas rights covered by the 
lease is extinguished; 

 
 (b) the obligation of the Crown to pay 

compensation is extinguished, even if the oil and gas rates covered 
by the lease are subsequently disposed of pursuant to this Act and 
the regulations. 

 
How does this clause affect compensation if the compensation is in dispute 
at the time?  It may not have happened, but let's say there's some dispute 
and these things expire, do they lose all their rights in terms of the 
appeal or dispute? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- I think, Mr. Chairman, that's something that would be 
settled in the courts.  I mean if someone had a valid claim at the time of 
compensation, then that would be something that lawyers would bring forward 
and pursue and it would be up to the court to settle. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 



 

 

 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 40 -- An Act to amend The Dangerous Goods Transportation Act 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Would the minister introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Petersen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have with me Bill McLaren 
from the Highway Traffic Board. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- Mr. Chairman, the minister provided me with some 
information in relation to the questions I raised in second reading with 
regard to Bill No. 40 and perhaps I might just seek a bit more 
clarification on the information the minister provided. 
 
The Bill transfers legislative basis for the enforcement of the dangerous 
goods transportation regulations.  And I want to ask the minister, in the 
transfer of the legislative basis, what is the likelihood of personnel 
changes due to this particular legislative change, any staff dislocations 
as far as Saskatchewan is concerned, and if I may, the cost implications of 
this if there are any? 
 
Hon. Mr. Petersen: -- There would be no cost implications and there would 
be absolutely no staff relocations or dislocations. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- I want to raise a question with regard to the 
Department of National Defence.  The Bill excludes the movement of 
dangerous goods where the Department of National Defence is the mover.  
Would the minister know, perchance, what percentage of the dangerous goods 
that are moved by Department of National Defence, are moved by their own 
units as opposed to for-hire units? 
 
Hon. Mr. Petersen: -- I would have no information with regard to the 
percentages, sir. 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- And, Mr. Minister, you state in the written explanation 
you gave to me that there is no reason for concern.  And I assume that 
there has been no concern whatsoever with regard to the Department of 
National Defence and movement of dangerous goods as far as our Department 
of Highways and Transportation is concerned in Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Petersen: -- I'm advised by my department that that would be 
correct, yes. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- Final question with regard to this Bill, Mr. Minister, 
has to do with the -- well, perhaps the second from final question -- has 
to do with checking with other authorities that may be impacted upon by the 
changes in this legislation.  What checks were necessary by way of 
consultation with other groups?  And could you just outline that a bit, Mr. 



 

 

Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Petersen: -- We've consulted with a wide range of different people 
and groups including the federal government, dangerous goods secretariat, 
shippers, so on and so forth.  And it's an ongoing consultative process 
that we've been involved with for some time, so there you have it. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- Can I take from your comments, Mr. Minister, that the 
consultation with these bodies that you felt was necessary to consult with 
resulted in their compliance with the effect of this legislation?  They're 
not resisting it; they're in compliance with it.  Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Petersen: -- Yes, industry has been complying with these types of 
regulations for some time, as it was enacted under the federal law, and 
there's been no resistance now. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- In conclusion, Mr. Minister, would you indicate to me 
that there are no new and unusual powers in this Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Petersen: -- To the best of my knowledge, there is none nor was 
there any intent to have any included. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 20 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 41 -- An Act to Amend the Highway Traffic Act 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- Mr. Minister, I want to thank you again for sending 
over the written explanation of some of the sections that I had intended to 
question you about.  The first one, of course, was a consultation with 
effective groups and I see you've listed the effective groups here at a 
national and at the provincial level.  I might only ask one question with 
regard to that.  The result of the consultation, as with the previous Bill: 
was the result of the consultation positive and in agreement with the moves 
that you are making, or was there resistance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Petersen: -- There's been general co-operation with this move.  
It's part of a national safety code which all governments and industry 
components support.  Yes, I 'd have to say there's been very good 
co-operation. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- Might I ask about consultation with urban 
municipalities in Saskatchewan with regard to -- let's pick a section -- 
U-turns by enforcement officers that this Bill would permit something that 
was formerly prohibited by municipal law.  Was the consultation 
satisfactory there with the municipal organizations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Petersen: -- Municipalities support this move.  It makes it 



 

 

consistent with other provisions that are presently in effect, so there's 
no objection to it. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- Mr. Minister, it mentions the Highway Traffic Board in 
here.  I wanted to, if I could get the minister to provide me with the 
members of the Highway Traffic Board, their appointment dates, where 
they're from -- would the Minister provide me with that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Petersen: -- Yes, I will provide that for you. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- I ask the Minister with a note of trepidation in my 
voice, because you will be aware, Mr. Minister, that I asked the previous 
minister of Highways for information during his estimates and it took him a 
year. He never did provide it. You eventually provided some of it to me 
after holding it in your warm hand for 30 days or whatever the length of 
time was. 
 
Mr. Minister, you have not provided me with one bit of information since 
your estimates were completed over a month ago.  Now are you serious when 
you say you're going to provide me with that information, and with the 
information you promised to provide me with during your estimates? 
 
Hon. Mr. Petersen: -- The short answer to that would be yes I am, and that 
information is being compiled.  I will attempt to have the list of members 
and their appointment dates for you later this day.  Outside of that I can 
only say that that information is being compiled and will be ready for you.  
I give you my word on that. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 13 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 37 -- An Act to amend The Cost of Credit Disclosure Act 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Would the minister introduce his officials 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have beside me Ron Zukowsky, 
who is the director of policy and legislative services in the Saskatchewan 
Department of Consumer and Commercial Affairs. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Thanks very much, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I only have 
a limited number of questions regarding the Act, and I'm sure we can move 
through it fairly quickly. 
 
Just for the record, sir, in 1988 when a similar Bill by the same title and 
similar nature came to the House, the minister at that time had indicated 
that you were hoping to see the regulations in harmony with regulations of 
a similar nature across Canada.  Have you done that, sir, with this Bill?  
Have you brought into harmony the regulations in the province with 



 

 

regulations across Canada in other jurisdictions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: -- Well we've tried to do that, but this is one area where 
regulation is unfortunately not uniform across the country.  And it's that 
way really in order to preserve the flexibility in meeting local market 
conditions and varying things. 
 
They all have them in their regulations which allow the flexibility for 
their own areas, depending on the different types of loans or the area of 
interest rates or whether it's a financial institution or a small merchant 
of some kind. 
 
It's fair to say that the whole country would like to get it regulated into 
one, but I think until the whole issue of interest rates is established 
across the country it's pretty difficult to put one of these variable 
interest rates into that set of specific regulations uniformly across the 
country. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Minister, did you in the drafting of the legislation, 
did you use other provincial legislations as a guide in preparing this 
piece of legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd like to tell the hon. member that not 
only did we look at legislation right across the country, but even here 
within our province we have so much legislation in so many areas referring 
to interest rates, we tried to bring in some reasonableness to the entire 
thing, keeping in mind that this whole thing is brought about by 
institutions and the like that are at an unfair advantage because of the 
Bank Act, as you well know, which is a federal piece of legislation. 
 
We're trying to keep everybody competitive, but there are so many different 
areas of concern that to have one again that would match right across the 
country, would be virtually impossible.  I think that you recognize that.  
The department tried to do their best, tried to have the best of all worlds 
by assembling it into this provision. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- I do recognize that, Minister, and I congratulate your 
departmental officials for indeed trying to do that, consolidate in this 
one piece of legislation. 
 
Mr. Minister, have you had opportunity in the drafting of the Bill or since 
the Bill has been presented, to consult with the lenders in the province 
who will be affected by the legislation; and can you report to the House 
their response to this legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: -- All of the major players that are involved directly 
where there was consultation -- the Credit Union Central, the association 
of loan and financial institutions, the farm implement dealers -- have been 
advised and are aware of it.  Basically they support the concept.  So that 
I think again all of the major areas of those involved, all support the 
concept of the variable interest rate and pretty extensive consultation has 
been done. 
 



 

 

Mr. Calvert: -- Minister, a more specific question perhaps: will this 
legislation affect the major chain retailers who will offer to their 
customers credit through charge cards and I refer to the kind of . . . like 
the Canadian Tire card, Bay, Sears, Eaton's, so on.  Will the legislation 
cover that situation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: -- Yes it will apply to all of those major institutions and 
the department has been talking to the Retail Council of Canada to get 
their support behind what we're trying to do.  So all of the institutions 
that involve credit cards, any retailers that involve the use of credit 
cards of their own, other than the banks, will all be subject to this piece 
of legislation which will be comparable indeed to what the federal Bank Act 
is. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Minister, will it apply to the charge cards provided 
through the major oil companies -- gas credit cards? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: -- I've been advised that they too as well will be included 
in the credit cards. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- And, Mr. Minister, there is in the Bill what I observe as 
an exemption and we've talked about this and we've discussed it.  I think 
just for the record there is an exemption to variable . . . this would be 
section 5, part 3 where an agreement for variable credit involves credit 
given by the advance of money only in that section. 
 
Perhaps, Mr. Minister, just for the records, since this is the one category 
of exemption that I see in the legislation, I think it would be helpful for 
the record if you could describe what that exemption means in real terms, 
in terms of credit that people understand.  Take away some of the legalese 
in the language of the Bill just to explain what that exemption is. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: -- Yes.  It is a technical part of the Act and it comes 
into play where rather than a cash advance or if you bought something on a 
credit card is concerned, there are many institutions that will offer a 
line of credit to their customer.  And it deals with the line of credit 
that could be advanced or would be advanced in the event that the customer 
would require the cash at some point in time, so that when that original 
line of credit is established the consumer will know up front how the 
variable interest rate will apply to the loan that he will be receiving at 
some future point in time. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Minister, again I would want to make the point, as I 
did in second reading debate, that it is from my point of view a real 
improvement that you've brought to consumer education and information, the 
provision of information from lenders to borrowers and consumers in our 
province.  And in that regard we certainly support the Bill. 
 
But again I would point out, Mr. Minister, that while this Bill goes a fair 
long way, as the title suggests, in disclosing the cost of credit to 
consumers -- it does and I wouldn't expect it to -- but it does not address 



 

 

the actual cost of credit.  And so, Mr. Minister, I would encourage you 
once again to lobby your federal counterparts to sincerely deal on a 
national level with the cost of credit, both in terms of those charges that 
are permitted to the issuers of credit cards; and secondly, to the high 
interest rate policy of your federal counterpart, sir. 
 
 DHon. Mr. Klein: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, what the member says is absolutely 
right.  I think it's . . . he well knows from media reports that our 
Premier has and will continue to address the high interest rate that 
Saskatchewan and western Canada is involved in, due in a lot of reasons for 
the hot economy in eastern Canada.  And the member nods his head that he 
recognizes that. 
 
And I agree; we can't really become involved provincially with the actual 
cost, but I'm pleased to hear that he supports the move that we are making 
in protecting the consumer as far as it relates to the disclosure side of 
it. 
 
And he mentioned it earlier and I would like to repeat that I think that 
our staff did an excellent job in researching the material.  They had scads 
of it to go through -- all kinds of Acts and the like to do.  And I think 
that they did a real good job in compiling these amendments, and it should 
go a long way in protecting our consumers that use the credit that they 
require. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Minister, I would simply join you in congratulating and 
thanking the staff of your department who I'm sure did work.  I, through 
the good services of our Legislative Library -- that's a very helpful group 
of people we have working in our Legislative Library -- they provided for 
me on very short notice, copies of Bills and Acts from all over Canada that 
I might be able to compare, so I have some idea of the weight of material 
that your officials and members of the department did deal with in drafting 
this legislation.  So I join with you in thanking and congratulating for 
their work. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 14 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 29 -- An Act to amend The Crown Minerals Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that the Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 40 -- An Act to amend The Dangerous Goods Transportation Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that the Bill be now read a third 



 

 

time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 41 -- An Act to amend The Highway Traffic Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that the Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 37 -- An Act to amend The Cost of Credit Disclosure Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that the Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Hours of Sitting 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
move, seconded by my seat mate, the member from Meadow Lake, by leave of 
the Assembly: 
 

 That notwithstanding rule 3, that this Assembly shall continue to meet 
this day until 10 o'clock p.m. with a recess from 5 o'clock p.m. until 7 
o'clock p.m. 

 
Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Indian and Native Affairs Secretariat 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 25 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Would the minister please introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to 
introduce my officials.  With me is Lorne Koback, acting secretary, seated 
on my left.  Behind Lorne is Bill Calder, assistant secretary.  Seated next 
to him is John Reid, executive director, Indian development, also known as 
J.R.  In the rear of the Assembly, we have Jerry Welsh, director of native 
career development and training.  We also have Howard Gelmich, 
administrative officer; and Lorri Lampard, policy analyst. 
 
It's my pleasure, Mr. Chairman, to introduce these officials to you.  These 



 

 

officials work on a daily basis in the Indian and Native Affairs 
Secretariat, consulting and touching base with Indian and native people 
throughout Saskatchewan.  They do an excellent job, Mr. Chairman, and many 
of them do extensive travelling throughout the province in their 
consultations. 
 
I can tell you, Mr. Chairman, that it is the intention of this government 
to continue to work in co-operation with Indian and Metis people of 
Saskatchewan in a number of different areas.  I think a prime example of 
this co-operative approach is the shared provincial and federal 
responsibilities between the province and the federal government. 
 
We have a lot of issues to deal with.  One of the major concerns that we 
have are federal reductions in services and programs offered to 
Saskatchewan's status Indian population.  It's an area that has significant 
consequences for the people of this province.  We have liaised with both 
Chief Roland Crowe and Jim Durocher on some of these issues -- very, very 
significant issues for the people of Saskatchewan.  And I want you to know, 
Mr. Chairman, that I will continue, I will continue to voice this 
government's strong opposition to any federal abdication of its 
responsibilities to Saskatchewan's aboriginal people. 
 
The secretariat will also continue its successful program of business 
assistance programs available to both Indian and Metis people.  Our active 
participation in the land entitlement area will be continuing.  Career 
training, employment equity, job placement assistance, and career 
enhancement are all a number of priorities within our department.  Policy 
development and the overall co-ordination of the provincial departmental 
initiatives in addressing aboriginal issues will as well remain a major 
focus. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I will leave my initial comments at that and I would welcome 
questions from the opposition, and through this means and method, I would 
trust that we would better be able to serve our aboriginal people in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- First of all, Mr. Minister, I'd like to also welcome your 
staff from the Indian and Native Affairs Secretariat.  I thought that this 
year already you might change it to an Indian and Metis Affairs 
Secretariat, but I see you haven't done that yet.  I think it's very 
important. 
 
I think I mentioned that last year, that you should be possibly moving 
towards changing the name in regards to section 35 of the Canadian 
constitution which recognizes Indian, Metis, and Innuit.  And in this 
province of course we have Indian and Metis and it would be probably be a 
little bit important for the minister maybe to change the name of the 
Indian and Native Secretariat to Indian and Metis Secretariat. 
 
I guess the first thing I would like to maybe get at is the whole issue of 
economic development.  You stated that economic development was very 



 

 

important and I would like the minister to tell me, you know, what was 
spent in regards to Indian economic development this past year.  And also, 
send me a copy of the total amounts that were provided for Indian companies 
and Indian people, and I mean all those that are over or under $10,000.  So 
could you provide me that information there, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Firstly respecting the 
Indian economic development program, you will recall that that program was 
budgeted at $1.3 million last year.  The actual amount dispersed under that 
fund was $1,299,182,000.  So in essence, the full $1.3 million was spent on 
a very successful Indian economic development program benefitting large 
numbers of Indian people, encouraging them to start up in businesses.  Many 
of the projects levered many additional funds out of federal government 
programs and other areas and gave the equity to successfully start up many 
of these companies. 
 
With respect to the native business development program, that amount was 
budgeted at $600,000 last year.  A total amount of $604,912 was spent.  
That was slightly over budget -- over budget by approximately $5,000.  
That's the global figures. The hon. member has asked for individual project 
listings.  I will send those to the member.  We will give you a complete 
list of all projects approved under either program. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Could you give me the amount that this will . . . How much 
was an increase from last year to this year in regards to those two 
programs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- The budgeted amounts for the Indian economic 
development program in 1989-90 was 1.3 million.  As well, this current 
fiscal year will be 1.3 million as well.  So both of those programs in the 
last two years have had identical numbers budgeted for them -- the Indian 
economic development program. The same applies to the native business 
development program -- both years 600,000. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, in regards to the policy on 
disbursement of the moneys.  I know that it doesn't, you know, under 
$10,000 they disburse the money through the department.  Now I'm wondering 
whether or not the policy of disbursement is exactly the same for the 
Indian economic development and also the native business economic 
development. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- The processes for disbursing these funds are the same 
in both the Indian economic development program and the native business 
development program.  And that process, by legislation, would indicate 
after recommendation by either board, that the amount or the proposal would 
be recommended, if you like, by the boards; would come to the officials; 
the officials would bring it forward to my office.  Amounts under $10,000, 
I could approve at my level.  Amounts in excess of $10,000 would actually 
have to go to cabinet, and there you would have to prepare an order in 
council for any amounts over $10,000. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Could you tell me the names of the boards, the two boards, 
and the members of the boards? 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Chairman, under the native business development 
program, we have seven individuals on that board: Gerald Nogier, Dan Welsh, 
Keith Madsen, Tony Durocher, Gene Salter, Lionel Dejardian, and Lorri 
Lavalley.  Those are the seven members that make up the native business 
development program. 
 
On the Indian advisory board, we have the tribal councils and their 
respective board members as follows: Mr. O'Neill Gladue, Chief Bernard Bob, 
Chief Wayne Morris, Mr. Wallace Tawpisin, Chief Mike Fineday, Chief Gabriel 
Gopher, and Mr. Allen Felix. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- In regards to these boards, do they review . . . on the 
Indian economic development, did the board review every particular 
individual case that came to the department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Yes, it is my understanding that the Indian advisory 
board does review each and every proposal under that grant program. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- So it would be my understanding that all the information 
that you'll be giving me in regards to all the disbursements were actually 
reviewed by the board themselves.  Is that correct, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- It's my understanding that the board does take a very 
active role.  It does review every individual business application.  There 
is one exception and that is applications that come from the FSIN 
(Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations) themselves, and the board, I 
understand, at times does not review those applications. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Could you give me the approximate number on how many these 
might be, Mr. Minister?  Or could you maybe give me the exact number on how 
many are reviewed then by the two systems? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- The total number of projects that were received and 
were reviewed by the board were 255; the total number of projects that were 
reviewed by the board and ultimately approved were 74. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- And how many were approved by the other system?  You 
mentioned another system through the federation.  And what total amount? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- There were four such proposals by the Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations, four proposals.  Total amount for those 
combined four was $147,500. 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Are these specifically broken down when you provide for me 
the disbursements then?  Okay, maybe I'll continue with the next question.  
In regards to the native business economic development, about a couple of 
years ago of course, it was about 500,000, three years ago, it was about 
500,000.  And in both cases, nothing was spent that year or last year.  You 
know, a certain amount was spent.  And of course, this year it's been 
overspent.  So there's been a big shift in just a few years, from basically 



 

 

nothing being spent for Metis and non-status Indians in the province in the 
first two years, then all of a sudden, a bit was spent last year and then a 
bit more just the preceding year under review. 
 
I'm just wondering what changes took place.  What was the big change in the 
increase in the native business development program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- I think it's important to make the point that this is 
a developmental program.  It has not been a program that has been ongoing 
in the province for a long, long time by any means. 
 
This program was initiated and started under this administration just a few 
years ago, and like any program that starts in its initial stages has a 
developmental growth period that it goes through.  There were policy 
decisions that had to be made; there were criteria decisions that had to be 
made.  What criteria are you going to attach to this program?  What is the 
structure of your board going to be like?  What decisions is that board 
going to make?  What decisions is the minister going to make?  What 
decisions is cabinet going to make?  Those types of things took some time 
to put into gear. 
 
It also took some time for many of the native applicants to gain a handle 
on this program and to express interest.  And I can say that the interest 
in the program has grown significantly and substantially over the last two 
years.  So I can only talk about a growth period for this program that in 
fact I think was long overdue. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- You mentioned the names of the board members on the native 
business development side.  Now I'm wondering whether that full board 
examined every particular case that came through that particular program. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- I'm advised that this particular board has not seen 
all of the proposals in any sense of the word.  What the board does do is 
screen the approved projects to ensure that they have been following the 
general criteria that has been laid down.  The criteria was very much 
established by that board, and the board functions in a manner that they 
would want to ensure that projects in a general and a specific sense are 
conforming to the criteria that was outlined by that board in the initial 
stages of the program. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Could you tell me in concise terms how many disbursements 
did come through the board and exactly how many didn't?  And how much money 
was involved in total on the ones that didn't go through the board and the 
ones that went through the board? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- We do not have that type of information right here at 
our fingertips.  We would have to go back and research through our files 
and find that information for you, but I would have no difficulty in 
supplying that type of information to you.  It's simply that we do not have 
it with us. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- I might just state on that, Mr. Minister, I mean we've had 
the program now for three years and it's not very difficult to 



 

 

operationalize a board.  You know, you can do it in one year.  I mean, the 
development on any boards doesn't take three years. 
 
I mean, the same holds true in regards to three years ago when I raised 
these same questions.  There was really nothing going on at the same time 
on Indian economic development and there was, you know, quicker action in 
that sense at that time.  And I'm just a little bit, I guess, concerned 
that the same didn't happen in regards to the native business development 
program. 
 
So I would advise the minister maybe to check that out and provide me with 
the details on exactly, you know, what was actually spent by the board and 
what . . . and which ones did not go through the board.  If they did not go 
through the board, could you tell me which individual  
 Dthen was handling most of the initial decision making on it? 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Why is the member on his feet? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- I wonder if I could ask leave, Mr. Chairman, to make 
some introductions. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Mr. Chairman, it's my pleasure on behalf of my colleague 
from Prince Albert-Duck Lake, Mr. Lautermilch, to make an introduction of 
some 35 grade 5 and 6 students who have come down to Regina and here to the 
legislature, all the way from MacDowall School.  They are accompanied by 
their teacher, Elmer Malec; and by chaperons, Mrs. Josie Peet, Mrs. Carolyn 
Smith, Mrs. Norma Boden; and their bus driver, Lloyd Tait. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch or myself will have an opportunity to meet with these 
students shortly for photos and then also for any questions or answers they 
might have.  And I would ask all members to join with me and welcome these 
students from MacDowall to the legislature this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muller: -- The chairman would certainly also like to greet the students 
from MacDowall because the bus driver happens to be a relative of mine.  So 
I say hi to him. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- We won't hold that against him. 
 
Mr. Muller: -- No, no one will certainly hold that against him, I'm sure.  
But I congratulate you for coming down.  I hope you enjoy your trip, and 
have a safe journey home.  Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 



 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Indian and Native Affairs Secretariat 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 25 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- The structure within the Secretariat of Indian and 
Native Affairs would be that we have two project officers who would be, in 
most instances, the officials that would be the first line of contact that 
individuals may approach.  And the two individuals are Harold Smith and 
Garth Schmidt, as project officers. 
 
Those two would be reporting to the acting director, Maurice Aubichon.  
That is the . . . It's a team, a team type of approach.  And you would have 
that as the actual mechanics of the program, those individuals involved.  
Above them you would have the permanent head, which would be Lorne Koback 
as the acting secretary.  And from time to time you would also engage 
consultants, who may or many not review projects. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- From the people there, how many . . . So what you're saying, 
Mr. Minister, is that Maurice Aubichon, the acting director, would be 
handling all the files then.  Is that what you're saying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- According to the organization chart and the way the 
team is set up, you do have your two project managers responsible to the 
acting director.  And indeed the files would flow through that acting 
director, Mr. Aubichon. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- So Mr. Aubichon would then make the recommendation then to 
his superior as to which ones would be okay and which ones wouldn't be.  Is 
that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Chairman, the administrative procedure that is 
used in the processing of applications is what we call a check-list 
authority system whereby the project officers review the projects.  They 
would put their recommendation on it as an individual project officer.  A 
check-list there flows up to the acting director, who would make his 
recommendation, flows through to the acting secretary, and it's a certainly 
a check-list authority system that I think is recognized in many different 
departments. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- In other words, who actually makes the actual decision?  So 
that you're saying that the acting secretary is then responsible for 
everything that happens within that department, or the acting director? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- I'm advised that this is a shared responsibility, once 
again with a check-list authority system whereby the project officers add 
their mark to it, the director adds his recommendation flowing through the 
secretary or acting secretary, ultimately coming to the minister's office 
by the legislation for ultimate ministerial approval. 
 
(1630) 
 



 

 

Mr. Goulet: -- So what you're telling me is that there is responsibility 
then at each level, at the project officer level.  And if anything then is 
wrong at that level or correct at that level, then it proceeds to the next 
level.  So at each level of responsibility, there is a degree of 
responsibility then at each level? 
 
But the greatest degree of responsibility, the first greatest degree of 
responsibility would then lie at Mr. Aubichon's decision-making level, is 
that not correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- I certainly don't deny that Mr. Aubichon plays a role 
in the approval of projects -- there's no question about that. 
 
But decisions can be . . . decisions and recommendations are made at every 
level, including the project officers, the director, as well the secretary 
and as well flowing up through to the minister. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Can you then provide me the information on how many 
decisions by Mr. Aubichon have not been approved at the next level then?  
And also provide me how many have been approved or how many disapproved to 
the next level. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- We do not have the figures with us, but I'll be happy 
to provide you with the total number of applications that were received in 
this department.  As well, we'll provide you with the number of 
applications that were finally and ultimately approved. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- When you also provide me with those total numbers, could you 
provide for me . . . on the ones that were approved I would like to know 
exactly how many were handled by Mr. Aubichon. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- We will endeavour to provide that information to you.  
Because of the fact that there is shared responsibility as part of this 
system, it is at times difficult to ascertain what the flow-through has 
been on some of these projects.  I want the hon. member to know that many 
of these projects are handled initially by the project officers, flowed 
through to the acting director, some of them may have; some of them may not 
have; some of them we may have those types of statistics available; others 
we may not. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- So in other words, what you're telling me, Mr. Minister, is 
that you will provide me with the information in regards to the files that 
have been handled by Mr. Aubichon and especially those files that have been 
later on approved.  So you'll endeavour to provide me with that information 
then, eh? 
 
So I'll then go to the next question.  In regards to decision making, on 
the ones that were approved, I notice that there is a Mr. Lorrie Lavalley 
that is listed as part of your board.  Is that the same Lorrie Lavalley 
that worked for your department previously? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Yes that's the same gentleman. 
 



 

 

Mr. Goulet: -- Has he received any moneys through the department other than 
as a board member? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- It's my information that Mr. Lavalley, under this 
grant program, did receive . . . did make an application and receive a 
grant after he was finished employment with the secretariat.  However, at 
the time I am advised that he was on the board. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Could you tell me how much he received and for what type of 
business? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- I understand that it was a rent-a-car business; the 
name of the business was Rent-A-Wreck, and we've certainly seen that 
franchise available all over Canada.  It appears to be a franchise 
business, Rent-A-Wreck, in the amount of $35,000. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- When you were doing a review on Rent-A-Wreck, was Mr. 
Lavalley the sole owner then of Rent-A-Wreck, or were there any other 
partners along with . . . in the Rent-A-Wreck business? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- We do not have all of the project files or in fact any 
of the project files with us.  I do not know.  I do not have that 
information available with me. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Just for the record, I notice that every time I raise 
questions on Mr. Aubichon or Mr. Lavalley, there was a certain degree of 
hesitation with regards to providing me with that information, although I 
do respect the minister in trying to get the information at hand and so on.  
But I still notice that, you know, most of this information should be 
relatively straightforward and fairly easy.  And so there was a deal of 
uneasiness on the wait that I've observed from you. 
 
But I just want to make a general statement.  In regards to both Indian 
economic development and for native business development, what we're 
looking at is 500,000 in the years before; a lot of it went back to the 
treasury, you know, to pay for the deficit in the first two years.  And 
we've been spending a little bit more this past year to the tune of 
$600,000 and also $1.3 million. 
 
Now for the public, I think it's important to recognize that there are, you 
know, for the $1.3 million spent for treaty Indians, I mean there's 70,000 
treaty Indians in the province of Saskatchewan -- 70,000.  The population 
figure is -- and I'm approximating -- I think there are 69,000-and-some 
number.  So that there are 70,000 treaty Indians in the province and they 
are getting $1.3 million, which I suppose works out to about 12 cents, 12, 
13 cents, you know, per Indian person in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
When you look at 10 or 12, 13 cents per Indian person in the province of 
Saskatchewan, it's a vast difference from $370 million for Cargill Grain 
which . . . it's a $38 billion industry.  So for the big huge corporations 
of the world, you know, that come into Saskatchewan, they get $370 million. 
 
Last year you spent on . . . up in northern Saskatchewan, you built roads.  



 

 

You have a contract with Weyerhaeuser to build roads, 400 miles of roads, 
and this past year we spent $8 million, you know, for Weyerhaeuser, again 
one company.  We spend $8 million of provincial expenditures on 
Weyerhaeuser, an American multinational giant, along with Cargill, an 
American multinational giant, to the tune of $370 million.  And when you 
look at Pocklington, you know, we spend . . . the figure was $20 million, 
initially. 
 
And we look at the various other deals in the province that we've come 
through.  A lot of Indian and Metis people are struggling and trying to be 
part of the business world.  They want to stand up on their own two feet 
and be able to partake in economic development, but in many cases they feel 
very discouraged when they know that a lot of the provincial dollars in 
this province are being used to go into large-scale development. 
 
Even in regards to northern development when I look at the mining, $7 
million royalty tax free money was given a couple of years ago on companies 
that made $700 million in the North. 
 
So when a lot of Indian and Metis people talk to me, they say, look, we 
like to work with the government; we want to make sure that the government 
works with us for development.  But they said, you know, 10 cents per 
person is not very much when we see them giving millions to the big 
corporations.  And they're really hoping that, you know, in the future that 
the government will change their policy and put a lot more bucks.  Because 
in the long run, when you put people to work, then they pay and we get a 
return on the income tax system. 
 
We also get a return in regards to people not having to depend on welfare.  
We make a lot of savings in that regard, and I think you've heard me say 
that for many, many . . . for the three years that I've been on.  So I'd 
just like to leave that with you in that area of economic development. 
 
The other thing that . . . so I'd like to move on into another area.  
There's been a major set of recommendations this year on the treaty line 
entitlement question and there was a presentation on May 9, 1990 by the 
treaty commissioner, Cliff Wright.  And this presentation was of course 
made to Chief Roland Crowe of the Treaty Indian Nations of Saskatchewan and 
the Hon. Tom Siddon, the Minister of Indian Affairs and Northern 
Development. 
 
(1645) 
 
There's a whole set of reports and recommendations in regards to the office 
of the treaty commissioner.  And I was wondering, could you give me a 
general summary on what aspects of the report that you liked and what were 
the strongest disagreements that you've had with the report that was tabled 
in May? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: --  The report of which the hon. member speaks today, the 
report that he refers to, is a report that indeed about a month ago I did 
receive the report.  It is a very substantial report, an in-depth report 
dealing with the entire land entitlement issue.  It is a report that is 



 

 

really only . . . was really only presented to me in the draft stages. 
 
I did have a good meeting with the recently appointed treaty commissioner.  
I have discussed the issue in a very general way with Chief Roland Crowe 
and other members of the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations.  They 
do meet with me on a very regular basis.  We did discuss it in very general 
terms.  I have instructed my departmental officials to look closely and 
look carefully at the draft proposal.  I instructed my officials to not 
only look at it from a perspective of our secretariat but as well to get 
comments from many other government agencies. 
 
I do not have any comments other than that really to tell you today, we 
will be discussing it further, reviewing it further, and at some point in 
time coming out and making an official response as to where we feel the 
strengths are and where we feel the weaknesses are and taking a stance on 
it.  But I hesitate to tell you any more than that today because we have 
not completed that review. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Just for the public record, I'd like to maybe make a general 
comment on the Indian land entitlement question and also the . . . we never 
also talk about the Metis land claims issue.  But I'll basically give a 
little bit of a brief overview. 
 
In terms of land, what we're really talking about is . . . and I'll give 
you an historical context.  About a hundred years ago under the Macdonald 
Tory government in Ottawa, the Indians of course paid their land claims 
settlement.  And at that time, approximately by 1985, 1980-85 period, they 
had received approximately 1.5 million acres of land. 
 
When we looked at the . . . and it's approximately the size of P.A. 
National Park today.  But when we look at the overall aspect of this land, 
a lot of people say, my goodness, that's a lot of land.  But when you look 
at the historical record, that's not a large amount of land when you 
compare it to the large-scale corporations.  We know that the CPR (Canadian 
Pacific Railway) got 23 million acres of land in western Canada.  We know 
that the Hudson's Bay Company got 7 million acres of land during the 
transfer. 
 
So two large-scale corporations, a hundred years ago under the Tory 
government, got 30 million acres of land, and the original owners of the 
soil received 1.5 million acres of land.  I think that's an important 
historical piece of information. 
 
Over a hundred years later of course we have the PC government again in 
Saskatchewan, and we've looked . . . and I've mentioned this quite often on 
the Weyerhaeuser agreement. Weyerhaeuser gets 12 million acres of our best 
forest.  The outstanding land entitlement question of course was 
approximately 1.3 million acres of land. 
 
So you have again an American multinational receiving 12 million acres of 
land and utilizing it and making huge profits, over a hundred million, you 
know, so far.  As a matter of fact, somebody was providing the stats here 
the other day and it was quite a tremendous sum of money.  So here you have 



 

 

large-scale corporations benefitting from land arrangements with the 
government, and now we have the outstanding land entitlement issue. 
 
Now we have this treaty land entitlement question.  And when I raised this 
issue with you last year, you mentioned that, yes, we're going to deal with 
it fairly.  You said, we were genuinely interested in moving towards a new 
phase, and you said -- and I raise this in the context of Saskatchewan 
formula because that 1.3 million acres was according to the Saskatchewan 
formula -- and you said at that time you'd be approaching a system that 
would be better than the Saskatchewan formula. 
 
Some of the bands, there was four bands in the Qu'Appelle Valley called the 
. . . they joined together and they called themselves MOPS, and they took 
the provincial government to court, trying to fulfil the arrangements in 
regards to the . . . at least they started a legal process in trying to get 
a settlement on the Saskatchewan formula. 
 
Of course the province said they didn't agree with the Saskatchewan 
formula.  And when I looked at the treaty commissioner's report, we have a 
new formula.  Of course the whole system was a data-first survey system, 
and under the data 
_first survey system, we would  
 Dprobably get about 166,000 acres of land which would be a loss of close 
to a million acres. 
 
Then this new equity formula that's in here is . . . the number that comes 
out is approximately 840,000 acres.  So we have 840,000 acres of land in 
the new equity formula position which is still a lot less than the 
Saskatchewan formula. 
 
The member from Regina South wants me to go through the figures, so I'll go 
through the figures for him because I think he was a little bit half asleep 
when he was over there.  So I think I'll raise them again. 
 
The figures are this.  There's about 1.3 million acres that are outstanding 
in regards to the treaty Indian land entitlement question on the 
Saskatchewan formula.  Now with a new report that come out, it will be 
about 840,000 acres.  Now the data for his survey was 166,000 acres.  Now 
when I talked with you last year, Mr. Minister, you said, yes, we are going 
to come up with a new formula and it's going to be better than the 
Saskatchewan formula.  I took that literally to mean that it would be 
better; it would be more than 1.3 million acres. 
 
And I'm wondering now that I've provided you with that information, that it 
is 840,000 acres, and now that I've given the precise figures, what is your 
immediate response in regards to the fact that it's only three-quarters of 
what the Saskatchewan formula was?  What is your response to that, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- The hon. member has talked about a number of different 
areas and, firstly, made some comparisons between lands that have been made 
available to our Indian people under the entitlement that they are entitled 
to and compared that with some multinationals, as you referred to them -- 



 

 

the Weyerhaeuser corporations, the Cargill corporations, and so on.  And I 
don't know that your analogy or comparison is really a valid one. 
 
I do want you to know that under this administration we have made 
significant progress when it comes to land entitlement.  A recent one that 
does come to mind when you brought up the Weyerhaeuser agreement was the 
Peter Ballantyne Band has very recently received approval in principle for 
a 4,000 acre partial entitlement.  In fact that land comes out of land that 
had been formerly assigned to the Weyerhaeuser corporation. 
 
And I want the member to know that as Minister of Indian and Native Affairs 
and as a Saskatchewan cabinet minister and a person concerned about our 
economy and concerned about our native people, I do not have anything that 
prejudices me towards the Weyerhaeuser corporations, other than I want to 
diversify our economy. 
 
But if there's land that is entitled by our Indian people, I have no 
hesitation, as this last example has shown, in going to certain selections 
such as that one and pulling lands out of the Forest Management Licence 
Agreement with a company like Weyerhaeuser, as we have just approved in 
principle and pulled out some 4,000 acres out of that corporation's 
jurisdiction if you like. 
 
So I believe that that is an example of a situation where Indian people 
will applaud this government for standing up and delivering those lands.  
It still has some ways to go in the process, but it has been approved in 
principle, and I think that's a very positive step. 
 
When the hon. member talks about the 1976 formula and alternatives to it, 
indeed there are many alternatives.  There have been alternatives recently 
put forth by the treaty commissioner in a very preliminary and draft stage.  
They're at a point where we need responses from the federal government.  
The hon. member would know that this is a primary responsibility of the 
federal government. 
 
I want the hon. member to know that we await the federal government's 
response to this report.  And as, or more importantly, I await further 
discussions with Indian bands across Saskatchewan, I want to ensure that 
any position that I would take on this subject would be acceptable to those 
bands, would be acceptable to the leadership of the Indian people in the 
province of Saskatchewan.  We would want to ensure that we could have a 
workable system, that is a fair system, a reasonable system, and one that 
will truly advance these settlements with greater speed than they have in 
the past. 
 
I for one am extremely dissatisfied with the overall progress we as a 
society have made with respect to land entitlements.  I feel that I've done 
a reasonably good job of speeding some of these up and being successful.  
Just last year for instance in the Lucky Man Band entitlement, I don't 
think I've ever attended a more moving ceremony than I did that evening 
sitting with the Lucky Man Band who had 7,740 acres provided to them under 
an entitlement that they had waited on for many, many tens and twenties and 
thirties of years. 



 

 

 
And, Mr. Chairman, I submit to you that whatever workable solution we can 
come up with, we will advance these entitlements as quickly as possible. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- It's interesting that you did mention the Peter Ballantyne 
Band and 4,000 acres.  Under that '76 formula, Peter Ballantyne was 
entitled to 229,000 acres, and under the new settlement, land quantums, 
it'll be 74,000.  In other words, they would lose 214 . . . no, I guess 
154, 154,000. 
 
That 4,000 acres of land that you said transferred from Weyerhaeuser . . . 
well one of the things under Weyerhaeuser contract . . . If you read the 
Weyerhaeuser contract, the Weyerhaeuser contract states very clearly that 
they get their land back.  You know, whatever date that they give, if you 
read the agreement on Weyerhaeuser, in cases on third-party utilization of 
land they also get an extension.  I mean they got large reserve areas as 
well; two major reserve areas for Weyerhaeuser. 
 
(1700) 
 
And also too, the Indian people were the original owners of the soil in 
that area and they had traditional lands all over northern Saskatchewan, so 
they had really the first shot at it.  And it's interesting when we bought 
Weyerhaeuser, it became a third level of government in the sense according 
to the contract you had to provide them with 90-day notice, etc., etc.  You 
had to go through some specified ways of . . . specified procedures. 
 
So when you utilize that as a good example, you know 4,000 acres from 
Weyerhaeuser from their 12 million acres is not very much.  They're looking 
at 12 million acres -- 12 million acres for Weyerhaeuser, Mr. Minister. 
 
You say that . . . you sound as if they're a good corporate citizen, but 
really the legal commitments have had to be there, you know, from the 
resources transfer agreement of 1930.  So I would disagree with your 
assessment there. 
 
Because of the time factor, I would like to just maybe ask you just a 
question on the Metis people in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Your government cut back their funding, you know, from over 700,000 to 
nothing, and last year they got a tiny amount of money.  This was a year 
when we gave ourselves increases in salary in the legislature of about 20 
per cent.  We got increases as politicians, as provincial politicians.  For 
the Metis politicians, we expect them to work for nothing.  So you cut back 
all the budget and sure enough, they had to work for nothing. 
 
But it is interesting whether or not . . . in your statement initially you 
said you were committed to Metis self-government, or something to that 
nature.  So I'm just wondering, what do you intend to do in relation to the 
whole issue of Metis land and self-government?  Where are you at with that?  
What do you intend to do with that, because, you know, there's been 
agreements being drafted up in Alberta; there's the process of the legal 
agreement in Manitoba taking place; there was 1.4 million acres initially 



 

 

-- although they lost about 80 per cent of it through speculators -- but 
Alberta had a major agreement this year.  Where is Saskatchewan?  Where are 
we going in regards to Metis land and self-government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- I would like to just very briefly go through some 
initiatives that have been undertaken by this government with respect to 
northern communities that are largely Metis.  And you would be very 
familiar with those communities.  And I think if you compare the record of 
this administration to any other administration over the history of the 
province of Saskatchewan, I think you would be hard pressed to find a 
better record in terms of what we have done to assist northern communities, 
largely Metis communities, obtain development with and greater control over 
their lands and attain greater self-sufficiency in economic development. 
 
You will recall in February of '88, that it was this government that 
announced the transfer of ownership of Crown lands within northern 
municipalities to municipalities.  You will note on March 1, 1990, the 
Ile-a-la-Crosse farm was formally transferred from the provincial 
government to a community-based development corporation in Ile-a-la-Crosse. 
 
And I think for Metis people, that has to be a very big step forward -- a 
very positive step.  Crown lands that were formerly owned by all the people 
of Saskatchewan, or the big thing called government, are now given local 
autonomy, a local community-based development corporation.  I think that 
just . . . I think every Metis person in that community would say, that's 
right; that's good for our community.  We've now got a chance to develop.  
We've all now got a chance to be more in control of our own economic 
destiny.  And I think that's got to be good news. 
 
I think the hon. member would recall the developmental agreement, dated 
March 30, 1989, with respect to the transfer of the Cumberland House farm 
to the Cumberland House development corporation.  I think that too is a 
very positive step in transferring lands to these community-based 
corporations.  I don't think the hon. member would have difficulty with 
those general principles.  And I think most Metis people would say, that's 
right for our community; that's right for us as Metis people; that is good 
for the future and it's good for our children. 
 
You've also noted the decision to transfer the central farm at Green Lake 
to the Green Lake trust.  Certainly there are some who are opposed to that 
for whatever reason, but I have to defend the government on this particular 
move, and I think most reasonable people would say that was another 
positive step forward.  I think it's got to be very, very clear, very clear 
that through these types of initiatives, that this government has 
demonstrated a commitment to northern communities, to ensure that they have 
full participation in the development of the lands that are within and 
adjacent to their communities. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- I suppose I could get into a long debate with you and 
provide you with a litany of all the sad situations that have arose in 
northern Saskatchewan since your government has come in, but I think I'll 
leave it for another day. 
 



 

 

And also, your examples that you use are basically things coming under the 
municipal authority, and you all know that the Metis position is one of . . 
. you know, under Metis control.  In much the same way that Indians talk 
about Indian control, a lot of the Metis talk about Indian control.  A lot 
of your examples are things under municipal control. 
 
So you are mistaken . . . you know, the concept of a municipal, you know, 
level of governing with a concept that has been proposed for many years in 
this province by people wanting a form of Metis self-government.  But I 
don't want to belabour that point with you because a lot more talk will be 
. . . a lot more, I guess, talk and action will be done in the future by 
the Metis people themselves. 
 
The other thing I would like to add, Mr. Minister, is this: as a 
government, you did away with the affirmative action program strategy.  You 
knocked off some of the best Indian and Metis people in the province that 
this province has ever had.  You had people with 22 years experience, 16 
years experience, people who were dedicated civil servants who had worked 
through the Liberal government, the NDP government, and the PC government; 
and people who were top-notch quality civil servants, and you knocked them 
off in the last year, just like that.  And that was a devastating thing 
when I met with them.  So for you to come in and say, yes we've done a lot 
for Indian and Metis people in this province and especially in the North, 
is highly questionable. 
 
We knew that in the lease agreements you never lived up to the agreements.  
When I talk about northern Saskatchewan -- the mining lease agreements, we 
used to hire 65 and even 69 per cent.  I was looking at an '82 report, 69 
per cent in Key Lake hired on the first-year apprentices, when I was 
looking at the report today when I was checking the library out. 
 
And then I looked at the stats later on and it had dropped to about 10, 15 
per cent.  And you of course changed around with a new formula that is a 
watered-down formula.  It used to be 15 years and half your lifetime and 
being of Indian ancestry to get into the proper records as far as northern 
Saskatchewan was concerned on people hired in the mines.  Then you changed 
it to three years and it doesn't even include Indian-Metis people.  It 
could be three years of anybody in the North, which is highly suspect in 
regards to the Human Rights Code because what is protected in the Human 
Rights Code are people of Indian ancestry, women, and handicapped people. 
 
So I thought that you know changing your formulas and trying to make new 
figures come out looking a little bit better, you know, doesn't fool 
people.  A lot of people recognize that there's a lot less Indian-Metis 
people working in those mines.  I might in all fairness say that there's 
been a bit of an improvement in the past couple of years, but not really a 
significant improvement. 
 
I would say that when I look back, other areas also suffered.  Native court 
workers' program, over $800,000 -- you completely cut that back.  And 
there's a lot more Indian and Metis people in jails these days basically 
because they don't have the proper support when they go and listen in on 
court procedures, etc., and so on.  Everybody knows how tough it is just to 



 

 

go into a plain ordinary legal case. 
 
(The member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
It becomes a lot more difficult, when somebody's speaking a second 
language, to go through court procedures and know exactly what's taking 
place. 
 
So those types of things your government did.  You know, it was a very 
terrible and sad state in Saskatchewan history when that happened.  At the 
same time this year a lot of the Indian governments are talking about a 
greater control in the justice system.  But I notice that the Premier at 
the Yorkton meeting never did respond to that item and so on. 
 
So that there's a lot of things that I can go on and on and on and on today 
and talk about, but those are just a few of the points that I wanted to 
mention.  So I think that is pretty well all for now. 
 
I would like again to thank the minister and also his staff, you know, for 
providing me with the details on the information today, and I look forward 
to receiving the information you will provide for me on both Indian 
economic development and native business development. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I'll anxiously await that information that you'll be 
sending me, particularly as it relates to Mr. Aubichon. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I too would like to thank my 
officials for providing me with the advice here today, and as well the very 
hard and dedicated work that they go to on a daily basis dealing with a 
major segment of our population and an important, important segment of our 
population. 
 
I also thank the hon. member for his questions that were provided to us 
this afternoon -- I'm sure in a very genuine manner -- and we look forward 
to working together in the best interests of all Saskatchewan people and 
specifically our first nations people, our aboriginal people, our Indian 
and Metis people who certainly give our province a very distinctive 
element, and we're very happy . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Distinct society. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- A distinct society indeed.  A very distinct society 
indeed and we look forward to doing what we can to make certain that the 
quality of life for these residents is improved over time. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 25 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- I'd like to thank the Minister and his officials.  And 
being past 5 o'clock, the committee will recess until 7 p.m. 



 

 

 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 


