





























































Hansard: April 02, 1990


 

 

April 2/90 
 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have two or three guests to 
introduce today.  First, I would like to introduce to the Assembly two 
representatives of the State of Maryland who are visiting here.  The first 
is the Hon. Wayne Cawley, Maryland's secretary of Agriculture, who is 
sitting in the Speaker's gallery; and Mr. Robert Walker, the deputy 
secretary of Agriculture from Maryland. 
 
These individuals are here visiting Saskatchewan as a result of a 
Saskatchewan-Maryland Conference.  We're doing some joint work on crop 
insurance.  And many of the suggestions and improvements that we've made 
recently in Canada in crop insurance are of interest to Americans.  We're 
also looking at joint ventures in tourism, in health care, and the 
combinations of other things. So I would ask all members to please join me 
in welcoming these two gentlemen to Saskatchewan and to our legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I also have a guest here from the Soviet 
Union, and I'm going to ask the Associate Minister of Agriculture to 
introduce him and then I will add a couple of remarks. 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to bid a welcome to 
Valery Pomerantsev from the Soviet Union.  He is here today visiting on 
behalf of the Soviet in Russia, and he is looking to buy some dairy cattle 
and equipment in relation to that.  I just want to point out that that's a 
very extensive farm that he manages over there. They operate mink, silver 
fox, fur bearing animals, cows, hogs, and also they have a fish processing 
opportunity there too, and a lot of farmers in Saskatchewan, sir, would 
like to have the opportunity to go fishing and have that as a part of their 
farm.  And we in Saskatchewan appreciate you coming to visit us, and we 
wish you well in your sightseeing and travel around the province. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- I just want to add to the minister's acknowledgement 
that I was received very well in the Soviet Union, meeting with the 
Minister of Agriculture and many of the officials.  And the hospitality was 
indeed as good as I've received any place that I've been in western Europe.  
So I say to the hon. member, welcome to the province of Saskatchewan.  
We've had many of your fellow ministers and officials here before, and we 
hope to continue to do good business.  Welcome to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, we have some 
out-of-province guests with us this afternoon.  I would like to introduce 
them to you, and through you to all members of the legislature, and they 
are seated in your gallery.  They come from the province of Ontario -- St. 
Catharines, Ontario, as a matter of fact.  We have Mr. and Mrs. Greg 
Elliott, and they are here in Saskatchewan visiting Mrs. Moser from Regina.  
And we want to wish you the best of a stay here.  We hope you get to see a 
lot of Saskatchewan.  We want to give you a hearty welcome to our province 
and to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to join the Premier and the 
House Leader in welcoming the guests from out of town. 
 
I want to turn your attention, Mr. Speaker, to another group in your 
gallery, this group from the constituency of Regina North, from Thom 
Collegiate.  There is just over two dozen grade 10 students here and they 
are accompanied by teachers, Miss Paulette Hubbs and Mr. Bill Heavisides.  
I ask all members to join me in welcoming this wonderful group to our 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As many people know, Thom 
Collegiate is on Argyle Street, which is on the east boundary of Regina 
North West and on the west boundary of Regina North constituency.  Many 
students who attend Thom Collegiate live in my constituency, and I'd like 
to join with my colleague, the member from Regina North, in welcoming the 
students from Thom Collegiate.  Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Help for Saskatchewan Farmers 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to the 
Premier and the Minister of Agriculture.  Mr. Speaker, as members of the 
House will know, and the members of the farming community in Saskatchewan 
will know, for weeks now, directly or indirectly, the government opposite 
has been assuring the farmers of the province of Saskatchewan that there 
would be -- the word used is a "commitment" of $500 million cash from 
Ottawa before spring seeding, for spring seeding, for Saskatchewan farmers. 
And in fact this commitment and promise was made as late as Friday's 
question period.  Mr. Speaker, I'm sure you'll remember the exchange 
between the Premier and myself in this regard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier is this:  in light of Mr. 
Mazankowski's announcement of Friday afternoon that we're going to get 
about $225 million only in Saskatchewan and not the $500 million, what 
happened to that commitment that you have referred to in the Speech from 
the Throne and repeatedly since that time?  What happened to that 



 

 

commitment?  Did you really have one, or were you just leading the farmers 
on? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity to meet with farm 
groups this morning from across the province -- the wheat pool, United 
Grain Growers, livestock producers, the (SARM) Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities and others.  Their message was exactly the same as it 
was a week ago with respect to Saskatchewan making sure that the federal 
government know that the federal government is responsible for cash 
injections into the province of Saskatchewan.  We had endorsement, in fact 
we worked on the plan to get our loan program out to the people of 
Saskatchewan.  They have been quoted in various articles that I would be 
glad to share with the Leader of the Opposition, saying the money must come 
from the federal government.  We met with and have talked with our American 
counterparts at the state level, Mr. Speaker, and you will find that the 
local states do not fund the export enhancement program.  The local states 
do not fund the deficiency payments, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- The fact is, and when I met with the leader and 
Minister of Agriculture of the Soviet Union we agreed that it's a price war 
and it's an international war.  And we both agreed that we must change some 
of those policies in western Europe, Mr. Speaker, because they're unfair. 
 
And the hon. member mentions China.  Yes, well, it's too bad there isn't 
some democracy in China as well.  We'd look forward to that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- There's no help from him.  Mr. Speaker, I would just 
say again to the hon. member that we have asked and the resolution here put 
forward our request for $500 million this spring.  We will stay with that.  
We have support of the farm groups, the opposition, people across the 
province, that the provincial government should not bail out the federal 
treasury. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, thank you very much.  I have a new question to 
the Premier.  And may I say by the way of preface to the Premier, I 
understand his argument with respect to the federal responsibility.  But I 
do remind the Premier that the commitment was referred to in the Speech 
from the Throne.  I have a copy of it here; it's on page four.  The 
resolution which was passed unanimously -- in fact last Friday's answer is 
again a commitment of $500 million cash.  I think the expression used was 
cash on the dash.  That was a commitment that you said in the Speech from 
the Throne, you had. 
 
Now on Friday we find out from the Minister of federal Agriculture, Mr. 
Mazankowski, that it isn't $500 million, it's only $225 million.  And it's 



 

 

going to be cost shared before Ottawa kicks in any money. 
 
My question to you, sir, is very simple and direct, for which I would ask 
you again to give us a response.  Did Ottawa mislead Regina, or did your 
government mislead the farmers of this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member cannot show this 
legislature or anybody else where there was a commitment for $500 million.  
Now you show us that.  I mean, he knows that's not the case.  We have a 
commitment by the federal government that they would provide money to 
western Canada.  And, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member and I passed a 
resolution here that it be $500 million -- $500 million now, $400 million 
later, and a billion dollars in the contingency fund.  That's what we're 
going to stick by. 
 
And the farm groups, Mr. Speaker, have agreed with us that we shouldn't be 
bailing out the federal government because it is indeed an international 
problem.  So we're going to stick to our guns, and I hope the hon. member 
will stick to the facts and make sure, make sure that farmers get support 
here and there's solidarity across Saskatchewan, solidarity among all 
provincial parties, politically, and farm groups, that we hold the federal 
government to the fact that this is indeed a national problem and an 
international problem and not one that Saskatchewan treasury should be put 
up to stake. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the Premier.  And I 
want to say to the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan, I think the 
farmers of the province of Saskatchewan know what the real issue is, and 
that is that they need $500 million in cash from Ottawa prior to spring 
seeding which is just around the corner.  That's the issue.  And the other 
issue is that it was your job to go to Ottawa and to get it, and frankly, 
Mr. Premier, you blew it.  You didn't get it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Premier, you blew it in spite of the commitments to the 
farmers that they would have that $500 million.  And my question to you, 
therefore, is very simple.  I want you to tell this House, if you will 
please, sir, specifically what actions you propose now to take to convince 
Ottawa to get something today that you couldn't get last week and 
specifically what your timetable is for getting that desperately needed 
cash. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I will just say, Mr. Speaker, with the 
greatest respect to the Leader of the Opposition, I've got more out of 
agriculture . . . for agriculture out of Ottawa than he did in his whole 
political career.  And you can wave all you like. 



 

 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- We've got hundred millions of dollars, billions of 
dollars, and low interest loans and protection, Mr. Speaker, and he doesn't 
want to hear about it.  He doesn't want to hear about it.  He says that's . 
. . Well, Mr. Speaker, I'll just say to the hon. member, we will stick to 
our guns and we'll defend the farmer and we will make sure that there's 
cash in his hands, Mr. Speaker, and there's money to seed the crop, because 
we will have the support of all the political parties, maybe not him alone, 
but all the political parties as we passed a resolution in this House, and 
indeed the farm groups, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Operating Grants for Education 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- My question is to the Minister of Education, and it has to 
do with his budget of last week's betrayal of young people in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
When you take all of the rhetoric out of the budget speech, we learn that 
the operating grants to universities, technical schools, and schools 
systems have only increased by 2.9 per cent at a time when inflation is 
running at 4.8 per cent.  On March 12, Mr. Minister, you received a plea 
from school boards, the school trustees' association, and LEADS (League of 
Educational Administrators, Directors and Superintendents) asking you to 
substantially increase funding to education.  I would like you to explain 
to the young people of this province how you justify your government's 
decision to cut educational funding. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Speaker, it's always interesting how members of 
the opposition can take figures and they all turn out to be cuts.  How you 
can turn an increase in expenditures of 5.6 per cent and several millions, 
44 million or $47 million, and that turns into a cut, is beyond me, Mr. 
Speaker.  I think that we need to take another look at what the budget 
actually says and what it means for young people in this province.  I'm 
very proud of the record of this government with regard to education in 
this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- We have made a very definite commitment.  We know 
that we're operating in tough times, and we've still increased the amount 
of spending for education in this province by $47 million.  More money for 
the universities, more money for the K to 12, more money for regional 
colleges, which is going to enable people out in rural areas to have 
greater access to first and second year university classes.  Consider the 
amount of money that is going into literacy programs, adult basic education 
-- just total them all up, Mr. Speaker, and that certainly does not shake 
down into a cut-back. 



 

 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- New question.  Mr. Minister, you can . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I must once more remind the hon. member that 
remarks directed to other members must be directed through the Chair. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- New question, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, you can dress it 
up any way you like.  The fact of the matter is that inflation in this 
province is running at 4.8 per cent and your government only increased 
operating grants to 2.9 per cent. 
 
The money that will need to come to pay for programs, teachers, staff, that 
sort of thing, will have to come from local property taxpayers.  When you 
transfer money from the province onto the local taxpayer, that, in fact, 
Mr. Minister, is a cut in funding. 
 
Now let me quote from Bob Thompson.  He says, quote: 
 

 We have made the system more efficient and managed to maintain a high 
standard of education through recent economic hard times.  For us to 
continue, the province must increase its support. 

 
You didn't do that, Mr. Minister, and so the local school boards are once 
again on the hook.  The SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees Association), 
LEADS and teachers have specifically asked you to back up your words with 
action.  Why won't you do that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Speaker, if you take a look at what the hon. 
member has just said, that the inflation rate is somewhere around 4.8 per 
cent, the increase in the educational budget is 5.6, which does add up to 
an increase. 
 
I would also point out, I would also point out, Mr. Speaker, that if the 
hon. member would just take some time to check the facts, that the amount 
of spending that the provincial government, the share of the provincial 
government going into operating grants for education in this province, is 
still at about the same level that it has been for many, many years.  I 
will admit, I will admit that it was a little bit higher at some of the 
years back in the 1970s, but I would point out that it's higher now than it 
was in the early '70s when that crew was in power. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, she needs to take a look at the facts instead of coming 
out with some of these stories here about the terrible things that are 
happening in education.  I'm still very, very proud of what this government 
is able to do in spite of the tough times, in spite of the fact that grain 
prices and oil prices and potash prices and uranium prices are down, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 



 

 

 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Speaker, a new question to the minister.  Mr. 
Minister, your officials were in touch with school division directors all 
across this province on Friday.  That is simply not what they are telling 
the school directors of this province.  All you have to do is ask many, 
many schools in rural Saskatchewan what happened to their funding.  Their 
funding was cut, Mr. Minister.  Their funding was cut. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, our school system is currently losing teachers and 
programs and services because the money is simply not there because of the 
economic crisis in this province and because of the horrendous depopulation 
that is incurring.  Now we have to face the worry of materials and programs 
being cut back even further. 
 
My question is: how many more teachers, how many more programs, how many 
more services are our young people going to have to lose, and why won't 
your government get with it and begin to help? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- I think it's interesting, Mr. Speaker, that the 
member opposite makes no mention of the fact that there are 2,200 fewer 
students in our schools today.  She's not making any mention of the fact 
that maybe fewer teachers are needed today than before.  There's no doubt 
about it.  There's no doubt about it that the taxpayers . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- There is no doubt about it, Mr. Speaker, that the 
property taxpayers are undoubtedly looking for some increase, but if you 
take a look at the grants that all of the school divisions across this 
province are going to be getting, there are very few of them that are going 
to be having a decrease.  And in any of those cases where they are getting 
a decrease, it's because the enrolment has gone down for the most part.  
For the most part, all of the school divisions across this province are 
going to be getting an increase in their operating grant.  They're also 
going to be getting, I think, some $14.5 million from the educational 
development fund, Mr. Speaker, something that this government brought in, 
which is also utilized for many different things, whether it's computers or 
resource materials or whatever the case might be. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we are doing the best that we can in these difficult 
economic times.  A 5.6 per cent increase in educational funding for the 
most part is being met very, very positively in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

University Funding 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I have a question for 
the Minister of Education also.  And it's strange, Mr. Speaker, that he's 
talking about tough economic times when they've got $65 million cash for 
Cargill, one of the richest multinational corporations in this world.  Mr. 



 

 

Minister, everybody is wrong but you. 
 
Let me just address a question to you, Mr. Minister, in regards to the 
University of Saskatchewan and the U of R (University of Regina).  Both 
President Ivany and President Barber have said that they needed increases 
of about 8.5 per cent in operating grants just to maintain the status quo.  
In your last budget, Mr. Minister, you gave them an increase of 3 per cent. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question to you is this:  when you meet with the 
presidents of the university, what programs are you going to recommend to 
them that they should cut?  What professors are you going to recommend that 
they should let go?  What students, Mr. Minister, are you going to say that 
they should not permit to enter the university?  And, Mr. Minister, my last 
question to you is:  how much are student tuition fees to increase in order 
that the universities can offer a good standard of education?  Which ones 
of these questions are you going to direct to them, and which ones, Mr. 
Minister, are they going to be able to carry out so that they can offer a 
good program at the U of S and the U of R? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I'm not going to be making any 
suggestions with regard to what tuition fees will be in the coming year.  
That's up to the board of governors and the administration.  I'm also not 
going to be suggesting what programs be cut, or in fact if there have to be 
any cut. That's a decision of the administration. 
 
The member opposite doesn't make any mention whatsoever about the increase 
that they're getting in their operating grant.  They're also getting an 
increase in so far as the enhancement fund.  There's also a substantial 
amount of money going into capital construction, particularly at the 
University of Saskatchewan and the College of Agriculture building. 
 
Plus, Mr. Speaker, there are some 46 or 47 millions of dollars going into 
student loans in the province, much of which will be targeted for 
university students at the universities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, you know as well as the people on your side do 
that the increase in student aid is mostly for repayment of default of 
student loans. In fact about half of the increase is for default of student 
loans. 
 
And my question to you, Mr. Minister, is this: are you saying to this House 
today that the increase in student loans is due to the fact that there has 
been an increase of attendance at private vocational schools, and a lot of 
that student aid -- last year 22.2 million went to private vocational 
schools.  Are you telling this House that much of that money is going to 
private vocational schools whose programs are suspect?  Is that what you're 
telling us today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Speaker, let me remind the hon. member that any 
of the money that is going into student loans . . . and he likes to play 
around with these figures.  There's a lot of money that's going to the 
students that are going to private vocational schools is also from the 
Canada student loans.  It's not just the Saskatchewan student loans 
program. 
 
I would also suggest to him it's really only in his eyes, for the most 
part, that these programs are not as good as some would like them to be.  
We have them under investigation at all times.  We have an advisory 
committee that is looking at the programs.  The qualifications of the 
teachers all have to be approved by the Department of Education, and I 
think, for the most part, Mr. Speaker, they're doing a very, very good job. 
 
I did not say that the student loan fund this year has increased; it's the 
same as it was last year.  The student aid fund has increased. 
 
And for you to say that a lot of this is default on loans is totally 
inaccurate.  The increases, for the most part, are to make up for the 
interest on those loans which students have who are still attending 
university.  And while they're at university, I would remind the member, 
they do not pay interest; the government has to pay that interest.  We have 
a much more positive program in student loans, Mr. Speaker, than that bunch 
over there ever had, with a lot lower interest rates. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Speaker, my last question to the . . . new question to 
the minister.  Mr. Minister, in 1987 you cut very dramatically . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, in 1987 you cut very dramatically the programs 
at SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology), and 
you also cut a number, hundreds of student spaces at SIAST in order that, 
you said, that you could put the money into distance education. 
 
I noticed in your budget, Mr. Minister, where you've cut the distance 
education SCAN (Saskatchewan Communications Advanced Network) by 33 per 
cent -- $1.5 million -- and yet you're telling the people of Saskatchewan 
that you are going to make education, post-secondary education accessible 
to people in rural Saskatchewan.  How do you explain that, Mr. Minister, to 
the people in rural Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Speaker, the distance education programs are 
going ahead very, very quickly in this province.  We also have to keep in 
mind the fact that SCAN is only one part of distance education and the 
provision of programs to rural Saskatchewan. 
 
He knows full well that in this particular budget there has been a very 



 

 

substantial increase for regional colleges which are going to be providing 
first and second year university courses to many more students, along with 
the vocational courses that are provided through SIAST.  So there's an 
awful lot more happening in rural Saskatchewan today, Mr. Speaker, because 
of the programs that this government has put into place. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Health Care Budget 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of Health, and 
it has to do with a quote from the Star-Phoenix on the budget, Mr. 
Minister, which says as follows: 
 

 I just question the allocation of the increases.  I think the commission 
members will be disappointed. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that sentiment was expressed by Dr. Bob Murray, the person 
whom the Minister of Health chose to chair the health care commission.  Mr. 
Minister, when the head of your commission says he's disappointed with the 
health care budget allocations, wouldn't you say that your health care 
priorities are skewed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, let me remind the House that I think it 
was about two years ago -- I remember it very well -- when the commission 
members, including Dr. Murray, the chairman, to whom the member now refers, 
were sitting there in the gallery.  They were introduced, and that member 
and other members on that side of the House talked about the commission 
members and the fact that they didn't have that much respect for the way in 
which the commission was appointed or who the members of the commission 
were.  Now all of a sudden Dr. Murray is being quoted by the member, and 
that's as it should be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Dr. Murray made those initial comments without having the 
budget documents in front of him, and he didn't.  And I say that very 
clearly.  And he . . . Mr. Speaker, the members will howl over there all 
they like but these are the facts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what Dr. Murray has said is in fact a sentiment that has been 
expressed by some people in the province, some people in the province who 
believe strongly that there should be even more money for home care than 
there is in this budget, even though this budget provides for nine and a 
half per cent increase in home care. 
 
What Dr. Murray has expressed is what has been expressed by others, Mr. 
Speaker, that has been expressed by others.  They would say, put more into 
home care, put less into the hospitals, into institutionalized care.  Mr. 
Speaker, that's what we have done.  That's what Dr. Murray said to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, new question to the minister.  Mr. Minister, in 
looking at the Public Accounts for 1988-89, we see that in the health care 
budget you spent over $1 million in advertising and another 144,000 with 
respect to polling in health care. 
 
Now, when you juxtapose that against Dr. Murray's comments where he 
indicated that we need more money in home care and a lot more money is 
needed for mental health and community health services . . . And he says, 
as far as health services in the North are concerned, and I quote, "That's 
third-world medicine up there," Mr. Minister. 
 
Now, since it was you who set up the Murray commission, since it is you 
who's talking about consulting and consensus, Mr. Minister, why didn't you 
consult with Dr. Murray before you set your budget priorities? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, I would express the same thing as Dr. 
Murray did.  It would have been better, frankly, if we had had the . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order!  The Minister of Health is being interrupted 
and I ask the courtesy of the members to allow him to continue without 
interruption. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, I concur with what Dr. Murray has said, in 
the fact that it would be better if we had received his report prior to 
this budget coming down.  That's true.  Mr. Speaker, the facts are that we 
did not receive the report but we are to receive it in a very few weeks 
now, according to the most recent release from the commission and from Dr. 
Murray. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, the member stands on her feet here today, talks 
about the expenditures, and she uses the term "advertising," but it's in 
the area of public affairs and promotion in the Department of Health, and 
she talks about the amount expended there.  A major portion of that 
expenditure, Mr. Speaker, was for the health care commission, the 
(Saskatchewan) Commission on Directions in Health Care.  A major portion of 
that expenditure was right there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So on one hand she's up here quoting from the commission chairman; on the 
other hand she's saying, don't spend any money on the commission. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Mr. Speaker, before Orders of the Day, with leave, I 
would like to acknowledge the Canadian Junior Women's Curling Champions. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 



 

 

Saskatchewan Women's Junior Curling Champions 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- As all hon. members would be aware, Saskatchewan has won 
the Junior Canadian Women's Curling Championship.  The rink consisted of 
Atina Ford; Atina and her sister, Cindy, are from Gray.  Atina is 18; she's 
attending first year University of Regina.  As well, Darlene Kidd was the 
third, she's 17; she's at Lumsden High School.  And Leslie Beck is 19; 
she's a second year arts and science student at the University of Regina. 
 
We will get the opportunity, I believe, Mr. Speaker, to introduce the 
Canadian champions at an appropriate date in the Assembly.  All hon. 
members were honoured to have the women's champions, the Brier champions, 
the juniors, men's and women's at the opening of the legislature, and I 
know we had a chance to meet them all at that time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I say, we will be acknowledging them at the appropriate 
time.  Their coach is a very good friend of mine, and I think this is 
number seven for Harvey Forner, the Saskatchewan champions.  He had also 
coached Jamie Schneider and the junior boys a few years back, so my 
congratulations.  And I know . . . I ask all hon. members to join with me 
in congratulating Atina Ford and her rink who are the Canadian Women's 
Junior Curling Champions. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As Sports Minister I'd like 
to join with my colleague, who just spoke on behalf of the Ford rink, in 
congratulating them on a job well done.  I should point out to you, and to 
members of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, that they were beneficiaries of the 
Sask First program which, of course, was so successful in culminating in 
the best ever performance we had at Jeux Canada Games this past summer in 
Saskatoon.  I also note that the rink will be going on to the world junior 
championships in March of next year, which are to be held in Glasgow, 
Scotland.  I had the pleasure of spending a few very, very happy years in 
Glasgow, Scotland, and I'd be happy to reminisce and share some addresses 
with them prior to leaving.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- With leave, Mr. Speaker, I would like to join with the 
ministers opposite on behalf of the members on this side of the legislature 
to congratulate the Ford rink for the accomplishments thus far, to wish 
them the best in their curling over the next year as they go into the 
championships and as they go abroad.  They are maintaining that 
Saskatchewan tradition of excelling in curling, and we are glad to see them 
continue with it. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Table Officer 
 
The Speaker: -- Before orders of the day, I would like to make the 
following announcement.  I wish to introduce to the hon. members Mr. Blair 



 

 

Armitage, committee clerk from the Senate of Canada.  Mr. Armitage will be 
on attachment to this House for the month of April to assist our own Clerks 
at the Table and to observe how a provincial Legislative Assembly 
functions.  On your behalf, I wish to welcome Mr. Armitage to our Assembly.  
Please welcome him along with me. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth that the Assembly resolve itself into the Committee of 
Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It's always a 
pleasure to enter into the debate in this legislature.  On behalf of the 
constituents of the Meadow Lake constituency in north-western Saskatchewan, 
I've been doing so now since 1978.  And once again, as I did for just a few 
moments on Friday as we wound up the debate last week, Mr. Speaker, spoke 
just briefly about that part of the province, the part of the province that 
I feel so honoured to serve, and about some of the points of interest about 
that area as we . . . and all of us in Saskatchewan face some of the 
difficulties that we do, especially in the agricultural area. 
 
I just might reiterate just very briefly, Mr. Speaker, and I have no 
intention of going back over all of that ground again, except to say that 
the key point and the point of which I am very proud and the people in the 
Meadow Lake constituency and that part of north-western Saskatchewan are so 
proud of, is that as we hear about diversification of an economy, as we 
hear about how important it is to have that diversification and spread that 
as much as possible throughout the economy of our communities and 
throughout our province -- and it's an area that we've tried to emphasize 
in a major way within this government since 1982 since coming into office 
-- it's something that we have been very fortunate about in that part of 
Saskatchewan in the north-west. 
 
The Meadow Lake constituency has . . . certainly agriculture's the major 
industry, without question.  It's a very important one, and that is the 
case, as is the case in all of Saskatchewan.  And all of our people in 
agriculture are faced with the same kinds of problems that agricultural 
people are throughout the province in terms of significant debt problems -- 
obviously the problems that we're all trying to address as we face 
international price wars and low prices, and so on. 
 
Agriculture in our area is more than just grain, very much a mixed farming 
area and, Mr. Speaker, very much a cattle ranching area.  I think I said 



 

 

the other day that . . . and it bears repeating.  I think many of us in the 
province and conventional wisdom in this province says most of the cattle 
in Saskatchewan or the largest cattle numbers across this province are in 
the south-west.  Many people believe that.  In the south-western ranching 
country, very excellent traditional ranching country.  But the facts are, 
and when one looks at the numbers of cattle across the province and the 
population of cattle, most of the cattle in this province are in the 
north-western part of the province, and a good portion of those are in my 
constituency of Meadow Lake where there are some very large ranches. 
 
Mr. Speaker, gas and oil, both of those we have in the province.  Certainly 
we know how important they are to the provincial economy.  Natural gas is 
very important and to some extent on the southern portion of my 
constituency south of Paradise Hill, in that area, heavy oil as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, tourism, an area that we all feel has a tremendous potential 
in this province, has certainly got tremendous potential in the Meadow Lake 
constituency, and we've been realizing upon that potential for a number of 
years and continuing to promote it because it, once again, is a way in 
which we can diversify the economy of our community. 
 
Forestry, Mr. Speaker, there's been a good deal talked about in recent 
years about the . . . and recent years and certainly in recent months about 
the forestry programs across the province and installations that are being 
built.  Mr. Speaker, I'm proud of the announcement in recent weeks of the 
CTMP (chemi-thermal mechanical pulp) pulp mill in Meadow Lake, and there's 
no question that that will have a significant impact on the economy of that 
portion of north-western Saskatchewan; frankly, Mr. Speaker, a significant 
impact on the economy of all of our province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me just say in leaving that aspect of my remarks today, 
because my intention is really to speak at some length on the Health 
budget, this budget presented by my colleague, the Minister of Finance, and 
presented very well, I might add -- and I want to add my word of 
congratulations to him for the way in which he presented that budget.  I 
think he did an excellent job, and he is doing an excellent job as the 
Finance minister of this province on behalf of all our citizens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I leave the area of my own constituency and get into 
the health portion of my remarks, I just want to say that I have been . . . 
from the time I came here in 1978, I have been very proud to represent 
those people.  I have said that before.  They are . . . I've talked about 
the diverse sort of ways of life that they are involved in.  They are 
involved in a diverse way of life.  We have a fairly diversified economy.  
They are without question, Mr. Speaker, salt of the earth people, the 
absolute salt of the earth of this province and western Canadian people who 
understand very, very clearly issues that are important and issues that are 
often talked about that are not so important.  And I just want to say once 
again that I am very proud to represent that diverse group of people here 
in this Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'd like to address some remarks this afternoon about our 
government's commitment to health care over the past eight years, and about 



 

 

the way in which that commitment continues with this year's budget.  I want 
to outline the accomplishments that have been made in the past, as well as 
the challenges that our health system poses for all of us into the future. 
 
There are concerns about our health system that many Saskatchewan people 
feel, and they feel those concerns deeply, I would submit.  These concerns 
include the sheer complexity of our health care delivery system; our 
ability as a society to continue to pay for increasingly expensive health 
services into the future; the stresses on individual sectors of 
Saskatchewan's health services such as -- and I'll just use one example -- 
such as our mental health services.  Our people feel those strains and they 
feel them deeply. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it's not my intention today to resort to resting on the 
laurels of past accomplishments.  And very often in speeches in this House 
we will hear that from, frankly, from members on both sides of the House, 
and historically we've done that sort of thing.  But it's not my intention 
to do that only today, although I do want to go back over some past 
history.  I believe it's important to look back at some of the recent 
history of health services in Saskatchewan. 
 
In addition, there are many innovative and creative suggestions being made 
at present to help us to deal with the problems we anticipate in the 
future.  But the thing I would like to stress most, Mr. Speaker, is the 
importance for all of us in the province to develop a vision.  Our 
government and the health department, along with all health providers, have 
been working toward that vision.  And that vision, I believe, can be stated 
as one of good health for all of our population -- good health for all of 
our population.  Easy to say; difficult to accomplish, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This more holistic approach to health is, in my view, a breakthrough in the 
way that government and health providers attempt to help the people across 
the province.  Within the Department of Health, Mr. Speaker, our mission 
statement is -- and it hangs on the wall in the various branches of our 
department and as you know the department is a very, very large one and 
it's one that's spread throughout the province in various areas within 
which it works -- our mission statement is: working together for health and 
well-being.  Let me repeat that: working together for health and 
well-being, the mission statement of the Department of Health.  It's a 
mission for health that I know is shared by the all the citizens of this 
province, and it's a mission that can only be accomplished by continuing to 
work together as we prepare to face the challenges of the 1990s. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Speaker, health spending increased dramatically in the 1980s, in the 
past decade, that decade just past, and it now accounts for one-third of 
our provincial budget.  One dollar in three in this provincial budget is 
spent on health care services.   With this 1990 and '91 budget, Mr. 
Speaker, health spending is now more than $1,500 for each man, woman, and 
child in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, ensuring the continued health and well-being of the people of 



 

 

Saskatchewan remains the number one social priority of all of our citizens.  
There's no question about that.  And it's the main social priority and the 
number one social priority of our government and of the Department of 
Health as well. 
 
Despite our difficult fiscal and economic environment, our government has 
continued to ensure access without financial impediments to hospital, 
medical, and other health services.  In order to preserve and improve the 
quality of our health system, we've increased health spending by $136 
million for this fiscal year, Mr. Speaker, $136 million more this year than 
last year.  Mr. Speaker, that's a significant commitment in some difficult 
times.  That represents an increase of 9.9 per cent over last year's 
budget, bringing total expenditures on health to more than $1.5 billion in 
this budget. 
 
We will spend more than 658 million on our 134 hospitals.  This represents 
a 6 per cent increase over last year and will provide for more than 2 
million patient-days of care.  To put that number in perspective, Mr. 
Speaker, that is as if every Saskatchewan resident would spend two days in 
the hospital in the coming year.  Now obviously most of us will be lucky 
enough to avoid a hospital stay, Mr. Speaker, but many others will not be 
so fortunate. 
 
In addition to that, we've developed a $2.5 million hospital initiatives 
fund to improve patient care and increase out-patient services.  I believe 
the result of these measures will be a more efficient and responsive 
hospital system, better able to meet each patient's unique requirements. 
 
Mr. Speaker, new developments in technology have made it possible for us to 
help more people with health problems than ever before.  I mean, that's a 
statement that can be made in every province in this country right now.  
It's a statement that can be made, frankly, across the western world 
because technology has increased our ability to care for more and more 
people and more and more ailments which people have. 
 
Think for a minute about the kinds of things that we are now increasingly 
taking for granted which just a very, very few years ago, a very few years 
ago, were really impossible or at best were very rare. 
 
Hip replacements. Think of the number of people that have been helped and 
the number of people across this province who have had new hips.  Knee 
replacements. Knee joint replacements -- tremendous breakthroughs in that 
area. 
 
Cataracts. New technology in that area to be able to replace lenses and to 
deal with cataracts and which provide independence and so on to more and 
more people all the time.  Changes, Mr. Speaker, services which just a very 
few years ago were not available to people at all and which have become, 
frankly, commonplace now.  Those all bring pressures onto the system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and with each of these -- and I use those just as examples -- 
with each of these there is significant new technology.  And new technology 
in health care as all of us can well imagine, and certainly we know that 



 

 

these pieces of equipment are not cheap by any stretch of the imagination.  
Because of this new technology, and it's a very high-cost technology, Mr. 
Speaker, we've established a medical technology fund to improve our ability 
to acquire new medical equipment across our hospital sector. 
 
In times of economic difficulties and restraint, I believe that this budget 
sends a clear signal to the people of Saskatchewan that our government's 
commitment to health is unshakable, Mr. Speaker.  Indeed, our government is 
fully committed to preserving and strengthening what is already the most 
comprehensive health system in this country today.  The most comprehensive 
health system in any of our provinces exists here in Saskatchewan, right 
now, and this proves our commitment to maintaining it at that level. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with consultation and co-operation of our partners in the 
health field, we've significantly reduced waiting lists for surgery at the 
three Saskatoon hospitals for the second straight year. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it's just a very short number of months ago, frankly, 
years ago, a couple of years ago when it was politically expedient to do 
so, we had questions, you know, from day to day.  I think you may recall 
some of them.  I certainly recall some of them.  And those questions were: 
there's a waiting list in the Saskatoon hospital and these people have to 
wait and it's all your fault and it's no commitment to health care, and on 
and on it went. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, those questions were raised and they were duly recorded 
by the news media, and the people of Saskatchewan, frankly, were concerned 
about some of those things.  And the reply at the time, if I could just 
remind you, Mr. Speaker, my reply at the time was: there was a need for 
some longer term planning, in some days just prior to that, in some months 
and years just prior to that, when what I would call some halcyon days when 
we had higher priced wheat and higher priced commodities across this 
province. 
 
And did we build day surgery units in Saskatoon in those days, Mr. Speaker?  
No.  This province did not.  Did we plan ahead?  Were the signals there?  
All these questions need to be asked, because we need to be reasonable and 
honest with each other about it. 
 
Were there signals there that some of these new technologies were coming on 
stream?  Were there some signals there that we had an ageing population in 
this province, that we would have more and more need for cataract surgery, 
for hip replacements, all of those things, in orthopedics?  Yes, those 
signals were there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But was there a response to the signals in the 1970s when they were in 
government?  There wasn't, Mr. Speaker.  I said so at the time, and I said 
as quickly as we can we will be dealing with this, almost in a -- if I 
could use quotation marks -- in a "catch-up" sort of mode, even though some 
of the times are more difficult. 
 
And we've done that, Mr. Speaker.  We've done that.  This government has 
done that.  New City Hospital is now under construction in difficult times.  



 

 

St. Paul's Hospital has a major regeneration opened last year, tremendous 
numbers of dollars -- tens of millions of dollars -- last year.  A major 
regeneration at the University Hospital last year.  A new Wascana Rehab 
Centre here in Regina.  A new cancer clinic -- not renovated -- a new 
cancer clinic in Saskatoon.  All of those things, Mr. Speaker, all of those 
things, important for our health care delivery system. 
 
While they were in the planning stages and before they were able to open, 
we had some short-term politics.  Folks over on the other side of this 
House were able to benefit from some short-term political headlines for a 
few days, a few months, a few weeks, whatever.  But, Mr. Speaker, I'll 
stand before this House today and show some of the headlines that are now 
about in Saskatoon. 
 
"Saskatoon hospital waiting lists pared."  This is from the Star-Phoenix of 
March 21 of 1990, and its quotations there about how the waiting lists have 
been dropping because of the new hospitals that I've been mentioning, 
because of an emphasis on money going for day surgery units -- the kinds of 
things which are the forward-looking health care system that we knew, and 
the signals were there in the 1970s that we needed. 
 
Another one, the Star-Phoenix: "City Hospital's waiting list slashed," Mr. 
Speaker.  Those things.  These are the kinds of headlines that are now 
there in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix; those are the kinds of things that are 
now there. 
 
I'm not up here . . . I haven't been up here saying to the hon. members 
every day, where's your questions about waiting lists, and all of that.  
Mr. Speaker, the question every citizen in this province should ask: why 
are there no questions about waiting lists now? 
 
Obviously we still have people that have to wait.  But, Mr. Speaker, there 
have been some tremendous strides forward, and we are striding forward even 
more so as time goes on and as some of these newer hospitals are still 
going to come on stream. 
 
So I just wanted make that point, Mr. Speaker.  It's very important that 
all of us think about this very large health care system in a way which is 
more reasoned than what we saw here a couple of years ago when some of 
those questions I referred to were coming our way. 
 
The most important thing . . . Before I leave this issue of waiting lists, 
Mr. Speaker, I've said it before, and it's very important that people 
understand.  It is not the number of people who are waiting for elective 
surgery.  The key in relieving pain of individuals and consternation in 
families and all of that, the key is reduce the length of wait that any 
individual would have to wait, the length of time that an individual would 
have to wait -- far more important than trotting out some number of the 
number of people who are waiting, whatever that length of time is.  And 
that's what we've been focusing on, Mr. Speaker, and that's what has been 
bringing us some result. 
 
I might add, Mr. Speaker . . . well I've been through some of this, I won't 



 

 

carry it on any longer.  Just to say that long-term planning that I 
referred to earlier, that was needed before, is an exercise that we are 
very much involved in within the Department of Health now so that this 
society, this population of a million people in our province that we care 
about so much, does not find itself wanting ever again in terms of our 
health care services and our health care facility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here in Regina, together with the Regina hospitals, we 
launched a major effort to address a shortage of specialists and 
successfully recruited some of those specialists needed to meet the health 
needs of southern Saskatchewan.  A case in point, Mr. Speaker, and once 
again we heard a good deal about this another time -- we don't hear it now 
-- is about ophthalmology and the availability of ophthalmology services 
here in Regina. 
 
And I just want to say to the House and to all members of the public of 
Saskatchewan that it was a major recruitment that went on there.  There was 
good co-operation between the department and from the hospitals of Regina, 
which is the only way that we're ever going to be able to approach any of 
these issues as we go into the future.  And we've had some success.  There 
are more ophthalmologists here now in Regina, and the length of time that 
people need to wait for that surgery in Regina has dropped dramatically. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we're not kidding ourselves as it relates to the numbers 
of specialists available, where they are, the maldistribution of our 
professionals, any of that.  The trend toward centralization of health 
professionals in our urban areas will be a difficult one to control.  No 
question about that. 
 
And I'm convinced that our community care initiatives will continue to 
improve local access to quality health services.  But while I say that, I 
say that it won't happen without good co-operation because it is a trend 
line that's very, very difficult for all of us in health care delivery to 
deal with. 
 
By working together for health and well-being, once again that whole area 
of our mission statement, we've accomplished a great deal over the past 
eight years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We've introduced the Everyone Wins health promotion program which 
encourages people to change their life-styles to prevent accidents and 
disease and to deal with areas of nutrition, physical fitness, stress, 
accident prevention, alcohol and drug abuse, smoking, and communicable 
diseases -- seven areas, Mr. Speaker, very much focused on those seven 
areas. 
 
And those seven areas aren't just pulled out of the sky.  They are the 
areas that health professionals, people in the field and people in 
community health and so on have said, those are the areas where we can make 
some changes in the way in which we approach our own life-style and areas 
in which we can make some changes and will have some effect on the way in 
which we live. 
 



 

 

This year we've targeted $3 million for Everyone Wins, for that program 
which, I would submit, can be only described as very successful.  And that 
$3 million will be there to ensure that they will have a continued impact 
on life-style choices in the work place and in the community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, community health's regional and district offices will be 
receiving sixteen and a half million dollars from this budget, a 7.1 per 
cent increase to carry out prevention and community services throughout the 
province.  And that's an area, the whole area of community health services, 
an area where there has been some significant pressure.  There's no 
question that that's true.  I know that people who work in the field will 
be . . . while they will still be under pressure, and no one is kidding 
themselves about that as well, I believe that they will be thankful for the 
7.1 per cent increase, the kind of response that this budget gives for the 
work that they do on a daily basis. 
 
In addition, we will be spending $2 million on communicable disease 
control, including immunization programs for children throughout the 
province. 
 
One point four million has been allocated for the breast cancer screening 
program scheduled to begin shortly.  This is a pilot project designed to 
help prevent breast cancer in women who are at risk; in other words, those 
who are between the ages of 50 and 69.  And that's the target group, Mr. 
Speaker, and it's important that that be understood.  From 50 to 69 is the 
target group of this pilot.  It's an educational program as well as a 
medical program, and it will help Saskatchewan women to seek early 
treatment if they develop breast cancer. 
 
(1500) 
 
Currently the pilot project will target two areas of the province.  One 
rural, and that being the north-eastern quadrant of the province, 
north-eastern corner; and one urban, and that being the city of Regina.  So 
those two areas, the pilot project and I am looking forward to the outcome 
of this pilot project, and if it proves successful, Mr. Speaker, there may 
be plans in the future to expand it to and include our entire province. 
 
The preventative value of these programs is difficult to estimate, and 
there have been some varying opinions about these kinds of screening 
programs.  But we're hopeful that they'll prove the axiom that an ounce of 
prevention is truly worth at least a pound of cure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there've been improvements in the children's dental plan.  We 
now have 36 more rural dental clinics than we had in 1987, resulting in 
quality dental treatment for more children and their families than ever 
before.  Last year, Mr. Speaker, 91 per cent of all children were enrolled 
in the children's dental program, and 92 per cent of those enrolled saw a 
dentist at least once. Mr. Speaker, this is the highest enrolment rate ever 
in the children's dental program in this province. 
 
The innovative, computerized health services card has made things easier 
for the consumer, and encouraged more responsible use of prescription 



 

 

drugs.  This technology has created interest around the world.  And I mean 
that, Mr. Speaker -- around the world. 
 
We had a company from this province, CDSL, Co-operators Data Services 
Limited, which was the company located here in Regina that was contracted 
with Saskatchewan Health to create this card and develop it, along with 
several other companies.  That company went to Anaheim, to a technology 
conference, I believe about a year ago, maybe a little more than a year 
ago.  At that conference, their technology was seen by a representative of 
the Belgian government, in Anaheim, California.  And from that contact in 
Anaheim, CDSL of Regina, Saskatchewan, Canada now is actively working in 
Belgium, actively working in Belgium, and the Belgian government is looking 
very actively at involving that sort of software, that program which we 
pioneered here in Saskatchewan, into their health care system, along with 
some of their insurance companies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people from our Health department and from the company CDSL, 
and other companies, computer technology experts here in this province, 
people who are resident in this province, who pay their taxes in this 
province, who employ people in this province, are now working with the 
European Economic Community.  Think of the impact of that, Mr. Speaker, if 
a technology developed here, a technology developed here, could go into use 
in the European Economic Community, as they come into one system, which 
they are intending to do shortly after 1992. 
 
The state of Maryland . . . We had guests here in the gallery today from 
the state of Maryland in agriculture.  The state of Maryland had its 
secretary of health was here in Regina to look at our system, and there's 
no question there's significant interest in the state of Maryland in the 
technology that we have introduced here in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the potential for application of the health card technology in 
other jurisdictions is great.  This brings up an important aspect, a sort 
of a concept of economic development within Health, a way in which we can 
capitalize on this sort of thing.  As world leaders in many aspects of 
health delivery, Saskatchewan people are in a position to market our 
expertise to the rest of the world. 
 
One of the things that we have not done -- we being this society in Canada 
-- have not done well as it relates to health care and the application of 
technology to health care, is to apply technology as it now exists in other 
sectors, in the insurance industry and the banking industry and some of 
those areas.  We have not applied new technology, leading-edge technology, 
to the administrative side of a very, very large industry. 
 
Health care has been on the leading edge, and as I've said in some of my 
earlier remarks, has been on the leading edge of technology when it comes 
to machinery, when it comes to the best equipment available, the best 
research and development and technology available as it relates to what is 
in the operating theatre in any of our hospitals.  Those kinds of things.  
But as it relates to the administrative side of health care, we have not 
been out on the leading edge, and it's time we were, given the percentage 
and the portions of our budgets that go out on an annual basis in the 



 

 

health care world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as many members in this House will be aware, the rapidly 
increasing use of prescription and over-the-counter drugs is a quality of 
care of issue.  As much as anything else, it's a quality-of-care issue. 
 
The study into the growth and use of health services: this was a study, Mr. 
Speaker, that was commissioned by our department and it was done in 
conjunction with the Saskatchewan Medical Association, the College of 
Physicians and Surgeons, and it had some very interesting findings, Mr. 
Speaker.  It found that almost half of drug expenditures in 1985-86 were on 
products that were not available in 1977-78; almost half of what we spent 
on prescription drugs was spent on products -- in 1985-86 -- was spent on 
products that were not available in 1977-78.  A significant statement if 
one thinks about it. 
 
For drugs available in both years, that is, 1978 and in 1986, drugs which 
were available both of those years, use per person rose by 43 per cent.  
Those are significant increases, Mr. Speaker.  The study recommended a 
public and professional education program, and I've accepted that 
recommendation.  The seniors' association of Saskatchewan and other 
organizations as well, but that group is key in this. 
 
As also requested, a greater emphasis on drug education.  This budget, Mr. 
Speaker, allocates one and a half million dollars to the safe use of 
medicines advisory committee, to help change attitudes and encourage more 
responsible use of medications.  This is something that's very important 
for every one of us, regardless of our age.  And I'm sure many of us know 
of a person who doesn't understand how to use the medications that they 
have correctly.  It's an initiative that I believe we as a government have 
a responsibility to provide for our citizens. 
 
You'll notice, Mr. Speaker, that I said a public and professional drug 
education program.  Just think for a moment of the number of drugs . . . 
and I just gave some statistics a while ago.  One of the things that is 
faced, not only by our public, because of the more and more products which 
are coming on to the market, but our professionals are being overrun by 
this as well.  The movement in drug therapy and the great innovations in 
drug therapy are difficult for our professionals, physicians and others, to 
keep up with.  So it's not as though we're pointing the finger at anyone, 
and the physicians have been very, very good about co-operating in all of 
this.  And it's very, very important that we provide education, not only 
for the public, but opportunities for continuing education for 
professionals as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Department of Health currently provides mental health 
services in 61 communities throughout this province, giving Saskatchewan 
one of the most extensive and comprehensive community-based mental health 
services in Canada.  Over $32 million will be spent for mental health 
services this year, about 50 per cent of that to be spent on community 
services.  Mr. Speaker, that's the highest ratio in Canada, the highest 
ratio in Canada of mental health money being spent on community services as 
opposed to institutional services. 



 

 

 
I'm still concerned though, that there are significant pressures in the 
mental health area, and all of us should be.  There's no question that we 
all must continue to be concerned about those pressures, and I'm willing to 
work together with mental health care providers and with consumers and with 
other interested groups to help alleviate the problems. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the last decade saw an unprecedented increase in the need for 
services to support the elderly and to help them to live healthy, 
independent lives -- and the next decade and the decade after that.  And 
all we need do is look at the demographics of our province.  Look at the 
demographics across the western world and we'll see that those pressures of 
an ageing population are upon us, and frankly, are just beginning. 
 
Let me just cite this example.  This sort of statistic, which if one really 
thinks about it, is mind-boggling.  Of all of the people who have lived on 
the face of the earth from the beginning of history, who have lived beyond 
the age of  
 D65, two-thirds of them are alive right now -- right now.  Two-thirds of 
the people who have lived to the age of 65 years in the history of our 
world are alive now.  That statistic in itself, Mr. Speaker, tells us that 
the pressures that health systems, that delivery systems throughout the 
social services, all of those kinds of systems, will be significant for us 
as we face the next decade and into the decade following that. 
 
We've responded in this province to some of those pressures that I refer to 
in the 1980s.  We've responded by building 2,400 new and replacement 
special care home beds, by building 16 new integrated facilities throughout 
the province, by expanding our home care, chiropody, and rehabilitation 
programs, and capping ambulance costs for seniors at $150, and no more than 
that.  That means that no senior anywhere in the province has to pay more 
than $150 for an ambulance trip to anywhere else in the province. 
 
While it's important to remember these past accomplishments, Mr. Speaker, 
and I want all of us take pride in each of them, there's no room for 
complacency.  There certainly is no room for complacency in this very large 
system that we all, as I say, take significant pride in.  But there's no 
room for politics in the system, either.  There are many present challenges 
that need to be addressed, and we're committed to meet these challenges. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year's special care homes' budget reflects that 
commitment -- $220.8 million will be spent on special care home services, 
representing an increase of 8.7 per cent over last year.  In addition, 
we'll be spending 30.4 million to serve this province's 19,000 home care 
clients.  That is a 9.5 per cent increase over last year's budget.  And 
you'll notice even though the numbers are small -- and it's important to 
say that they're small -- they're not . . . the percentage on home care, 
which is where there is more pressure even than there is in the 
institutional side, the percentages on home care are higher, are 9.5 per 
cent; institutional care as it relates to long-term care, 8.7; and in the 
hospital sector, 6 per cent. 
 
That's significant, Mr. Speaker, because it shows ever so slowly trying to 



 

 

change the direction that we're going, over to more of the independent 
living within their own homes, and so on, that people have been telling us 
and have been wanting, and that we heard a bit about here in the question 
period, as people were referring to the comments by Dr. Murray of the 
health care commission. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of us want to keep our seniors and our disabled in their 
communities and close to family and friends.  That's why we've allocated 
10.9 million for wheelchairs and other mobility aids offered through 
Saskatchewan Aids to Independent Living.  This service protects the 
independence, the dignity, the quality of life of these Saskatchewan 
residents who benefit from the program.  But I expect continuing pressure 
in the '90s to devote an even larger portion of the provincial budget to 
health, and that's a major statement for us to make here. 
 
We will have a continuing pressure throughout the next decade, as well, for 
an even larger portion of our budget.  Our challenge is to continue 
managing health programs in an effective and an efficient manner.  While 
escalating health costs will not shake our commitment to protect access for 
all to quality health services, we must be aware of the questions that our 
society increasingly asks. 
 
Can we continue to pay for double-digit increases in health budgets on an 
annual basis?  Significant questions.  What can we realistically expect 
from our health system?  These aren't questions that are just asked in . . 
. (inaudible interjection) . . . The member across says, start managing the 
system.  These aren't questions that are just being asked in Saskatchewan, 
in this society of a million people, here in the middle of this continent.  
These are questions that are being asked across Canada, across the western 
world, and certainly here in Canada.  What can we realistically expect from 
our system?  Those are the questions, and they're important ones, and the 
ones that we should be addressing -- all of us, as citizens. 
 
The principles we must rely on as we prepare for these challenges include: 
Consultation -- we intend to give individuals and communities a greater say 
in the health services they provide and the health services they receive.  
Responsibility-- individuals, communities, and government must begin to 
accept more responsibility for their own health and for the management of 
the health system.  And compassion -- ensuring access for all to quality 
health services whenever they are needed. 
 
We will accomplish those goals in this province, and I believe most of the 
health system across the country will accomplish those goals, if we 
continue to work with . . . and it's very important that we work together 
with the care-givers -- the nursing professions, the physicians, 
pharmacists, ambulance operators, other health professionals who play a 
major role in our health advisory committees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I mentioned the nursing professions and working with them.  
One of the significant issues in health care in the next number of years as 
we look out into the future -- and we've seen some examples of it in the 
recent past, not only here but in other provinces -- where nurses have been 
expressing frustration, expressing frustration with their inability to be 



 

 

as active as they would like to be in the running and administration of the 
institutions within which they work, and the systems within which they work 
and the community based services -- all of those things are all key and 
important questions. 
 
(1515) 
 
The questions that relate to nursing, and the role of nursing, in the 
delivery of health care will be some of the most significant issues of the 
1990s.  We saw some of these frustrations come to light in recent years in 
the context of collective bargaining.  And they come forward in that 
context and it's a very difficult circumstance for the hospital 
administrations and for the nursing home boards and all of those to deal 
with in that circumstance.  But I think the signals that are there for all 
of us who are charged with the responsibility in health care to deal with 
many of the facts that are presented to us, we must deal with them outside 
of the context of collective bargaining and in a co-operative and reasoned 
way.  And we're trying to do that and we're trying to set up structures 
within which we can do that, through a nursing advisory committee and other 
things here in this province. 
 
And the ministers of Health of Canada, all of us across the country from 
all the provinces and the two territories of Canada, are joining to bring 
together people from the nursing professions, both from the unions and from 
the professional bodies, in Winnipeg.  I'm not sure of the date of it now, 
but it's a few months away, and it's the kind of thing that we're trying to 
attack as a nation, frankly, rather than just within one institution or 
within one province.  But those are issues . . . I just wanted to identify 
them here, because they are important issues for our future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can never emphasize enough how proud I am of our commitment 
to health, both in the financial sense, as we have seen in this budget, and 
in the budgets of the past number of years, but also in the creative and 
thoughtful ways we have approached the problems posed by health delivery. 
 
But I also think it is time to go beyond the way that we have been defining 
good health care.  When we try to measure our success in the health field, 
it's time to look at more than simply the number of services performed.  
And I grant you, that's some of what I've been doing in the earlier part of 
my remarks. 
 
But it's more than just the number of services performed or the number of 
beds built.  We must look at health, Mr. Speaker, rather than health care 
in many cases.  We sometimes forget that it is better health for our 
population that we are working toward.  And better health is only assisted 
by better health care.  Better health is only assisted by better health 
care. 
 
Because of our preoccupation with illness, we have focussed on our ability 
to patch things up with services when things go wrong.  We call this 
approach the medical model.  We talk about services, activities, and inputs 
as though they were positive indicators in their own right. 
 



 

 

For example, Mr. Speaker, this year 47,000 in-patient surgical procedures 
and over 17,000 day surgeries will be performed in our larger centres.  And 
we now have more than 10,000 long-term care beds in our special care homes 
throughout the province. 
 
Should we consider it a success that we've increased the number of 
surgeries performed and added thousands of special care and hospital beds?  
Or should we in fact be viewing these indicators as a measure of our 
failures as a society?  We often make the mistaken assumption that health 
care determines the health of a population.  But, in reality, health is 
much more complex than that and many factors play a role in determining it. 
 
The key factors affecting health appear to be the following, Mr. Speaker;  
heredity, physical environment, social environment, psychological factors, 
life-style choices, and of course the health care system.  It's worth 
noting, Mr. Speaker, that most of these factors are within our control.  
That's why I say that many things, aside from health care, affect our 
health. 
 
We cannot limit our vision, our talent, or our resources to providing only 
one necessary requirement for good health -- to providing only one 
necessary requirement for good health.  Our challenge is to determine which 
factors  affecting the health of the population can achieve the greatest 
results within the resources available, and then each of us must begin to 
take some personal and corporate responsibility for making it happen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just . . . I can't, as I pause for a drink of water here, 
and I hear the chirping from the member from Quill Lakes, and he's there 
yelling across here, "user fees," and the old political saws that he's been 
into and that he's, in his whole career here in . . . his whole career here 
in the legislature is to yell some kind of political scare tactic, as it 
relates to health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I'm talking about here is dealing with the most important 
thing that we can talk about as it relates to . . . No Health minister 
should be speaking only about the health care system without referring 
directly to the approach that the health care system, and the way in which 
the health care system contributes to the health of the population of the 
province.  That's key, that's what it's about.  And even though we have the 
old political stuff and the mediscare junk that comes from members like . . 
. and I don't say all members opposite, because many of them are very much 
in tune with what I'm saying here.  But that member who has been involved 
in the mediscare stuff for so many years does not understand exactly what 
I'm saying. 
 
When we consider health and quality of life, Mr. Speaker, we must begin to 
think of both treatment and prevention.  One of our major challenges as 
legislators is to encourage Saskatchewan people, young and old, to adopt 
healthier life-styles.  Researchers have found that just a few changes in 
our life-style can make a world of difference in our personal health and in 
the demands we place on the health system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe we all share a vision for Saskatchewan.  It's a 



 

 

vision of a healthy population and a healthy society.  To reach our goal we 
must and we will provide and fund health services that contribute to our 
health, but we must also support those activities that maintain wellness 
and lead to better health.  This approach to health will play a vital role 
as the people of Saskatchewan prepare for the next century. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as Minister of Health, I ask everyone, not only members of the 
legislature, but others across the province, I ask everyone to consider the 
changes you can make in your own life to improve your personal health and 
well-being.  I especially ask the member from Quill Lakes, think of 
whatever changes you can make, we'll all think of those things and it's 
important that we do that as we deal with the health of our population, 
health of the people that you serve, that I serve, all of that.  I ask 
everyone to consider those changes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, by working together for better health, we can build the best 
health system anywhere, and I emphasize, Mr. Speaker, the best health 
system anywhere, not the best health care system.  Mr. Speaker, that's why 
our Premier asked the Commission on Directions in Health Care to assess the 
current state of the system and advise our people on its strengths and its 
weaknesses.  I'm looking forward to seeing the commission's report and I'm 
convinced that it will help us to keep our health system the envy of the 
rest of the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say a word of thank you to all of those who have 
contributed, and all the individuals and the groups who've made submissions 
to the health care commission; many submissions -- I think more than 600 
submissions to the health care commission -- as they travelled through our 
province.  Their participation in the process assures their place in 
deciding the future directions of health care in this province. 
 
Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, their recognition that the process of 
consultation is a valuable one is to be commended.  Our government wants to 
listen to the people of this province and we want to know the best way to 
serve the needs that are out there.  And it is through venues such as the 
commission that the people are able to have their say and the government is 
able to listen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, throughout these remarks today, I have outlined many 
expenditures that this government has made to help improve the health of 
Saskatchewan people.  These expenditures are significant and they will 
continue to be significant.  I believe the money we spend in health is a 
responsible amount of money and it reflects the desires of Saskatchewan 
people to maintain and enhance our health system. 
 
There's no doubt that there's room for improvement, as costs of technology, 
medication, and professional services continue to rise at an alarming rate.  
There is increasing pressure on provinces across Canada to control these 
costs.  Although our department has received a large increase in funding 
for this year's budget, we've still been challenged to make our system more 
efficient. 
 
There must be a way, people tell us, to maintain our health system in the 



 

 

face of these rising costs.  I believe, Mr. Speaker, that there are a 
combination of ways to accomplish this goal.  It is something that is 
larger than the bounds of the Department of Health, obviously, larger than 
the government itself.  It is in fact an issue that will involve each and 
every resident of our province. 
 
We as government will continue to do what we can to eliminate waste and 
inefficiency within the health system.  I believe we have accomplished this 
to some extent.  Frankly, we've accomplished this to a great extent.  I 
feel that we can continue to do it without sacrificing the outstanding 
service that our system provides. 
 
But the one idea that I feel is imperative here, the idea that I would like 
every member of the legislature to take home to their constituency, is that 
the people of the province must work with us toward better health.  
Everyone is interested in their own health, obviously; that goes without 
saying.  But the important thing to recognize is that each of us has a 
personal responsibility for our own health.  Each Saskatchewan resident can 
do his or her own part, and in doing that they will all receive additional 
benefits. 
 
I'm not asking that everyone try to live healthier simply because that 
would be easier on the provincial treasury.  That's not it at all, Mr. 
Speaker.  A healthier population will have that effect, but it will also 
have many other far more positive results.  Healthier people are more 
productive, they're more active, they're generally happier than those who 
are less healthy.  These seem like obvious statements, Mr. Speaker, but I 
submit to you and to all members of this legislature that we as a society 
do not think about them enough. 
 
Our government, through the Everyone Wins program, and several other health 
education initiatives in this budget, is trying to disseminate that 
message, Mr. Speaker, a message of personal responsibility in health.  I 
ask all members to help improve the health of our province by encouraging 
citizens to take an active interest in their own health. 
 
When the people of Saskatchewan need health services, Mr. Speaker, 
government will be there, as we have been in the past.  We will continue to 
enhance the services we offer, and we'll continue to be fiscally 
responsible in the way we deliver those services. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, this health budget is true to the principles of service, 
enhancement and maintenance as well as the principle of fiscal 
responsibility.  It will allow us to provide needed care, counselling, and 
education to Saskatchewan people.  I hope the people, through consultation 
and other processes such as the Commission on Directions in Health Care, 
will continue to recognize our challenges and work with us to accomplish 
that common goal -- the common goal of all of us, hopefully, and that goal 
being better health for all. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 



 

 

 
Mr. Koenker: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, before I begin my 
remarks this afternoon, I'd like to congratulate both you and the member 
for Souris-Cannington on the special event that's happened in your life 
since I've last been in this Assembly and had a chance to address the 
Chair.  I'm speaking of course of your marriage this past winter.  Few 
things, Mr. Speaker, are as important as family life and the joys that they 
bring. And especially when you're in political life, which may not last 
very long, it's important for all of us to have a family to go back to that 
we can love and cherish and be accepted by.  And so, Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to wish you all God's blessings in your new life together with your 
family. 
 
The Speaker: -- Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- I would now like to turn my remarks to the budget of this 
government and to give voice to some of the concerns of the people of 
Saskatoon Sutherland and in fact some of the people of . . . (inaudible) . 
. . I want to begin by saying that this budget has all of the optics of 
being a good budget -- all of the optics.  Now I hear a member on the 
opposite side saying hear, hear.  Certainly they must agree, they must know 
that it's an optical illusion that this budget projects fiscal 
responsibility, and yet the truth of the matter is exactly the opposite, 
exactly the opposite. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to say that this budget is an exercise in 
cosmetology -- creative cosmetology even.  It's really a creature or a 
creation of a government that wants to conceal and mask its record, mask 
the truth about how much money it has spent and where that money has gone. 
 
(1530) 
 
I think, for example, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of this government's record with 
respect to Cargill -- $369 million for Cargill; $65 million directly out of 
the public purse in form of a cash grant.  That is masked in this budget. 
 
I think, for example, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of this government's record with 
respect to Weyerhaeuser corporation.  And I want the people of Saskatchewan 
to know that this year and for 20 years they will be building roads and 
bridges for Weyerhaeuser corporation in northern Saskatchewan for 20 years, 
20 miles each year, each and every year.  Thirty-two kilometres, 20 miles 
for 20 years at taxpayers' expense.  That is scandalous.  That's why this 
budget, Mr. Speaker, has to be cosmetic, because if it tells the truth 
about this government's record and its handling of public affairs, nobody 
could stand to look at it or listen to it. 
 
This government has basically walked as it says in this budget, hand in 
hand with Weyerhaeuser and handed over a billion dollars worth of assets 
from the Saskatchewan public to Weyerhaeuser and will see nothing unless 
and until Weyerhaeuser makes a 13 per cent profit, and on the public money 
given Weyerhaeuser, 8 per cent interest rates. 



 

 

 
Why can't this government let these facts see the light of day?  Because 
people would be outraged if they knew about it. 
 
So this budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is an unabashed attempt to beautify a 
beast -- the beast of this government's fiscal mismanagement.  And that 
beast has been growing larger and larger the last eight years with record 
and scandalous public debt.  And what an ugly picture this debt presents in 
this most recent budget when it weighs in at $4.3 billion. 
 
How to you cosmetize a beast like that?  It begs to be beautified, and 
that's what this government attempts to do.  A half a billion dollars, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, projected in this budget as the cost of servicing the 
public debt.  Imagine that!  This year alone Saskatchewan taxpayers, by 
this government's own admission, will spend half a billion dollars for 
nothing.  We'll have nothing to show for it.  A half a billion dollars 
simply to pay the interest on the Premier's deficit.  That's Tory 
economics.  That's a beast that needs to be disguised with the application 
of any kind of cosmetic surgery or make-up that the government can put onto 
the scene.  The ninth straight deficit . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, order.  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- I'd like leave of the Assembly to introduce a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  It gives me a good 
deal of pleasure to introduce to the Assembly, Mr. Tim Hammond, who is 
seated in your gallery here today.  He's the Senior Stick for the College 
of Agriculture at the U of S in Saskatoon.  He is selected on the basis of 
his academics, interest in college activities, personal character, and 
leadership qualities.  He just lives between Rosetown and Biggar, and I 
want to welcome him here.  He's here viewing some of the activities of the 
Department of Agriculture and the relationship that the minister's 
department has. 
 
And it gives me a good deal of pleasure to welcome him to the Assembly, and 
I'd like other members to join me in welcoming him here. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE continued) 

 
Mr. Koenker: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  What an embarrassment to 
this government this provincial debt really is.  In just eight years 



 

 

they've gone from a budgetary surplus that they inherited to an accumulated 
deficit of $4.3 billion -- a major embarrassment, a major facial flaw on 
the face of this government. 
 
And Mr. Deputy Speaker, we aren't just talking about pimples or warts on 
the government's record; we're talking about a major facial flaw -- a $4.3 
billion deficit.  If this were just a few zits, if this were just a few 
zits it'd be incidental, Mr. Speaker.  It might embarrass the government a 
bit but that could be cleared up.  People might not even scarcely notice, 
but this deficit of $4.3 billion translates into $4,300 of debt for every 
man, woman, and child in this province of Saskatchewan.  And the interest 
on this deficit is $1.3 million a day, $56,000 an hour, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  
That's grotesque, that's socially unacceptable, that's publicly 
unacceptable, and the government knows it. 
 
And so it gives lip service to fiscal management while it goes on with 
fiscal mismanagement of the public affairs.  Each year the promise of 
fiscal responsibility and not a word outlining a plan to deal with this 
problem that the province finds itself in in this budget.  And that's why 
this budget is cosmetic.  It has to be.  It has to have all the appearance 
of something good and beautiful, and so what do we got?  We've got money 
for agriculture and we got money for health and we got money for education.  
It all looks very good.  It all looks very good.  It's all sweetness and 
light, folks. 
 
That's the projection that this government wants to put on this budget for 
public consumption, but underneath the fac pçade, underneath that 
projection, are very real, ugly problems.  Things aren't what they appear 
to be.  You take a look at the money given for agriculture in this budget 
and what it really is is more debt for farmers.  You take a closer look at 
health and that money doesn't go where it's needed -- into home care.  
There aren't the right priorities there.  You take a look at education and 
there are cuts to education behind the figures in this budget.  Now I'm 
going to go into that and document those, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
It's no accident that this budget is cosmetic.  It has to be.  And I say, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this Premier of ours has learned a thing or two 
from his wife who has a background in cosmetics, who's driven a pink 
cadillac and has sold for Mary Kay Cosmetics.  She knows how to make things 
look better than they really are.  And that's the same with this Premier.  
He's learned the art of make-up.  He's learned the application of make-up 
to the presentation of public affairs and to the face of his government.  
And this government reflects . . . and this budget reflects it with the 
taxes that it talks about. 
 
And I want to quote from the budget speech, page 13.  The Minister of 
Finance says: 
 

 And so, Mr. Speaker, I say to you, and to all the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan, this Government has listened. 

 
Parenthetically it has in bold print: 
 



 

 

 There are no tax increases in this Budget. 
 

No tax increases in this budget.  No new taxes.  Well, what an untruth.  
Another fib from this government.  We look at the gas tax, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and there we see an increase of $68 million in taxation to the 
people of this province, and the Minister of Finance has the gall to say 
that there are no increases in taxes in this budget when he eliminates the 
10 cent a litre gas rebate.  And he says there's no tax increases. 
 
There are increases in taxes in this budget of $56 million in individual 
income tax and sales tax combined.  People in Saskatchewan are going to be 
paying, and paying dearly for this government's fiscal mismanagement.  It's 
simply not true, it's not being honest with the people of Saskatchewan to 
say that there are no tax increases in this budget.  The average family 
that drives a car in this province is going to be spending $200 a year more 
because of the elimination of the gas tax rebate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now want to talk a little bit more particularly about this 
government's budget and how it impacts on education.  I want to talk 
specifically about how it impacts on the University of Saskatchewan, since 
that community is very much a part of the Sutherland constituency.  I have 
large numbers of students, faculty, and staff who work at the University of 
Saskatchewan.  And I want to look at what the government says in this 
budget about education expenditures and what it does about the truth of its 
education spending. 
 
I have here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a copy of this past Saturday's 
Star-Phoenix, and on the third page there's an article entitled "Campuses 
in financial strait-jacket."  And the lead sentence reads: 
 

 The University of Saskatchewan is 6 million short of what it requires for 
this year as a result of Thursday's provincial budget. 

 
The University of Regina says it must go into an "underfunded and trimming 
program mode" as a consequence of the budget.  The vice-president of the 
University of Regina said about this budget, "Clearly it didn't meet our 
needs."  And the U of S chairman of the faculty association says about it, 
that it's a financial strait-jacket for the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
The university operating budget, the Minister of Finance will know, claims 
to increase university funding by 3 per cent when inflation is four and a 
half per cent.  The government talks of giving $8.5 million in a 
discretionary enhancement fund, 21 per cent more than last year, 
putatively, and the truth is that the total increase for education at our 
universities is more like 3.8 per cent. 
 
And that's why people from the university community comment the way they 
do.  They don't believe the Minister of Finance when he gives his figures.  
The truth is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the 3.8 per cent increase that the 
province gives the university community is far, far short of the 8.4 per 
cent that President Ivany of the University of Saskatchewan said two months 
ago that he needed, just to tread water and to meet present operating 
expenses. 



 

 

 
So the Minister of Finance will give the University of Saskatchewan some $4 
million when it needs $10 million just to stay where it's at right now.  
And the truth is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the University of Saskatchewan 
has been underfunded for the last eight years and now is underfunded again 
in this budget.  And the Minister of Education, the member from Mayfair, 
has failed our province's young people with his efforts to enhance 
education in this budget. 
 
The morning after this budget, in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, the headline 
reads, education wins.  But that's the cosmetics, Mr. Speaker.  That's the 
cosmetics applied.  When people scratch beneath the surface of this 
document, they see that it's just a short-term public relations effort, 
that its appearances are very, very deceiving and deceptive, and that the 
truth is quite other than what the Minister of Finance represents it to be. 
 
And I want to talk, Mr. Deputy Speaker, now, about student aid because this 
is another perfect illustration of the doublespeak engaged in by this 
government. 
 
The Minister of Finance on page 5 of his budgetary speech from last 
Thursday says, and I quote: 
 

 As well, our commitment to assist students in obtaining access to our 
universities, the Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology, (SIAST) and or our regional colleges means that student aid 
funding in this budget will almost double to $47 million. 

 
(1545) 
 
Sounds pretty good, looks pretty good -- a commitment of $47 million to 
student loans. And yet when you talk to people on the USSU (University of 
Saskatchewan Students Union) at the University of Saskatchewan, student 
representatives, as I did today, they told me that there is no extra money, 
that there is zero new money for student loans in this budget; that this 
budget represents, for student loans, the same old program with no program 
changes, with students stuck with the same problems that they've been stuck 
with before. 
 
And how can it be then that the Minister of Finance says in his own remarks 
that it means that student aid funding in this budget will almost double to 
$47 million?  How can that be?  Well, it's more cosmetics applied.  It's 
more make-up applied to this budget. 
 
Student financial assistance hasn't changed at all.  What has changed has 
to do with government money going to student loans that need to be paid . . 
. government money going to pay down interest rates for student loans 
announced back in '86 or '87 when the interest rate was going to be 
subsidized down to 6 per cent.  And the government now has to make up the 
difference to 11 per cent. 
 
What this really means: there's going to be an increase putatively for 
student loans, that this has to do with the government forgiving certain 



 

 

loans and writing down certain loans.  But there's no new money for 
students seeking student financial aid at the University of Saskatchewan.  
And it's doublespeak and it's misleading to tell the people of Saskatchewan 
that that's what it's all about.  It's not $47 million.  It's not even half 
of that for student loans. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that's why young people and their families here in 
Saskatchewan resent this government because they can't be honest about what 
they're saying.  Nothing grates on people's nerves more, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, than the fact that there are quotas imposed at the University of 
Saskatchewan, that 1,100 student spaces at our technical institutes have 
been cut.  And people across Saskatchewan know that their future is being 
cut off at the knees by this government's chronic inability to adequately 
fund higher education. 
 
And much the same is true, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when it comes to our 
elementary school system.  Operating grants have been increased by 3 per 
cent to $360 million.  But the education director of the Saskatoon separate 
school system says in an article in Friday's Star-Phoenix that this will 
only meet education costs half-way, only half-way. 
 
The Saskatchewan Schools Trustees Association estimates that on average 
school divisions will need 5 per cent just to keep pace with their costs, 
and the government gives them 3 per cent.  The truth is that the 
Saskatchewan School Trustees Association needs seventeen and a half million 
dollars, and what do they get?  They get ten and a half million from this 
government.  And the results are inevitable.  They're a shift in the burden 
of taxation to local taxpayers, or the inevitable reduction in educational 
services, with local boards cutting programs or staff or resources, or 
increasing class size so that children will suffer. 
 
And this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, from a province that has the lowest per 
capita funding for education in all of Canada in 1989, spending $744 per 
person when the average provincial expenditure for education was $995.  
Another way of looking at it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is about 14 per cent of 
the provincial budget was spent on education in 1989, which was again the 
lowest in all of Canada. 
 
And so it's not just the Saskatoon separate board of education, but the 
Saskatoon public school board that feels it basically will have nothing 
more to operate with this year than it did last year. 
 
And it isn't just the educational system that is impacted by this budget in 
Saskatoon or across the province.  I want to talk for a moment about the 
city of Saskatoon and what this budget means for them, a $1 million shift, 
basically -- a $1 million shift in financing onto the backs of Saskatoon's 
local taxpayers. 
 
This budget eliminates the $300,000 operating grant for the Centennial 
Auditorium in Saskatoon and the $710,000 transportation grant, a grant that 
has existed for years and years for the city of Saskatoon for its public 
transport system, now gone with this budget.  The truth -- it means that 
this $1 million must either be made up with a 2 per cent increase in 



 

 

property tax rates in Saskatoon, or by way of cuts in services for 
Saskatoon residents, or an increase in rates at the Saskatoon Centennial 
Auditorium, or for people who use the public transportation system. 
 
And what does the Minister of Finance say about this budget?  He says, no 
tax increases, no tax increases.  Just not so, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  In 
fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it's the same Minister of Finance in this same 
budget who says on page 13 of his budget address: 
 

 Mr. Speaker, I could stand here tonight and announce large reductions in 
government funding for hospitals, school boards and universities.  We 
could have followed the Government of Canada's example and shifted our 
fiscal problems onto others.  We could have said that the federal Budget, 
by cutting transfer payments for health care and education, forced us to 
reduce our support to these areas. 

 
And what did he do?  That's exactly what he did with the city of Saskatoon 
in shifting the costs of running Centennial Auditorium and the public 
transport system onto the backs of Saskatoon taxpayers.  And yet he has the 
gall to say, again in the same page of his speech: 
 

 We recognize that shifting costs from one government to another does 
nothing to relieve the burden on taxpayers. 

 
 DDoes nothing to relieve the burden on taxpayers, but he does it anyway, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker.  He does it anyway.  And you've got to ask yourself 
why. Why would he do such a thing?  This is off-loading, the very word that 
the Minister of Finance doesn't like when it comes to the federal 
government, off-loading programs onto the backs of the provinces like 
Saskatchewan.  It's just empty rhetoric. 
 
Revenue sharing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, revenue sharing.  The minister says in 
an article on the front page of the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix this past 
Friday, and I quote.  He says about the $300 cut in the Centennial 
Auditorium operating grant, and I quote: 
 

 It's "not a big number, but it's certainly big enough.  But I would argue 
in terms of looking at that whole off-loading question, the numbers that 
the municipalities are most interested in are the revenue-sharing numbers 
and we've maintained that pool." 

 
Again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a plain and simple half-truth, a plain and 
simple half-truth that he's maintained that revenue-sharing pool.  He's 
maintained it frozen for the last three years and therefore municipalities 
lose ground.  It's been frozen at $67 million for 1989, frozen at $67 
million for 1990, frozen at $67 million for 1991.  So well does the 
Minister of Finance say we've maintained the revenue-sharing pool.  He's 
frozen it; that's what he's done. 
 
And if you go back to 1987 and '88 budget, when they cut revenue sharing 
down to $66 million, it's basically stayed there ever since.  During the 
last four years . . . in fact if you take inflation into account when you 
calculate revenue sharing, there's been a 16 per cent drop in revenue 



 

 

sharing with urban municipalities from this government. 
 
And that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is why nobody believes this government.  All 
they see is cosmetics.  All they hear is make-believe and make-up, 
half-truths at best.  And what happens when governments can't believe . . . 
when people can't believe their governments?  They lose trust and they lose 
hope.  They lose confidence in their future.  And that's exactly what we 
see happening across this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker -- a crisis in 
confidence; a crisis in hope; despair settling over the province. 
 
The truth about Saskatchewan today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that people 
can't wait to have an election.  They can't wait to have an election.  They 
literally can't wait.  They have to move out of this province.  They've got 
to leave.  And that's why, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there were some 23, 24,000 
people who moved out of Saskatchewan last year alone -- a net loss, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker -- the second worst record in Saskatchewan history. 
 
And do you know what the record is for the first two months of this year?  
Three thousand people gone in January and February of 1990 alone.  More 
fleeing the province.  We're losing some thousand farm families a year here 
in Saskatchewan.  We have the worst -- the worst -- job creation record in 
the country; bankruptcies that are the highest in the province's history. 
 
Sixty thousand people have left this province since 1985, the majority of 
them under the age of 34, Mr. Deputy Speaker -- our brightest and best 
people, our future, fleeing the province because of this government's 
mismanagement. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is hard to believe, but would you believe 
that 16 per cent of Saskatchewan families live on a yearly income below the 
Statistics Canada poverty line?  Sixteen per cent of Saskatchewan families 
live below the poverty line.  That there are some 64,000 Saskatchewan 
children growing up in poverty -- 64,000 people, young people, children, in 
this province growing up in poverty, day after day, year after year.  Their 
childhood. 
 
The minister says -- opposite -- that it's not true.  But nobody believes 
the minister, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Nobody believes the minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government and this budget talks, 
with a lot of fanfare, about $740,000 that's going to be spent to fight 
child hunger; $740,000 to fight child hunger this next year.  With over 
64,000 children growing up in poverty, that amounts to about $12 a year per 
child.  That's going to really do something about child hunger in 
Saskatchewan.  It's pathetic: $12 a year; a dollar a month; 3 cents a day.  
That wouldn't buy a cup of oatmeal, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  That 3 cents 
wouldn't go that far. 
 
You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have a bit to do with the Saskatoon food 
bank; I take things down there periodically.  And I want to share with the 
people of Saskatchewan, that last year in the month of December alone, 



 

 

there were 2,719 children 11 years of age or younger who relied on the 
Saskatoon food bank -- just for that month of December alone -- with 
another 4,000 teenagers and adults coming to the food bank for help. 
 
These people are desperate.  They don't want to come to the food bank.  
They have to go to the food bank because there's no other hope. 
 
You know something else, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  This government, after it was 
elected in 1982, cut the northern food allowance for communities so that 
they could fly in fresh fruits and vegetables, cut that, cancelled it back 
in 1982-83.  And within a week or two of that, increased cabinet expense 
allowances.  Would you believe that?  That's sick.  That's sick. 
 
(1600) 
 
What a scandal, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  What a cosmetic operation.  And the 
Premier says that waste will not be tolerated.  Waste will not be 
tolerated, he says.  And yet we have 20 cabinet ministers with three 
assistant cabinet ministers and 10 legislative secretaries all lined up at 
the public trough.  And children in Saskatchewan have to go hungry.  All 
these government members, MLAs on the government side, lined up at the 
public trough with full staff complements of deputy ministers and 
assistants and cellular phones and everything else, and cars, under the 
sun. 
 
And it doesn't stop there, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Far from it.  Not by a long 
shot.  Even former cabinet ministers still get in and put their snouts at 
the public trough.  People like Bob Andrew and Graham Taylor, with pensions 
of $30,000 a year, and severance packages of $60,000 a year, and government 
salaries of $100,000 a year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there you have more than half of what this budget provides for 
hungry children this year.  With those two former cabinet ministers, you 
have more than half of what the government provides for hungry children in 
Saskatchewan.  Two cabinet ministers, two PC cabinet ministers, fed this 
year to the tune of some $200,000 each.  And for 64,000 children in 
Saskatchewan growing up in poverty, $12 a year.  That's obscene and that's 
immoral. 
 
And that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is why I say this budget is a cosmetic job.  
And that's the kind of monstrous face that this government can't allow the 
public to see any more than is necessary.  And that's why Saskatchewan 
people are so outraged when they see this face of the government, and why 
they can't wait for an election and have to leave the province.  They can't 
stand to look at this government any more. 
 
The deception, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the half-truths, and then this budget 
has the gall to proclaim, this government has the gall to proclaim, this 
Minister of Finance, on the second page of his speech as he's warming up: 
 

 We have eliminated severance payments for government MLAs going to 
Saskatchewan government jobs. 

 



 

 

And that's not true.  It's simply not true.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, the face 
of this government is so bad it can't even be seen in public. And that's 
why they have to come up with Consensus Saskatchewan.  That's why they have 
to come up with Consensus Saskatchewan -- more cosmetics, more fresh 
optics, more make-up for the Saskatchewan people. 
 
And I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the time has come to give the people of 
Saskatchewan a new face in government, a new premier of this province, a 
new cabinet here in Saskatchewan, and a new set of public priorities that 
can stand the bright light of this province's sun without cosmetics and 
make-up; that can stand up to public scrutiny -- the public scrutiny of 
every man, woman, and child in this province, without 100 chosen elected 
having to be their representatives. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the face of this present Premier belies a hardness of 
heart, a real keen hardness of heart.  A Premier who will subsidize alcohol 
shipments to northern Saskatchewan and eliminate subsidies for fresh fruit 
and vegetables for northern children -- that is scandalous. 
 
And I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is a better way.  There's got to be a 
better way.  There is a more positive role for government to play than to 
subsidize alcohol shipments to northern Saskatchewan and cut shipments of 
fresh food. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that there will be a new day for 
Saskatchewan people, a day when the jungle mentality of the PC government 
will disappear and will be replaced with principled leadership of a New 
Democratic government that has its priorities straight. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- A day, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when the governing modernistic, 
materialistic, me-first values will finally surrender to a higher ethic, an 
ethic that says, we are our brother or our sister's keeper, an ethic that 
insists that public interest be served and protected, an ethic that demands 
that the God-given resources of this province belong to the people of this 
province and are there to benefit all the men and women and children of 
Saskatchewan, and not just a few who have money. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Yes, there is a better way to govern in this province.  
There's got to be a better way to govern this province of Saskatchewan, 
than to rely on the magic of the market place, the sort of macho economics 
that these PCs rely on, that's predicated on unadulterated greed, an 
unbridled worship of capital and money, and where we have the slanderous 
and scandalous spectacle of a Cargill -- the single, largest, 
multinational, privately owned corporation in the world -- living off of 
$65 million worth of public money here in Saskatchewan.  Or millionaire, 
Peter Pocklington, entrepreneur, getting $10 million handed out.  Or a 
Weyerhaeuser corporation, every year for 20 years, getting 20 miles of road 



 

 

built for it at public expense, such a deal.  Eight per cent interest 
rates, such a deal. 
 
Yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is a better way and there is a new day 
coming for Saskatchewan people.  A day when the public interest will be 
served and protected; where the public interest will be the right way to 
govern; where kids will not go hungry.  And that is our pledge on this side 
of the House, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
We won't govern like a bunch of drunken sailors, as if there's no tomorrow.  
We won't sell this province for a song.  We won't sell out to big business, 
and we won't sell health and education and social services short, and then 
tell half-truths about it. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we will fight for this province and we will fight for 
what's fair for all Saskatchewan people, and not just the privileged and 
wealthy few.  And that is the better way, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is the 
way to a new day for this province.  That is the positive role for any 
government to play.  And that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is why I will be voting 
against this budget.  Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It's my privilege 
today to reply to the budget speech, and judging from what I hear from the 
people in my constituency and across the province, Mr. Speaker, in judging 
from the feedback that I have received in the few short days since the 
speech, the direction that was outlined in the budget is right on target. 
 
First of all, I want to commend the member from Weyburn, the Minister of 
Finance, for taking his views to the people; for seeking out their ideas 
and seeking out their concerns; for asking the people of Saskatchewan to 
help this government define our economic direction for the coming year and 
the coming years.  And Mr. Speaker, I want to commend him for being so 
sensitive to the concerns of Saskatchewan people who articulated to him, 
their ideas were articulated to him, in the pre-budget consultations that 
he took part of from across this province.  This budget is positive proof 
of just how important public consultation is and how well it works for 
government and for people in partnership. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan told the Minister of Finance that they want the 
government to eliminate waste, inefficiency in the government.  They said 
they wanted the government to protect the priority areas of health, 
education, and agriculture to put more money into these areas to protect 
our future.  We've done these things, Mr. Speaker, because they are vital 
to the well-being of our province. 
 
But the last area of concern that was stated in the pre-budget consultation 
presented a conundrum.  On one hand the people asked for increased 
spending.  And on the other hand they asked to reduce the deficit.  But 
they told the Minister of Finance in no uncertain terms that they did not 
want to have taxes increased. 
 



 

 

So they wanted him to increase spending and to reduce the deficit and to 
hold the line on taxes to pay for it.  Well, Mr. Speaker, they can't have 
it both ways.  And I know, in talking to the people of my constituency and 
those who have phoned me from other constituencies within the city of 
Regina, that the public understands that situation. 
 
I'm pleased with the decision of the Finance minister to enrich some 
programs which will help the farmers get their seed into the ground this 
spring, the increased budget which will enhance our children's education, 
and the increased budget that will help bolster our health care system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as minister responsible for seniors, I am pleased that there 
will be a further $1.3 million allocated to the Seniors' Secretariat. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- The secretariat provides an important service to our 
elder citizens, and I'm grateful that we have received this $1.3 million 
injection that will allow us to help our seniors live more independently 
and more fulfilling lives. 
 
I compliment the Minister of Finance, and the Minister of Health who spoke 
earlier this afternoon, on the additional 9.5 increase for home care, which 
is an area that is requiring more and more interest all the time, and 8.7 
per cent increase for long-term care or for nursing homes, those in the 
budget, as the Minister of Health mentioned a few minutes ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, by consulting with the people of Saskatchewan, the Minister of 
Finance has developed a budget that is responsive to the reality of 
Saskatchewan today. But this is not a new process.  This is a process which 
has always taken place because it works. 
 
If a government is to be the servant of the people, it must respond to the 
will of the people.  It must listen and it must respond.  This is the most 
fundamental element of the partnership between the community and of the 
government, beginning at our own doorstep in our own constituencies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the constituents of Regina Wascana have always been an 
important source of wisdom and advice for me as an MLA for this government.  
My constituency represents a cross-section of pretty much every segment of 
society in this province.  There are pockets of low income families, 
single-parent families, dual income families, families on welfare, and 
families in what would be considered high tax brackets.  We have business 
people, professional people, government workers, farmers, academics.  There 
are blue-collar workers, white-collar workers, clerical collar, and every 
collar in between. 
 
The views of the people of Regina Wascana are pretty representative, I 
believe, of the views of the people of Saskatchewan as a whole.  Mr. 
Speaker, my constituents tell me about the importance of protecting our 
communities and the need to help stabilize them and to allow them to grow.  
They tell me about the importance of small business sector and the need to 
create new jobs. 



 

 

 
They talk about diversifying our economy, of breaking up the welfare cycle, 
of empowering families to take charge of their own lives.  They believe in 
the future of education and the future of our children.  They believe you 
must feed our hungry children, but that neither governments nor schools 
should bear the burden alone.  They say we need a partnership, a 
partnership between communities, service organizations, churches, 
individuals, educators and government to tackle this problem. 
 
They tell me about the importance of parenting skills, of teaching our 
children about nutrition, budgeting, and about parenting.  They say we must 
start today if we are to have healthier families tomorrow.  And my faith in 
my constituents was confirmed when I was appointed Minister of the Family 
and began to travel the province to consult with community leaders across 
Saskatchewan and to ask them about the strength and weaknesses of the 
families where they live. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I visited over 20 communities, and what I hear is the same 
whether it is Regina, Churchbridge, Yorkton, La Ronge, Kindersley, 
Cumberland House, or all the towns in between that we have visited.  They 
say parental involvement is the key to the children's success in adulthood. 
 
They tell me that our seniors are important.  They're a  
 Dvaluable source that we should not leave out when talking about 
parenting, because they have the skills.  We should keep them as busy as 
they want to be, doing meaningful tasks. 
 
(1615) 
 
We talk about the importance of teaching parenting skills, of getting 
volunteers mobilized, the importance of communication. 
 
One lady told me in Humboldt one day, the moms and dads don't make time for 
their children.  They should be started when they are young right up to 
their teens; that this communication should be started when they are young 
right up to their teens, even if it means only eating meals together.  
People tend not to make time. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, you can accomplish a great deal with your children 
if you just go for a 15-minute walk every night or three or four times a 
week or even twice a week.  Take your children for a walk.  Walk around the 
block.  Well, Mr. Speaker, parents should understand that when they take 
the children for the walk this should be an opportunity for the children to 
have their say.  Because children are tired of being talked to.  They want 
to have an opportunity to speak.  They want their parents to listen to 
them.  And they can do that very comfortably by going for a 15-minute walk 
every night. 
 
Another fellow told me that families expect to have problems, but he 
identified communication as the biggest problem.  That opinion was echoed 
by some high school students that I met not too long ago. 
 
They said, you think our biggest problem is drugs and alcohol, right?  I 



 

 

said, well yes, I guess so; that's what some people have told me.  They 
said, you're wrong; our biggest problem is communications.  Our parents 
don't listen to us.  They didn't listen to us when we were four or five or 
when we were 10 or 12 or when we're 15 and 16.  Now that we're 18 they're 
ready to listen to us, and by this time it's too late.  That's what the 
young people have told me. 
 
And I've had dozens of young people come to the legislature and sit down 
and talked to them and asked them that question.  And almost universally, 
Mr. Speaker, the young people have told me the same thing: we want to 
communicate more often with our parents; we want them to listen to us.  
When we were little, they sent us to our rooms when there was decisions to 
be made, and now it's too late. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, all these issues which are surfacing in my community 
consultations are also being dealt by the communities themselves.  The 
Family Foundation has been sponsoring what we call forums about families.  
Mr. Speaker, we call these forums about families.  These are community 
family workshops which are planned, organized, and delivered by the 
communities themselves. 
 
The Saskatchewan Family Foundation assists community groups and 
organizations identify community needs and conduct these workshops.  We 
help them with funding, to a limited extent, we locate speakers and provide 
resource materials, and we offer help in setting up the seminar themselves. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, the community takes leadership for 
determining the focus, for the planning, for the organizing, and for 
staging the forum.  Local businesses and service organizations assist with 
funding as well as with manpower.  The workshops teach family living 
skills, topics may be covering parenting skills, marriage preparation, 
understanding child behaviour, drug awareness, caring for ageing parents, 
budgeting, farm stress, suicide counselling - 
_ whatever the community decides is of concern to them. 
 
By the end of this week, Mr. Speaker, 40 forums will have been held with 
about 4,000 people in attendance.  We are expecting about 150 to be held 
before the end of the calendar year, 1990, and, Mr. Speaker, we should have 
no trouble getting that because the applications just keep coming in from 
all over the province. 
 
These workshops have been tremendously successful.  The Saskatchewan 
Cerebral Palsy Association held a workshop in Regina on March 2 and 3 and 
wrote to tell us that it was, in their words, an unqualified success.  Mr. 
Speaker, I'd like to read from that letter that we received from the 
Saskatchewan cerebral palsy organization: 
 

 This was the first workshop our association has hosted in Regina.  . . . 
the workshop itself was an unqualified success.  All participants felt 
that they benefited from the experience and evaluation forms were very 
positive.  The support networks and contacts developed through 
participation in this workshop will strengthen these families in the 
future. 



 

 

 
Mr. Speaker, the first time they've had an opportunity to hold a workshop 
like this.  And as I've said, and this is the most important sentence in 
this letter: 
 

 The support networks and contacts developed through participation in this 
workshop will strengthen families throughout this province in the future. 

 
And that's signed by Heather Rasmussen, provincial co-ordinator of the 
Saskatchewan Cerebral Palsy Association. 
 
These sentiments were echoed in the evaluation received from the 
association of community living about their workshop for young people 14 to 
21 which is held in Saskatoon at the same time.  Their workshop attracted 
young people from across the province, many of whom have handicapped 
brothers and handicapped sisters.  This is what they said, Mr. Speaker, a 
letter to my Deputy Minister, Dan Perrins, Saskatchewan Family Foundation.  
It goes on and on and then it says: 
 

 Thank you for your generous support of this training event 
 

It was held on March 2 to 4 and it said this very successful forum 
attracted 27 young people from throughout the province. 
 
And this was the concluding paragraph, Mr. Speaker.  It was from Karin 
Melberg Schwier, youth committee support staff.  And it said: 
 

 The weekend provided an opportunity for siblings and other family members 
to talk about their feelings, for teens to learn about careers in the 
field of human services and for all to be reminded of the power of simple 
friendships. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that's from the Saskatchewan Association for Community Living.  
Mr. Speaker, these workshops are delivered by existing community service 
organizations.  More often than not, our family forums have a different 
focus.  We are encouraging the community as a whole to get involved and to 
stage a much broader interest festival-type forum.  And for the most part 
this is what has happened in places like Estevan, Weyburn, Yorkton, 
Humboldt, North Battleford, Cumberland House and a number of other 
communities throughout the province. 
 
Just let me show you, Mr. Speaker, this is the program from the Estevan 
Family Festival that was held on February 16 and 17 in the Estevan 
Comprehensive School.  I had the opportunity to be there, Mr. Speaker, and 
it was certainly encouraging to be there. 
 
Well it started on the Friday night, and I had an opportunity to be part of 
that.  And on the Saturday they covered such workshops as: how to improve 
communication with your partner; peer pressure -- you can beat it; 
parent-teen relationships -- technique for reducing conflict. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, for each of these workshops they bring in highly 
qualified people, many of them from this province.  They bring very few 



 

 

from outside the province because we have extremely high quality people 
throughout this province who can speak to these issues. 
 
And other workshops that they held were: there is help for the single 
parent; teen-aid; the challenge of a disability in the family; how to cope 
with stress, and on and on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That was held on Friday night and all day Saturday in Estevan, and it was 
by all accounts an unqualified success with something in the neighbourhood 
of 350 people there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Humboldt family forum will be held April 6 and 7, that's this 
coming weekend.  I'll have the opportunity to be there on Friday.  And 
their keynote address is: what are healthy and functional family patterns?  
They have many . . . many of these forums, Mr. Speaker, are for younger 
children, like children from nine to 12 years of age: free to be 
hassle-free.  And another one which should be most interesting, Mr. 
Speaker, is: raising parents.  And they have a session for teenagers 13 to 
18 years of age.  It's called:  chocolate chip cookies, part one, given by 
Colleen Wickenheiser, Bachelor of Education, with the Department of 
Education.  And that's a very interesting, I understand, and humorous 
presentation.  Also: teenagers' responsibilities in the '90s, by Corporal 
John Hodgson who is with the RCMP. 
 
And for the adults, Mr. Speaker, they're going to have: why we get married 
anyway; family growth through community involvement -- is there time for 
both; family self worth or building self worth in the family; faith, 
spirit, and religion in the family; parents -- should we talk to our 
teenagers about sex?  A good question; healthy life-styles -- make a change 
for the better.  And that'll be in Humboldt this coming weekend, Mr. 
Speaker, and I know it's going to be a big success. 
 
Well Gull Lake is staging a conference of communities where hundreds of 
people from surrounding communities will participate in a day-long event.  
That'll be coming up tomorrow, Mr. Speaker, and I'll have an opportunity to 
be there. 
 
Well, Friday night, Mr. Speaker, I was in North Battleford at their family 
festival, and that was, to say the very least, an unqualified success.  
They had 400 adults registered with presenters, people doing displays.  The 
total was close to 500 participants, and 150 children took part in the 
North Battleford family festival on Friday and Saturday. 
 
The thing about it, Mr. Speaker, is that the people that were there were 
people who really needed to be there, Mr. Speaker.  And that's really part 
of the key to the family forum.  There's not much sense in having a forum 
and having just the same people who always go to these things.  The 
important thing is to get to the people who need to be there.  And the way 
they do that, Mr. Speaker, as they told me in Estevan, is they involve 
these people in the organization of these family forums. 
 
People came from 75 miles around to attend the forum in North Battleford on 
Friday and Saturday.  Mr. Cardwell's session drew about 200 people.  He's 



 

 

an excellent speaker, a Saskatchewan man.  He talked about parenting 
teenagers; what you always knew about marriage anyway; pre-teens, letting 
them grow up, about letting them go.  There were about 60 in the session 
about building our child's self-esteem. 
 
And evaluation forms had a lot of positive comment from participants.  One 
woman said she took two days off work just to come to the forum.  She 
thought it was that important. 
 
And in the North Battleford News-Optimist, appearing in the newspaper which 
I understand was published yesterday -- I would have thought it'd be today 
but apparently it was published yesterday -- an article by Steve LaRose of 
the News-Optimist says: 
 

 Organizers of the first Battlefords' Festival of Families are calling it a 
success and hope to follow it up with a permanent method of delivering aid 
to families.  "We had more than 400 people registered," said Bernie 
Etchivery, one of the organizers. "There's been a great deal of interest 
expressed in aids to parenting." 

 
More often than not, Mr. Speaker, the forum organizing committee is a group 
of interested individuals who are plugged into the community but have never 
worked together before.  And ideally, after this event is over, the 
committee will stay together, will work together, and meet other needs 
within their community. 
 
The organizing committee has stayed together in North Battleford and is 
working on an interesting model for a larger community organization to 
serve the needs of families in North Battleford.  I think it may very well 
be a model for other areas in the province.  They're looking for ways to 
bring the various agencies and services within the community network 
together in a co-ordinated fashion, and are seeking help from the Family 
Foundation to do that. 
 
The educational focus of the family festival was the reason the committee 
got together originally, and they put on a first-rate series of workshops.  
But the long-term benefit of mobilizing the community organizations to work 
together will have a lasting impact on the people of The Battlefords. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people need to talk about their problems.  People want to talk 
about their problems.  They need to understand that others have problems 
too, many of the same problems that they have.  If these people can get 
together and talk about it and listen, it will help everyone. 
 
These forums bring communities together to examine and address the issues, 
to work together to build stronger families, stronger communities, and a 
stronger Saskatchewan for our children.  This government is concerned about 
our families and our children.  We are working to help them help themselves 
to build a future for our children. 
 
The Family Foundation is primarily concerned with all families, not just 
the 10 per cent of families that are in crisis at any one time.  However, 
we do recognize that some families are experiencing difficulty to make ends 



 

 

meet.  Some of our children are hungry, and the government has a 
responsibility to help break the cycle of hunger and poverty in 
Saskatchewan for future generations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, hunger is an issue which has been very high on my agenda since 
I became Minister of the Family in October.  I have spent a tremendous 
amount of time meeting with community groups and individuals who are 
directly involved with feeding the hungry and helping them cope with life. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I've been getting a fair amount of criticism from the member 
from Saskatoon Eastview who is the critic of the family, and who criticizes 
the family at every turn of events.  And the reason, Mr. Speaker, that I've 
been reading in newspapers about criticism from the member from Saskatoon 
Eastview, the critic of the family, and his criticism was, Mr. Speaker, 
that somehow or other we hadn't explained what our mandate is.  So, Mr. 
Speaker, I sent him a letter, and he's still saying, what is our mandate.  
I would suggest to the member from Saskatoon Eastview that perhaps some 
remedial reading classes might help in this regard. 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm going to take just a moment to read the letter that I 
wrote to the member from Saskatoon Eastview.  In case he lost the letter or 
didn't have an opportunity to read it, I'm going to read it now. 
 
It says: to the Member from Saskatoon Eastview.  It says, Dear Mr. so and 
so, Saskatoon Eastview: 
 

 You have made several press statements recently . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . 

 
I can use his name?  I'm reading a letter, Mr. Speaker, so I'm advised that 
I can use the name.  Okay. 
 

 Dear Mr. Pringle: (who is the member from Saskatoon Eastview, who is the 
critic of the family) You have made several press statements recently on 
the Family Foundation which indicate you may not be aware of the work this 
department is doing.  This letter is intended to provide information to 
you on the valuable work of the Foundation. 

 
 The purpose of the Foundation is to strengthen Saskatchewan . . . (family 

relationships and to manage their resources and) . . . We are doing so by: 
(first of all) 

 
  consulting with people from every part of the province to keep 

informed about issues of concern to families and communities 
 
  reviewing government policies and programs to determine their effect 

on families 
 
  speaking for family concerns and acting as a bridge between local 

problems and government programs 
 



 

 

  working together with government departments, community groups, 
agencies and individuals to develop programs and policies that work 
for families 

 
  promoting information and services to help people enhance their 

family living skills 
 
 Consistent throughout these activities is the goal of preparing and 

valuing men, women and children for their contribution as family members 
and caregivers. 

 
And the letter goes on to Mr. Pringle, the member from Saskatoon Eastview: 
 

 An example of the work of the Foundation is the Forums About Families an 
initiative . . . 

 
The Speaker: -- Order, Order.  The hon. member is quoting a letter, and of 
course quotes are allowed. However, I think he should be careful about 
reading entire long texts from letters because it defeats the purpose of 
the rule which allows quotations. 
 
The member from Moose Jaw North, perhaps he should pay attention to this as 
well so that he's not tempted to  
 Dbreak the same rule in the future. 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- Well thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I won't continue with the 
entire letter.  I think I made my point.  I would only urge the member from 
Saskatoon Eastview, the critic of the family, to read the letter that I 
sent him so he can no longer say that he doesn't understand what our 
mandate is.  Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to continue. 
 
In this time of great need and this time of limited economic resources, any 
response to the problem of hunger must be affordable and, Mr. Speaker, must 
be carefully targeted.  It makes . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The member is being interrupted.  It's 
difficult to hear him.  I'm sure hon. members want to hear his remarks, and 
therefore I ask your co-operation in allowing him to continue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- Mr. Speaker, it makes the most sense to focus our 
attention on the children and on their parents, both as an immediate 
response and when looking for long-term solutions. And this is the essence 
of what I'm hearing right across the province. 
 
Initially, Mr. Speaker, I wrote to each of the school boards in 
Saskatchewan to determine the nature of the problems of hungry children in 
their jurisdiction.  Mr. Speaker, of the 150 letters that our department 
wrote, only about 25 were answered -- only about 25. 
 
With the exception of Regina, Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, Prince Albert and North 
Battleford, virtually all the school divisions told me that hunger was not 
a major concern in their area.  Even in Regina and Saskatoon, hunger 
largely exists only in pockets in the inner city areas.  Moose Jaw tells me 



 

 

their problem is moderate.  And for Prince Albert and North Battleford the 
issue of hunger takes second place to their problems with street kids and 
gangs. 
 
From the smaller communities, several of the letters that I received spoke 
of isolated incidents of hunger.  Some identified a family here and there.  
But, Mr. Speaker, most said that hunger was not a real problem.  And so I 
read to you, Mr. Speaker, a letter from the Thunder Creek School Division 
from Jim Armstrong, chairman.  He said: 
 

 Children experiencing hunger has not been identified as a problem in our 
school division.  This is not to say, however, that individual isolated 
cases may appear from time to time.  We have found that in such instances 
Social Services has adequately provided for the needs of students and 
families. 

 
I want to repeat that, Mr. Speaker.  He said: 
 

 Children experiencing hunger has not been identified as a problem in our 
school division. 

 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I just want to remind the hon. members that 
you will have your opportunity to speak.  I think that the tradition and 
the courtesies of the House dictate that you should give the Minister of 
the Family now the opportunity to speak.  And you will have the opportunity 
after him. 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm going to go back to this letter from 
the Thunder Creek School Division, one of only 25 letters that we received 
who indicated that there was any kind of a problem in rural areas. 
 
I did say we wrote 150 letters, Mr. Speaker.  This is one of the ones we 
received -- from Thunder Creek School Division from Jim Armstrong.  He 
said: 
 

 Children experiencing hunger has not been identified as a problem in our 
school division.  This is not to say, however, that individual isolated 
cases may appear from time to time.  We have found that in such instances  
Social Services has adequately provided for the needs of students and for 
families. 

 
That's from Thunder Creek division, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some school divisions identified the nutritional value of food, and not the 
amount of food, as the problem.  For instance, from the Shamrock School 
Division, Mr. Speaker, a letter from Austin Gerein.  He says: 
 

 In response to your letter (etc., etc., etc.) . . . we do not have any 
hungry children in our schools. 

 
 However, he does contend that we do have a number of students who are 

malnourished because of improper or poorly balanced diets. 
 



 

 

The problem is, Mr. Speaker, as he says, is junk food.  The problem, they 
say, is junk food in the Shamrock School Division.  That letter from Austin 
Gerein. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the letters were much like that.  The Swift Current 
School Division said, and I shall quote from them as well.  This is a 
letter from J.J. Dalton, Jim Dalton, the superintendent of education in the 
Swift Current School Division No. 94.  He says: 
 

 There does not appear to be a significant hunger problem for the school 
children attending the Swift Current School Division No. 94 or the 
Comprehensive High School. 

 
 The kinds of foods . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker, here we go again with the same comment as we heard in the last 
letter.  It said: 
 

 The kinds of foods some students eat could benefit from nutritional 
inservice.  Many students eat sufficiently in quantity, but lack the 
quality of the essential food groups.  Awareness sessions might help to 
overcome this problem. 

 
And that's from J.J. Dalton, superintendent of education. 
 
Still other schools identify parenting skills as a problem.  The Melville 
school board, for instance, Melville separate school board, said -- this is 
from St. Henry's Roman Catholic Separate School Division in Melville, Mr. 
Speaker, from A.A. Wihlidal.  It says: 
 

 . . . we do not have children who are experiencing hunger because of lack 
of food.  In the case of 2 or 3 families, we do observe children eating a 
poorly balanced diet at the noon meal.  This situation seems to exist 
because of the lack of adequate parenting skills. 

 
And that's from Melville, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And there's another one, Mr. Speaker.  Let me read another one.  This one, 
Mr. . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I would like to read to the hon. member rule 
328 which refers to quotations, and it reads as follows.  And I will read 
the whole rule to you as a matter of fact: 
 

 A Member may read extracts from documents, books or other printed 
publications as part of his speech, provided in so doing he does not 
infringe on any point of order.  A speech should not, however, consist 
only of a single, long quotation, or a series of quotations, joined 
together with a few original sentences. 

 
I acknowledge that the initial part of your speech certainly wasn't that.  
But the last several minutes, quite a few minutes, you have been quoting 
one letter after another, and I believe that that is improper.  Quotations 



 

 

are allowed, but they should be spread out and not joined together as to 
form a major part of your speech. 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- So, Mr. Speaker, I understand the reading to be then 
that even if I read a line or two from the couple of letters I have left 
that that would be improper, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: -- The rule indicates that if you keep quoting from documents, 
and simply join them together with one sentence, or that sort of thing, 
that that is against the rules of the House.  Speeches should not be 
quotations that are joined together with one or two original sentences. 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- All right, Mr. Speaker, I understand.  Very quickly, 
then, from the Davidson high school: 
 

 Weekly, we receive concerns from individuals and schools which indicate a 
tremendous need . . . for assistance with learning about parenting 
practices. 

 
So parenting practices, Mr. Speaker, parenting skills, seems to be a common 
theme that runs from many of these schools.  So we're talking about 
nutrition.  We heard the same thing from . . . the Paynton school division 
district conducted a survey, in which they said that programs such as 
budgeting, economical buying, Mr. Speaker, basic meal preparation, 
nutritional needs, beginning at the grade 4 level at least, Mr. Speaker.  
What the Paynton school division is telling us, Mr. Speaker, is that we 
should be teaching these nutritional values, and teaching parenting skills 
to these youngsters at a very early age. 
 
In all the answers I received, Mr. Speaker, each school division expressed 
concern and the common theme, Mr. Speaker, was clear.  Responsibility for 
feeding hungry children should not rest in the laps of the schools.  
Wherever I went, all through this province, they all said the same thing.  
It must be a shared responsibility between the family, the community, the 
municipal and provincial governments, and the schools -- in partnership, 
Mr. Speaker.  And any solutions must include an educational component. 
 
I spent the last many weeks meeting with the mayors and school boards and 
community groups in cities across the province, as well as individuals 
involved directly in feeding programs.  I discovered that each jurisdiction 
has developed a different response to address the problem in their 
community, and the needs are very different, Mr. Speaker, from community to 
community. 
 
For example, in Prince Albert and North Battleford, there is the parallel 
problem of street kids -- young people who don't go to school, or hang out 
on the streets after hours, who have organized themselves into gangs.  For 
these kids, hunger is an issue, but only part of a larger issue. 
 
And in schools, hunger is seen as a family issue, a community issue which 
involves education, training, parenting skills, as well as a co-ordinated 
feeding program. 
 



 

 

Mr. Speaker, the school boards and the mayors agree that a co-ordinated 
effort is needed to address both the problem of hunger in schools and the 
kids on the street.  This is a community concern that involves everyone -- 
community groups, volunteers, churches, and services organizations as well. 
 
The mayor of Prince Albert told me that he felt that it was not realistic 
to expect government to carry the ball.  In his words, and I quote: 
 

 Governments can assist, but can't solve the problems.  The community has 
to take hold and pull itself out. 

 
The needs are different from city to city, and the recommendations that 
were given to me by mayors, as to the school boards, and the community 
organizations I had met with, were unique in their community. 
 
In Saskatoon there is a child hunger and education program, the CHEP 
program, where a co-ordinator who is a nutritionist heads up a program 
which is tailored to each individual school community.  The CHEP program is 
a partnership between the city of Saskatoon, the school boards, the private 
sector, churches and service organizations, as well as concerned 
individuals. 
 
Beyond feeding hungry children, its focus is on teaching them about what 
they're eating and what is good for them, and it works to get parents 
involved as both as volunteers and through educational programming.  It's a 
good model, Mr. Speaker. It's a good model, Mr. Speaker, and it certainly 
works well for Saskatoon.  It would be nice, actually . . . it would be 
very nice, quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, if we could introduce this CHEP 
program in all the communities in Saskatchewan, but I'm not sure it would 
work in all the communities.  Mr. Speaker, I'm not sure that all the 
communities want that particular program; they all have their specific 
needs. 
 
In Regina, hungry children are being capably served by a number of 
different programs in different locations around the city, for instance, 
Kitchener School.  There's an excellent program in Kitchener high school . 
. . or rather, public school in Regina.  Theresa Stevenson's Chili for 
Children feeds lunch three times a week.  The Circle Project reaches both 
hungry children, younger children and high school age.  Food for Learning 
has an important educational component, and there are others.  They're all 
telling me that they still have a need for more support. 
 
(1645) 
 
All these community organizations have stepped in to fill the need.  But it 
is often overlooked that children are being fed by the provincial 
government as well.  Mr. Speaker, since 1972, the Government of 
Saskatchewan has been subsidizing feeding programs for the community 
schools' program through the Department of Social Services, and through the 
Department of Health. 
 
In Regina alone, Mr. Speaker, government funding accounts for approximately 
1,600 meals a day.  In other words, Mr. Speaker, 1,600 meals a day, the 



 

 

children in this city, in Regina, are being directly funded by government 
agencies. 
 
An interesting point should also be made here, Mr. Speaker.  When it comes 
to feeding the hungry in Saskatchewan, we all recognize the importance of 
partnership between governments, municipalities, churches, private sector, 
community and service organizations, individuals, and especially families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to say at this point, that I mentioned that 1,600 
families . . . or 1,600 meals are being paid directly by the government now 
in the city of Regina; there are about 2,000 children who are fed every day 
in this city, a great many of them through the community schools' program. 
 
So if the government is feeding 1,600, Mr. Speaker, then another 400 are 
being fed by the service groups and by community organizations.  I want to 
commend these organizations, Mr. Speaker, because what they are doing . . . 
what they have been doing for a long time, as I say back to 1972 people 
have been doing this, all of a sudden it's become a big issue in this city, 
Mr. Speaker.  But, Mr. Speaker, these things have been going on for a great 
many years and these people, these same kind of people, have been feeding 
these children all this time without a lot of publicity, without a lot of 
hearings, without a lot of public exposure, these programs have been going 
on by government funding as well as the community workers. 
 
And, I think, these people who dedicate themselves and many of their free 
hours that they do have to feeding these children, educating these 
children, feeding them with an educational component, Mr. Speaker, deserve 
a great deal of credit from the people of this city, because they're 
providing a service that hasn't been provided for a long time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- I think, Mr. Speaker, we should almost also be looking 
to the federal government to share the partnership and share some of the 
costs.  Right now that is not happening to the degree that it should be.  
They do have some help, Mr. Speaker, but not to the degree that it should 
be. 
 
But feeding children is only an immediate response to a program that 
requires long-term solutions.  We have to develop long-term strategies to 
break the cycle.  And that strategy has to revolve around helping families 
help themselves as far as possible.  It's all up to us, especially 
governments, to open the door to empower families to take care, to take 
hold of their own lives. 
 
The recent increase in the minimum wage to $4.75 an hour at the first of 
the year and again to $5 at the first of July will help to some extent.  
And I've often been told, and I agree, that all the programs in our social 
safety net should be reviewed.  What worked 10 years ago, Mr. Speaker, 
might not work that well today.  Times are changing and we must be 
responding to these changes.  Mr. Speaker, as the Minister of the Family, 
it is my job to do that, in co-operation with the other ministers and the 
other members of this government. 



 

 

 
But if families are to take charge of their own lives, then education is 
the key.  This has been the universal theme in all of our discussions -- 
involving parents in the schools and helping them encourage their children 
to get the best education that they can; involving parents in the feeding 
programs and giving them the benefit of nutrition and food preparation 
education; involving children in the preparation of their own lunches, just 
as they do in the boys and girls club in North Battleford. 
 
Bill Wood, the principal of Kitchener School here in Regina said to me when 
I was out there the other day, he said, if I could just get parents more 
involved, it would be like icing on the cake.  I'll be spending more time 
with Mr. Wood out at Kitchener School and the people that work with him out 
there, because I think we're going to be able to do some business together 
in terms of helping him and his program. 
 
Harvey Welch at Pleasant Hill School in Saskatoon is doing everything he 
can to get parents involved in his school program and get them involved in 
preparing food for the children.  He tells me that parental involvement is 
the key to the children's success in adulthood. 
 
What he tells me, Mr. Speaker, is that many of the children who are coming 
to the school and need to be fed are coming from homes where education is 
not a priority to any extent.  The parents are not encouraging the children 
to go to school.  As a consequence, often they don't go to school. 
 
And so his answer to that is -- that is, tying education in with the hunger 
problem, Mr. Speaker -- is to involve the parents in some kind of a 
program.  And I think Harvey Welch of Pleasant Hill School in Saskatoon has 
some of the most innovative programs that are now currently existing in 
this province. 
 
And recently several teams of teachers from Saskatoon, three groups of 
three actually, went to Winnipeg, went to Calgary, and went to Edmonton to 
see what kind of programs they're doing there with the inner city hunger 
problems that they have in these cities as well as they have here.  And 
Harvey tells me that some of the programs at . . . the program they have in 
Winnipeg may be one of the most innovative programs that he's seen in a 
long time.  It may actually, it may work very well in this city and 
certainly in his city.  So we'll have an opportunity to talk to Harvey 
about that. 
 
He has been very successful in getting parents into the schools along with 
the children.  And what he does, he gets them into the school, gets the 
parents out at the school.  He puts them in one class-room where they'd 
have some, perhaps some literacy education, some teaching, some schooling 
of some respect anyway, education of some kind, and while the children are 
also learning. 
 
He feels that if you can get the parents involved and get them interested 
in education, get them enthusiastic about learning, that they then will 
make that a higher priority for their children. 
 



 

 

And surely, Mr. Speaker, if the parents themselves see the key out of this 
in the long term is education, and then therefore influence their children 
to become more educated, that may be and probably is the one way that we 
can break this cycle, this welfare, this hunger cycle that seems to go on 
year after year after year, and has been going on for a long time in this 
province, and certainly well back into the '70s -- probably before that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I was a boy growing up and going to school in this city, 
they were feeding children then as well.  The same kinds of groups were 
feeding children then.  This is not a new problem, Mr. Speaker.  We have to 
break it.  The way to break it, the way to break the cycle, Mr. Speaker, is 
to use education as the key. 
 
Harvey said he'd like nothing more than to have a family centre set up in 
his school, Mr. Speaker, a family centre set up in his school.  Let me 
explain to you what a family centre is.  It's the initiative of Social 
Services and of Education that the government announced in November.  It 
puts a social worker in the school to bring families into the school 
setting and give support and guidance to the parents as a group. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, a year ago a family centre was set up in Haultain School 
here in Regina.  This is a tremendous story, Mr. Speaker, because what they 
did was Social Services and Education got together and they put one worker 
into Haultain School, a young lady named Jamie Weintz who had been a social 
worker for a great many years and obviously a dedicated social worker. 
 
She went into this school, and in the basement of the school she found a 
room that was full of all sorts of stuff, took it all out, and fixed up 
this room in a nice . . . you know, you put some curtains on the windows 
and fixed it up, put some paintings up, and made it a very comfortable 
place to be -- put in a chesterfield and a couple of chairs and a table or 
so. 
 
Her job was really to respond to the teachers, so when the teachers 
identified a child in need or a child that'd been neglected, she would then 
go to the home. 
 
Let me give you one example of what she did.  A child was identified as 
being a child being neglected.  So she went to the house of where this 
child came from.  It turns out that the woman, the mother of this child, 
slept till noon.  Well she slept till noon because she had no other reason 
to get out of bed. I mean, she didn't have any place to go.  She didn't . . 
. you know, she had nothing to do so she slept till noon, and it just kind 
of got into that pattern over a long period of time. 
 
So Jamie Weintz said to this lady, why don't you come on over to the school 
and we'll talk about it.  Well she was a little hesitant to come but after 
a few days she kind of wandered in, and she didn't look that great.  Her 
hair wasn't washed and she was looking, you know, a little messy. And 
obviously she could look a little better if she tried. 
 
But after a few days, she came back again, and within a week or so she was 
coming rather quite regularly.  Every time she came she looked better.  Her 



 

 

hair was washed, she had her make-up on, she cleaned herself up, and 
because, Mr. Speaker, because she started to feel better about herself. 
 
And the reason she started feeling better about herself was very simple.  
Because when she came over to talk to Jamie Weintz, Jamie Weintz sat and 
listened to her.  She listened to her talk about her problems. And over the 
weeks, Mr. Speaker, within three weeks, the woman had improved and felt so 
good about herself, she was virtually running the place.  She was answering 
the phone and meeting people at the door and bringing people in.  Within 
six months that woman had a full-time job and today is working full time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- Now, Mr. Speaker, that didn't cost anybody any money.  
I mean, that wasn't throwing money into the pot.  It was a simple matter of 
one person sitting down and listening to another person and helping them 
listen to their problems and getting them to feel better about themselves, 
Mr. Speaker.  One on one. 
 
Now the other thing that happened, Mr. Speaker, in that community was . . . 
This woman wasn't the only one in the community; there are a number of 
other people in the community who weren't feeling very good about 
themselves as well.  So as a consequence, Mr. Speaker, women would come 
over to Jamie Weintz's little room in the basement of Haultain School.  
They'd sit around and they'd have a little group meeting and they'd bring 
their muffins or their doughnuts, whatever it was. 
 
And week after week after week, women started coming in.  They started 
sharing their problems and discussing -- this worked for me; maybe it'll 
work for you.  An excellent program, Mr. Speaker.  One might even say that 
you could probably even identify that in a sense with something like an AA 
(Alcoholics Anonymous) program or an AlAnon meeting.  And there's no 
question, Mr. Speaker, that in the history of this world, there is not a 
social program as successful as AA.  It doesn't cost anybody any money.  
It's one on one or a group of people sharing their experiences and talking. 
And it works. 
 
So that's what happened at Haultain School.  As a result of that experience 
with this young lady, Jamie Weintz, a social worker at Haultain School, we 
then went to -- the Minister of Social Services, the Minister of Education, 
and myself -- went to the school boards in Saskatoon and Regina and said 
hey, how about expanding this program?  In Regina a public school was 
already; Haultain School is a public school.  Regina Catholic School Board 
said yes, great idea; we'll do it as well.  Saskatoon said, great idea; we 
want the program as well. 
 
So right now, Mr. Speaker, there are three individuals working in schools 
in Saskatoon in what we call a family centre, and there are two in Regina.  
They want them in Prince Albert.  They want them in Moose Jaw.  They want 
them in North Battleford.  Mr. Speaker, this is, I think, a simple idea, 
doesn't cost anybody any money, and boy, does it ever work well.  And many 
of the schools that I've talked to want it, Mr. Speaker. 
 



 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, that in a sense is a response to the hunger issue.  That 
child is no longer hungry, that was coming to school neglected, because 
that woman now gets out of bed in the morning to go to work, prepares food 
for the child, and sends him to school with a full stomach.  That's a part 
of an answer to the hunger issue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I've been actively seeking out opinions and recommendations 
about the issue of hunger right across Saskatchewan and have taken the 
concrete evidence that I've gathered back to cabinet.  They share the 
concern, Mr. Speaker, and they share the desire to build the kind of 
community partnership that will not only empower families, but will build 
stronger and more stable communities as well. 
 
And they are responded by approving funds for addressing the serious 
problem in the short term -- funds, Mr. Speaker, in the amount of $740,000 
that were announced in the budget.  It is a substantial amount of money, 
Mr. Speaker, but not a lot of money; $740,000 is enough to help the 
communities address their needs.  It is enough to give the community groups 
a stimulus that they need to carry on their work, but also to look for 
creative and innovative ideas that will help to lead to long-term solutions 
in the problems of hunger among our children. 
 
Rather than buying 150,000 jars of peanut butter, as the member opposite 
would recommend, this money must be put toward programming and 
strengthening communities and families.  It must be used to get to the root 
of the problem.  It must be used to support the many organizations and 
individuals who are already doing an excellent job of feeding our hungry 
children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the plan for disbursing the money must come from these 
organizations themselves.  These funds must be used to support communities 
as they see fit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for too long governments in this province have been telling 
people what they had to do.  And the people don't want that, Mr. Speaker.  
They want to make some of the decisions themselves.  After all these years 
of socialism in this province, Mr. Speaker, the people have said, enough of 
that.  We want to have a say in what goes on in this government.  We want 
to have a say in how you distribute the money, how you introduce your 
programs, Mr. Speaker.  No more from above, Mr. Speaker, like which is the 
socialist doctrine; but from above, which is the democratic way of doing 
things, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This government commitment is part of the partnership between communities, 
individuals, and the government.  And the creative solutions must grow out 
of that partnership. 
 
My next step is to continue working with the many people that we have been 
consulting with.  They must come back to me with substantial 
recommendations as to what they believe should be done -- recommendations 
generated by people who are directly involved in feeding hungry children; 
recommendations that are tailored to the needs of their own community.  
Then, Mr. Speaker, based on those grass roots recommendations, decisions 



 

 

will be made about how the $740,000 should be allocated. 
 
The hunger issue is an important part of my responsibility as Minister of 
the Family, and I am committed to making something happen.  But for the 
short term and the long term, as I said, Mr. Speaker, hunger is a real 
family issue.  As Minister of the Family, if I am to be effective in 
building stronger families in Saskatchewan, then the issue of child hunger 
must be seriously addressed. 
 
The Speaker: -- It being 5 o'clock, the House stands recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


