





























































Hansard: April 03, 1990


 

 

April 3/90 
EVENING SITTING 

 
SPECIAL ORDER 

 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 
MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth that the Assembly resolve itself into the Committee of 
Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Petersen: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  In my opening remarks 
before supper, I dealt with an overview of some of the things that we've 
done, and I'd just like to highlight that for some of the members opposite 
and for some of the people who are viewing at home. 
 
We talked about the budget and how we've put our dollars into priority 
areas.  In education we had a 5.6 per cent increase in funding, a total of 
$888 million being spent.  Mr. Speaker, we've increased our student aid.  
Increases to universities, technical institutes, school boards, regional 
colleges are all part and parcel of that budget. 
 
In the area of health, Mr. Speaker, in health care, we've almost had an 
almost 10 per cent increase in the spending, Mr. Speaker.  That's an 
increase of $136 million.  The health budget is at $1.5 billion, $1,500 for 
every man, woman, and child in the province of Saskatchewan -- $4.1 million 
a day, $172,000 an hour -- however you want to put it, it's a lot of money, 
and a lot more than has ever been spent in health care before. 
 
The budget includes increases for home care, nursing homes, and hospitals.  
Mr. Speaker, we care about the people that made this province -- our 
seniors.  We care about families.  We've seen increased funding for the 
families, Mr. Speaker. 
 
At the same time, we've attempted to use a certain amount of fiscal 
responsibility.  There were no tax increases in this budget, no tax 
increases, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  We've talked to the people; we've consulted 
with them.  The Minister of Finance travelled the province, met with 
people, and they said, we can't take any more tax increases.  Don't do it; 
we don't need any more tax increases.  And we've done that, Mr. Speaker.  
We've achieved that.  We have been spending in priority areas, Mr. Speaker.  
We have increased spending, as I said, in health, education, and maintained 
that spending, increased it with no tax increases. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we've also got to look at some of the things that are a 
priority in this province as far as the overall infrastructure is 
concerned, and transportation is one of those areas.  We've entered into 
agreements with the federal government on a joint provincial and federal 
national highway policy. 
 



 

 

The national highways should be a responsibility of all levels of 
government.  In the United States the interstate system is paid for 90 per 
cent by the federal government and 10 per cent by the state that it travels 
through.  That doesn't happen in Canada.  Here the funding in most cases is 
exactly the opposite, and we have to work towards achieving a more 
equitable situation as far as funding for our national highway system is 
concerned. 
 
And we're working very hard on that with the federal government.  And we've 
got to hold their feet to the fire, Mr. Speaker, because they have been 
guilty of off-loading many of their responsibilities onto the provinces.  
And that's resulted, Mr. Speaker, in situations where this year we see a 
decrease in our transfer payments to the province of Saskatchewan.  We see 
them moving in other areas as well, and we've got to maintain solidarity.  
We've got to maintain the commitment by this province and other provinces 
that enter into an agreement with us to hold the federal government's feet 
to the fire and make them live up to their responsibilities. 
 
In the 1990-91 Highways budget, Mr. Speaker, we see about $233 million for 
highways and transportation.  We're going to improve more than 1,000 
kilometres of highways.  We've got many projects.  We've got 58 surfacing 
projects coming up, 30 grading projects coming up, 24 bridge projects. 
 
And a few of the highlights, a few of the highlights in this year's array, 
Mr. Speaker, are the continued upgrading of Highway 11.  We've got six 
surfacing projects on Highway 1; we've got five projects on the Yellowhead; 
reconstructing Highway 46 from west of Pilot Butte to Balgonie; 
reconstructing a section of Highway 302 west of P.A.  I'm going to be 
tabling the entire list, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at the end of my remarks, so I 
won't dwell on it any further. 
 
The major emphasis is going to be on rehabilitation.  Rehab will exceed $42 
million, Mr. Speaker.  We're going to improve 400 kilometres of paved 
highways.  Now, Mr. Speaker, the maintenance budget increased by $2 million 
to over 92 million this year.  It provides a safe and efficient highway 
system, a very safe and efficient highway system, and safety is number one 
with us, Mr. Speaker.  All of the employees in the Department of Highways 
have safety as their number one priority. 
 
We've got the largest road system in Canada, over 25,000 kilometres, Mr. 
Speaker, and we've got to make sure that we keep those roads in a very, 
very safe condition.  And just to talk to you about safety, we've had the 
fewest fatalities since 1961 in the past year.  Unfortunately 192 people 
lost their lives in 1989.  It's below the average, but we've still got to 
do better, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Seat belt usages are at an all-time high of 88 per cent in the province of 
Saskatchewan; that's the highest in North America.  We've seen headlight 
use during daylight hours.  We've reduced the number of drinking drivers on 
the road -- reduced the number of drinking drivers.  We're seeing a lot 
more people acting responsibly in the use of alcohol, but it's still a 
major factor. 
 



 

 

In 1989, 7 per cent of all accidents were alcohol related, and 45 per cent 
of all fatal accidents had alcohol involved.  We have got to continue our 
safety programs.  We've got to continue our promotional programs as far as 
the use and abuse of alcohol and driving is concerned. 
 
The department maintains as safe a system as it possibly can, but we 
require the co-operation of every citizen of Saskatchewan in order to make 
it even more safe.  Our mission statement, Mr. Speaker, is very simple, 
very very simple.  It's working together for excellence in transportation 
-- very simple.  We've got to set some goals and we've got to work towards 
that.  We want to be a leading government department in the delivery of 
services and programs.  We want to maximize transportation's contribution 
to the social and economic development of the province.  Mr. Speaker, that 
means taking a look at our expertise and our innovation in transportation 
areas, using what we've got. 
 
In the department we have a wealth of information and a wealth of knowledge 
and experience.  The deputy minister, Mr. Jack Sutherland, started working 
in the Department of Highways in 1953.  Mr. Speaker, that was the year that 
I was born.  Needless to say, when Mr. Sutherland suggests something 
happen, I tend to give him some credibility. 
 
We've got a group of people in the department, Mr. Speaker, that I am very 
proud of.  They've worked very hard this winter to make certain that our 
highway's as safe as possible.  They're out there at 4 o'clock in the 
morning putting sand and salt on the roads trying to make sure that people 
have as safe a system as possible, trying to make sure that no one is 
inconvenienced needlessly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they do that because they have a sense of pride in their job.  
They're proud of what they do.  They're proud of the fact that they can 
maintain the highway system and as good a system . . . situation as they 
can.  They're proud of the fact that many of them are 20- and 25- and 
30-year employees, Mr. Speaker.  They're proud of the fact that their 
department has a history of working for the public of Saskatchewan.  Mr. 
Speaker, I'd like to see even more of that.  I'd like to see the department 
work even closer with communities, with rural municipalities, with the 
public at large to make that system even more efficient. 
 
We've looked at a number of areas in my opening remarks as far as 
diversification and innovation was concerned, Mr. Speaker.  And I've dealt 
with the road-railer; I've dealt with Southern Rails.  Members opposite 
perhaps didn't agree or didn't care to listen to what I was talking about, 
but indeed it is an important innovation. 
 
We've got other types of innovations.  We've got a type of paint called 
Technos 1000 -- it's a two-part paint that is sprayed on and will last up 
to five times as long as the paint that's used now for striping on the 
highways, Mr. Speaker.  That will cut our costs. 
 
We've looked at weight and motion technology, and for members opposite, 
that means that we now have the technology whereby we do not have to pull a 
machine over, stop it, and move a little bar across a little weigh scale 



 

 

and take a look at them and see what they're doing, see how much they 
weigh.  Weight and motion technology is so advanced that it can tell you 
the weight of a vehicle as it's travelling down the highway.  And that's an 
important part when we're looking at control and we're looking at 
regulation; when we're trying to consider all the factors that go into the 
life and life expectancy of highways, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We're looking at other innovations, as well -- container ports, container 
ports.  Containerization is becoming a major method of moving many of the 
products that we are now manufacturing and processing in the province of 
Saskatchewan.  Other provinces have had access to containerization for a 
number of years.  And for members opposite, containerization is a very, 
very simple method whereby the product is processed, bagged, packaged, 
whatever, put into containers that are sealed in the province of 
Saskatchewan and shipped as a unit -- a complete unit -- lifted on to and 
off of our transportation systems by means of a crane loaded on to ships 
and sent directly overseas where the container is then opened and the 
product is removed and distributed according to their needs.  
Containerization allows us the ability to process right here in the 
province, to package it right here in the province instead of sending bulk 
shipments out to British Columbia for processing, packaging and loading 
there, or bulk shipments across the ocean to other countries for them to 
enjoy the benefits of the jobs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we've also had some other firsts.  We've had a study to 
enhance the transportation and distribution capabilities in the province.  
Mr. Speaker, that will enhance our economic development in the province.  
And we all recognize that transportation and new methods of transportation 
will be key in the diversification of the province of Saskatchewan.  We 
have to look at different methods of moving our product than what we're 
used to, and some of them are fairly innovative.  And if any of the members 
opposite have any ideas at all in this area, or any ideas period, I'd 
invite them to come and share them with me. 
 
We've also had, Mr. Speaker, for the first time a very, very prestigious 
group.  The Canadian Industrial Transportation League met in Saskatoon for 
their 74th annual meeting.  And that's the first time -- first time -- that 
that group ever met in Saskatchewan, and that includes all of Canada's 
major shippers, and indeed some from the United States as well.  All of the 
major players in the transportation area of companies that are situated all 
across Canada met in Saskatoon for their convention, for their show.  All 
of those people, Mr. Speaker, were surprised at what they found in 
Saskatchewan.  They said, we didn't know that you had this type of 
facility; we didn't know that these things were available; we didn't 
understand the type of infrastructure that you have.  Nobody's told us 
about you before.  They were quite amazed at what they found.  I'm sure 
that some of them will be setting up offices here in Saskatchewan and 
starting to look at Saskatchewan as a distribution centre, because we are 
geographically located very, very favourably for all the markets in the 
central United States.  We've got access all directions, Mr. Speaker.  
We're centralized.  We are right in the middle.  We can move a product 
anywhere in the continent from Saskatchewan, so why shouldn't we be a 
distribution centre?  Why shouldn't we be? 



 

 

 
But members opposite perhaps will disagree with that and say that we 
shouldn't do it, but I think we should.  I think we should provide more 
jobs for the people in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, some of those are examples of the spirit of Saskatchewan 
and how the people are working here in the province and many of the 
innovations and new ideas that are coming from the people in Saskatchewan 
and from the department as well.  And I say department as well because I'm 
very proud of the department.  The department has worked extremely hard on 
new innovation and technology, as I've said -- the road-railer and other 
innovations like that. 
 
(1915) 
 
But on the smaller scale at the local shops, Mr. Speaker, I toured every 
district office, both the administrative and engineering head offices and 
the mechanical shops around the province, and I met as many people as I 
could.  Some of those shops manufacture their own equipment for use on the 
highways.  Not the major equipment -- they don't build caterpillars or 
graders or trucks there -- but the smaller equipment, the specialized 
equipment that we need in Saskatchewan that's used exclusively for highway 
work.  Many of those innovations developed in the local shops, like in 
Yorkton and Prince Albert and Saskatoon, Regina, North Battleford, Swift 
Current, are making the job of the people working in Highways much, much 
easier and much safer.  A very simple piece of technology that's going to 
be tried out this year -- everyone's known the consternation of driving 
down the highway when we've got a sweeper in operation, and there's dust 
blowing up from the sweeper as they're sweeping off some of the sand-sealed 
gravel or perhaps some of the winter accumulation of sand, and it's dusty 
and people complain about that.  Or you see problems with that as far as 
construction is concerned, and people are concerned about it.  And it's a 
little bit hard on them because they enter a dust area and they're a little 
bit worried about what might be through the dust cloud. 
 
We're trying to improve that safety.  We've already got signing.  We've 
already got controls.  We already advised people to slow down, take it 
easy, people are working here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a very piece of simple technology is to add a spray container 
ahead of the sweeper.  We've tried it with water trucks in the past going 
ahead, but it got a little bit mucky.  Now we're going to calibrate the 
amount of water needed right as the sweeper is travelling, just to keep the 
dust down, still remove the gravel and debris from the road and whatever's 
accumulated over the winter, but keep the dust down.  It makes so much 
common sense, Mr. Speaker.  A very simple thing, a very simple thing, but 
it will make things safer.  It will help to alleviate the concerns that the 
public have and will make things safer for the highway workers. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I could go on for quite some time this evening, 
extolling the virtues of the people in the department and talking about 
this government and its commitment to the province of Saskatchewan, and 
also I could go back to setting the historical record straight as far as 



 

 

members opposite when they were government as compared to ourselves. 
 
But I'll just suffice it to say, Mr. Speaker, that I think the budget that 
we have developed, that the Minister of Finance has developed, is a very 
fine one, and at this time, Mr. Speaker, I would like to table for you the 
1990-91 construction project array.  Mr. Speaker, with that I will just 
say, thank you very much.  I'll turn it over to another member. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it was interesting as I 
was listening to the Minister of Highways, not once did I hear the word VIA 
ever come out of his lips.  In an hour and a quarter -- that long, an hour 
and a quarter -- in that time, while 12 people were leaving Saskatchewan, 
if you take the average of the number of people that left in the past year, 
while 12 people were leaving Saskatchewan, I can assure the member opposite 
they were not leaving Saskatchewan on a VIA train. 
 
You know the difference, Mr. Minister, between people fleeing from East 
Germany and people fleeing from Saskatchewan, from the Tory oppression in 
Saskatchewan?  They've got a passenger train; that's the difference.  They 
can still take the train.  It's interesting that you would talk not a word 
about passenger rail service while it's been eliminated by your cousins, 
the Conservative Party . . . the Conservative government in Ottawa.  And 
nary a peep from government members here over that disappearing. 
 
You know earlier, Mr. Speaker, we have heard government members talking 
with great glee about what events are taking place in eastern Europe and in 
the Soviet sphere of influence, and of course what they're referring to is 
the democratization process that is taking place.  Members opposite simply 
can't believe that we are elated on this side of the House with events that 
are transpiring in eastern Europe and in the Soviet circles.  We are elated 
with it, Mr. Speaker, because what is happening is we have millions of 
people who are now, for the first time in decades, getting a taste of what 
democracy is all about.  They're moving to a multiparty system rather than 
a single party, oppressive system that government members opposite would 
have us believe would somehow serve Saskatchewan well.  Somehow or other, 
government members opposite say, oh, the opposition has got to simply say 
yes to every single thing that they're about.  Well the reason we're not 
saying yes to the things that they are about is the very people that I and 
my colleagues represent are feeling the pain.  They're feeling the hurt 
from your government's actions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: -- We think, Mr. Speaker, it is time for a tired government to 
get out the the way.  They're obviously devoid of ideas.  The best they've 
been able to come up with in the past two weeks is ConSask.  Tonight, this 
very day, we see on the evening news, we see the Premier throwing sticks at 
some farmers, figuratively throwing sticks.  He was blowing his stack at 
some farmers, saying oh, you're not on our side, not on my side, the 
Premier says. 
 



 

 

Well when did people of Saskatchewan have to pick sides?  We had a large 
group of farmers visiting this very legislature earlier today.  I had the 
pleasure of meeting with four of those people, Mr. Speaker.  They made some 
very good points.  Farmers right across Saskatchewan should be very proud 
of the work that those individuals did at great personal expense, because 
not only were they giving up a day of work on their farm, but it also cost 
them a significant pile of cash to come down here and visit us in the 
legislature.  So I'm very pleased with the initiative that those farm 
groups took earlier today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As I was looking at the Finance minister giving his budget address, Mr. 
Speaker, I couldn't help but being struck by a feeling of, well what does 
this budget do for my constituents.  How does it affect the good people of 
Regina North?  How does it affect them? 
 
Does it help any of the number of people who are currently fighting with 
the Workers' Compensation Board, battling for fair compensation after they 
have been injured at work and have now been, unfairly in many instances, 
deemed capable of earning X dollars a day, the problem of course being that 
they're deemed capable of doing jobs that simply aren't in existence.  Did 
the budget address some of the fundamental problems of the Workers' 
Compensation Board system and how it affects my constituents?  It did not, 
Mr. Speaker.  It did not. 
 
What about social services recipients, people who in virtually every 
instance, through no fault of their own, have been forced to approach the 
Department of Social Services and ask for what they hope, they sincerely 
hope to be temporary, short-term help?  What did we see in this budget 
address, Mr. Speaker?  We saw silence.  We saw not even a hold the line 
budget; we saw, when you take inflation into account, we saw a decrease in 
the funding for the Department of Social Services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the past few days I've had the -- I'm not sure whether to 
say pleasure or displeasure -- I had the opportunity to speak to a single 
parent who is a social services recipient, new to Regina, moved in from 
rural Saskatchewan in the hopes of finding a job.  This woman, because she 
left her two children behind to finish the school year, is deemed to be a 
single employable welfare recipient.  Because of that, the absolute maximum 
amount that she can receive is $405 a month: 200 for housing; 140 for basic 
needs; and various from 35 to 65, that's the minimum and maximum amount for 
utilities.  Taking the maximum amount for utilities, comes to a grand slam 
total of $405 a month. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is no way that a human being can survive in Regina on 
$405 a month.  That is disgraceful.  That is a discredit to the government 
members opposite.  It is something that we will be looking forward to 
changing at the earliest opportunity. 
 
People such as the woman I'm just describing want job opportunities.  And 
that of course will be a priority with us, but in the mean time, she's got 
to have enough money to be able to buy food, to be able to buy housing or 
rent housing, arrange for her housing, for clothing, food, transportation, 
and the various needs that we all have.  And what did the budget say to 



 

 

her?  Nothing.  Nothing at all.  What a disgrace! 
 
I've also in the past two weeks, Mr. Speaker, had an opportunity of talking 
to a small-business woman in my constituency again.  This woman has been 
dealing with the Department of Economic Diversification and Trade.  I had 
to look it up because small business keeps rolling; we never know from one 
month to the next what department it's going to fit into.  We don't know 
who's in charge, and I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, nor do the small-business 
men and women of Saskatchewan know who's in charge.  What this woman has 
done is gone three separate times to SEDCO, three separate times has been 
turned down.  Despite the road-blocks put up by the government opposite in 
their lack of planning, lack of a clear indication of what is available and 
what is not for small business, she has spent an inordinate amount of time 
seeking out programs that might be of some help to her, when in fact the 
patent truth is there is nothing, no program this government has to offer 
for her. 
 
Despite that she was able to set up her own business.  It is running, there 
is some outstanding debt from the set-up, and she's currently working very, 
very, very hard to overcome those initial start-up difficulties.  But I can 
tell you, Mr. Speaker, this business woman is going to do it all on her own 
because there's just nothing available from government members opposite.  
There was nothing mentioned in the budget speech; she's on her own. 
 
And how did the budget affect another small-business friend of mine from 
out of town who had the displeasure of being foreclosed on?  He's a friend 
of mine and the Minister of -- what do we call it? -- Economic 
Diversification and Trade thinks it's irrelevant. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- No, no, that's consumer affairs. 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Oh, consumer affairs, I'm sorry; used to be in charge of 
tourism and small business when it was called that -- thinks it's 
irrelevant.  But I can tell you it's not irrelevant.  There's four members 
of that family.  They have friends and they're talking.  What has happened 
since his business has been foreclosed is now -- I was talking to him about 
three-quarters of an hour ago.  It looks very much like that family is 
going to join the exodus of people leaving Saskatchewan.  They are going to 
wind up in all likelihood in Ontario.  He has a job offer there.  He told 
me on the telephone three-quarters of an hour ago, there is just nothing 
available for me in Saskatchewan.  And what a crime, what an indictment on 
this hoping for business government opposite -- hoping for business.  It's 
amazing.  Yet over $360 million for Cargill, and yet the small business 
sector is really hurting and you've got apparently nothing for them. 
 
What did the budget say about day care, Mr. Speaker?  How does it affect 
the families who require child care in my constituency?  Well, for the -- 
I'm not sure how many years, but it's a lot of years -- the day-care 
subsidy remains frozen in this year's budget, frozen again.  Another 
hardship particularly on young families that are struggling, trying to get 
their head above water.  Many of them have not had wage or salary increases 
that even approximate what the cost of living has gone up over the last 
eight or nine years.  And the day-care subsidy remains frozen; they 



 

 

continue to go further and further behind.  So the budget really didn't 
have much to say to those people. 
 
(1930) 
 
Did the budget address pay equity?  Did the budget address equal pay for 
work of equal value? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Did that years ago.  Did that in 1987. 
 
Mr. Trew: -- The member for Regina Wascana says we did that years ago, did 
it in 1987.  Well that'll be a great revelation, Mr. Minister, to the many 
women, the women in Saskatchewan who continue to be paid on average less 
than two-thirds of what the men of Saskatchewan are paid -- less than 
two-thirds.  That's the Minister of Families telling us, oh, we dealt with 
that years ago, ergo it's irrelevant.  We've crossed that bridge; we've 
done wonderful things, he says.  Tell that to the women of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, order.  I've asked members to allow the 
member for Regina North to make his comments.  Everybody gets an 
opportunity to . . . Order.  Order.  I've asked the member for Regina . . . 
Order.  I've asked the member for Regina Wascana to allow the member for 
Regina North to make his comments on the budget speech. 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  And it is a shame, and the women of 
Saskatchewan know exactly what I was just saying.  They know that the issue 
has not been addressed, not addressed to any reasonable satisfaction.  Not 
even close.  Not even close.  And the minister continues on it.  You'll 
have your opportunity. 
 
The budget was silent on pay equity, Mr. Speaker.  And what did the budget 
have to say for the thousands, the tens of thousands of Saskatchewan men, 
women, and young people who are working at or near minimum wage?  Nothing.  
No mention of a change in the minimum wage.  Not a peep.  Not a peep.  So 
where is . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I'll get to buses just now, 
Mr. Member from Regina South.  Buses is coming; trust me, buses is coming. 
 
In the meantime we have tens of thousands of people on minimum wage that 
are continuing to work at a level of pay that doesn't even approximate the 
level of poverty.  We have men, women, and young people struggling to pay 
their bills, struggling to get by in life, and this government thinks, well 
it doesn't matter.  They continue to fiddle while Rome burns, just like 
Nero of old. 
 
I look, Mr. Speaker, at the budget given to us short days ago and I see the 
Finance minister has the gall to stand up and say, oh but there's no tax 
increases.  No tax increases, he says.  Well I think he misspoke himself, 
at very least he misspoke himself, because they cut $375,000 in a grant to 
the city of Regina -- this year's portion of the rail relocation.  And it 
is going to lead -- just watch -- it's going to lead to a dropping, a 
complete elimination of a $25 million grant to the city of Regina for the 
province's portion of that rail relocation project. 
 



 

 

In essence, the government members opposite have decided that they've heard 
enough.  They've heard the people and they're quashing that project, and 
it's not their decision to quash.  But the long and short of it is, it's 
going to cost taxpayers in Regina in excess of $25 million.  That's a tax 
increase on property owners in Saskatchewan.  It's a tax increase on small 
businesses in Regina. 
 
A look at the capital program to the major urban centres -- the majors 
cities, primarily Regina and Saskatoon is what I'm speaking of right now -- 
last year was capped at about one-third of the rate, per capita, as other 
centres were paid.  Now the argument that government members opposite used 
at that time was: well, Saskatoon got some help with Saskatoon Place, quite 
a number of millions of dollars and Regina is going to get $25 million for 
rail relocation.  So on that basis, Mr. Speaker, they gave Regina and 
Saskatoon approximately one third of the funding for the capital program, 
per capita, that they gave smaller centres. 
 
Well that argument's gone.  Where is the increase?  Where is the sense of 
fairness?  Is this government again putting the boots to the people in the 
two major centres -- Regina and Saskatoon?  You're again putting the boots 
to my constituents.  I object.  This is an unfair budget.  It's not worthy 
of us passing it, Mr. Speaker, because it is so, so unfair. 
 
The Finance minister, Mr. Speaker, had the audacity -- he misspoke enough 
to say there's no tax increases in this budget.  Scant few days before, he 
stood up and addressed us with his budget. 
 
The Premier goes on province-wide television and announces retroactively 
that he has eliminated the gas fuel tax rebate program, eliminated it 
completely.  And for 1989 retroactively he cut half of it off.  What that 
means, Mr. Speaker, is effectively a 20 per cent increase in the cost of 
providing fuel or buying fuel for vehicles.  That's what my constituents 
will pay; that's what I will pay. 
 
For a 60-litre tank of gas, this one magic stroke that's not a tax 
increase, according to members opposite -- not a tax increase -- but this 
little magic stroke of the wand for a 60-litre tank of gas is going to cost 
an additional $6 for my constituents.  An additional $6, assuming they buy 
one tank, one 60-litre tank of gas every week, 52 weeks, it comes to an 
increased cost of running their vehicle $312 per year.  And that's not a 
tax increase? 
 
I can hardly believe that the government would be so nai pïve as to believe 
that people would even for two seconds buy your lying that they're not 
faced with a tax increase.  Three hundred dollars for a modest amount of 
gas for a vehicle per year.  I think that the Minister of Finance has 
clearly misspoke.  I wish he'd come clean with the Legislative Assembly. 
 
But there's another issue to go with this now-we-see-it gas tax, and that 
is government members opposite can no longer be trusted on absolutely any 
promises whatever.  Because what they've done is after the fact in March of 
1990, Mr. Speaker, they cut half the fuel tax rebate program for 1989, a 
year that was right completely into the history books, and this government 



 

 

has retroactively snatched away half of that fuel tax rebate program. 
 
What about . . . Mr. Speaker, let me remind you about the students' union 
building right here on the campus at the University of Regina.  I take you 
back to the heady days just before the October 1986 election.  The 
government announced, we've got money, we'll kick in our share for this 
much delayed, much needed student union building.  We'll kick in our share, 
you said at that time.  The ink wasn't even dry on the ballots after the 
election, that money was snatched away from the University of Regina 
student's union, snatched away.  To this very day they do not have that new 
student's union building that they so richly need, deserve.  In fact if you 
would care to take the time to go out to the University of Regina campus, 
you would see that the existing students' union building is literally 
collapsing around them.  It has long since served its time.  The university 
students at the U of R need and deserve a new students' union building.  
That's another broken promise of the government members opposite. 
 
So we see tax increases coming at ordinary people.  That's what this budget 
has done, despite pleas to the opposite from government members.  We see 
tax increases on regular people, and yet we see there is in excess of $300 
million for Cargill.  What a double standard.  Government members have got 
all kinds of money for the megaprojects, lots of money, but not anything 
for the real people, the people that matter, the people that count.  The 
most important investment in our province is our people.  It's the people 
that's going to turn Saskatchewan right side up again; it sure isn't 
government members opposite. 
 
Look at the urban affairs.  What's happened in the 1991 budget, Mr. 
Speaker, short list:  Regina rail relocation, cut; Saskatoon Centennial 
Auditorium grant, cut; urban revenue sharing, zero per cent increase; 
northern revenue sharing, zero per cent increase; community planning 
grants, cut over 31 per cent; municipal transit grants, and that is going 
to cost the people of Regina $700,000, that one neat little cut alone -- 
$700,000. 
 
I don't know how, Mr. Speaker, the government has the audacity to say, no 
tax increases.  The Minister of Finance in his opening remarks said, and I 
won't quote because I don't have the exact words here -- I guess I could 
look it up, but words to the effect that, well the Government of 
Saskatchewan could have followed the lead of our federal government and 
simply transferred the costs to a lower level of government, but we chose 
not to, they said.  Well what's that mean for the $1.829 million plus 
transit grant, municipal transit grant that was transferred to the major 
urban centres. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, this cut, this one cut in itself makes Saskatchewan 
the only province in Canada that has a major urban transit system that 
doesn't get any help whatsoever from the provincial government.  Imagine 
that.  Out of 10 provinces we rate tenth, tenth.  Dead last.  What a 
disgrace! 
 
Business tax rebate program cut 25 per cent.  Municipal capital program cut 
by $4 million this year.  Municipal transit for the disabled, zero per cent 



 

 

increase -- nothing for them.  And I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that I 
do have a number of constituents who make good use of that service that's 
provided in Regina.  It's a good service.  The problem they have is a 
chronic lack of funding.  There is a shortage of drivers, shortage of buses 
and people to drive them, and because of that the waiting period to get on 
to these buses is several hours.  Can you picture, Mr. Speaker, waiting . . 
. You go to do some shopping.  You're in a wheelchair; you go to do some 
shopping.  The only way you can get there is on this municipal transit for 
the disabled.  You get into the shopping centre, do your shopping, and then 
you have to wait several hours before the bus can come and pick you up -- 
not exactly a happy situation.  I wonder how many government members 
opposite would be happy if, day in and day out, they had to wait hours, 
hours for their transportation to arrive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I see that the revenue-sharing grants are again frozen.  This 
is the third year in a row that the revenue-sharing grants to the urban 
municipalities has been $67 million -- third year in a row.  Heavens, in 
1983 it was 60 million, and by 1991, eight years later, it's gone all the 
way to 67 million.  It's a pretty disgraceful record. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm not sure if you're aware, but I rhetorically asked a 
question: what is the loneliest job in the PC caucus? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Is it the Premier? 
 
Mr. Trew: -- It's not the Premier.  The Premier has people that will talk 
to him.  The loneliest job in the PC caucus is that of back-bencher, 
because the number of members opposite that are not on the public payroll 
for extra money, extra to their base salary as MLAs, the grand number is 
one.  One back-bencher, and you've got all kinds of cabinet ministers, all 
kinds of legislative secretaries.  We have just no shortage of people on 
the extra dole. 
 
(1945) 
 
I have a few examples, Mr. Speaker.  Members of Executive Council . . . I'm 
going to just read into the record some of the changes in members of 
Executive Council.  And I see under Agriculture and Food on page 20 of the 
1991 Estimates . . . This is for legislative -- pardon me -- it's for 
cabinet ministers and legislative secretaries to cabinet ministers: 1989-90 
there was a sum total of $7,800 budgeted for that; 1990-91 it goes to 
$36,600.  Maybe that's where some of the increased spending in agriculture 
is. 
 
Let's look at Consumer and Commercial Affairs: 1989-90 expenditure, zero; 
1990-91 expenditure, $36,600.  Remember, this is for cabinet ministers and 
legislative secretaries. 
 
You look at Culture, Multiculturalism and Recreation: 1989-90, zero; 
1990-91 -- the budget we're talking about now -- $36,600.  And yet we see 
in the same Culture, Multiculturalism and Recreation, we see grants to 
local authorities and other third parties has dropped from over 15 million 
to $11.6 million.  Seems to be not money for that, but watch out for the 



 

 

cabinet ministers and the legislative secretaries. 
 
I could go on and on, Mr. Speaker, and I choose not to.  I'd be happy to 
share that information with anyone who cares to contact my office.  I'd be 
happy to share that information with them.  It's a matter of public record, 
it's no big secret, but I'm not going to take the time of the legislature 
in this budget debate to get into that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the budget and how does it affect . . . Let's take an 
important area.  I talked a bit about women's issues earlier.  The women's 
secretariat had a cut again this year.  They're down; they get a grand 
total of $540,000, down from last year's 559,000 and the year before 
777,000. 
 
It seems to me, I remember in 1988 or '89 government members opposite 
touting how wonderful this government is to furthering the cause of women, 
to furthering issues like day care, to furthering issues like women's 
shelter, to dealing with the wage gap.  I spoke briefly about the wage gap 
earlier.  What we've seen subsequent to that is cut after cut after cut in 
these important areas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to point out a quote from a December 6, 1989, 
Leader-Post article: "Family violence said a top government priority."  And 
I quote: 
 

 Social services Minister Bill Neudorf says the province will consider 
launching an advertising campaign attacking violence in the home. 

 
 Calling the issue of family violence a government priority . . . 
 

It's a priority, a government priority.  I leave that and go to a 
subsequent paragraph: 
 

 (The minister) told a press conference that the government is committed to 
helping victims of family violence . . . 

 
Committed.  Well, Mr. Speaker, some kind of a commitment.  What do we see?  
Actions speak louder than words.  Show us in the budget where there's any 
kind of priority.  This is not a priority.  This made a nice one-day wonder 
-- one-day wonder headline for the minister.  A one-day wonder. 
 
Meanwhile we have battered women and their children that cannot get into 
safe shelter.  We have that situation.  And it's not unique to Regina, but 
it's certainly here.  We have that situation.  We're not talking about 
millions of dollars needed, Mr. Speaker.  We're talking about a 
considerable number of thousands of dollars. 
 
Might I suggest that I talked about some of the areas where we see cabinet 
ministers and legislative secretaries, increasing the amounts paid for 
that.  Agriculture and food, from 7,800 to 36,600.  Well that's a neat 
little 28 to $29,000 increase.  That would have been I think . . . I submit 
to you, Mr. Speaker, that would have been money very, very well spent on a 
very, very serious -- sad and serious -- problem.  Why is it that the 



 

 

government chooses not to see?  Why is it they choose not to hear?  Why is 
it they choose not to act? 
 
Mr. Speaker, actions do speak louder than words.  I urge the government to 
come in with some supplemental estimates; kick in some money there.  It is 
desperately needed.  It's sad to see a budget that doesn't address the 
problems of the men, women, and children of Saskatchewan, the people that 
make this province what is to me and what I hope it is to you as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have before me: business bankruptcies in Saskatchewan.  And 
it's a chart that shows the number of business bankruptcies, and lo and 
behold! from 1982 it just mushrooms.  I recall very vividly the very first 
nomination that . . . where I was first nominated to represent the 
constituency . . . the New Democrats in the constituency of Regina North.  
I was using numbers of business bankruptcies and I was explaining to the 
people how the business bankruptcies had spiralled.  I think that's almost 
an identical motion to what I used then.  I see here that in 1985 the 
number of business bankruptcies was 302.  And that was way up, way up over 
anything it had been in the previous decade, 302 business bankruptcies.  
And yet I see for 1989 the number's not 302, Mr. Speaker; it's 542, an 
increase of 190.  And it's not just an increase in numbers; those are real 
business bankruptcies.  There's families that are involved in that.  
Families that were in business no longer are.  What does the budget say to 
those people?  It's silent.  One can only assume, Mr. Speaker, it is 
because the government is so totally devoid of ideas.  They don't know how 
to deal with it.  They cannot. 
 
I look at out-migration.  Some of my colleagues have addressed that.  I 
just wish to make two points, one being in 1989 the total out-migration 
from Saskatchewan . . . I'm sorry; not the total out-migration -- the net 
migration.  In other words you subtract the people that have come in from 
the people that have gone on, the net difference.  We've lost 23,705 people 
from Saskatchewan in 1989. 
 
The point I wish to make there is the last year that . . . in fact the only 
year that was higher was 1970, when Saskatchewan lost 28,358 people.  I 
point out to you sir, that was the last year of the Ross Thatcher Liberals.  
They were on the way out the last time numbers approached this.  Now we're 
over 23,705 with no apparent slowing of that out-migration trend.  The 
dying days of a Liberal government; compare them to the dying days of a 
Conservative government. 
 
We want to turn that thing around.  We want not to make rhetoric out of 
bringing the kids home.  Remember that line you used in 1982:  we'll bring 
the kids home.  We don't want to make rhetoric out of that; we want to do 
it.  We want to just provide the opportunities for Saskatchewan people.  We 
want so that people can come home, so there's a choice for them.  Not 
everyone will choose to; some of them will be into other things and life 
goes on and we tend to move around a little bit in our highly mobile 
society. 
 
But we want to be able to provide people a choice.  Mr. Speaker, the choice 
is becoming ever more evident to the people of Saskatchewan.  I look at the 



 

 

youth employment in the 1990-91 budget that we're addressing right now, and 
the Opportunities '90 student employment program this year cut by half a 
million dollars.  Put it another way, in 1985-86, sir, the government spent 
$9 million; this year they're going to spend $2.6 million or roughly 
one-quarter of the amount spent a few years ago.  And that is going to mean 
5400 fewer jobs for students this year, that alone 5400 fewer jobs. 
 
You're telling people by your actions, you're telling them, we don't have 
anything to offer you in Saskatchewan.  Go; find a job somewhere else; go.  
That's what you're saying.  Wrong message.  The Public Service Commission 
also has a PSC (Public Service Commission) student employment program; that 
too was cut by half a million dollars.  So in total we've got a million 
dollars less spent this year than last on student employment at a time when 
youth unemployment is running in excess of 15 per cent, Mr. Speaker, and 
the government continues to fiddle while Rome burns.  While students can't 
find employment the government chooses to hear no evil, see no evil, and 
certainly speak no evil. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to deal briefly with the goings on in the government as 
it relates to the Saskatchewan Transportation Company.  We see in recent 
weeks and months, Mr. Speaker, very serious allegations.  We see court 
cases.  We see a government bouncing from pillar to post as they seem to be 
covering up; they seem to be dodging bullets; they seem to be in trouble on 
this issue, and it doesn't matter what . . . They just don't have an out.  
And I submit to you, sir, they don't have an out because there's a lot that 
we don't even know about, transpiring with Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company. 
 
We see earlier today that being a fairly significant issue in question 
period here.  I think it's symbolic.  What happened in question period is 
somewhat symbolic of what this government truly is all about.  Because we 
have government members who said, oh we're going to be consultative.  We're 
going to seek consensus.  We're going to listen and converse with people.  
We want to be open about what's going on. 
 
Yet this very day we see an internal audit that was promised to be made 
public by the end of March, three or four days ago in other words, and we 
see that now being rolled into a judicial review.  Somewhat symbolic, I 
think, of the secretiveness, the shrinking, the drawing inward of 
government members.  No public consultation is involved in that, not a whit 
of it.  And it's really tragic that we have these allegations going on. 
 
I think enough said on that, Mr. Speaker.  The events are unfolding, but 
the secretiveness -- that is what is going to get the government.  It's the 
very, very secretiveness, the saying one thing and doing another; saying 
we're for people and then increasing the personal income tax; we're for the 
people, then eliminating the fuel tax rebate program; we're for the people, 
and then eliminating the urban transit program that funded urban 
transportation systems, that costing, as I pointed out, $700,000 this year 
alone to the city of Regina.  It's the saying one thing and doing another 
that's going to do this government in.  Government has lost all credibility 
and, you know, just symptomatic of it. 
 



 

 

(2000) 
 
I'm not going to suggest that there's anything other than what the 
government says in the latest increase in the price of alcohol.  But isn't 
it a little bit mysterious, Mr. Speaker, that we have budget day, price of 
alcohol remains the same; next opening day of the liquor stores after that 
there is an increase.  And it's announced, well this isn't a tax increase, 
this is simply passing on the increases from the suppliers. 
 
Well normally that would be accepted at face value.  This government has 
totally lost credibility.  I have had a number of people that have asked me 
quite pointedly: do you believe that that's what really happened, or do you 
think the government is sneaking some more money in the back door?  Don't 
have the courage to announce it as a tax increase, but they're sneaking it 
in the back door.  I say that, Mr. Speaker, to point out the lost 
credibility. 
 
This government refuses, absolutely, adamantly refuses to listen to the 
people of Saskatchewan.  Adamantly refuses to consult.  They try doing 
things in an underhanded manner.  I pointed out the gas tax change.  I 
talked a bit about the $25 million that the city of Regina is losing this 
year because of the rail relocation decision.  I misspoke when I said $25 
million this year; it's 300-and-some thousand dollars this year.  But the 
ramification is the city will lose $25 million next year; that's the 
ramification.  And I would be very, very surprised, Mr. Speaker, if I'm 
anything but right on in that. 
 
So what of the future?  What should there have been in this budget, Mr. 
Speaker?  What should there have been?  Well it is incredibly obvious that 
we have got thousands of hungry children.  I look at the Regina food bank 
had fed close to 60,000 people in 1988, a food bank that was non-existent 
before your government took office, absolutely non-existent, and yet 60,000 
people were fed at the Regina food bank alone.  Saskatoon, it was 76,164 
people fed at a food bank, a food bank that was non-existent prior to 1982.  
The P.A. food bank fed over 12,200 people -- again a food bank that was 
non-existent prior to 1982.  Mr. Speaker, we have got to seriously get past 
the rhetoric in this Legislative Assembly.  We have got to get past that 
and get on with the real job. 
 
I shared with you the amount of help that a single employable person can 
expect from the Department of Social Services: a maximum of $405.  Mr. 
Speaker, that's inadequate.  You can't feed yourself, you can't buy your 
shelter, feed yourself, clothe yourself, provide transportation and health 
care, or whatever else you may need.  You can't do that on that miserly 
amount of money, so we need to increase the social services bottom rates, 
we need to create jobs, we need to invest in student employment for the 
summer. That is urgent. 
 
We need to make some action, do some real things on the environment.  In 
the budget speech there was talk of what was happening to the environment 
and yet the moneys for enforcement are identical this year to last.  
There's nothing new in environment.  Government members talk a little bit 
about it but it's not there.  We need to move into some very real 



 

 

environmental enhancing projects.  We need to move on revenue sharing, and 
yet that was woefully missing in the budget. 
 
We have school boards that are looking at the provincial government 
increasing its share of funding for education.  It's a goal that I support 
and I think the government should have been moving in that direction.  
Instead they're going the other way, they're reducing the provincial share 
of funding. 
 
We need some open and fair government tendering, Mr. Speaker, so that there 
is no question that the government gets best value for its dollar on every 
project, on everything it purchases whether it's a goods or a service.  
There should be open and fair tendering so people can in fact compete. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those are some of the things that my colleagues will be 
addressing at some greater length.  I wish to allow other members of the 
Legislative Assembly to participate in this important debate.  I thank you 
for your attention. I am most grateful to my constituents, the people of 
Regina North, for again providing me the opportunity to represent them in 
this budget debate. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I am opposed obviously to this budget.  I am not in 
favour of it for the reasons I have outlined.  There are some changes that 
need to be made.  I urge government members to make some of those changes, 
and then I would happily support the budget.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLaren: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  It's certainly an 
honour to rise in the Assembly and to join in this debate on our budget.  I 
would like to compliment my colleague and the Minister of Finance for the 
way in which he presented his budget and for the timely budget which he 
delivered on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 1990 and '91 budget tabled by the hon. member from 
Weyburn was, in my opinion, very responsible, very complete, and in fact 
very exciting, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  And I would say that it is a common 
sense budget - 
_ common sense because it recognizes the difficulties facing Saskatchewan 
families; common sense because it addresses the difficulties that we are 
facing in these difficult times; and common sense because it not only meets 
the challenges facing us today, but because it charts a course for our 
future. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this budget maintains our commitment to protecting our 
Saskatchewan families, to protecting Saskatchewan farmers, and Saskatchewan 
small business people, to protecting the people of this province, people 
from all walks of life.  And so, on behalf of my constituents and the 
people of this province, I want to comment on the outstanding ideas and 
initiatives outlined in the budget speech, ideas and initiatives which are 
responsive to the economic and social needs of Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are facing some very difficult times in 



 

 

Saskatchewan.  We don't argue with that, difficult times for economies, for 
government, and for the people.  But Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 1982 we made a 
commitment to address the needs of Saskatchewan people, and this budget is 
a continuation of that commitment. 
 
Saskatchewan has a proud history of facing difficult times, and we have a 
proud history of taking courageous steps to control our own destiny so that 
our people and our communities continue to have secure and rewarding lives 
even during tough times.  The government, under our Premier, has provided 
courageous and determined leadership to provide that security, and we see 
that in this year's budget. 
 
We see in Saskatchewan today a government that is flexible, a government 
that is compassionate, and a government that is able to adapt and change.  
This government has had to make some very difficult decisions over the past 
while.  We had to make the difficult decision to cancel the gas tax rebate 
program, to cancel the home improvement program, and to modify the mortgage 
protection program.  We had to make the difficult decision to cut 
department funding and to eliminate some grants and programs.  We had to 
make these decisions, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because these are the difficult 
times that we are in.  We made these choices so that we can redirect that 
money to areas where increased funding and support were required. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I speak of those areas, I am speaking of health 
care and I am speaking of education and I am speaking of the family farm.  
This government recognizes areas that require increased emphasis, and I 
believe this budget responds to those needs. 
 
Take agriculture, for example.  The excessive drought, low commodity 
prices, high interest rates, and increasing debt are devastating the family 
farm, along with the European-American subsidy wars that are also taking 
their toll on Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
When farm families are literally about to lose their homes, their farms and 
their livelihood, we did not sit idly by, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  When the 
realized net farm income for 1990 is forecast to be a negative $9 million, 
the lowest level since the 1930's, we did not say, well that is too bad.  
No, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we did not say that at all.  Instead we installed a 
safety net that is specific programs and policies targeted to agriculture. 
 
We paid millions of dollars to Saskatchewan farmers to help them through 
this crisis.  In 1982 we created the Agricultural Credit Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, we introduced a guaranteed vendor mortgage program, and we 
established The Farm Security Act.  And all this to protect farmers, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker.  We helped farm families consolidate loans and manage their 
debt problems.  We argued in Geneva for changes to the General Agreement on 
Tariffs and Trade to eliminate unfair advantages for small grain-producing 
countries.  We did that all, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because this government is 
committed to protecting farmers from things that are beyond their control. 
 
But the farm crisis didn't just happen overnight, Mr. Speaker.  Years of 
drought and low prices have placed an unbearable economic and emotional 
strain on rural Saskatchewan.  These farmers are trying to hang on to their 



 

 

livelihood and preserve Saskatchewan's way of life.  They deserve our help 
as they face the harsh reality that the crop has to be planted, and we 
realize that some farmers do have a cash flow problem.  And even though we 
called on the federal government for assistance, and we called on the 
federal government to alleviate the affects of international subsidy wars, 
we did not wait for them to act. 
 
We understood that the crop must go into the ground on time, and so, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, this government, the Government of Saskatchewan, has dug 
deep into its pockets; we have tightened our own belts so that we could 
address the immediate crisis in agriculture. 
 
I am very proud of the Saskatchewan spring seeding program that was 
announced in this year's budget, a program which provides some $525 million 
to farmers in the form of operating loans.  This program will equip our 
farmers with short-term loans at ten and three-quarter per cent.  It will 
entitle them to borrow $12.50 per cultivated acre for seed, for fertilizer 
and fuel, for chemical and repairs. 
 
This program will give farmers the money they so desperately need to get 
this crop in the ground.  We could have told the farmers of this province 
that we couldn't help them, that our hands were tied.  And I can remember 
the members opposite during the 1979 and '80 when the interest rates went 
up to 20, 22 per cent.  What answer did we get from them?  Well, it's a 
federal problem.  I can remember the now Leader of the Opposition making 
that statement. 
 
We still do not know what the outcome of the federal commitment will be.  
They have their responsibility; we have ours.  We could have said wait, but 
we didn't, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  We responded with a responsible budget 
which puts money into the hands of our farmers to at least get their seed 
in the ground; a budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, which allocates the $525 
million of provincial money directly to agriculture; a budget which 
contains an additional 400 million in spending and tax assistance to our 
farm sector. 
 
That is almost $1 billion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, $1 billion dedicated to 
protecting farm families and to building the farming industry so that it 
may compete successfully in the world market. 
 
We are also preparing our children so that they can compete in that same 
world market, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  We are preparing them to make informed 
decisions, to understand their rights and responsibilities as citizens and 
participants in a market-based economy so that they understand the world 
economy and its impact on our daily lives. 
 
(2015) 
 
This government is committed to providing a quality educational system to 
ensuring that all students get a solid foundation to prepare them for a 
lifetime of learning.  We are committed to building on our strengths so 
that Saskatchewan people will have even greater access to learning 
opportunities.  That is why we allocated $10 million in 1990-91 to the new 



 

 

core curriculum agenda. 
 
The core curriculum agenda is one of the most important initiatives we have 
ever developed.  This new curriculum will teach essential skills, skills 
such as independent learning, creative thinking, and problem solving; 
skills which will enable our children to communicate and understand our 
society and technology; skills, Mr. Deputy Speaker, which will complement 
other subject areas which will enable our children to adapt to a rapidly 
changing world. 
 
And we're also doing much in the area of literacy.  The year 1990 has been 
designated International Literacy Year and we are at the forefront of the 
fight for literacy.  We are reducing drop-out rates, and we are providing 
reading skills programs, and we are going to wipe out illiteracy in this 
province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in this year's budget $740,000 was announced to deal 
with the problem of child hunger in our society.  We also called on church 
groups, schools, parents, and volunteers to help us find long-term 
solutions that will eliminate child hunger in this province. 
 
An $8.1 million commitment was also made to the regional colleges for 1990 
and '91, and that is a $2.6 million increase over last year.  There was a 
$5.6 million increase for SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 
and Technology), a $6 million increase for universities, and a $10.5 
million increase for school boards. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government has doubled the amount of funding 
available to students.  This means that student aid for 1990-91 will jump 
to $47 million.  That is a tremendous amount of money, Mr. Speaker, and in 
total this budget provides $888 million for educational spending; 888 
million or one-fifth of our total spending budget for this fiscal year; 888 
million which translates into 2,600 for every elementary and secondary 
school student, and $8,500 for every university student in this province. 
 
We have also done much in the area of health care, too, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  
This government is committed to ensuring that the people of this province 
have access to a comprehensive, province-wide, quality health care system.  
That is what the people have asked for and that is our number one priority.  
That is why we have announced a 10 per cent increase in health care 
spending for 1990. 
 
We will be spending that money on hospitals, on long-term care, on 
prescription drugs, on the dental plan, on special care homes, on seniors' 
housing, on drug and alcohol clinics, on research, on preventative 
programs, and the list goes on and on and on, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  We will 
be spending one-third of our total budget just on health care -- one-third, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, or the equivalent of $1.5 billion. 
 
These figures are very difficult to comprehend simply due to their sheer 
size, so I'm going to put them into perspective for Saskatchewan people.  
Broken down, that $1.5 billion for health care represents some $172,000 
spent every hour, 24 hours a day, seven days a week on health care.  That 



 

 

is $4.1 million spent every day for the year just on health care. 
 
I think these figures demonstrate this government's commitment to our 
health care system, and I think it shows that we are here to protect, to 
maintain, and to build on Saskatchewan's health care system.  We have done 
this and we will continue to do so.  We have built in health care and we 
have built in education and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have protected our farm 
families. 
 
We have done all of this, we have accomplished all of this during difficult 
economic times, as I mentioned before, and without raising taxes: no tax 
increases, Mr. Deputy Speaker; no increases on income tax; no increases in 
sales tax; no increases on consumption tax -- absolutely no tax increases. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this budget provides the resources for the programs and 
priorities set out by the people of Saskatchewan.  It has done this in a 
situation of economic crisis.  It has done it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
admittedly without significant deficit increases.  But more importantly, at 
this time and in light of these economic circumstances, the people cannot 
bear any more tax increases. 
 
And as sincerely as I can speak, Mr. Speaker, I invite members opposite to 
tell the people of Saskatchewan how they propose to spend billions of 
dollars on the programs that they have demanded in this House, not make any 
of the cuts which they have opposed, and balance the budget without 
imposing massive tax increases.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, it cannot be done.  
This budget is a responsible budget without give-aways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I conclude, I'd like to make a few comments on the 
member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake and the member from Regina North.  
Every day and every speaker, we've been hearing about the out-migration of 
people in Saskatchewan.  They say that's what's been happening and that's 
true, but let's look at the facts.  Let's look back to about 1972 when 
those members were in power.  What happened to the population of 
Saskatchewan?  There was out-migration.  There was 900-and-some odd 
thousand, by 1973-74 it had gone down to 890,000.  You had gone below 
900,000 people.  And then it started coming back; and then it got up to 
over a million people by 1983.  And it's still not down to the numbers that 
you had in the province when we took over in 1982.  We're still around a 
million people in the province. 
 
And I can remember, Mr. Speaker, when I had to go out hiring people for the 
company that I used to work for -- I had to go to Great Britain . . . I 
used to have to go to Great Britain to get welders. I went to Great Britain 
for welders because everybody had gone to Calgary and Edmonton, working in 
the oil patch.  That's where they were.  But no, that doesn't happen to the 
NDP.  They never mention that kind of thing. 
 
Why have we got a deficit?  We keep hearing about the deficit.  We could 
have not spent the money to help the farmers.  And the deficit, you keep 
saying, well we had a million and 100-and-some odd million in the coffers, 
which I presume you did.  But where was the debt?  I took over SaskPower 
and I found out where a bunch of the debt was, $1.2 billion of SaskPower's 



 

 

debt, and you people were siphoning off the money out of SaskPower -- $100 
million in ten years -- to make your consolidated fund look like you were 
balancing your budget, which you weren't.  That's exactly what was 
happening. 
 
Now the member from Regina North keeps talking about the multinationals.  
I'd like the members opposite to tell me what a multinational is.  Is it 50 
people?  Is it 1,000 people?  How do you measure a multinational?  For all 
I know, my company was a multinational.  And how do we keep the people in 
Saskatchewan without diversifying our economy, without not promoting 
Gainers -- and I'm sick and tired of hearing you talk about Pocklington.  I 
wish I'd have got him in Yorkton.  I tried.  And he got was . . . The money 
that was there was an incentive to create jobs in our province.  That's 
exactly what he did. 
 
What about Weyerhaeuser?  What about Nabu?  What about Nabu?  You lost 8 
million; we only lost . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  All members will have an opportunity to 
enter into the budget speech if they haven't already entered into it.  So 
I'd ask the member from Quill Lakes to allow the member from Yorkton to 
finish his comments. 
 
Mr. McLaren: -- How in Heaven's name do we get employment in our province 
without having megaprojects, without having small businesses?  And we 
considered ourselves a small business, but we had 500 people working for us 
in Yorkton, Saskatchewan.  Is that a multinational?  What's a 
multinational? . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I don't care what they 
are.  Cargill is going to build a plant in this province that's going to 
sell fertilizer.  Why should we not have the jobs here?  Why not let it go 
to Alberta then?  That's where they would have gone -- or Manitoba.  But 
no, we have to buy our fertilizer from the United States.  That's what you 
people are saying.  That's ridiculous.  I never heard anything so 
ridiculous in all my life. 
 
And what did they do?  What did they do?  They bought out potash mines for 
5, $600 million.  And how many jobs did that create in our province?  Not a 
one.  Bought holes in the ground where people were already working, and 
that's all you folks created here. 
 
I look at my own constituency.  I try to look and count on my hand what 
happened there in the eight years prior to us coming into power in 1982: 
not one senior citizens' complex; no additions to the nursing home; no 
additions to our hospital.  We got all that in four years.  We had three of 
them . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You mention it.  You tell me what 
it was.  I can't think of any. 
 
And then the other thing that bothers me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the 
comments about travel, and so on.  We had a member from the Soviet Union in 
our gallery here two days ago.  The only reason that he was here was 
because our Premier went over to . . . had the foresight to go and start 
establishing some markets in the Eastern bloc countries. 
 



 

 

You can't build business by sitting on your prats here in Saskatchewan 
behind a desk.  You can't do it.  I commend the Premier for having the 
initiative to go and do some of that sort of work over in the Eastern bloc 
countries. 
 
Another thing that the Prince Albert-Duck Lake member mentioned was that 
privatization wasn't in our budget.  And I think back to last year when 
about this time we were facing four walls here.  There was nobody in here 
on that side of the House.  Going out and scaring the people of 
Saskatchewan that we were going to privatize SaskPower. 
 
We had no intention of privatizing SaskPower.  SaskEnergy it was called.  
SaskEnergy is was called.  And do you know what I did, Mr. Deputy Speaker?  
Out of those mounds of petitions that they supposedly brought in here, I 
went through every one of them, picked out every name that was there that 
was from Yorkton, and in the same exercise I found people there from 
British Columbia, Alberta, Manitoba, Ontario, Nova Scotia, New Brunswick.  
What a farce.  What a farce. 
 
And I picked out 424 people out of Yorkton that had signed that petition, 
and I wrote them a letter.  I wrote them a letter, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
I told them the truth.  You know what happened?  People started coming back 
asking if I could get their names off the petition.  They didn't know what 
they were signing.  They didn't know what they were signing. 
 
I found duplication.  I found families of mother and father and six kids, 
name on one of them would be two years old.  She sure didn't sign the 
petition, let me tell you.  That's what I found. 
 
That's what you people are doing all the time.  Fear tactics to the people 
that started in 1978 when I became involved listening to you people with 
medicare.  Little old ladies that I called on after them crying because 
somebody had told them that medicare would be gone if she didn't put a lawn 
sign on her lawn.  That's what you were doing. 
 
The same thing happened in '82, same thing happened in 1986, and the same 
thing happened in Assiniboia-Gravelbourg when your own leader spread a 
letter around that constituency and not telling the truth at all.  This is 
the way you people operate and it just makes me sick. 
 
Mr. Speaker, thank you very much for the opportunity to say the few words, 
and I certainly will be supporting the budget, let me tell you that. 
 
(2030) 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Well thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I'm pleased to have the 
opportunity to enter into the debate on the budget.  And I want to, at the 
outset, to indicate that the minister . . . no, the former minister, the 
member from Yorkton, who is running scared for his life, was trying to make 
a valiant attempt to defend the actions which is destroying this province. 
 
I want first of all, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to indicate that I represent the 
Quill Lakes constituency for a number of years.  And I want to say that 



 

 

that was a rich agricultural area and during the 1970s and 1980s many young 
farmers took up farming.  And they were proud farmers and they worked the 
land well and they were efficient. 
 
But there's more to the area of Quill Lakes than the agricultural scene, 
and I want to lay before this legislature what was achieved during our term 
in office.  This government stands up and starts talking about 
diversification.  Well let me take a look at the Quill Lakes and what was 
done.  At Annaheim, Doepker Industries, founded during the Blakeney 
administration, employing 40 to 50 people on a constant basis.  Let's go to 
Englefeld and we'll find Schulte Industries, manufacturing in existence far 
before the member from . . . what? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Mayfair. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Mayfair ever came into this house -- employing 40 to 50 
employees.  Annaheim, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Doepker Industries.  Englefeld, 
Schulte Industries, manufacturing of mowers, manufacturing snow-ploughs, 
manufacturing rock pickers.  Plains Poultry at Wynyard -- and I remember, I 
recall the former Agriculture minister and myself helping them through 
SEDCO, taking an equity position and providing a base that they could 
continue to provide over 300 jobs. 
 
I go to St. Gregor, a very small community in my riding, and do you know 
what I find?  Three industries -- diversification it's called.  Western 
Industries, manufacturing truck boxes for farm trucks.  Michel's 
Industries, St. Gregor, manufacturing windows and tarps.  Hogemann 
Transport, operating some eight to 10 transports out of the town and 
community of St. Gregor. 
 
I go to Leroy; Block's tarp, manufacturing tarps for trucks and boats.  I 
go to the area of Drake, Bergen Industries operating.  I go to Muenster, 
Al's Welding manufacturing hydraulic cylinders.  I go to the area of 
Lanigan and the farmers started Pound-Maker, whereby they take in cattle, 
feed them and put them to market. 
 
Those are some of the achievements and accomplishments of diversification 
that took place under our administration. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- And I'll tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it didn't take $370 
million to create the hundreds of jobs that are created by these industries 
in my constituency.  But I'll tell you, this government decided that during 
the last election they're going to get into diversification and down they 
came to Kandahar.  They said they are going to set up a potassium sulphate 
plant.  A potassium sulphate plant they indicated they were going to set up 
in Kandahar.  And they were going to extract the sulphate from Quill Lake, 
mix it with the potassium and make a special fertilizer called potassium 
sulphate.  Wonderful idea. 
 
Under our administration we had done all the research, we had set up a 
pilot project and a mine west of Saskatoon.  Well just before the election 



 

 

they said they were going to proceed with the potassium sulphate plant and 
there would be over 300 people employed in the construction of this plant.  
There would be over 150 people employed, they said, when it's in 
production.  That was election time.  Now, after the election, we have nine 
people working at the plant -- nine people.  That was the basic great 
diversification of this administration. 
 
But I want to say that we are not going to stop because of this government, 
because the people of Quill Lakes are confident that they're going to be 
tossed out of office come the next election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- And I'm pleased to indicate that at Wynyard we have 
developed -- or at least a young business man has developed -- the 
marketing of spring water called Quill Water.  And in conjunction with it, 
he himself went to Japan and got the Japanese to come and join with him in 
the development of a plastic plant at Wynyard.  And you know what? That is 
done by the entrepreneurial strength of the people that live in my riding 
because we've done it before and we can do it again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- And the people are confident that there's going to be a 
change of government and that there is a future for small business and 
small manufacturers.  That's the record. 
 
I want to say that working with the people of Quill Lakes has been a great 
privilege and an honour.  And I want to say to you that working together we 
have been able to provide many amenities of life for the constituency.  I 
look in the field of education.  We have a new school at St. Gregor 
recently, a new school at Lake Lenore, a new school at Wynyard.  We have 
major renovations at the Lanigan school.  We have a new gymnasium during my 
period of time at Muenster and Englefeld and at Quill Lake. 
 
I've seen the development of a housing program under the Blakeney 
administration which provided senior citizen housing in every community 
throughout the constituency, Leroy and Spalding and Wynyard and Jansen and 
Lanigan and Quill Lake.  I've seen recently the enriched housing in Drake 
and Wynyard, Quill Lake and Muenster. 
 
I've seen the development of rinks under programs whereby we provided 
essential grants for communities to build these amenities.  I've seen rinks 
built, curling rinks built, arenas built.  And I'll tell the member from 
Mayfair, he ran out in the area, he says he's from Quill Lakes.  And when 
he ran out there, they tossed him out.  I doubt if his brother voted for 
him. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- I doubt it if his brother voted for him.  In fact I talked 
to him and he was doubtful whether he would. 
 



 

 

But anyway, what I'm saying to you, we have worked out in Quill Lakes and 
much has been achieved.  And we're working to the future, as I've said, 
because this government's term of office is coming to an end and the people 
of Saskatchewan are rejecting their priorities. 
 
And in working in conjunction with the constituents, I know at Quill Lake 
they're looking for a new community hall complex and I'm going to work with 
them when we form the government and they'll get it.  I know at Leroy 
they're looking at a new nursing home.  I've talked to the citizens of 
Leroy and it's a great centre of support, and I'll say that we'll bring a 
new nursing home to Leroy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- I know that Wynyard has been neglected, and their nursing 
home, which has provided services and was built under our administration, 
needs some renovations and some additions since we introduced home care, 
and level 1 and 2 facilities are no longer needed but we really need level 
3 and 4.  So Wynyard, we need a major renovation in our nursing home -- 
renovation and addition. 
 
Spalding and Naicam have made a presentation to me as to what their needs 
will be.  And they're looking at an integrated health care facility and 
enriched housing in Naicam.  In Watson, which has seen such tough times 
under this Tory administration, where some 10 businesses have closed in 
Watson, but the people, again I have spoken to them, and they said, when 
will there be an election?  That's the question they're asking.  And I said 
it has to come soon because this outfit is bankrupt of ideas and bankrupt, 
the province they can no longer govern, and it's without a leader. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- And I talked to the people in Lanigan.  And in Lanigan they 
also say there is hope again.  And when you get into government, we want 
you to help us again like you did to other communities in building a new 
arena complex with some other offices or libraries attached thereto.  And 
that's what we're going to do throughout this province, is to give the 
people of this province new hope.  We're going to give this province a new 
direction.  We're going to give to the people what they rightly deserve, 
and which this government has failed to deliver. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to turn to what has really occupied my thoughts, and 
that is with the agricultural crisis that exists in Saskatchewan.  No one 
who is familiar with the agricultural crisis can be less than sorry to see 
what is happening.  There are farmers who are committing suicide because of 
the stress and on the verge of losing everything they built.  There are 
families that are breaking up and there are homes that are being destroyed. 
 
And I want to say that in respect to agriculture, the crisis can only be 
addressed, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if we clearly articulate the vision of 
agriculture that we want.  What is our commitment to agriculture?  What do 
we want for agriculture in the future?  Do we want, as I will refer to an 
article from United States, the huge multinational corporations owning land 



 

 

and all of the processing?  Or do we have a vision of wanting to keep the 
family farm strong and allow young people to enter the farming industry?  
We have to have a vision of what we want. 
 
And I can tell the people of Saskatchewan, and I can tell the Tories 
opposite, that our vision is in support of sustaining the family farm, and 
not equity financing, and not multinational corporations owning the land. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- And I say, if we have a vision of what we want to preserve 
and build, then we can address the problem. 
 
But I say the government opposite does not have a vision.  I know they have 
a lot of rhetoric from the Premier -- oh, that he's a farmer and his family 
has lost land and so therefore he's in the same boat.  Except the Premier 
sits on Albert Street with a swimming pool in his backyard, with $100,000 
as Premier, and he compares himself and his plight with the farmers who are 
losing their land. 
 
Yes, I think it's easy to know where the Premier and the Tory party and the 
Tory governments are coming from, because they are aligned with the banks 
-- totally and unequivocally.  Premier even went down to have a chat with 
them, to the bankers, and he says, Mr. Bankers, I'd like you to help out a 
little bit. 
 
(2045) 
 
Well I've referred to before, but I want the people of Saskatchewan to know 
what the banks think about the status of farming.  They say there are three 
types of farmers.  They say there are those who are on the leading edge 
entrepreneurs; they say there are the progressives; they say there are the 
traditionalists; and they say there are the marginal majority.  By contrast 
he says, the marginal majority, which represents 40 per cent of today's 
farmers, do not use many information services, are poor managers -- and you 
can hear the Tories running around; we have to let the market system get 
rid of the poor managers -- they keep no records, they're not well 
organized, and they have no long-term plans. 
 
And the bankers, you know what they said?  The bankers who the Premier went 
down to chat with to help the farmers?  Well they said they can profitably 
service the leading edge entrepreneurs and the progressives, and that's 
where it's at. 
 
And this hypocrisy about going down to get the bankers, whose philosophy is 
to get rid of the inefficient -- as they call them -- majority of farmers.  
They don't want to support them.  They wouldn't finance them.  And the 
Premier goes begging -- or pretending he's begging -- to save the farmer. 
 
But let it be made clear -- and I want to repeat this, and it's been 
repeated in this House before -- and I ask any of the farmers to do some 
research, and they are, by the way.  And you'll find the position of the 
Premier of this province, when he was an economic professor at the 



 

 

University of Saskatchewan, where he clearly indicated exactly the same 
position as the Royal Bank's position on agriculture, that 80 per cent of 
the inefficient farmers must go. 
 
That's the vision.  And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, with that vision there 
will be no solution to the agricultural crisis.  You know what?  I agree 
that the Premier can analyse the problem.  No doubt about that.  He's 
fairly accurate.  Because he went down East to talk to the bankers, and 
part of what he said . . . he noted that 20,000 farmers, one-third of the 
entire province, are faced with financial ruin.  And he goes on to say: 
unless they get a cash bail-out of $500 million, 20,000 farmers facing 
financial ruin.  And there's more.  And he says, get $500 million, $10 an 
acre pay-out, and that's going to save their operation.  No way.  He knows 
it, the farmers now know it, and I'm telling you, that's the scam that is 
tried to be perpetrated on the farmers of this province.  They aren't 
looking to solve the major problem. 
 
But the Premier stands on this, and the Minister of Finance, and he says: 
we're committed to agriculture.  Whoopee, he said, look what we have done.  
We have set up . . . He says, first of all, the major problem is the 
farmers are carrying too much debt.  They can't service that debt.  And the 
Minister of Finance and the Premier come into this House, and what do they 
bring and what do they offer to the farmers of Saskatchewan?  Five hundred 
and twenty-five million dollars available at ten and three-quarter per cent 
interest -- more debt.  More debt. 
 
And you know what the total cost of that is?  Thirty to 40 million at tops.  
That's the commitment of that Tory government across the way to 
agriculture.  Thirty or $40 million is what they said.  And that is for 
60,000 farmers across this province. 
 
And you know what they offered to Cargill?  Three hundred and seventy 
million dollars, $60 million in equity -- no problem -- 370 million with 
equity and loan guarantee.  Sixty million to help Cargill, one 
multinational corporation, and $30 million for 60,000 farmers across this 
province. 
 
Let's take a look at what deal they gave to Weyerhaeuser.  They gave 
Weyerhaeuser a pulp mill, 239 millions, and you know what the terms that 
they gave them -- 8 per cent interest.  But the farmers of this province, 
that built this province, it's ten and three-quarter per cent.  And then 
they say to Weyerhaeuser, well you don't have to pay anything unless you 
make a profit of 12 or 13 per cent.  That's the commitment. 
 
Let's talk a little more about their commitment.  Let's talk a little more 
about their commitment to farmers.  Thirty million to the farmers.  Thirty 
million to 60,000 farmers -- that's his commitment.  And you know what?  
The Tory government in Ottawa, the Tory government in Alberta, and the Tory 
government in Saskatchewan put up close to a billion dollars to help 
finance an upgrader in Lloydminster.  And you know who they're helping to 
finance?  A billionaire from Hong Kong.  A multibillionaire from Hong Kong 
who has the controlling interests of Husky Oil.  Priorities, but boy, are 
we for farmers! 



 

 

 
An Hon. Member: -- You're against it. 
 
 DMr. Koskie: -- Ah, the member from Lloydminster says we're against it.  I 
say there has to be priorities, member, and the priorities have to be to 
the people of Saskatchewan that built it, not the billionaire from Hong 
Kong. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The hon. member will allow the member from 
Quill Lakes to continue. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- And you know what the problems is now?  They gave out about 
$30 million to 60,000 farmers -- that's 50 cents an acre, someone said it 
came to.  That's about what they're offering.  That's really going to solve 
the problem.  The Premier says 20,000 farmers are going under, they're in 
financial ruin.  And then he goes to Ottawa.  He says, I got a commitment 
for $500 million.  Then he goes to Ottawa, he comes back -- well I don't 
have a commitment.  And the situation is getting so bad that meeting with 
some of the farmer union people that wanted to discuss it with him, the 
Premier made finger-pointing accusations against those that were talking 
about the crisis -- what a Premier. 
 
But now the game is on.  They're going close to an election, so what are 
they going to do?  They are going to try to play the same game that they 
did prior to 1986.  In 1985, going into the '86 election, boy, we'll put 
out a production loan of $1.2 billion at 6 per cent; that's going to solve 
the problems. 
 
That's what they did in '86.  What are they doing in 1990?  Another type of 
loan, just about the same . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Half. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Half, that's right.  Thanks for your help, member of . . . I 
was going to mention it that you . . . now they only have half the 
commitment that they had then, and they doubled the interest. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- I want you as my prompter, by the way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that's the situation.  They're going through the same act.  
Only during the '86 election, in desperation the Premier got on to the 
phone and he says:  Brian, boy, I'm losing this election; I need your 
bucks.  And it wasn't mentioned in the House of Commons, and the Prime 
Minister said he'd bail him out.  And it came through.  It wasn't a billion 
dollars for Saskatchewan as was alluded to at the time of election.  That 
was deception.  But what are they doing again?  Now we have an election 
again on the horizon, and those people across the way are playing with the 
lives of the people of Saskatchewan because they're playing games with the 
federal government as to when that payment is going to come, to suit their 



 

 

political agenda rather than helping farmers.  And that's where it's at. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- But I'll tell you, they've done a wonderful job.  There is a 
crisis.  There is no doubt there is a crisis.  Here are some of the 
statistics.  Interest expenses for Saskatchewan's farmers in 1989 was 473 
million.  Ten per cent of Saskatchewan farmers have been involved in formal 
debt review procedures.  It goes on to say that the number before the debt 
review has decreased in Alberta and Manitoba, but Saskatchewan has 
experienced an increase of 19 per cent in these applications. 
 
The financial institutions, according to the Premier's figures, that the 
financial institutions have repossessed from farm families 850,000 acres.  
This has taken place . . . this compares with three years ago, 121,000.  
There are 5,400 Farm Credit Corporation accounts in arrears in 
Saskatchewan, or roughly one-quarter of all the corporation's Saskatchewan 
accounts. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- One in four. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- One in four.  Four thousand of these accounts are over one 
year in arrears; 1,500 are over three years in arrears.  And then as 
December 31, '89, and the statistics will be worse by now, 33 per cent of 
agricultural credit corporation's 3,687 capital loans were in arrears -- 
one third.  Production loan program had 17.9 per cent in arrears, up from 
10.5 per cent. 
 
Now, boy . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- What a job. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- What a job, is right.  What a performance, what a . . . 
meeting the crisis that exists in agriculture.  The crisis is there but the 
will is not there.  What we have is another political game being played, 
saying it's federal responsibility; it's provincial responsibility; we 
can't get together; we can't agree, while the farmers leave the land or are 
driven off the land. 
 
And I say to the 20 thousands of farmers that are out there that are in 
financial ruin, in the description of the Premier, don't be bought by 
hollow promises come the next election.  I say to the farmers across 
Saskatchewan, the cash is fine but get rid of the Premier. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Across this province there is a way of addressing it, and 
you have to address it with a comprehensive program.  We support getting 
some assistance of $500 million.  We say, okay, give them some operating 
loans, but only the operating loans if you have a complete package of 
addressing the crisis. 
 
There has to be debt restructuring, and not tomorrow.  And the Premier 



 

 

says, well we're studying it.  But he's been studying it for five years.  
He said in 1985 he's going to have a long-term agricultural policy.  And 
today what we have is the same ad hoc program that we had in '86. 
 
We need an income assurance program, we need a longer tenure for leasing 
back land that had been seized by financial institutions, and we need an 
intergenerational transfer system.  These are the objectives of the New 
Democratic Party, and the farmers of Saskatchewan and the people of 
Saskatchewan are turning to us for that leadership. 
 
(2100) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to turn a little bit to one other topic that concerns 
me to no end.  And that is the absolute crippling mismanagement and waste 
and corruption of this government.  Nine successive budgets, nine 
successive deficits.  And at budget after budget they say they were going 
to bring down that deficit.  In fact, they promised by the year 1991 they'd 
have a balanced budget.  And last year they said we are on the road down.  
We'll get a smaller deficit.  We got only 226, we brought it down from 358, 
I believe.  So we're really on the right direction. 
 
But what happened?  They came in with $390 million.  And this year they 
come in and they say, well we have cut a lot of fat from government.  We 
got it under control.  We've cut a $150 million in programs.  We have cut 
$60 million in two years from internal cut-backs and cabinet ministers' 
salary and travel and those internal matters.  Three hundred million 
dollars they said they cut. 
 
And so they come in this year, and they come in with another devastating 
deficit of 363 million.  And I predict, Mr. Premier . . . Mr. Speaker, 
pardon me. I predict, Mr. Speaker, that that is just a figure.  I predict 
that if we have an election this year, that the party opposite, the 
government members will spend any amount of money that it takes to try to 
get them elected. 
 
Because history demonstrates what they do.  In 1985-86 the budget was just 
over 325, 28 million.  And you know what they brought in?  They overspent 
by a billion dollars.  That's what the people of this province have in 
store for them again.  The same old format, the same deception, and trying 
to buy the people with the people's own money while at the same time 
putting a mortgage on the future of the next generations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Mr. Speaker, these numbers are almost unbelievable.  And I 
would have thought that the member from Yorkton, a former business man, 
would have shown concern.  But he joined like a trained seal to give the 
same lines that are written by Nancy McLean or by Decima advertising or 
whoever their advisers are going into the election.  I thought he would 
have had the decency to stand in this House and protect the future and 
future generations, but not him. 
 
Do you realize that the third highest expenditure in this province is 



 

 

servicing debt? -- $493 million annually just to pay interest; $1.35 
million a day.  We have a total debt in this province of $13.2 billion, and 
they say they can manage and the people should trust them. 
 
I'll tell you, you ask what future does the next generation have with this 
crippling debt, this crippling debt perpetrated on the people of 
Saskatchewan by the so-called business men while they waste the money on 
GigaText, while they give it to their corporate friends, and while they 
desert the people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, others of course want to speak in respect to this budget 
speech.  But I see and hear there are three or four principles that were 
put forward in the budget address.  And what the budget address said is 
that, oh, we were consulting with the people and the people of Saskatchewan 
were telling us what to put in the budget.  Well I'll tell you, they told 
us . . . one fact that is true in this one.  They told us to eliminate 
waste and inefficiency in government.  And I'll tell you, that's what the 
people in every town and every city is saying.  This government no longer 
has the moral right to govern this province because of the waste and 
mismanagement and the corruption that is going on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- In the last session we spent a considerable amount of time 
digging into the scandalous GigaText fiasco.  And today, this session when 
we first came in, what are we plunged into again?  Into another scandal; 
scandal of operation of this government.  Talk to any business man across 
this province and you know what they say: this government has no integrity, 
it can't be treated, and it's not fair.  That's what they're saying.  And, 
Mr. Speaker, I am confident that this is not a budget for the future, but 
this a budget for the death of the Tory party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gleim: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It gives me great pleasure this 
afternoon to have the opportunity to support the Minister of Finance on the 
1990 budget.  Economic times are tough and it does hurt agriculture, oil 
and the potash.  But I guess what I'd like to say: in my constituency I 
have oil, I have agriculture, and we have some industry.  And when times 
are tough in the agricultural industry, it's tough for all the rest of the 
people in my constituency. 
 
I think the budget that the moneys were going to in agriculture, education 
and health is the right way to go.  Those are the main pillars in this 
province, and it is very, very important for rural Saskatchewan. 
 
I know what tough times are.  I went through them as a boy.  I come from a 
very big family, a family of 13.  We went through tough times, but I guess 
in those times we were diversified because we had chickens, cows, pigs; we 
farmed a little bit.  It didn't mean anything for the two of us to sit down 
and milk 20 cows at night and 20 cows in the morning.  It is not something 
that I can say that I'd want to do today, but I'm proud of what I did. 
 



 

 

Maybe that's some of the things that we're going to have to start now to 
maybe survive on the farms, is maybe we're going to have to have a cow, a 
chicken, a pig, or whatever it takes to help on the kitchen table . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Go sheep, goat. 
 
Mr. Gleim: -- Right.  There are some people across the way probably have 
never experienced that.  And I don't imagine they'd know how to cope with 
it if they did have to . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- I give you two coyotes for your three goats over there. 
 
Mr. Gleim: -- That's right.  You're probably making money on coyote there.  
The member from Elphinstone, maybe you should buy some coyotes . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- How many goats you got out there, Ted.  I'll take a 
couple. 
 
Mr. Gleim: -- I have two.  I guess that's what I'm trying to get at, Mr. 
Speaker, is that we have to diversify, and this is what this government's 
all about, is to diversify. 
 
I just want to speak on a few areas.  I'm not going to carry on too long; 
I'm not going to get long-winded like the member from Quill Lakes.  I want 
to talk about some of the things that is important in my constituency. 
 
In agriculture alone, Mr. Speaker, the ACS (Agricultural Credit Corporation 
of Saskatchewan) program, loan program, subsidized loans to farmers to 
establish and expand livestock and irrigation operations . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, order.  The member's being interrupted and 
he's having difficulty being heard by the members.  Allow him to speak 
without interruption. 
 
Mr. Gleim: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The ACS livestock cash advance 
improved cash flow for position of the livestock producers and to help them 
retain their herds.  The ACS production loan program assisted farmers with 
the expense of seeding in 1986 and was similar to the same program we have 
here announced today, or last week that the Premier announced. 
 
Between 1984 and 1988 this provided financial and management counselling, 
operating loans, and consolidated loans guaranteed to farmers in my 
constituency.  The feeder association loan guarantee program to promote 
cattle feeding in Saskatchewan authorized loan limits of $4.85 million.  
This, Mr. Speaker, was a great asset and a great, I would say, probably one 
of the most positive things done in the last three or four years in my 
constituency.  It increased our cattle feeding industry by 60 per cent. 
 
At one time we used to feed probably 12 per cent of our animals in 
Saskatchewan, and as of last year we were up to 70 per cent of the animals 
that were fed in Saskatchewan were finished in Saskatchewan.  And that, as 
I say, Mr. Speaker, that's what I say is diversifying.  We are processing; 
that's where the jobs are, in processing.  When you process an animal here, 



 

 

that means a job.  You process that animal in Ontario or wherever else, 
that is a job down there.  And I think this is a great step forward, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I just want to mention a couple of things about the spring seeding program 
that the Premier announced, the $525 million up front with a ten and 
three-quarter interest rate that the member from Quill Lakes was making a 
joke of.  This loan program is for spring seeding program.  This is at ten 
and three-quarters.  I don't ever recall those people across the way, when 
they were in government, ever giving an interest rate reduction on any loan 
programs that they ever put out.  It was always the interest rate at 
whatever you paid, and I remember paying 22 per cent interest rate, and 
that wasn't that many years ago, and that will never be forgotten. 
 
Agriculture in my constituency is the backbone of my constituency, and I 
think it always will be by the way it is situated down there and with the 
cattle and livestock and with a lot of prairie Crown lands that are there. 
 
In my constituency the natural gas, the individual line service, the 
underground power has made it, I would say, for the farmers.  At one time . 
. . Well, when we got in 1982 we had no natural gas, we had no individual 
line service, we had no underground power.  That is a service that the 
people in my constituency deserved.  They shouldn't be treated as 
second-class citizens as what they were treated as before.  Plus with the 
water corporation programs, the well testing, the dug-outs, and the water 
assistance for the communities has been something that have been well 
accepted in my constituency. 
 
As we all know, water is a problem.  Once the water leaves you, it never 
usually comes back -- at least I have never seen it come back.  And this is 
what I think I have heard the member from Rosemont has indicated that some 
day maybe the water will come back, but there is no use to save it, we'll 
get it when we need it.  Well we do need the water, Mr. Speaker.  And that 
is why we are putting on the programs that we have; that is why we're 
trying to build dams, is to save water.  We're not just building dams to 
create jobs; we're building dams to save water.  Water is a great natural 
resource that is sparse actually.  Water is a resource that is probably the 
deepest to my heart of anything in agriculture, because where I live we 
have a shortage of water. 
 
(2115) 
 
One of the other things in my constituency that is very important is health 
-- what this government has done for health.  They have had a nursing home 
construction program that is all over my constituency that was never there 
before.  They built one and another one under way.  There's the programs 
for the home care.  Just the increase in health alone, 10 per cent, which 
we've heard from across the way is not near enough.  They talk about 
deficits -- maybe we should have taken the increase in health and put it 
towards the deficit.  What would they have said then? 
 
The increase in education, the same thing, the same tune from across there.  
We've given out grants to eight different towns that have nursing homes and 



 

 

hospitals in my constituency.  They all appreciate that.  We haven't cut 
back on that.  We increased the home care, like I mentioned before. 
 
The education in my constituency is very important.  It is another one of 
the pillars that I was talking about.  We've had grants go to . . . I have 
nine different schools in my area that got education grants, and the 5.6 
per cent increase was welcome.  I talked to two directors, education 
directors, on the weekend.  They always say, you know, we appreciate more, 
but we understand where the money is coming from; it comes from the people.  
And with economic times the way it is, Mr. Speaker, it is tough to get a 
hold of money these days. 
 
I want to talk about some programs that I am very proud of that this 
government brought in since it's been in power since 1982.  And some of 
these programs have just come in, been implemented in the last two to three 
years.  There's the new tourism program, the rural medical practice, the 
new rural development corporations.  I believe that the people in rural 
Saskatchewan want to help, but you have to give them the chance to help, 
you have to consult with them, and you have to have the people working 
together.  The people in rural Saskatchewan want to work together.  They 
want to have some responsibility.  They don't want the government to run 
their lives. 
 
The rural medical practice is probably one of the first, besides another 
one up North, that was started two years ago.  Actually we started it three 
years ago, but it's under way.  We have the town of Eastend, the town of 
Climax, the town of Shaunavon that are working together.  They have the 
base hospital in Shaunavon where they're doing minor operations.  They had 
the doctor from Eastend and a doctor from Climax.  Under some of the 
changes in the regulations, they all work together.  They can all cover up 
for each other.  One goes on a holiday or wants to take a weekend off, 
somebody else can cover for him. 
 
I'm sure not all the kinks have been taken out of this program yet, but 
it's progressing.  The people are accepting it, the doctors are accepting 
it, and the boards are working together.  They have all the boards.  Out of 
those boards they have two people from each board, and they have a regional 
board, and these people make the decisions.  I'm just going to mention that 
later on again. 
 
We have a CTAP (Community Tourism Assistance Program) program, tourism 
program, that was implemented two years ago.  This program is probably one 
of the programs that I'm very proud of.  We have 10 towns, communities that 
have joined forces.  They call it the horseshoe circle.  And all these 
communities have organized their own CTAP program, their tourism program.  
It has to be a . . . a sponsoring body has to sponsor this, and it's 
usually the town that they're in that sponsors this.  They appoint their 
members to this board.  These members are from all walks of life:  
ranchers, farmers, business people, whoever, school teachers, whatever. 
 
These boards have to set up by-laws that are approved by the program.  
These people have the chance to have ten different areas that they want to 
go into, that they feel their community can proceed with.  That gives these 



 

 

people a chance.  They get some seed money; they have to match this seed 
money.  That gives them the chance to promote their community. 
 
Every community has something to offer, Mr. Speaker, even though they feel 
. . . I know there was a lot of quotes were made, say, well what do we have 
to offer, you know; what is it going to do for us?  These same people that 
organized this program sat down and before the night was over they had a 
list this long what they have to offer in their community that people don't 
know about.  This gives them the opportunity in the horseshoe circle that 
is being organized right now.  I was part of that.  This horseshoe circle 
has organized and they're going to be putting out a brochure which is going 
to be ready in about three to four weeks time for the spring tourism, to 
promote areas from Consul right up to Cypress Hills, to Maple Creek, across 
to Swift Current, down to Ponteix, down to Val Marie, up to Shaunavon, down 
to Climax, down to Frontier, including Eastend. 
 
This is going to be a horseshoe circle that they're going to promote, that 
if somebody comes into that area, he's just not going to . . . he may be 
visiting Shaunavon or Climax, he can pick up this brochure and say, well if 
I'm going to be here a couple of days, maybe I can stay a couple days 
longer; these are the things I can see; here's something that you people 
have to offer that has been kept a secret.  And that's why one of the 
slogans is the town of Eastend is called the valley of hidden secrets.  
It's been a secret for a lot of years and it's time to promote them 
secrets. 
 
With this tourism program we are involving the state of Montana.  We went 
down and had a meeting with the governor earlier on, but since then we've 
went down and we've met with the chamber of commerce, the department of 
transportation, the agricultural department, the governor's office, the 
senator's office, and the congressman's office, and the department of 
tourism.  That was in the town of Havre.  We had a real good reception.  
These people are interested, the same as we are, for tourism.  They want 
people to come down and have a look at what they got.  They've been sitting 
back the same as we were probably . . . you can say, we're responsible for 
that, sitting back and letting the people say, well we know it's there, 
we'll come down.  This does not just happen.  You have to promote your 
community.  They're ready to do this in co-operation with us. 
 
We have formed a committee between Montana and Saskatchewan.  The next 
meeting is going to be in Saskatchewan.  It's going to be in Eastend.  
These people are going to come up and have a joint meeting with us to 
promote . . . to tell us what their promotions are going to be.  There's 
going to be representation from all those committees that I talked about: 
the tourism, the congressman, the governor, maybe the . . . I think that 
we're even going to have the congressman and the governor up to this 
meeting. 
 
They have lots to offer the same as we do.  I think with a joint effort, 
and this is why I say it has to be a joint effort that we can promote each 
other.  And this is what this is all about.  You promote me; I promote you. 
 
In conjunction with this I want to mention the other program, rural 



 

 

development corporation.  We have a rural development corporation that has 
been founded down there.  It has 10 RMs; five towns are involved in this.  
This is to promote your community, promote industry, trying to get industry 
to locate industry into your community.  This rural development corporation 
has by-laws, has rules to go by under legislation. 
 
This rural development corporation has seed money.  Mr. Speaker, this rural 
development corporation can go out and have the powers to go out and hire 
somebody to go out and promote them, whoever they think is the best; they 
decided that; they've hired somebody already.  This  
 Dperson is responsible for taking in conventions here and there to find 
out if there is an opportunity and to tell these, wherever they're at, we 
have an opportunity down in the south-west.  Here's what we have for you. 
 
So this is how the rural development corporation . . . I could go into more 
detail.  But the point I was getting at, there's these three programs that 
are all working in conjunction, working in conjunction of rural 
Saskatchewan -- tourism, rural development corporation, the rural medical 
practice.  All these three programs are going to promote health and 
education. 
 
Recreation: we have a recreation grant that I'm very proud of too, Mr. 
Speaker, because without this recreation grant right now, some of these 
recreational facilities would be in jeopardy.  We all know what it costs to 
build the new facilities.  At least I do; I was involved with a new 
facility.  It was over $1 million.  We're not finished yet.  I was involved 
with it from day one.  I know what it costs; I know how many dollars it's 
going to take to finish it; I know how many hours it takes.  Most of that 
is free labour, Mr. Speaker. 
 
With the three items or the topics that I was talking about here, it makes 
it so important for rural Saskatchewan that if we lose one school or one 
hospital or one recreation facility, that community is probably in 
jeopardy, because we are working with the minimal number of people with 
just about everything we do.  That's why working in co-operation, everybody 
co-operating, I do believe that we have a chance in rural Saskatchewan.  
Everybody's thinking positive.  I've been to all their meetings.  Even when 
the rural medical practice started up there was people who were a little 
negative.  They said, it'll never work.  Those same people are saying right 
now that it's probably going to be the saviour of our hospitals and our 
nursing homes. 
 
The same thing as the tourism program; some people said we have nothing to 
offer.  And like I mentioned, by the time the night was over they had their 
committee formed.  They had lots to offer.  There's people out there 
saying, we have to maybe think about where these people are going to stay.  
What have we got for facilities?  They're even talking about setting up 
venture capital corporations for maybe a motel, maybe a cafe pé, or 
whatever.  They're thinking about increasing golf courses.  The town of 
Shaunavon is going to spend a quarter of a million dollars on their golf 
course, because they feel without that we just don't have the attraction 
there for the people to come with the golf course the way it is.  They want 
to put grass greens, grass fairways, watered fairways, to make it a number 



 

 

one spot, a class one spot for the tourism. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, that we are ready to fight.  The people that are 
out there are thinking positive.  I can stand here and mention some of the 
things that the people opposite were talking about.  Negativism, be 
negative; this is what they're preaching -- preaching be negative, because 
that's the only way they feel they can get elected is they can get the 
people thinking negative.  Well, Mr. Speaker, the people aren't going to . 
. . they're not going to swallow that, Mr. Speaker.  People out there are 
going to think positive.  This is not the first time this has happened to 
this province or this whole country.  We've had our problems before.  You 
can talk, you can ask your ancestors, your grandfathers, grandmothers, your 
fathers, they all say the same thing: times are going to change.  I just 
hope that I'm here when the change is here.  Mr. Speaker, I know it's going 
to change. 
 
I've just got one thing I'd like to mention.  I heard the member from 
Wilkie talk about the Co-op upgrader, Husky, Husky upgrader in 
Lloydminster, jobs.  Those are things . . . Those two co-operations -- 
corporations, you might call it, a corporation in co-operation with the 
government are jobs.  They call them multinationals.  What have they got 
against multinationals?  They don't believe in jobs, I see.  Any time you 
start spending $600 million on the Co-op upgrader and a billion dollars on 
the Lloydminster project, that creates a lot of jobs in that community.  
That creates a lot of jobs all across Saskatchewan.  And I guess if you 
people, if the people across the way want to play political games with 
that, they can go right ahead.  The people aren't going to believe you. 
 
I come from a constituency where we have oil.  The Co-op upgrader was a 
blessing.  The Lloydminster upgrader was a blessing.  They've been waiting 
for it for years.  The people across the way talked about it, but that's 
all they did; they just talked about it. 
 
We have a project down there that we are starting that I have to credit to 
the Minister of Agriculture, both ministers, the associate and the 
minister. 
 
(2130) 
 
A water project.  We're doing a study on it on the Battle Creek.  You want 
to go down there, maybe, and take a little trip down there some of you some 
day and find out the appreciation the people are giving the people of 
Saskatchewan for even considering building something in that area, because 
that's all that's ever been done, is considering.  We are serious about 
this project.  We have dealt and we have met with United States. 
 
We have have met with the governor; we have met with the people in Montana.  
These people down there have the same problem as we do.  The water goes by 
and it don't come back.  These people want to co-operate.  They want to 
work with us on this project.  We are going to work together on this 
project and we are going to build it.  Mr. Speaker, that is positive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to close by saying I feel much better going to bed at 



 

 

night thinking that tomorrow is going to better than thinking that tomorrow 
is going to be a sad day.  With that, I support the Finance minister in the 
1990 budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I am grateful for the 
opportunity to participate in this budget speech debate.  The member who 
just concluded his remarks spoke with some optimism about the future of 
Saskatchewan.  I share that optimism.  He spoke about change and I, too, 
believe the change is coming.  The change is coming when the Premier calls 
the election in this province.  And there is going to be a big change, a 
change in government and a change in direction for Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since the budget was delivered to this House and the people of 
Saskatchewan last Thursday night, I've had the opportunity to visit with a 
fair number of people in my own constituency.  I've had the opportunity to 
travel to the city of Swift Current and meet people there.  I've had the 
opportunity to travel to the community of Girvin and meet people there.  
And I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, and all members present, that no 
matter where I travel in this province, either before the budget and 
particularly since the delivery of the budget, people across this province 
are indicating to me that they have lost their confidence in this group of 
men and women; that across this province this group of men and women no 
longer enjoy any credibility.  They no longer enjoy the confidence of the 
people that they were elected to govern, Mr. Speaker, and so I'd describe 
the situation in Saskatchewan today as a crisis of confidence. 
 
The Minister of Education should know this that across the province I 
believe there is a crisis of confidence.  When the people of this province 
have lost confidence in the men and women they elected to lead them, then 
it is time, Mr. Speaker, it's time to defeat that group of men and women 
and replace it with a group of people who can restore the confidence of the 
people of the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would argue in this debate that the budget that was 
delivered to us last Thursday evening in this House by the Minister of 
Finance only goes on to deepen that crisis of credibility and the crisis of 
confidence in this province. 
 
In his budget address, Mr. Speaker, I heard the minister say, and I quote, 
the people have "told us to eliminate waste . . . in government."  That's 
what the minister said in his speech, and then he went on to claim in his 
speech, we have reduced inefficiency and waste.  He went on to claim, we 
first tightened our own belt. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, when the people of Saskatchewan hear that kind of 
comment from the Minister of Finance, is it any wonder this government 
lacks in credibility?  How, Mr. Speaker, can the people of this province be 
expected to believe what this government says when they see what this 
government does? 
 
Mr. Speaker, by way of illustration, while this Minister of Finance in the 



 

 

House and before the people of Saskatchewan was indicating that this 
government was coming to grips with inefficiency and waste, even while the 
words were leaving his mouth, for an example, at our home I receive, 
delivered by the letter carrier, three bills -- one from SaskPower, one 
from the gas division, SaskEnergy, and one from SaskTel -- all of them in 
three separate envelopes, each with three separate stamps, delivered by the 
letter carrier to our home.  Now you will know, Mr. Speaker, that I can pay 
each of those three bills with one cheque in one envelope.  Mr. Speaker, 
while this is this government's best attempt at efficiency and the 
elimination of waste, Mr. Speaker, three bills in one envelope with one 
stamp would save the consumers of Saskatchewan literally hundreds of 
thousands of dollars.  But somebody over there can't seem to figure that 
out. 
 
While this Minister of Finance is talking about inefficiency and waste, and 
how they've really tackled the problem, his own colleague, the Minister of 
Education, is delivering to the parents of every child in the school system 
in Saskatchewan another letter, on fancy government stationery, delivered 
to our homes in what is obviously the use of taxpayers money in 
pre-election propaganda.  Mr. Speaker, if this government was truly 
interested in dealing with waste and inefficiencies and mismanagement, that 
kind of letter would never be sent to the parents of this province. 
 
While he talks about the elimination of waste in his budget, the very same 
week in this House we learned that his colleague, the former minister of 
Finance, last year alone spent $99,000 so that he and his entourage could 
travel around the world.  Mr. Speaker, is there any wonder we have a crisis 
of credibility here?  Is it any wonder the people will not believe what 
they say when they see what they do? 
 
And then he said in his speech, well we've tightened our belts; we have a 
grip on it and we've tightened our belts.  Well you'll remember, Mr. 
Speaker, and the people of the province remember about six months ago they 
loosened their belt about eight notches; they fattened up this government 
about eight notches.  Now by my count I think there is only one member on 
the government benches now who doesn't receive extra pay for some cabinet 
or Legislative Secretary responsibility -- only one left who would be 
considered a true back-bencher.  Know what that means, Mr. Speaker, and 
what the people of the province know it means, is it's not only a question 
of extra salaries.  It's a question of extra pension benefits, it's extra 
offices in this building, it's extra staff, it's extra cars, extra airplane 
trips. 
 
He says, now but whoa, we've tightened out belts.  We're going to cut back 
on this severance thing to ministers who leave the government.  Well what's 
happened here is they may have pulled the belt in by one notch, but six 
months ago they let it out by eight.  And they want the people of the 
province to believe that they've got some grip on waste and inefficiency 
and expenditures right out of line. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, is there any wonder that we have what I describe as to be 
a crisis of credibility, a crisis of confidence in the province, and a 
crisis, Mr. Speaker, that I argue begins to put into question our whole 



 

 

democratic system and process in this province.  That's what is truly sad 
about this. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I repeat that when a government has lost the confidence of 
the people, when it has lost its credibility and demonstrates as much in a 
budget address, then it's time to defeat that government.  It's time to put 
into place in government a group of women and men who will indeed restore 
confidence, not only to the budgetary process and the financial management 
of our province but confidence to our people in what we can do and be in 
the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that this budget, as I have studied its documents 
and its implications, I believe it's a budget that will continue to press 
hard on Saskatchewan households, and yet at the same time does not offer to 
the Saskatchewan household, to the Saskatchewan family, the kind of hope 
and the kind of promise and the kind of direction that Saskatchewan people 
are looking for. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, in my hearing, when someone was asked to comment on 
this budget in a succinct way, that individual responded, well, I guess 
we're another day older and deeper in debt.  That's a very succinct 
analysis of this budget.  Yes, we're another day older and we're in deeper 
in debt. 
 
It needs to be recognized, Mr. Speaker, that this budget that's before us 
now is not simply the consequence of the last year in this province's 
history.  This budget that we were delivered on Thursday night last is the 
consequence, not of one year but of eight years -- of eight long years of 
financial mismanagement in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is provided in the estimate figures that accompany this 
budget, it is accompanied in the minister's own . . . it is indicated in 
the minister's own address that we, the people of Saskatchewan, we, the 
province of Saskatchewan, we, the government of Saskatchewan are now 
handcuffed by the debt that has been put upon us by this group of men and 
women since they came to office.  Mr. Speaker, I say we are handcuffed as a 
people by this debt.  The budget indicates now that the debt of the 
province and the operations of government has reached $4.36 billion -- 
$4.36 billion in debt put on the people of this province by this group of 
men and women since they came to power. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I point out again as other members have that the interest 
payment now on this debt is the third largest item in the Saskatchewan 
provincial budget.  I point out that figure is very near to $500 million a 
year which amounts to $1.35 million a day in interest payments to service 
this debt accumulated by the government opposite since they came to power 
in 1982 -- $1.35 million a day to service the debt, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that money, Mr. Speaker, comes directly out of the pocket-books of the 
Saskatchewan people, right out of the bank accounts of Saskatchewan people 
through their tax dollars, and right into the vaults of the financial 
institutions in New York, Tokyo, and Geneva.  Mr. Speaker, this kind of a 
debt handicaps . . . this kind of a debt handcuffs the government of 



 

 

Saskatchewan. 
 
Speculate, Mr. Speaker, if you will, what we could do as government if we 
didn't have this entry in the budget, $500 million a year interest payment; 
what we could do with $500 million.  For the agricultural community of 
Saskatchewan this spring, if we had $500 million, what could we do?  If we 
had $500 million, what could we do, Mr. Speaker, in terms of creating jobs 
for the people of this province?  If we had that $500 million, what could 
we do in health care, in education?  Imagine what we could do to feed the 
hungry children of this province.  Imagine what we could do to provide 
day-care spaces if we had that $500 million. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- But no, Mr. Speaker, that $500 million, that $1,350,000 a 
day goes straight from your pocket-book, from my pocket-book and all of the 
pocket-books of Saskatchewan taxpayers, straight into the vaults in New 
York and around the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I argue that the budget we have before us, with its lack of 
service to people, with its tax burden, is a result not of just one year 
but of eight years of mismanagement.  It is a natural consequence -- this 
kind of budget -- of a province that is technically bankrupt. 
 
And I might add, Mr. Speaker, it's a natural consequence of privatization, 
because in sacrificing the revenues that came to the people of Saskatchewan 
from the assets owned by the people of Saskatchewan and sacrificing that 
revenue, we have no vehicle now to deal with this debt except taxation.  
And I might add, Mr. Speaker, that the great tragedy in my view is that 
this debt will remain; this debt will remain when this government is gone; 
that this debt will remain with this generation and the next generation and 
very likely the next generation, and it will continue to handicap the 
people of Saskatchewan, my children, and their children.  That's the 
tragedy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget would also indicate that this government is simply 
not capable.  It demonstrates incapacity to be able to manage, to deal with 
this debt.  There is nothing in this budget address, we heard nothing in 
the throne speech, that would indicate that this government now has a plan 
to see us out of this financial morass. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what the people of this province want is a plan.  They 
understand this is going to be a long-term problem, but the people of this 
province want and need and deserve leadership from their government, a plan 
that will see us through this financial catastrophe that we're now in. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I join with my colleague in saying that that will take 
a new government. 
 
(2145) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want in this budget debate to reflect for a short while on 
the implications, as I see them, of this budget on the community of Moose 



 

 

Jaw.  And then I would like to, if time permits, to comment how this budget 
reflects on those areas that I serve as the official opposition critic for. 
 
So in terms, Mr. Speaker, of my own community of Moose Jaw, I have looked 
very carefully at the budget speech and the accompanying documents, the 
Estimates and the Supplementary Estimates.  I've looked at them very 
carefully and I can find, Mr. Speaker, no specific reference in these 
documents to a new St. Anthony's Home for the community of Moose Jaw.  Mr. 
Speaker, I remind you that the commitment was made to the community of 
Moose Jaw prior to 1986 by the Premier himself that a new St. Anthony's 
would be built.  Mr. Speaker, you will recall after the election that 
commitment was put on hold. 
 
Now since then, members opposite know, and we all know, that a good deal of 
thought and reorganization and replanning has gone into that project for 
St. Anthony's Home, and the community and the board and the people of Moose 
Jaw are ready to go.  Houses in fact these days are being levelled to make 
way for this new home.  Mr. Speaker, I cannot find in these budget 
documents a specific commitment to ensure that project.  Now perhaps I may 
be nai pïve, but I am trusting the money is there.  And this will be a 
question that I will be anxious to put either to the Associate Minister of 
Health or the Minister of Health when we come to the estimates of his 
department.  The community of Moose is anxious to know about that very 
specific commitment . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Now the member 
from Lloydminster wants to know if we will publicly thank the government 
when that commitment is made, and in fact I will.  In fact I will. 
 
The citizens of Moose Jaw will long remember that the commitment made by 
the Premier before 1986; they will long remember that commitment being put 
on hold; they will long remember the delays.  But when in fact you commit 
finally to that project, you will receive the gratitude of this member and 
the people of Moose Jaw. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, I have looked carefully in this budget at the 
estimates for the Department of Education, and I have done that because 
education is vital in Moose Jaw, as it is in every other community of the 
province.  But I looked with a very specific eye to the funding for SIAST, 
to the funding for SIAST, STI (Saskatchewan Technical Institute), the 
Palliser Campus, located in Moose Jaw.  Mr. Speaker, I am left with some 
concerns. 
 
Given that the Minister of Education and other members of the government 
have repeated over and over again that the increased funding in Education 
is 5.9 per cent -- I believe that's the figure they're using -- when I turn 
to the very specific item, which is a grant to the Saskatchewan Institute 
of Applied Science and Technology, I find that in 1989-90 the estimated 
funding was $69.8 million.  The bottom-line figure for the current year, 
Mr. Speaker, is $65.7 million.  Now, Mr. Speaker, that, in anybody's 
language is a decrease in funding from 69.8 last year to 65.7. 
 
Now I want to be fair to the government, Mr. Speaker, I want to be fair to 



 

 

the government because under the grant to SIAST you'll find two categories: 
one is in payments to the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation and 
the other is for operations.  Now I note that much of the decrease in 
funding to SIAST is a decrease that is against the payments to Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation.  Frankly, I don't understand that.  We'll 
want to ask the minister about that in Estimates. 
 
In operations I see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that in fact funding has 
increased.  It's gone from 48.3 million to 49.8 for the operations of our 
technical schools.  Now, Mr. Speaker, again I don't think you need to be a 
Ph.D. in mathematics to understand that that is a 3 per cent increase -- 3 
per cent increase to the fundings for operations of our technical schools 
-- 3 per cent.  Now, Mr. Speaker, you and I and members in the House know 
that inflation, in fact, is running in the neighbourhood of 5 per cent or 
greater.  Now, Mr. Speaker, I will want to ask the member and the member 
from Moose Jaw North will want to deal with this in the Minister of 
Education's estimates.  How will the board of SIAST, the staff and the 
students of SIAST live with a 3 per cent increase in funding when inflation 
is running at 5 per cent, and somehow be told that they're a lot better off 
than before this budget?  Now we'll want to talk to the Minister of 
Education about that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the city that I represent and am proud to represent, our 
small-business community, our city council, the people of Moose Jaw are 
working hard in terms of attempting to revitalize our downtown in a variety 
of ways.  I do not find, Mr. Speaker, within the budget any assistance in 
that regard.  I do not find in this budget any specific mention of the kind 
of downtown revitalization projects that would serve our community and 
others.  And so again, I and the member from Moose Jaw North will want to 
pursue this with the ministers responsible.  Can we find in this budget 
some very tangible assistance to downtown revitalization in the city of 
Moose Jaw. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I've reviewed these documents and I've asked the question: how 
will this budget affect the property tax payer in Moose Jaw?  How will this 
budget affect the people that are paying property taxes on their homes or 
through their businesses or as renters through their rents in apartments.  
How will this affect? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I really think for unmitigated gall this statement in 
the budget must rank among one of the best.  The Minister of Finance stood 
in this House and he said: 
 

 We could have followed the Government of Canada's example and shifted our 
fiscal problems onto others. 

 
Further on he says: 
 

 We recognize that shifting costs from one government to another does 
nothing to relieve the burden on the taxpayers . . . 

 
The implication here of course is that they're not shifting any burden of 
taxation onto the local municipalities.  Well he said he's not going to 



 

 

shift it, he's not going to off-load on the municipalities, and then he did 
it, he did it.  The urban revenue sharing is frozen.  In the period of 
inflation, that means obviously a 5 per cent cut, a cut that the city of 
Moose Jaw is going to have to deal with.  City council of Moose Jaw is 
going to be faced with that unhappy prospect of either cutting services or 
raising property taxes.  There's no option.  They don't have the option of 
deficit financing like this group have used; they're going to have the 
unhappy choice. 
 
If, in fact, as I read the budget the base funding to education is in the 
neighbourhood of 2.9 or three per cent, a gain of less than inflation, the 
school boards in Moose Jaw are also going to be faced with that unhappy 
choice.  You either cut or you ask more from the property taxpayer.  This 
budget is not good news for the property taxpayer of the city of Moose Jaw, 
Mr. Speaker, or in any other municipality in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the community that I represent we have a high percentage of 
seniors, and a goodly number of those seniors depend on the bus, the city 
bus, for their transportation.  On Sunday evening, Mr. Speaker, I was 
speaking to a senior in Moose Jaw, one who I know quite well who lives in 
my constituency, and her question to me was: what's going to happen to our 
buses?  Are they cutting the money for our buses?  The answer is yes.  
They've cut the municipal transit grant. 
 
Now that for the city of Moose Jaw amounted to $140,000 a year.  That is 
not an insignificant amount of money for the city I represent.  Mr. 
Speaker, the city of Moose Jaw are going to be faced with the unhappy 
choice: what do you do, cut services, raise fares, or increase taxes?  And 
that service in my community, Mr. Speaker, is an important service. 
 
So I say to the Minister of Finance, just as Michael Wilson off-loaded on 
to you, sure enough you've off-loaded on to the taxpayers of the 
municipalities of the province, including the city of Moose Jaw.  The 
difference is at least Michael Wilson was honest about it.  He didn't try 
to disguise it; he was honest about it. 
 
Well you know it's often been said, Mr. Speaker, you can fool some of the 
people some of the time, but you can't fool all the people all of the time.  
And the people of Moose Jaw are not fooled by this budget and the 
consequences that it may in fact have on our community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just also want to say just a word about households in the 
constituency I represent.  I want to say a word about families and the 
households of Moose Jaw South. 
 
In the last decade, Mr. Speaker, those households, they've seen their real 
disposable income decline.  It becomes harder and harder for families in my 
constituency to make ends meet.  People in my constituency are being forced 
to give up their homes.  They no longer can make their mortgage payments.  
People in my constituency, many people in my constituency have seen their 
jobs disappear.  Even as we meet tonight, a good many workers from Canada 
Packers are being laid off, are laid off. 
 



 

 

And they have some real serious concern about their future.  We've lost, 
just recently, 20 jobs from Via Rail.  In Moose Jaw we've seen our SaskTel 
crews and our SaskPower reduced.  Stores have closed down on our Main 
Street, throwing people out of work.  And, Mr. Speaker, the stress shows -- 
it shows in the households, in the homes and the families of Moose Jaw.  
Parents and grandparents in my constituency are watching as their children 
and their grandchildren leave the province in search of jobs elsewhere.  
Families are being torn apart. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, perhaps the most tragic indication of this 
situation, of this lack of employment and jobs, is the fact -- and this is 
fact, Mr. Speaker -- that in a school not far from my home, in Westmount 
School in Moose Jaw, 28 children, 28 hungry kids lined up this morning for 
breakfast at school. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is an absolute first in the city of Moose Jaw.  In 
Westmount School, this morning, 28 kids lined up for breakfast.  And I know 
for a fact, Mr. Speaker, I know for a fact because I sat behind that desk 
for a number of years -- that in the course of this day, people will have 
lined up at Zion United Church to get a referral for the food bank in Moose 
Jaw.  That's the tragic reality.  That's the tragic indicator of the lack 
of employment opportunity, the lack of jobs, the lack of economic direction 
being provided by those men and women who are charged with bringing that 
into my community and to this whole province. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I firmly believe that in this budget the households of 
Moose Jaw were sincerely looking for an economic game plan.  They were 
looking for opportunities where they might have the prospect of working 
again.  They were looking for a plan that might give them the prospect of 
long-term and secure jobs, an economic plan that could begin a turnaround 
in the state of this province.  And what they were delivered, by the 
Minister of Finance, was more taxes; in spite of what he said, more tax.  
They were delivered a fair bit of rhetoric and no plan, no plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Moose Jaw are not fooled, and they want a 
difference.  They want a change.  And I tell you what they want is a New 
Democratic difference.  They want a New Democratic change and that's what 
they'll see again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to quickly deal with two of my critic 
areas.  I listened again very carefully to the Minister of Consumer and 
Commercial Affairs as he gave his address in this budget debate, and again 
I note that the minister did not comment on the investors who have lost 
much of their life savings in the collapse of Principal Trust. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I remind you again, we are talking here of thousands of 
Saskatchewan people, mostly seniors, who either currently, or come from 
farming or working backgrounds or small business, who invested in Principal 
Trust, trusting in their government to have regulated; trusting in their 
government to have policed; trusting in their government to ensure that 
operations in this province were safe. 



 

 

 
Since last we sat, the Ombudsman of this province has delivered his 
scathing attack on the ministers and the government opposite pointing out 
what investors have said, what Saskatchewan people have said, that the 
collapse was due to the negligence of this government and the minister 
responsible for their concerns.  The minister responsible for the concerns 
of these thousands of Saskatchewan people comes into this House, not only 
in his throne speech but also then in his budget speech, and fails to 
mention, fails to mention, says not a word in regard to the investors in 
Principal Trust who are looking now to him for some assistance in their 
plight.  And when he's approached by the press outside of this House, I 
quote from the Leader-Post, March 30, 1990, an article that points out 
there was nothing in this budget for the investors.  I quote from the 
article: 
 

 When questioned about the possibility of compensation, Consumer and 
Commercial Affairs Minister, Jack Klein refused . . . comment . . . 

 
Refuses to comment in his throne speech; refuses to comment in his budget 
speech; refuses to comment to the press.  Well, Mr. Speaker, again I serve 
notice that before this session is completed he will comment. 
 
The Speaker: -- It being 10 o'clock the House stands adjourned until 
tomorrow at 2 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10 p.m. 
 


