





























































Hansard: June 13, 1990


 

 

June 13/90 
 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure, Mr. 
Speaker, to introduce to you, and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, 42 grade 4 and 5 students from William Grayson School in Moose 
Jaw who are seated in the east gallery today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These students are accompanied by their teachers, Diane Hicks, Pat Barbier, 
and Pat Gilhes.  We met earlier this day, Mr. Speaker.  These students have 
been to the science centre here in Regina.  They've been on tour of the 
Legislative Assembly and we've had a chance to have pictures and 
refreshments and a bit of a visit before they're coming to take their seats 
in the east gallery today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of the Assembly to show welcome to the 
students from William Grayson to this, their Legislative Assembly, and to 
as well wish them a very pleasant summer holiday this summer. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, today I would 
like to introduce to you, and through you to all members of the 
legislature, a couple of people who are located in the west gallery, Mr. 
Speaker.  These are two Progressive Conservative candidates freshly and 
newly nominated, and I'd like to firstly introduce the candidate for Regina 
Rosemont, Myrna Petersen.  Myrna is a health worker at the . . . 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Myrna is a health worker at the Pasqua Hospital.  The 
other new candidate for the Progressive Conservative Party for the 
constituency of Bengough-Milestone is Derrell Rodine, a farmer from the 
Goodwater area, a gentleman who has had extensive experience in the area of 
counselling for farm stress. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think you would probably agree with me that these two 
individuals represent two very important constituencies.  And, Mr. Speaker, 
I submit to you they are a winning combination of a popping good health 
worker and a good farmer from two very important areas of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gardner: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce to you and to all 
members of the Assembly this afternoon some 35 grade 5 students that are 
here from Victoria School in Kamsack.  They're seated in the east gallery 
behind me, and they've had a tour of the Assembly -- or of the building 



 

 

this afternoon and they're now here in the Assembly with us.  I'll meet 
them later after question period to answer any questions they might have. 
 
And Victoria School, Mr. Speaker, is kind of special to me because -- I 
don't want to date one of their teachers, Mrs. Reilkoff, that's with them, 
but her and I were students in that school, I'll say just a few years back, 
together.  I know this is an annual event for the Victoria School in 
Kamsack.  And I would wish all members to welcome them here in the usual 
manner.  And I'll meet with them shortly after question period. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, first let me 
add my welcome to Ms. Petersen here in the Assembly today.  I'm sure Ms. 
Petersen will prove to be a fine candidate for the Conservative Party, 
given the experience that she has had running for them.  And I know that 
she will acquaint . . . and put forward the record of this government well. 
 
And I might say, Mr. Speaker, I may say, Mr. Speaker, that like other 
members of the Assembly who sit here, we hope that our opponents enjoy the 
proceedings from the gallery for a long time. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, I've risen to welcome to the Assembly and to all 
members of the Assembly through you, sir, 18 students who are here on 
behalf of Luther College.  Now these students aren't regular students at 
Luther College in my constituency of Regina Rosemont, they are from Bonn in 
the Federal Republic of Germany.  They are accompanied by Herr Behrla who 
is here from Bonn as well, who I've had the opportunity to meet once before 
I believe, in their previous visit to this Assembly. 
 
And as well, Mr. Speaker, we'll be meeting with the students following 
today's question period, in room 255, as well as for pictures and 
refreshments.  So I'd ask all members to welcome these fine students from 
the Federal Republic of Germany here today to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 
as well on behalf of my colleague and neighbour, the hon. member from 
Kelsey-Tisdale, introduce to you and to the members of the legislature 53 
students from the grade 7 class of Stewart Hawke School in Hudson Bay, 
Saskatchewan, and they are located in the west gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It is my pleasure to welcome you to Regina.  I hope you have a great day in 
Regina and I look forward to meeting you later for refreshments and 
pictures and possibly answer a few questions for you on behalf of your MLA.  
Let's all give them a real warm welcome to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Gerich: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  On behalf of the Minister of 
Social Services, the member for Rosthern, my seat mate, I'd like to 
introduce from South Corman Park School, in the Speaker's gallery, 24 



 

 

students, grades 5 and 6.  They're accompanied by their teacher, Harold 
Kroeger, Holly Stasiuk, Carol Buckwold, Liz Carpenter, and Shelly Loewer.  
I hope that they find the proceedings entertaining and educational this 
afternoon.  Please welcome our guests. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  While we're in the 
business of introducing candidates for the next provincial election 
campaign, I thought I would leave the very best to the last. 
 
And I have therefore to introduce to you, sir, and to the members of the 
Legislative Assembly -- especially to the Minister of Justice, who if he 
was with us after the next election would know exactly how good this 
candidate's going to be, but unfortunately I don't suspect he'll be here -- 
to introduce to you, sir, the candidate for Saskatoon Westmount. 
 
Our candidate has very big shoes to fill, that is the role fulfilled by our 
long-standing MLA, a former Speaker.  The member from Westmount currently 
comes from the distinguished Brockelbank family.  This candidate is the 
past president of the Saskatoon Co-op.  She teaches at the University of 
Saskatchewan, and I'd ask her to rise so she can be recognized, Dr. Janice 
MacKinnon. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to join with my leader in 
welcoming my constituent, Ms. MacKinnon from Saskatoon Westmount.  I know 
she'll be a worthy successor of me in this legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I don't mean to drag out introductions 
but I too would like to acknowledge the presence of and welcome to our 
legislature Janice MacKinnon. 
 
Janice was a professor at the university when I attended there and I would 
submit to this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, that she did an excellent job of 
teaching me history and a little bit about political science.  And I can 
say, Mr. Speaker, that I learned an awful lot from her. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Federal-Provincial Farm Aid 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my question 
today, in the absence of the Minister of Agriculture and I believe the 
Associate Minister of Agriculture, probably should be to the Minister of 
Finance.  And it pertains to the farm aid package. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you will know, members know, about two weeks ago now or 



 

 

perhaps more, Regina and Ottawa announced a farm aid package -- promised 
quite some months ago, mind you, by the governments both here and in 
Ottawa.  In the two weeks since that time we've had absolutely no concrete 
information with respect to the details of how this farm aid package is 
going to get paid to the farmers who are so desperately in need of cash. 
 
My question therefore, Mr. Speaker, is to the front bench, presumably the 
Minister of Finance.  Will he be able to tell us today a specific date as 
to when farmers can expect to have their money in hand?  And while he's on 
his feet, in addition to telling us the date, will he tell the House and 
the farmers of this province exactly how this money is to be paid out?  
Because as we all know, they desperately need it, and it's long, long 
overdue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, in so far as when the farmers will 
receive the payments, as I think I've said in this legislature before and I 
think the minister and the Premier would back up, everyone recognizes the 
urgency in getting the cash into farmers' hands.  That was the underlying 
objective when the Premier started out on this some several weeks ago and 
what turned out to be a very successful mission. 
 
At this time I can't say precisely what date those cheques will be in 
farmers' hands, but I know everyone is working towards it being sooner 
rather than later.  As it relates to how it will be paid out, cultivated 
acres, seeded acres, those kinds of things, the Premier, the Minister of 
Agriculture, and the Associate Minister of Agriculture and other members of 
the agriculture caucus have been meeting with and consulting with the 
various farm organizations to make sure that the payment is in accordance 
with, and taking the good advice and counsel that these farm groups and 
farm leaders have willingly given all through this process. And indeed I 
think there's a meeting yet scheduled with these farm leaders again today 
to work out final details, Mr. Speaker.  Because of that I think we can 
expect a further and more detailed announcement very shortly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the Minister of 
Finance.  And I might say, Mr. Speaker, that listening to the Minister of 
Finance's answer, I think it can be safely said that he has redefined the 
meaning of the word urgent.  Because this answer has been the answer in 
variation that we've been getting now for the last, I would say several 
months. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you know, the House passed a motion, I believe unanimously, 
calling for a pay-out this spring. It was committed in the Speech from the 
Throne on March 19, 1990, this spring.  Consultations have endlessly been 
undertaken. Seeding is now virtually complete, and still no money and still 
no details. 
 
Mr. Minister, why isn't the program finalized by now?  For goodness sakes, 
given all of the staff that you have, all of the consultations that you've 



 

 

undertaken, why hasn't the program been finalized and the payments made 
before now, as has been promised to the farmers.  Why are you not getting 
on with the job? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, the payments, as I've said, will be 
going out as soon as possible.  Everyone is working towards that goal.  And 
additionally, this Premier and this government and this agriculture caucus 
and this caucus believes in working with and taking the advice of farmers, 
farm groups, and their leadership.  That's been a very successful recipe in 
the past and we're sticking to it this time, Mr. Speaker.  An additional 
meeting, I believe, is scheduled yet this afternoon and hopefully further 
details -- maybe the complete details -- can be announced in very short 
order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the minister.  It's 
somewhat encouraging to hear him say that the details will be announced in 
short order.  I can only say, it's about time -- it's about six months 
time.  But none the less, I guess we have to be thankful for small mercies. 
 
My question to the minister is this: Mr. Minister, are you able to tell 
this House where the administrative costs and the costs for administration 
of this plan are going to come from?  Are they going to come from your 
budget, our budget here in the province of Saskatchewan, or are they going 
to come from the $277 million-approximately grant money from Ottawa, or 
some other source? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- I can't answer that question precisely, Mr. Speaker.  
I know there's been discussion relative to that.  I suspect the costs will 
be in the order of a million dollars.  Albeit that's a substantial enough 
number, Mr. Speaker, but when you put it up against the $277 million that 
farmers will receive under this payment, I think that's not an unreasonable 
sum, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Population Loss 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Speaker, I address my question to the minister 
responsible for Human Resources, Labour and Employment.  Mr. Minister, the 
May figures are out today.  In the month of May, according to your 
government statistics, Mr. Minister, 980 people moved into Saskatchewan 
while 2,755 left the province, for a net loss in Saskatchewan for the month 
of May again of 1,775 people. 
 
In the first five months of this year, Mr. Minister, that brings our net 
loss of people in our province to 9,429, on par, Mr. Minister, with the 
direction that will take us to a net loss by the end of the year of 23,000 



 

 

for the second year in a row.  And that would be a first in Saskatchewan 
history. 
 
And so I ask you, Mr. Minister: when is your government going to stop 
blaming the weather and other governments and, as of last night, high 
school graduates?  I ask you, Mr. Minister, when are you going to start 
taking responsibility yourself for addressing this human crisis -- the loss 
of our people from the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased that the members opposite 
took to heart my advice last night that we stop repeating what the problems 
are and look for solutions.  This government is proposing solutions.  We 
are proposing an economic policy which includes community bonds for local 
economic development, which includes government joint ventures in 
fertilizer plants and government joint ventures in upgraders, which 
includes the expansion of former Crown corporations by putting these 
corporations into the free market and letting them compete across Canada 
and across the world. 
 
The examples of course are there of WESTBRIDGE and Weyerhaeuser and the 
Biggar malt company, many many examples where there are expansions.  We are 
doing things, Mr. Speaker.  We are doing things as fast as possible, and we 
promise to redouble and triple the effort. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- New question, same minister, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, you 
know that you and the Premier in particular and your government in general 
are responsible for formulating an economic development plan for the 
province of Saskatchewan.  In the last five years it hasn't borne a great 
deal of results, Mr. Minister.  In the last five years, Saskatchewan has 
now lost over 70,000, a net loss of over 70,000 people -- more than the 
combined populations of the cities of Moose Jaw and Prince Albert.  Mr. 
Minister, more than half of those people, as you and I both know, are young 
people between the ages of 15 and 34. 
 
And I ask you, sir, I ask you, in the face of opposition from the people of 
this province, overwhelming opposition from working people in Saskatchewan, 
and opposition even from within your own cabinet colleagues, Mr. Minister, 
you continue to put forth the solution as your brainwave of piratization, 
Mr. Minister, and I ask you, when are you going to get a new plan?  When 
are you going start a new direction, a new workable, economic direction for 
the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Speaker, certainly a negative attitude is not 
going to get us anywhere.  It hasn't over the last 60 years, and it's not 
going to get us anywhere. 
 
We have to have a positive look at what can be done in this province.  We 



 

 

have to combine education, where we have a new College of Agriculture, a 
world centre for agriculture being built in Saskatoon.  We have to process 
our agricultural product. 
 
The members of the NDP do not acknowledge the value of agriculture and the 
value added that can be done.  They don't acknowledge that Pound-Maker and 
the wheat pool are going to build an ethanol plant at Lanigan.  They don't 
acknowledge that we have to do more and more processing of our agricultural 
products.  They don't acknowledge that we are working on alfalfa dehy 
plants.  They don't acknowledge that we are working on irrigation.  All of 
these matters are for export and value added.  There are so many things 
that the members of the opposition don't acknowledge because they only 
think negative. 
 
We have to have a positive outlook in this province.  We have to look at 
positive cash flow projects.  We have to look at the future; the future is 
particularly bright.  Yesterday there was an announcement of a major oil 
discovery; natural gas well-drilling is up.  Natural gas is being used in 
this province.  We now have more natural gas than we need. 
 
And so if the members opposite would come up with a policy that's positive, 
this province could get on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Minister, you said to me last night and you say in this 
Assembly again that there needs to be an attitude adjustment.  Well I 
agree, but it's not for the people of Saskatchewan.  It's you and the 
Premier and your cabinet colleagues -- that's where the attitude adjustment 
has got to start. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Then you go on to whine and complain, Mr. Minister.  Well the 
people of Saskatchewan are tired of your excuses.  They want a government 
that's got more than just excuses.  They want a solid economic plan for the 
'90s that's not the economic approach of the '30s.  That's what they want, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
And so I ask you, I ask you if you're going to change your ways.  Have you 
got a new plan?  Are you going to change your ways or are you locked in to 
the one you're in right now, Mr. Minister?  If you won't change your ways, 
then will you and your colleagues step aside and allow the people of 
Saskatchewan a government that will get Saskatchewan working again? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- How are they going to get Saskatchewan working?  We 
have, Mr. Speaker, a positive plan; rhetoric will not get this province 
working again.  What we need is the government as a catalyst to help get 
joint ventures going such as fertilizer plants, such as upgraders.  What we 
need is the government as a facilitator to assist communities and community 
bonds to build their own industries, to build their own projects.  What we 



 

 

need is a positive attitude towards business, so that companies like 
Weyerhaeuser will build a second pulp mill rather than be denounced by a 
negative opposition.  We do not need an opposition that will scare the 
world's business away from this province.  What we need is a clear 
statement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- We need a clear statement, Mr. Speaker, that 
Saskatchewan will participate in the world by the world's rules and that we 
will be prosperous with the balance of the world. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Supplementary, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, you say that we 
need a catalyst, I say we need a catalyst.  Will you do the ultimate 
catalyst and call an election to get Saskatchewan moving again? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Speaker, it's all the opposition wants is power, 
and you cannot give power to people who don't know what they will do with 
it, to people who do not tell you what they would do with it, to people who 
want raw power for the sake of power alone so that they can have control of 
the province and the people of Saskatchewan.  That's why they want power. 
 
But power has to be granted to people who tell you what they're going to do 
with it, use it wisely and use it respectfully.  This government has power 
and this government is using that power to give the people an opportunity 
for their own future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Decline in Housing Starts 
 
Ms. Smart: -- Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the Premier, my question is to 
the Minister for Economic Diversification and Trade.  Mr. Minister, it's 
time to stop the rhetoric and look at the facts.  For the first five months 
of 1990 housing starts are down 21 per cent from last year which was a 
terrible year.  There's been a similar slow-down in multiple-unit 
construction which has meant a 62 per cent drop in activity for the 
building trades, and CMHC (Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation) has 
stated that Saskatchewan housing starts are at record low levels due to 
stagnant economic conditions and continuing net out-migration. 
 
Mr. Minister, where have you been for the last eight years, and when are 
you going to develop an economic plan that works? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, we should do in Saskatchewan what 
is working in other parts of the world.  We should do in Saskatchewan what 
Ontario does, put value added on their natural products.  We should do in 



 

 

Saskatchewan what Alberta does, diversify to put value added on their 
natural products.  We should do in Saskatchewan, I say for the member, what 
western Europe is doing.  We should do what Japan is doing.  We should do 
what the United States is doing.  And we should do more of that. 
 
And none of those countries and none of those provinces are doing that with 
the government telling the people what to do and the government owning the 
resources.  People have to have faith in their economy and invest in it.  
If the people are not allowed to own anything, they can't invest.  In this 
province the people own savings, and we are encouraging the people to use 
those savings to invest in their own future.  What we have to do is copy 
Ontario, copy Alberta, copy the prosperous parts of Canada and do the same 
thing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: -- New question, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, what we have to do 
is what's best for Saskatchewan.  You call an election and let us do that 
on this side of the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: -- Mr. Minister, under your government we have record high 
out-migration, record low housing starts, and a record number of 
Saskatchewan people are deciding that under your government this province 
is not the place to establish a career, start a family, and build a future.  
And any government which has that legacy should be ashamed. 
 
I would like the minister to explain what precisely your government is 
planning to do to effect a turnaround in the housing industry and give 
people back some confidence in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Well in housing there will . . . housing will be built 
where it's needed.  Mr. Speaker, there is a housing shortage in Dysart, 
Saskatchewan because . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  It seems that the hon. member has been asked 
to answer the question, and let us allow him to do it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Speaker, housing will be built where there is a 
need for housing.  There is a need for housing in Dysart, Saskatchewan 
because there's a new furniture plant there.  There's a need for housing in 
Prince Albert because there's new paper mill and a new pulp mill being 
planned there.  And when those things are built, there'll be more houses 
built.  There will be need for housing in Moose Jaw and Belle Plaine area, 
Regina, because there's a large fertilizer plant being built in the area. 
 
You simply do not build houses to stand empty, as the NDP did, in 
communities around Saskatchewan, and not have any industry so that people 
have jobs to move into those houses. 
 



 

 

Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: -- Supplementary, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, you've had eight 
years.  Why hasn't your approach worked and why are we in such a mess? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- I will . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  It seems that the hon. members want to ask 
questions and answer them.  The member from Saskatoon Centre and the hon. 
member from Melville have the floor. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Speaker, the member that asks that question 
doesn't have the confidence of her own political party and is giving the 
government advice on how we should govern.  What has to be done here is -- 
and I will say to that member clearly -- is that she has to spend more time 
reading about what is going on in the world and what the world-wide 
solutions are.  And I know she's a very literate person and she should be 
able to set out some sort of a plan or policy.  Instead, she has negative, 
rhetorical, political criticism and not one suggestion. 
 
I have given a list today of things that can be done to make Saskatchewan 
prosperous.  Those things are being done.  Every time we try to do them, 
one of them stands up and tries to stop the project, whether it's a 
fertilizer plant or a dam or a hydro plant or a thermal plant.  Whatever it 
is, they want to stop it and stop it all the way to prosperity.  That will 
not work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Free Trade Agreement 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of Economic 
Diversification and Trade.  The Toronto Globe and Mail is reporting that 
Canada has lost 165,000 manufacturing jobs in the past year, and many 
people blame that on the free trade agreement with the United States.  
These are exactly the kind of economic consequences that we and other free 
trade opponents tried to warn your government of, but you plunged headlong 
in your support of the deal without listening to any arguments and without 
listening to reason. 
 
Mr. Minister, how do you square these massive job loss figures all across 
Canada with your assertion that free trade would be good for Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Speaker, freer trade is good for western Canada.  
I'm not an expert on eastern Canada, but when I go to eastern Canada they 
don't seem to be suffering any.  I wish we could suffer like Ontario; 
that's what I wish upon us. 
 
But what we are looking at, Mr. Speaker, is the situation where 



 

 

manufacturing in Saskatchewan is up very close to 600 per cent -- 585 per 
cent I think is the exact figure.  We are not suffering from free trade.  
We are suffering from lack of free trade.  We need more of it. 
 
As the Minister responsible for Economic Diversification and Trade in this 
province, I can tell you that at least twice a week I have potential 
manufacturers coming to my office, looking at Saskatchewan for number one 
reason -- that we have access to the United States market.  And I can tell 
the member that last week in Melville, Saskatchewan, Babcock & Wilcox 
Canada was certified by the American engineering association to do business 
in the United States.  Now we have free trade and American qualifications; 
now we can do business in there.  They are putting on three shifts. 
 
We need more free trade.  We need more of it in Melville; we need more of 
it in Regina; we need more of it everywhere in Saskatchewan.  Will you stop 
being negative?  Will you get on with business?  Why do you not want to 
take American money when they want to pay us for something? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is that something like 
165,000 manufacturing jobs in this country have simply disappeared during 
the first year of the free trade agreement.  And how does the minister 
explain that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Saskatchewan people have seen the damage done to our hog 
industry because the trade deal did not guarantee adequate access to 
American markets.  Now in the past year, Canada's gross domestic product 
grew by only half of the previous year's rate and for the first time in 13 
years, we had a national merchandise trade deficit, and our merchandise 
trade balance with the United States dropped by 23.5 per cent.  Now don't 
those figures speak against your government's continued support for this 
deal?  What can you possibly offer as a success story to counterbalance 
these horror stories that we're hearing? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Speaker, let me answer both of those . . . 
allegations is too kind a term for what that member has said in those 
questions.  First of all, he says free trade is bad.  Yes, it's bad to this 
extent, that the Ontario economy is overheated as a result of free trade 
causing inflation, causing high interest rates for western Canada.  Ontario 
is prospering from free trade.   We are prospering from free trade, except 
the interest rates are up because of the inflationary factors of that kind 
of growth.  Canada has led the western world in economic growth in the last 
two years. 
 
And in addition, we get into this hog-wash about hog-trade problems.  The 
member should know.  He graduated from the same law school as I did.  He 
should've learned as much as I did.  And he should know, the member should 
know that our trade problems in hogs are not related to the free trade 



 

 

agreement.  They are connected to countervail.  He should know the 
difference between countervail and the free trade agreement.  The member 
opposite should but he doesn't.  That's what the NDP know about trade. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Would the hon. members come to order. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 45 -- An Act to amend The Land Titles Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill to amend The 
Lands Titles Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next 
sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
Bill No. 36 -- An Act respecting a Report on the State of the Environment 

 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, today I have the 
pleasure of moving second reading of an Act that I feel is an important Act 
for the people of Saskatchewan.  I believe it's an important Act when it 
comes to the major issue confronting the province of Saskatchewan and the 
people of Canada -- being the environment.  And this is An Act respecting a 
Report on the State of the Environment in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Act and the annual report on the state of the 
environment, which this Act will create, I believe reflect what the mandate 
of the Department of the Environment is, and I believe it also reflects an 
environmental commitment on behalf of this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'd like to go into just a little bit of the history of the 
subject of environmental reports such as this.  Our legislation today has 
its roots in the first federal State of the Environment Report that took 
place in 1986, and as well the Canadian Environmental Protection Act in 
1988 which gave the legislative mandate or muscle to that federal report. 
 
I want you to know, Mr. Speaker, that the federal government has sought a 
similar commitment to environmental information from each of the provincial 
governments.  And, Mr. Speaker, the legislation that I am proposing today, 
I believe, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Now earlier on one of the members suggested 
that perhaps we should allow the noise to carry on for a while.  Well 
certainly it has and we can't hear the Minister of the Environment.  
Perhaps we should stop the noise and allow the Minister of the Environment 



 

 

to speak. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I appreciate your 
interjection in calling members to order. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to report that the Saskatchewan government fully 
agrees with the concept of state of the environment reports.  And, Mr. 
Speaker, more importantly, we intend to put this belief into practice here 
today in our province. 
 
By this Act, Mr. Speaker, we intend to move decisively and quickly to 
create an annual environmental report which provides the people of 
Saskatchewan with the information that they need to understand and act on 
environmental issues.  Mr. Speaker, this Act . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  It seems that the hon. members are full of 
enthusiasm today and enjoying themselves . . . the way it should be in the 
House.  However, the hon. member for Melfort, the Minister of Environment, 
does want to make some remarks, and let us allow him to do that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, because this Act grows out of our 
mandate, I first want to review with you the directions and some of the 
values that we have in the Department of Environment and Public Safety.  I 
will then demonstrate how this Act before us today is very consistent with 
a forward-looking and a comprehensive view of environmental protection. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my main task, my responsibility is protection of the 
environment.  And that's where we begin, Mr. Speaker.  That is the 
fundamental value that we hold in the Department of the Environment, and, 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that it's a value that I cling closely to. 
 
In another time, Mr. Speaker, a government may have acted on that 
responsibility by having officials draw up a set of rules and regulations, 
some standards; may have incorporated them into some legislation; passed 
the legislation, and simply told the people, well, here's how we're going 
to protect the environment.  Follow these rules, and everything will be 
okay. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that may have been former approaches.  Those former approaches 
may have worked in days gone by.  But it's a different world out there 
today, Mr. Speaker.  Today the world is changing, and it is changing 
rapidly. 
 
I'd submit to you, Mr. Speaker, that right now, at present, we're probably 
in a period of history never before where change has been at such a rapid 
pace -- an unprecedented pace of change in history, Mr. Speaker.  And that 
old approach is just not good enough. 
 
The agenda on environmental issues, Mr. Speaker, cannot be set by big 
brother government.  It cannot be set solely by corporations or business or 
institutions.  Mr. Speaker, in today's changing world, the agenda is being 
set by the people.  And, Mr. Speaker, I intend to respond to the people of 
Saskatchewan who are demanding environmental action, and I believe that 



 

 

this report today will go a long way to taking some concrete actions when 
it comes to the issue of the environment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this agenda is being set by the people themselves, who have 
raised the whole area of environment from something that was almost 
non-existent to an issue today that is uppermost in the vast majority of 
people's minds. 
 
I'd submit to you, Mr. Speaker, that just as the environment is everywhere, 
it also affects everything and everyone.  The scale and the complexity of 
environmental issues today are enormous.  That conclusion I think is fairly 
obvious.  If my job is to protect this big thing we call the environment, 
then there is only one way that I can really do that, Mr. Speaker, and 
that's by the involvement of people through public participation in this 
province. 
 
In the first place what we have to do is define just what this environment 
is, how do we want to protect it.  We must make a decision which the people 
themselves are involved in.  They must become involved in policy-making 
process more closely than ever before. 
 
In the second place, Mr. Speaker, protecting the environment isn't going to 
happen if we all wait for someone else to do it.  The public has come to 
realize that every citizen in this province must make personal choices, 
must make personal changes to a large extent.  We call that, I think a good 
term, Mr. Speaker, "responsible living": responsible living through 
becoming involved in the making of environmental policy, responsible living 
through taking personal action for a better environment at home and on the 
job. 
 
This of course does not absolve government from total responsibility.  
Indeed the responsibility of government is greater than ever.  But the duty 
of government in fact becomes putting in place the tools for the citizens 
themselves to take actions that are part of responsible living. 
 
In fact what you could call it, Mr. Speaker, is empowering -- empowering 
people to take those types of actions.  That means consultation.  It means 
education.  It means addressing the larger questions of resource use before 
we address specific proposals for development.  Empowering citizens also 
means providing them with the information they need for personal action, 
facts and figures in understandable terms. 
 
(1445) 
 
I believe that that's what the people of Saskatchewan are asking for, and I 
believe that that's what this State of the Environment Report is meant to 
do.  Under this act, the State of the Environment Report will be annual.  
It will be a thorough and comprehensive statement of just where we stand in 
the province of Saskatchewan.  It will reflect what the state of the 
province's resources are.  It will reflect what the trends of resource use 
are.  It will reflect the economic significance of our resources, as well 
as the current rates of resource use.  They will consider them against the 
broader goal of what we call sustainable development. 



 

 

 
These elements of annual reporting must not merely be covered.  They must 
also be communicated in a form which is understandable to everyone in the 
province.  To achieve that the report will develop indices, for example, 
indicators on water quality, air quality, rates of resource use, and so 
forth.  These indices will be meant to do for environmental reporting what 
indices such as the gross national product or the consumer price index do 
for economic analysis. 
 
I think on those two particular points, Mr. Speaker, the public at large is 
very familiar with the term, consumer price index; most people know in 
general terms what gross domestic product or gross national product means.  
And, Mr. Speaker, I submit to you, in a few short years the facts and 
figures and indices that are contained in this annual report will become as 
well known to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
We will be able to develop a clear picture of what the state of the 
environment is, how it relates to the economy, and where we are going or 
what the trends are.  If such reporting is done systematically, as economic 
reporting now is, we hope to achieve the following:  open access to 
objective information on resources and the environment, measures of 
progress in dealing with environmental problems, early warning of emerging 
issues, and encouragement for all Saskatchewan people to strive for 
sustainable use of our resources. 
 
I believe that knowledge is power, Mr. Speaker, the power to understand and 
the power to make wise choices.  The State of the Environment Report will 
provide, I hope, that kind of knowledge.  By doing so, the report will 
become an important tool with which the citizens of this province can be 
empowered for responsible living, empowered to take personal actions as 
individuals, as corporate leaders, and as representatives of institutions 
and governments at all different levels. 
 
With this full participation in setting the public agenda, we will provide 
the basis for comprehensive protection of our treasured environment here in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that this report will be well accepted by the public 
in Saskatchewan.  Environmental groups from all across this great province 
have asked for more information on the state of our environment.  They've 
asked for more information on where we are going, what the trends are, what 
we can look forward to, what are some of the key areas that we have to pay 
attention to. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this will indeed be a thorough report on a very, very 
important issue in the province of Saskatchewan, and I would encourage all 
members of the legislature to pay close and serious attention to this piece 
of legislation.  We are committed to doing this, Mr. Speaker, and I would 
ask for all members' full support of this particular Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you.  I want to thank the member from 



 

 

Shellbrook-Torch for that applause, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do want to make some response to the comments that the 
Minister of the Environment has made with regard to this Bill.  And I want 
to outline some of the concerns that I have and our caucus has with regard 
to this Bill; concerns which people who are concerned about the 
environment, we share with them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister said in his remarks that this is a very important 
Act .  It is the subject of environmental reports. 
 
Well without being disrespectful, I might just say, Mr. Speaker, that this 
government, if there was a report card that was to be prepared on its 
record on the environment, would score a very dismal F because of the kinds 
of things that this government has done and, more importantly, Mr. Speaker, 
because of the kinds of things that this government has not done which it 
should have done even in the face of legislation and guide-lines which the 
government itself is supposed to administer but has chosen on many 
occasions not to bother to administer, in fact, to ignore. 
 
I want to tell the minister -- as soon as I can get his attention, Mr. 
Speaker -- I want to tell the minister that if there is anything that 
environmental groups are asking for more than anything else, they are 
asking for this government to be responsible.  Environmental groups are 
asking this government, don't make it necessary for people who are 
concerned to have to time after time after time take the government to 
court to make sure that the government adheres to its own laws. 
 
That's the biggest question that environmentalists and environmental groups 
are asking, Mr. Speaker, because of the kind of attitude and approach that 
this government has displayed in the last eight years with regard to this 
very important issue. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, no one will oppose the principle of this Bill.  The 
principle that is addressed in this Bill is something that this caucus has 
proposed in the past and proposes today.  The reason that New Democrats, 
Mr. Speaker, and the public at large is concerned about such matters is 
that our party and our caucus has supported sustainable development as a 
guiding principle to guarantee the environmental health and the future of 
Saskatchewan.  That should be the guiding principle, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And to implement that principle we propose a number of measures.  And among 
those measures is included the establishment of an independent 
environmental protection commission.  This commission would have a broad 
mandate to protect and enhance the environment.  It would recommend 
standards of environmental quality and protection.  It would supervise 
baseline studies to measure the present extent of environmental 
degradation.  It would implement a system of effective environmental 
monitoring; identify areas where compensation or mitigation is required. 
 
You may be wondering, Mr. Speaker, what I have just said has got to do with 
the Bill which proposes to establish an annual report on the state of the 
environment.  I have a very specific purpose for outlining, in a very brief 



 

 

manner, this independent environmental protection commission.  And the 
reason I do that, Mr. Speaker, is because the Bill which the minister 
brings forward today has two very important shortcomings. 
 
The first one is that it proposes that the minister shall annually prepare 
a report to be presented.  That's what it says in clause 3(1) of the Bill.  
Well, Mr. Speaker, ministers of the Environment have been preparing annual 
reports for some time.  This is not something new.  Not in this formal 
manner which this Bill will now require it to be done, but ministers of the 
Environment have been providing reports during estimates, they have been 
providing reports in their annual reports of their departments.  And I 
might say, Mr. Speaker, that those reports have really not done the job.  
And to no greater extent will just another report, which the Minister of 
the Environment has to present, do any better job. 
 
 DThe problem has been that these ministerial reports, Mr. Speaker, tend to 
be tainted and they tend to be biased politically to suit the government of 
the day.  And one only has to look at the kinds of reports that this 
government has presented to know that in their reports and in decisions 
that they have made of very important economic projects which have a major 
impact on the environment, there has been very extreme and strong political 
bias at the expense of environmental considerations. 
 
So I say, Mr. Speaker, if this legislation which the minister proposes to 
propose was independent, then I think it would have something to commend 
it.  If this legislation had been in place under the auspices of the 
Minister of Environment, either this one or the two previous ones in the 
last eight years under this government, would the minister have reported on 
the uranium mine spills in the North which they sat on for months and 
months and months, in which there were 150 of them in a period of 180 days 
. . . or 18 months I should say, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Do you think that this minister would have made a report on that?  Of 
course not.  Because he had the opportunity to make a report and to make it 
public and to establish an inquiry to look into this extreme problem, and 
he refused to take that opportunity and did not act on it. 
 
Do you think that if this Bill had been in place as the minister proposes, 
with this major flaw in it, that they would have reported on the Cargill 
fertilizer plant which threatens to be another Rafferty boondoggle, which 
the member from Rosemont so aptly has described it to be?  Of course not, 
because the  minister would have been able to employ political bias and his 
own party and political prejudices in preparing of that report.  Nothing 
would have been different than it has been in the last eight years. 
 
Now the minister said something, and I think I'm quoting him correctly 
because I wrote it when he was speaking.  He said, there is a different 
world out there; old approaches are not good enough.  Well, Mr. Speaker, 
isn't the fact that this minister and this government approved the 
construction of a major fertilizer plant with all of its chemical 
components, with all of its utilization of a major resource of which we are 
short of -- water -- half the supply, on a daily basis, that the city of 
Moose Jaw uses.  Isn't the fact that this proposed fertilizer plant was 



 

 

approved without even an environmental impact assessment using the old ways 
and the old approaches? 
 
It is almost laughable to have the minister stand up and talk in such 
glowing terms about the need for new approaches because in the last year he 
has had, on a number of occasions, the opportunity to use the new 
approaches, and he has stubbornly resisted using them and has used all of 
the old approaches. 
 
I have some questions which I will be asking the minister in the estimates 
-- maybe even in question period, but certainly in the estimates -- about 
all of the omissions in information that even his own department had said 
that certain questions had been not answered about this plant. 
 
All of those omissions and answers which were not provided to those 
questions and in spite of them -- Mr. Speaker, it's documented -- he's 
approved the construction of this fertilizer plant without an adequate 
environmental impact study, simply for political reasons. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is the old approach.  And to hear that government spout 
words about the need for a new approach, Mr. Speaker, really lacks, in a 
big way, credibility and sincerity. 
 
The minister also said that the only way to protect the environment is by 
involving the public. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Exactly. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, the minister says exactly.  Well, if the minister 
chooses to explain this in closing remarks or in the consideration of this 
Bill in committee, explain why, if he is so committed to involving the 
public, why he refused to have public hearings on the environmental impact 
study of the Millar Western pulp mill. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- It's not true.  We had them. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Not public relations meetings, Mr. Minister, public 
hearings where the public can come and ask questions and make presentations 
and demand that the company and the Department of the Environment justify 
things that they're saying in that report.  The minister hid from that. 
 
If the minister is so serious and so committed, and so committed to public 
involvement, Mr. Speaker, why did he not first of all have an environmental 
impact study at the Cargill fertilizer plant and even still to this day, 
publicly say he will not hold public hearings when finally there is an 
impact statement prepared? 
 
You see, Mr. Speaker, words are not good enough.  I hear the words and they 
really sound very good.  But when you look at the record, those words by 
this government are never implemented.  And so although the principle of 
this Bill is a good principle and is deserving of support, I'm afraid that 
the public of this province and my colleagues and I -- you can't blame us 
if we're somewhat cynical about whether the government would really follow 



 

 

up on doing what the principle of the Bill intends to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if we are really serious about having an honest and an 
accurate annual assessment of the state of our economy and our environment, 
a study which has public confidence, it should be an independent, 
scientific, and objective assessment.  It should not be a political 
assessment, which is what the minister proposes to do. 
 
(1500) 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, before I go on further, I just want to bring to the 
attention of the House some rather recent information.  I made some 
comments about the Cargill fertilizer plant.  Well I think the editorial in 
the Star-Phoenix really blows out of the water the minister's argument 
today about adequate studies and 70 pages of reporting and wanting to 
involve the public, because the editorial says accurately what in fact has 
taken place.  And  
 DI want to read it to you, Mr. Speaker, because I know you'll be 
interested. 
 
The editorial said, ". . . it seems the real purpose of the study . . ." 
This is the new study after the fact, environmental impact study -- almost 
unbelievable -- but an environmental impact study which is going to be done 
after the minister has given the licence for this project for $377 million 
of Saskatchewan taxpayers' money to proceed.  He gives the licence, they 
dig the holes, they start pouring the cement and then he says whoa, I'm 
going to have a study -- going to have a study. 
 
Well the editorial says: 
 

 . . . it seems the real purpose of the study is to allow the government to 
backtrack, ensuring that all its environmental bases are covered.  The 
reliability of the study is also in question -- its premise seems 
concocted to ensure the project goes ahead, no matter what the 
environmental outcome. 

 
I think that's an accurate reflection by the editorial writers of the 
Star-Phoenix about what's been happening here, and that's why I said 
earlier, it is much like, in fact exactly like, the disaster and the mess 
that has been created at the Rafferty situation, because that's the process 
that was employed there. 
 
Now the minister also made some comments about how the government is going 
to act -- let me find it here, I wrote it down -- yes, the government is 
going to act decisively and quickly.  Well he picked an unfortunate day to 
say that.  He picked an unfortunate day to say that because today in the 
Leader-Post, it tells you how decisive and how expeditious the government 
is going to be, because there's a report here from the minister's 
environmental round table -- he does the speaking for them of course -- I 
mean, even they don't have that much independence it seems -- in which they 
say, "Environmental strategy vowed by fall of '91." 
 
The article goes on to say: 



 

 

 
 You'll have to wait until next year to find out how the province plans to 

deal with one of the prickliest problems of the 1990s -- balancing 
economic development against environmental concerns. 

 
 Sometime in the fall of 1991 . . . 
 

Now, Mr. Minister, I don't know how you define decisiveness and quick 
action, but that is not my definition of decisiveness and quick action.  
That is my definition, Mr. Speaker, of stalling for time in the hope that 
somehow they can get by an election campaign so that if they happen to win 
-- I don't think they will -- but in their dream world they probably think 
they might.  And then they can ignore the environment again for another 
three years and hope to resurrect some kind of public relations in the 
fourth one more time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Meadow Lake has spoken . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, the member from Meadow Lake seems to want 
to speak from his chair more than I'm saying from my feet.  So I thank you 
for calling him to order. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  To be fair, the member from Meadow Lake 
wasn't alone in interrupting your remarks. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I would urge the member from Melfort to also settle 
down as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Now, Mr. Speaker, this legislation if it was 
appropriately done, could be of great assistance to government.  I wish 
this government would recognize that there is legislation that is open and 
there are things that others might say that can be of help.  But this 
legislation, if it was done correctly, could be of great help to government 
in the sense that it would provide needed information that could determine 
policy and program and legislative initiatives. 
 
Government shouldn't hide from that or try to set up structures which they 
can manipulate.  Government should be more open.  It could act as the 
signal to industry where there are problems that if it doesn't act to 
address them, the government will have to make them act.  I don't buy this 
argument that governments have no role in anything, as the Conservatives 
opposite seem to try to propagate.  Governments do have a role to protect 
the public interest. 
 
This kind of legislation could provide confidence to the public that there 
is an unbiased scientific watch-dog over the environment.  And to make this 
annual environmental report yet another political report, after so many 
unfortunate failings of this government to adhere to environmental 
assessment processes, is a major failing of this legislation and really 



 

 

puts a great doubt about the sincerity of the government. 
 
And for these reasons, Mr. Speaker, our party, the New Democratic Party, 
has proposed that the intended environmental protection commission, which 
we have committed ourselves to, would publish such an annual report on the 
state and the future of our environment.  It could identify developments 
and situations that endanger our environment or people, and make 
recommendations for actions. 
 
Governments shouldn't fear such an independent process if they don't have 
plans to ignore environmental protection requirements.  We don't fear such 
an independent process, and in fact would welcome its input into the 
decision making. 
 
And in conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out the second shortcoming 
in this Bill.  The second shortcoming is that it does not specify a time 
when the report can be released.  The minister can sit on this report 
indefinitely, Mr. Speaker.  As a matter of fact, let me give you an 
example. 
 
The way this Bill reads, the report on calendar year 1990 could be 
completed in December of 1991 and then not tabled until sometime in the 
spring session of 1992.  Mr. Speaker, the problem is very well exemplified 
by what this government has done with the Public Accounts report from time 
to time, in which, because there is no specific time when the report has to 
be made public, the government has sat on it to suit its own political 
objectives rather than providing information which the public has the right 
to know by legislation which has been passed by this legislature even 
before my time. 
 
So in closing, Mr. Speaker, I repeat again that we support the principle of 
the Bill.  We regret the government is not committed sufficiently to this 
principle to implement it adequately. 
 
If legislators are to catch up to the public on environmental issues, 
they're going to have to involve the public and stop building barriers 
between the concerns of the people and the facts about what is happening 
and what needs to happen. 
 
A New Democratic Party government, Mr. Speaker, would be very clear on 
this.  We would implement an independent, environmental protection 
commission which would have among its mandate the functions of monitoring 
and reporting independently on the state of the environment in 
Saskatchewan.  This Bill is in keeping with the correct principle, but 
falls very short, Mr. Speaker, in its actual implementation.  Thank you 
very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee 
of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 15 - An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Embalmers Act 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to explain these amendments to 
The Saskatchewan Embalmers Act which deal with the ability of the council 
of the Saskatchewan Funeral Service Association to effectively regulate 
advertising by its members. 
 
The existing Act currently contains two provisions dealing with advertising 
restrictions.  However, these provisions were written in 1965 and are too 
rigid and outdated to apply effectively today in 1990. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the association still wants to ensure that advertising by 
their members is carried out in a professional and in a dignified manner.  
These amendments will allow the association to specify a more comprehensive 
and relevant set of advertising restrictions in their by-laws.  And in this 
way, these restrictions will also be easier to amend in the future to 
ensure that they remain up to date as time goes on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm sure that these amendments are not seen by anyone to be 
controversial.  The efforts of the Saskatchewan Funeral Service Association 
to better regulate its members to protect the public deserves our support. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 15, An Act to amend The 
Saskatchewan Embalmers Act. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I've had an opportunity to review 
the legislation and to speak to the Saskatchewan funeral association, Mr. 
Speaker, and we have no objection to this legislation coming forward and so 
we'll just let it go at that.  Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee 
of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 41 -- An Act to amend The Highway Traffic Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Petersen: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second reading of 
amendments to The Highway Traffic Act.  These amendments will complete the 
package of legislative changes under my responsibility which are required 
by the National Safety Code for commercial trucks and buses. 
 
As the hon. members would know, the Assembly passed amendments last year 
dealing with regulations respecting trip inspection, reports, and hours of 
service.  The National Safety Code is an interjurisdictional effort to 
ensure minimum safety standards across the country for commercial trucks 
and buses.  Most of these standards are already law in Saskatchewan, and 
the main purpose of this Bill is to assist carriers in identifying and 
correcting safety problems. 
 
The Bill before us authorizes the Highway Traffic Board to maintain and 
review safety records or operators of commercial vehicles and to provide 
this information to these carriers. 
 
The Bill also authorizes regulations requiring commercial vehicle operators 
to maintain records and requires drivers of commercial vehicles to provide 



 

 

items such as traffic tickets to their employer.  I can assure hon. members 
that we will be reasonable in placing additional paperwork requirements on 
those commercial carriers.  Nevertheless a commercial vehicle operator will 
be aware of safety related problems in his operation if he or she keeps 
records of drivers' convictions and warnings, drivers' qualifications, 
accidents, medical reports on drivers, road inspection reports, vehicle 
maintenance procedures, trip inspection reports, and hours of service logs 
for their drivers. 
 
The new Bill will also extend and enhance Highway Traffic Board powers to 
sanction a carrier that chronically violates safety standards.  The Highway 
Traffic Board has operated a progressive system of counselling and 
disciplining truck and bus companies for the last six years.  Department 
officials advise me that the program has reduced carrier convictions and 
unsafe practices on our highways. 
 
Many of the amendments proposed in this Bill are merely to ensure the 
program is well based in Saskatchewan law.  A carrier acquiring a higher 
than normal level of violations is notified by the board.  Initially the 
carrier is informed of the problem and asked to take corrective action.  
Where problems persist, board staff is prepared to review the carrier 
safety procedures and suggest possible improvements. 
 
The Bill grants the Highway Traffic Board new powers to order a commercial 
vehicle operator for cause to cease operating in Saskatchewan.  Currently 
the board can cancel the operating authority of a for-hire carrier.  The 
board is also authorized to create an order with conditions attached or to 
assess a fine in lieu of a prohibition order. 
 
The Bill makes it an offence for a commercial vehicle operator to operate 
vehicles in contravention of any order of the board.  The Bill also 
contains a provision to ensure fairness in any deliberations by the Highway 
Traffic Board.  The board would be required to hold a hearing and give the 
carrier an opportunity to be heard, and that's a long-standing practice in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
As a final part of this package, there's a new provision to assist those 
Saskatchewan-based carriers who operate outside the province.  Frequently 
these companies require evidence of a satisfactory NSC (National Safety 
Code) safety rating, and Saskatchewan will issue a safety rating 
certificate upon request. 
 
The Bill also covers the area of financial responsibility for commercial 
vehicle operators.  At present only for-hire operators requiring an 
operating authority certificate must carry insurance over and above the 
basic plate insurance of $200,000.  We hope to extend the protection 
offered to the public by requiring commercial vehicle operators to carry 
additional insurance.  I'm told by my staff that such requirements will 
have little impact, as most large carriers already have additional 
insurance coverage. 
 
The Bill contains a number of housekeeping changes, many of which have been 
identified by the Department of Justice. 



 

 

 
We're all concerned about safety on our roads, Mr. Speaker, and this Bill 
promotes bus and truck safety.  I believe the Bill before us reflects this 
government's commitment to protect the public, and our experience in 
Saskatchewan suggests the travelling public is becoming much more safety 
conscious.  Our accident rate is down, fatalities and injuries are down, we 
have the highest seat-belt usage in Canada -- the list goes on and on, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I'd be pleased to answer any of the hon. member's questions during our 
committee review of the Bill, and I'm pleased to move second reading of An 
Act to amend The Highway Traffic Act at this time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(1515) 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, we would like an 
opportunity to review the remarks of the minister and to consider this 
legislation further, and therefore we'd ask to adjourn the matter. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Economic Diversification and Trade 
Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 45 

 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Would the minister introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  First of all let me say that 
I have an associate minister, Mr. John Gerich, and he will be available 
later and will answer questions with respect to tourism so if the members 
of the opposition could hold their tourism questions until Mr. Gerich 
arrives. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- He's on holidays right now or what? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- No, he's not on holidays.  He's at a meeting dealing 
with tourism matters so there's no need to be concerned.  He'll be here 
shortly. 
 
The question that we have here is the officials on the department and, Mr. 
Chairman, if the members of the opposition could be quiet just long enough 
that I could introduce my officials then they can get in their usual 
riotous conduct. 
 
On my left is the deputy minister, Henry Kutarna; on my right is the 
associate deputy minister of the international division dealing primarily 
in trade, Dr. Don Wright; behind me is Terry Tarowski, the director of 



 

 

administration; and Peter McNeil, director of programs and services, 
science and technology division; and behind Dr. Wright is Dr. Peter 
Phillips, acting director of policy and research. 
 
And also with us in the Assembly are Tom Young, the executive director of 
tourism; Mr. Bryce Baron, director of industrial opportunities; Dr. Graham 
Parsons, chief economist and co-ordinator of community bonds; Dona Miller, 
the executive director of communications; and Lyle Pederson, the executive 
director of small business and co-ops.  And as I indicated earlier, my 
associate minister will be here in due course and answer further questions. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I want to tell the minister that we 
will not be addressing tourism matters this afternoon so that he need not 
concern himself in spite of some of the information that was being fed to 
you. 
 
I want to tell you, minister, that I want to talk first of all about the 
immigrant investor program.  And that will probably consume most of the 
afternoon.  Although if I do have some time this afternoon, I would like to 
resume our discussion in question period about the free trade agreement as 
it relates to countervailing duties and particularly countervailing duties 
with respect to hogs because obviously you're in need of further education.  
And I'd be more than pleased to do it for you to assist you, and I hope 
we'll have time to do that this afternoon. 
 
I have a list of questions here, minister, that I won't be asking orally, 
but I'll send it across to you and you can answer to me in writing in due 
course, and two or three weeks would be all right.  But if I can have a 
page, I'll just send these over to you. 
 
And now I want to begin a series of questions with respect to the immigrant 
investor program.  I want to say at the beginning, minister, that this had 
been a very strange program.  The country was rather surprised by it at the 
time that it was announced by the federal government. 
 
And I suppose it's not a concept with which any of us are particularly 
easy.  Certainly members of my caucus have some unease about the program 
when it is put in the context of passports for sale.  For a $150,000 or 
$250,000, depending on where you live, if you live in the right country, 
you can buy your way into Canada. 
 
And expressed in those terms, it's certainly a different way of attracting 
immigrants to this country.  Certainly it wasn't the way in which my 
grandfather came here; nor was it the way, Minister, that your grandfather 
came here.  And so it doesn't really fit into the Saskatchewan historical 
way of attracting immigrants or receiving people from other countries. 
 
But at the same time we do understand that it is a source of new capital 
that is entering Canada, and Canada is in a capital squeeze position and 
has been for some years, as many countries are in the world.  And so I 
understand that the program has a positive aspect to it as well. 
 
And having said what I've said, Minister, I don't intend to dwell upon the 



 

 

program itself because I understand it's a federal program.  I understand 
it's in effect across Canada, and it is not a program for debate in this 
House. 
 
The statement that you made on June 1, Minister, about the way in which 
these applications had been received and processed by your government, I 
found to be very concerning.  The statement I'm referring to is where you 
indicated that your government had rubber-stamped virtually all 
applications to set up immigrant investment funds in Saskatchewan during 
the program's infancy. 
 
And I found that to be an amazing statement for you to make and an amazing 
admission that this was the case, and particularly so because it seems to 
us on our reading of the federal material that is available including the 
business manual -- the federal Employment and Immigration business manual 
-- and reading the June 1988 guide-lines for the immigrant investor program 
as well as the December, 1989 amendments to the immigrant investor 
regulations, it seems to me that the federal government was and is relying 
on the provincial government to sort out these applications at the level of 
the province.  That when they asked the provinces to initially approve 
these proposals, they were serious. 
 
And they thought that at the provincial level you would be taking steps to 
look at these applications, look at these proposals, these investment 
syndicates, rather carefully before you sent them to the federal government 
for approval to ensure that they were appropriate or they were worthwhile 
kinds of applications -- applications that you would indeed place your 
approval upon.  And so we found your statement of June 1 that you'd 
virtually rubber-stamped these applications, to be quite, quite surprising. 
 
I wonder, Minister, if you could elaborate on that and indicate why you 
took that position and whether that remains your position or if it's 
changed; and if it's changed, in what respect it's changed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Member for Saskatoon Fairview is correct when he says 
that there is a world-wide shortage of capital.  That is becoming more 
apparent all the time, and that Japan is now consuming more of its capital 
domestically and that capital is not on the world capital markets; that 
Germany is consuming more of its capital domestically.  And the two great 
exporters of capital in the last 10 years have been West Germany and Japan. 
 
They are no longer exporting capital but consuming that capital locally, 
which in combination with federal deficits, provincial deficits, and the 
United States deficit, creates a great demand for capital, and the supply 
is not there and interest rates are going up accordingly.  Now in Canada 
they are about 5 percentage points or 5 per cent higher than the United 
States due to inflationary problems in Ontario.  There will be in the 
foreseeable future a greater demand for world-wide capital than the supply 
that will be available. 
 
We are not, however, looking at business immigration investors from a 
capital point of view.  The key criteria there, the key concern is that by 
having immigrant investors we are receiving investors with business 



 

 

experience, business know-how, entrepreneurs who can not only come to 
Canada to take a job but come to Canada to create a job.  Create one job, 
create 20 jobs.  These are the kind of people that are in short supply in 
Canada.  There's a short supply of entrepreneurs and an over-supply of 
employees and therefore we have unemployment. 
 
What we are doing with respect to the immigrant investment funds is that 
originally when the federal government set up these funds, they only asked 
the provinces to comment on the economic merits of a particular fund.  
Saskatchewan was of the view that all investment was of value to this 
province so we were not rejecting funds initially. 
 
(1530) 
 
Since I have taken over the responsibility of this new department, I have 
reviewed the immigrant investor funds and we have set in place criteria 
that are being developed right now.  But there is no regulatory authority 
in statute law for the regulation of these funds outside of the Securities 
Commission.  The Securities Commission has put in place some regulatory 
authority that's within their jurisdiction. 
 
The ultimate answer is that in Saskatchewan the federal government will not 
consider the funds unless they are approved by the minister.  And as the 
new minister, I will not approve new funds unless they are directed towards 
targeted economic activities along the lines of the criteria set out in The 
Community Bonds Act and the community bonds program. 
 
Existing funds that have already been approved will continue to operate, 
and new funds that have not yet been approved by Canada, we will make 
recommendations for approval or non-approval based on a criteria level 
similar to the criteria on community bonds. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Minister.  Can you tell me how many proposals 
or applications have been made to the provincial government pursuant to 
this program?  And the second part of my question is: of that group, how 
many were rubber-stamped, if I can use your term?  In other words, how many 
slipped through to the federal government before we got serious about our 
responsibilities under this program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, if we could go on to another 
question . . . They're doing a count-up on their computer list and we'll 
give you those figures. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Okay, Minister, I'll just expand the question then a bit 
so they can get some other numbers.  I asked you how many applications had 
been received and how many had been shipped along in the way in which they 
were handled in the first days of the program where they were 
rubber-stamped, to use your term. 
 
I want to know whether they were all forwarded to the federal government or 
were any turned down at the provincial level; and if so, how many.  And did 
the federal government in turn approve all of the applications or did they 
turn down any; and if so, how many?  So I'll add those questions to the 



 

 

mix. 
 
Now I was very interested in hearing your reference to targeted economic 
activity as what you're looking for in this program.  And I take it from 
your answer -- and please correct me if I misunderstood you -- I take it 
that these are the applications that you're accepting now and that you 
would not be accepting of other types of applications.  I just want to 
pause while you answer that, Minister, and then ask my question after that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Let's say I took over as minister on April 1, 1990.  
Up until that time the department did not deny any applications, but the 
applications were forwarded to Ottawa for their consideration.  There were 
some applications which the department found the material insufficient and 
asked them to make amendments or asked the applicants to supply further 
information.  But to my knowledge, all of them up until April 1 were 
forwarded to Ottawa. 
 
As of April 1, 1990 I have not approved any applications, and I have spoke 
with Barbara McDougall.  There are 30 under consideration by Ottawa.  I've 
asked them to freeze the approval on those while I review those 30 that 
Ottawa has not approved, to see whether those 30 should apply, should be 
considered as new applications and be required to follow the new criteria, 
or whether those 30 should be grandfathered with the others that were 
approved earlier. 
 
And I've stated publicly, and I will state that here for the record in the 
Assembly, that I do not consider building strip malls in Regina and 
Saskatoon and the building of purely real estate projects to be of 
sufficient benefit for me to approve them as minister, and they will have 
to be exceptional circumstances before I approved any of those. 
 
And I realize there are gray areas where processing and manufacturing and 
tourism have incidental real estate components, and if it is an integral 
part of something that would ordinarily qualify, then we will not exclude 
real estate totally.  But a purely real estate development, competing with 
other Saskatchewan developers and with other Saskatchewan real estate 
interests, we do not consider to be of sufficient economic impact for 
myself as minister to approve those.  So I expect there will be some 
unhappy people. 
 
But I have to take into account that they have gone to some expense in 
preparing these submissions, have made applications to the Securities 
Commission, so we haven't made a final decision on where we will draw the 
line.  But I can say that in the future I will be a lot tougher on 
approvals and that where we will draw the line on the grandfathering of 
existing applications has not been finally decided yet. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Well, that's an . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- I do have some numbers for you.  Sixty-nine have been 
approved by the federal government.  To date there are 50 that have been 
forwarded to the federal government and have not been approved.  That was 
effective June 12.  The province has accepted all 119 of those and 69 have 



 

 

been approved by the federal government; 50 have not yet been approved.  On 
some of those 50, the province . . . and maybe on all of those 50.  The 
information I had from the federal government, when I met with the federal 
minister, was that there were 30 they hadn't processed.  Information I have 
now is that there are 50.  Those will be reviewed as to whether or not they 
meet new criteria. 
 
And as I explained earlier, whenever you change rules or the law, you have 
to make a decision on how retroactive it'll be and effective what date.  As 
a matter of fairness, I would accept your advice on whether we should be 
very firm on this or whether we should review the ones that we had approved 
in the past.  So I accept your advice in that area. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Well I'd be pleased to give you my advice, Minister.  I 
thank you for that information.  First of all, just to review as I 
understand how the program works and give you an opportunity to comment on 
that, and then give you the benefit of my views. 
 
There are, as I understand it, three basic categories of investment that we 
may deal with.  The first is a category of self-employed individuals who 
are immigrants who are required to create their own job.  And I am not 
aware if we have any of those in this province. 
 
The second category is what is referred to as the entrepreneur category 
where the immigrant investors are expected to establish a business and 
manage a business that they create, and they create jobs, and they maintain 
the jobs.  And that, I think, is the targeted economic activity that you 
referred to in a previous answer. 
 
And then the third is a category called the investor category, or commonly 
referred to as the investor category where the person coming into Canada 
with the $150,000 invests that in a fund.  And that is what we saw in 
Saskatchewan as we will be discussing later -- a large number of those 
funds. 
 
And as I have understood, Minister, the answers that you give me to this 
point, while there were quite a number of those applications, you are not 
inclined to be sympathetic to them although you may let a few go through 
that are now before you where there has been a considerable investment of 
time and money in the preparation of the proposal. 
 
So that's my understanding of the categories that we're talking about, and 
that you have arrived at the conclusion that you should prefer the second 
category, the entrepreneur category, where there is a targeted economic 
activity.  And assuming that that's correct, Minister -- and you'll have an 
opportunity later to comment on that -- I want to make a few comments of my 
own. 
 
First of all, I think it is fair to say that Saskatchewan had a mix of 
investment categories which was quite different from the mix in other 
provinces.  Quite different, for example, than the mix in Ontario.  I have 
obtained some numbers with respect to the use of these categories by 
province.  And let me just read you some of these numbers, Minister, to 



 

 

help make my point. 
 
In Ontario, for example, at the time that I made this inquiry, which is 
some months ago, probably about the time that you were appointed the 
minister, there had been 26 applications made pursuant to the program, and 
23 of these had been specific to a business venture and three had been 
investment syndicates.  At the same time, British Columbia had received 37 
applications, and 19 of those were business ventures and 18 were investment 
certificates.  And so across the country the ratio of business ventures to 
investment certificates was either in favour of the business ventures or 
about even. 
 
But in Saskatchewan there had been a total of 47 applications made, and 16 
of those were business-specific and 31 of them were the investment 
syndicate, the big investment funds -- almost 2:1 in favour of investment 
syndicates.  And that was quite out of step with all of the rest of Canada 
and led a number of federal people to observe that this program was being 
set up, or being run or responded to differently in Saskatchewan than it 
was anywhere else in the country. 
 
Ontario had a great deal of success with their entrepreneur category, with 
the second category.  Quite a number of small businesses were established 
there and a number of jobs created. 
 
Now the numbers that I've given you, I just want to backtrack on that.  I 
want to just flesh out some information.  I had some 1986 numbers from 
Ontario which indicate that some 235 entrepreneurs were approved and 
accepted.  And that involved an investment of $82.8 million and they 
created 3,396 new jobs.  Now those are quite interesting statistics. 
 
In the meantime, in Saskatchewan our program was biased towards the 
creation of these funds and their job creation record to this point I think 
is nothing like the experience in Ontario. 
 
(1545) 
 
So that my advice on the matter, Minister, is that after a very, very shaky 
start on this program, you seem to share the view that I had developed 
early on in this program, and that is the best use of the program is to 
target it to a specific economic venture and try and encourage immigrant 
investors who want to come to Saskatchewan with their $150,000, to come 
here and invest in a specific business and get that business up and 
running.  And I know, and I know you know a number of situations in 
Saskatchewan where that's actually happened. 
 
So my advice is that the second category is the one to focus on and we 
should move away from approving the big funds, the third category of 
investments.  So I'd like your comments on that, Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Well first of all I'm going to send over for you a May 
29, 1990 Canada-wide statistics indicating current statistics so that your 
research is current.  And then let us examine this area. 
 



 

 

The business investor program categories as set out by the federal 
government are self-employed, entrepreneur, and investor, as you've 
indicated. 
 
Self-employed.  I've never been to Asia.  I suppose I'll have to go so I 
understand that area better because I have considerable jurisdiction and a 
lot of . . . I have a lot of Asian people coming over and expressing an 
investment interest in Saskatchewan, so I should really understand what 
they're doing a little better. 
 
But my understanding is that most of these people come from Hong Kong, 
which is a fairly crowded city on a small land mass.  They're used to a 
crowded city.  So, number one, the self-employed people tend to go to 
Vancouver or Toronto because it's the kind of city they're used to.  It's 
crowded, by our standards, and it has a lot of people.  There are a lot of 
Chinese people in Toronto and Vancouver.  I read in one of the papers that 
there were 300,000 people of Chinese origin in the Toronto metropolitan 
area.  And so they have a sense of community.  So we wouldn't expect to get 
a lot of the self-employed people here from Asia. 
 
This is not a program that is limited to any part of the world, but it is 
in Asia where people have accumulated some wealth and are concerned about 
their economic and political future and are interested in bringing some of 
that wealth to Canada and putting it to work in Canada in a North American 
market.  Because we are now a North American market as far as they are 
concerned, with respect to the free trade agreement we've signed with the  
 DUnited States. 
 
People from Asia like Canada as a friendly country, want to come here and 
invest here to sell to the North American market -- the United States and 
Canada.  So they have got themselves a market of about 270 million people 
and can live in Canada. 
 
Now the entrepreneurs are the kind of people we would like to attract to 
Saskatchewan for reasons already stated.  They have an affinity to 
Vancouver and Toronto, but we try to attract as many as possible.  The 
investor can invest in a specific project, in a syndicate, or a government 
administered project.  And what you have then is you have investment funds 
which are quite attractive in Saskatchewan because we are in need of 
investment.  The federal government has designated us to be an area where 
you can invest with $150,000 cash rather than $250,000, as in Ontario and 
British Columbia. 
 
So investors are putting their money into funds.  We are in substantial 
agreement, you and I, that funds should be targeted.  Initially we left 
this in the hands of the federal government and it is their program, but I 
have indicated clearly that since I've taken over, that there will be 
targeting of these funds. 
 
The only thing that you are in error on is that we do not . . . while we 
like the entrepreneur to come here as an immigrant, it is not impossible to 
target funds. And that's why I'm review the applications on funds to try to 
get some targeting with respect to investment in processing, manufacturing, 



 

 

destination-tourism, and those types of investments that would enhance our 
job market in Saskatchewan rather than build real estate. 
 
And we're in substantial agreement, but I just wanted to clarify for you 
that we are not going to prevent funds; we are going to try to target the 
funds. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- I want to ask you, Minister . . . and I think we made a 
mistake, for whatever reason, when we let this program get started in 
Saskatchewan the way that it did.  I'm not exactly clear on how you go 
about shaping the way in which the program gets started in a province but I 
look at the numbers for Ontario and, according to the numbers that you sent 
across to me, they had 131 approved proposals for business ventures and 14 
for investment certificates, whereas in Saskatchewan we had 45 business 
ventures and 75 investment certificates.  So there's a huge difference in 
the mix there and you and I are agreed that the business venture category 
is the better approach to take with respect to these funds coming in. 
 
And what I want to know is how you explain Saskatchewan got off on what I 
would call the wrong foot?  How did we get so preoccupied with the 
investment category and down-played or at least did not develop the 
business venture option a little more aggressively? 
 
Now in that connection -- and I think it's in that connection, you 
announced a policy review of the program or maybe it was your predecessor 
that announced it immediately before your appointment -- and what my 
question in that connection, and I believe it may be related to my first 
question, is: what triggered that policy review? 
 
And let me suggest the answer, and you can comment on that in giving me 
your answers, that it had to do with the investment syndicates and the 
regulation or the lack of regulation of those syndicates.  And you'll 
remember, Minister, there were exchanges between you and I in the press on 
. . . or at least me and the minister of the day in the press on that score 
because we had these syndicates being developed in Saskatchewan, being 
approved by the Saskatchewan government with little or no examination, 
being forwarded on to Ottawa, being approved by Ottawa seemingly on the 
assumption that Saskatchewan had looked at them.  And then the people 
selling these funds were off in Asia, for the most part, selling $150,000 
units to people who live there who wanted to immigrate to Canada. 
 
And it was a shocking situation from many points of view.  It was, first of 
all, a situation where there was no regulatory agency looking at it at all, 
including your department with respect to the early applications, and 
certainly not the federal government and not the Securities Commission; not 
the Securities Commission, Minister, in the same way that it would review a 
similar proposal for the sale of units to the consumers of Canada. 
 
In other words, the Securities Commission was not giving it the kind of 
review on the merits of the investment that they were giving to a domestic 
proposal to sell securities.  And that's what you're selling when you're 
selling units in one of these syndicates: you're selling a security by 
definition under the Act. 



 

 

 
And yet our security commission couldn't do anything; the provincial 
department wasn't set up to do anything; the federal government was not 
really doing anything with respect to the merits of the proposal.  Over in 
Hong Kong, for example, they weren't doing anything there either, because 
it wasn't within their jurisdiction. 
 
And as a consequence, we had these -- I call them early syndicates, the 
investment syndicates that were set up in the early days of this program 
who were out there on the streets of Hong Kong selling units in this 
program, and nobody had taken a look at it.  And I thought that that was a 
most extraordinary thing. 
 
The best answer I could get, Minister, was that these people who would be 
putting up the $150,000 fell into a sophisticated investor category and 
therefore you didn't have to vet or you didn't have to review the security 
in quite the same way as you did if you were selling penny stocks or dollar 
stocks on the stock markets of Canada. 
 
And yet that's hardly a sufficient explanation when you really think about 
how the program worked, where you have some person in Hong Kong who has 
barely heard of Canada and probably never heard of Saskatchewan, looking at 
a proposal to buy a unit in a fund being set up to purchase a hotel, and 
doing it from material that had not been vetted and had not been approved 
by any of the approving agencies.  And that, I suggest, was a major problem 
with the program and may to this day still be a problem with the third 
category of investment. 
 
So my question, Minister, in that connection is whether your review was 
related to that problem and to the fees that were being charged and the 
commissions that were set out.  You know what those were in the offering 
memorandum.  There are opportunities there for people to make enormous sums 
of money in the handling of these syndicates and in the selling of the 
units in Hong Kong -- huge amounts. 
 
And my question is whether these shortcomings, these defects in the program 
are what led you to the policy review; or if not, what were the factors 
that led your predecessor and you to reviewing the policy with respect to 
this program? 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Why is the Minister of Highways on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Petersen: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd ask leave to introduce some guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Petersen: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I'd like to 
introduce to you and through you today, 27 grade 5 and 6 students from the 
Wishart School in Wishart, Saskatchewan.  They are accompanied by Virginia 
Latoski, Gloria Rink, their teachers; and chaperons, Donna McDougal, Helen 
Nichol; bus driver, Valerie Stefankiw.  I'll be meeting with you for 



 

 

pictures and refreshments very shortly, and perhaps we can have some 
questions and answers.  I'd invite all hon. members to join me in welcoming 
you here today.  Enjoy yourselves. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
                      Economic Diversification and Trade 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 45 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Chairman, my department and, I say I, but my 
department on my behalf and myself are not reviewing any of the funds with 
respect to the merits of the investment or the security of the investment 
with respect to the investor.  We are reviewing funds only with respect to 
the targeting of the investment to desirable economic development in 
Saskatchewan, that is a diversification style of development rather than a 
real estate style of development. 
 
Let us say that earlier the type of investors that we've attracted in 
Saskatchewan -- there're several problems.  First of all we didn't spent 
enough money on this as a government to go out around the world and attract 
the people that we would want to have. 
 
I'll give you an example.  Quebec runs their own immigration and spends $31 
million per year on their immigration offices.  Saskatchewan doesn't have 
that kind of money; we haven't spent that kind of money.  And earlier on we 
didn't have people in the field to see what was going on in Hong Kong and 
in Taiwan and Singapore and East Asia, where most of the immigrant 
investors come from. 
 
So we are looking primarily at targeting and we do not intend to spend 
money building a regulatory authority to protect foreign investors.  
Foreign investors have the benefit of coming to Canada and will have to 
take their chances on investing in Canada.  We believe Canada is a good 
investment and that they are coming to Canada, they are prepared to invest 
$150,000 to come to Canada, and to invest in this country.  And so we leave 
that to their judgement, but we will target the investment funds in the 
future. 
 
(1600) 
 
And I've taken a tough line since April 1, 1990.  And you would not expect 
me to take any other kind of a line, would you?  And I've taken a tough 
line on this and I think you'll agree with the tough line that I'm taking 
on this matter.  And that's how we intend to operate in the future. 
 
With respect to regulation, it's not our program; it's a federal program.  
It's up to the federal government to regulate the program.  We are only 
advisors.  And all I have as a provincial minister is a veto right now, and 



 

 

even that the federal government could override.  If I refuse to approve a 
project, the federal government could still override it because it's a 
federal program. 
 
We are pleased that the federal government is asking for our opinion.  What 
I am saying is that we are going to get tougher about what we give a good 
opinion to.  And British Columbia is three years ahead of us in this area.  
Quebec is five years ahead of us in this area of immigrant investment.  
They have spent a lot of money.  They've sent a lot of people to Asia to 
promote these matters.  British Columbia has certain natural advantages 
because they are the closest province to the Pacific Rim.  They are right 
on it.  But to Asia, they are the closest province.  And that is really the 
situation that we are going to take a tough line on targeting, but we never 
ever want to get into appraising the merits of individual investment funds 
to say to investors in Asia, this is a good investment or a bad investment.  
They'll have to make those decisions.  We're only interested in targeting 
at this stage. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Now with respect to the last part of that answer, 
Minister, I want to pursue that because I don't understand it.  I mean we 
have the Securities Commission in existence now and it is well staffed and 
very competent to do the job that it's required to do by The Securities 
Act.  And part of its existing function is to review prospectuses for the 
sale of securities.  And in respect of this program, we have exactly that.  
We have offering memoranda which are prospectuses for the sale of units in 
an investment fund which are securities. 
 
And it seems to me that it would be a small matter for you to simply 
require Securities Commission review with respect to the ordinary things 
that the Securities Commission looks at all the time to try and ensure that 
there's a measure of protection for the people who invest. 
 
Now I realize that these people who are investing in these funds are not 
from Canada, but we want . . . you know, they're coming as citizens, 
Minister.  We want them to come with their families.  We want them to put 
down roots here and live here for generations.  And why wouldn't we be 
protecting their investment of $150,000 that got them here in the first 
place? 
 
And we have only to look at the offering memoranda to see the holes in them 
and you know that the Securities Commission would not have approved them 
for domestic investment.  Some of the offering memorandum were so general 
and vague that they're practically meaningless and you couldn't really 
ascertain what was going to be the subject of the investment fund. 
 
Many of these funds had not retained qualified investment advisors, which 
would have been of interest to the Securities Commission.  And there have 
been allegations flying around for months about the tactics used, the 
deceptive tactics used in marketing some of these funds in Asia. 
 
So my question is to you: why wouldn't you use the existing Securities 
Commission, with its existing bureaucracy that's already in place, to do 
precisely what I suggested? 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Chairman, the Securities Commission should and 
does enforce what is within their jurisdiction.  They are licensing the 
fund managers, I understand, requiring them to be licensed.  They are 
requiring a prospectus to be filed with the Securities Commission. 
 
But the bottom line is, Mr. Chairman, that these securities are sold in 
Asia, not in Saskatchewan, and this is an exempt market of sophisticated 
investors.  And I can't justify having Saskatchewan taxpayers' money being 
spent building up a bigger bureaucracy to protect foreign investors.  I 
can't, I don't . . . one million people in Saskatchewan cannot build a 
bureaucracy to protect 3 billion people world-wide. 
 
They'll have to make some of their own decisions world-wide.  The 
Securities Commission will do what it can.  But I certainly cannot 
authorize expenditure of further taxpayers' money to protect foreign 
investors who are investing in Canada in an exempt market where the 
securities are being sold in foreign countries.  I understand it's complex, 
but the bottom line is I will not put taxpayers' money into regulating 
securities sales all over Asia. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Well, Minister, I'm very critical of that answer, because 
you're not here just talking about shares that will be sold in Asia, you're 
talking about securities, investment units that will be sold to people who 
in a matter of months or weeks are going to become Canadians.  They are 
people who are going to be putting, in many cases I suppose, a sizeable 
portion of their life savings in order to buy citizenship in Canada. 
 
And they're coming here under an immigration program sponsored by the 
federal government.  Probably most of them are aware that there's two 
levels of government that have been involved, because no doubt the . . . 
well I know the offering memorandum refers to the Government of 
Saskatchewan as well as the federal programs.  So when they buy into these 
funds, Minister, they know that they're buying into a government program at 
least on the immigration aspect of it. 
 
And they are not sophisticated investors, Mr. Minister, as we understand 
that term domestically in Canada.  These are not people who are 
Saskatchewan residents or Toronto residents or Vancouver residents with a 
lot of money accustomed to playing the Canadian stock-market with all the 
kinds of information and sources of information that those truly 
sophisticated, domestic investors have. 
 
These are people trying to get out of Hong Kong or trying to get out of 
South Korea, trying to come to Canada, a free and democratic country.  And 
they are going to be Canadians.  It's not simply a matter of them making an 
investment in Canada, trying to make some money.  They are changing 
countries.  They're moving their whole families for ever into our country. 
 
And I'm critical of your answer because it just simply doesn't take into 
account the fact that you're dealing with future Canadians, people who in a 
matter of months will be domestic citizens of Canada or at least landed 
immigrants in Canada, people who we would protect here through the same 



 

 

Securities Commission with respect to almost every other security that they 
may buy in the future. 
 
And I invite you, Minister, to at least show some flexibility on this and 
give some consideration to the fact that the Securities Commission is here 
and is competent and capable of taking on these applications without any . 
. . probably without any large increase in staff at all.  It's not a 
question of spending a lot of new Saskatchewan taxpayer money to protect 
people who live in another country.  And besides, as I said earlier, these 
are people who are, while living in another country, on their way to 
becoming Canadian citizens and deserving of all of the protections that we 
would accord to our own citizens. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Well I don't think it pays for us to prolong this 
discussion.  If you want to go on and on repeating the same things, I 
suppose that we can.  But I'm just saying this: that if someone in Ontario 
organizes a company to mine gold in Saskatchewan and sells shares in 
Ontario, they apply to the Ontario Securities Commission and the Ontario 
Securities Commission regulates those securities.  The fact that the mine 
is situated in Saskatchewan is not in question because the securities are 
sold in Ontario.  So there's nothing unusual that if someone is selling 
securities in Asia that we would not reach out into Asia and try to 
regulate in Asia what's being sold in Asia. 
 
We are concerned.  The Securities Commission is doing what it can within 
its jurisdiction.  The bottom line is that we're not going to spend 
Saskatchewan taxpayers' money to protect foreign investors who are 
purchasing securities in a foreign jurisdiction.  Where the investment will 
eventually be in Saskatchewan, the sales are being made in Asia. 
 
And I encourage the Securities Commission to operate within their 
jurisdiction, but I'm not going to give them more money or more 
jurisdiction to spend more money with respect to regulating securities 
outside of Saskatchewan.  Each home jurisdiction has a responsibility to 
protect its own investors, and Hong Kong can pass these kind of rules if 
they're not satisfied with the sales people being in Hong Kong selling 
securities there. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- All right.  What you've said is you're just not prepared 
to be flexible on this question and I guess that we'll just have to leave 
it at that, Minister, as something on which you and I don't agree.  But I 
certainly am critical of the position that you've taken on this and of the 
fact that you're not prepared to show the flexibility necessary to review 
this very important question. 
 
I want to ask you a specific question about the potential investments 
approved for Saskatchewan.  What is the total amount of potential 
investments that have been approved for Saskatchewan, and how does this 
compare with other provinces?  Is it the largest amount that had been 
approved for any of the provinces or how does it compare with other 
provinces? 
 
And secondly, Minister, how many of the investment syndicates have met 



 

 

their minimum offerings and are now ready to invest in Saskatchewan? 
 
And a third question that I'll ask is related to that.  When will you 
receive the first interim report from these syndicates reporting where and 
by what instruments they have invested the funds? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Well I've provided you with that information.  The 
total approved maximum subscription is $1,452.228 million, of which 
subscribed to date is $138.6 million -- a total of 877 investors.  And that 
does not mean that the money is available for an investment in Saskatchewan 
at this time, the 138 that's been subscribed, because under the program all 
of the people in the fund have to be approved for immigration to Canada 
before the money can be released, so the bulk of that money is in escrow 
right now.  In March, 1990, the federal government agreed to change the 
rules so that 70 per cent of the money in escrow could be released for 
investment out of the fund, even though all of the immigration matters had 
not been approved. 
 
Immigration processing is going too slow.  It's taking one and a half to 
two years to get the investors processed, so most of these 877 investors 
are in the process, most of them through the Hong Kong office where 800 or 
so people are applying to get into Saskatchewan on the immigrant investor 
program. 
 
I recently met with the federal immigration minister, discussed with her 
the delays in processing the immigrant investors to Saskatchewan, discussed 
with her the fact that British Columbia and Quebec had twice as many people 
processed  
_- in Canada, per capita -- as Saskatchewan has and that she assured me 
that this was a matter of Quebec and British Columbia being out there in 
the market and that there is no conscious effort to slow things down for 
Saskatchewan.  She assured me that they would try to co-operate in every 
way possible.  The Hong Kong office, I am told, is extremely busy.  We have 
our own Saskatchewan office in Hong Kong, and they're trying to expedite 
these matters as much as possible. 
 
But the federal officials are the federal officials, and they will do 
things in their own federal way so that there's only so much we can do even 
with a minister promising co-operation.  There's only so much we can do to 
get this expedited. 
 
So while the cash is committed, there is very little that is actually 
available for immediate investment. 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- So I take it that you won't be receiving any reports or 
interim reports from the syndicates about how these funds have been 
invested.  You don't expect to do that for some time, I understand from 
your answer. 
 
Now, Minister, what problems do you foresee as these funds are approved and 
as they're invested?  Have you any thoughts on that, Minister?  Has your 



 

 

department foreseen any problems such as, will the money be there to return 
to the investors?  By and large, how do you think these syndicates are 
going to work, based on your analysis to this point?  And are you concerned 
at all about the position of these funds? 
 
And what, if any, steps do you plan to take to watch these funds and see 
how they develop?  And are you concerned, Minister, are you concerned about 
that in the context of Saskatchewan's reputation in places like Hong Kong 
and South Korea and other places as a result of the activities of some of 
these syndicates to this point and as a result of their performance in the 
future? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Well according to the federal rules, these investments 
are to be risk investments that are not guaranteed.  And you were critical 
here a few days ago in question period that there was some suggestion of a 
guarantee.  And the rules are quite clear, there is to be no guarantee. 
 
As a matter of fact, with respect to the question you raised in question 
period on the Omnivest Capital Limited Partnership in Regina, Saskatchewan, 
on June 4 I wrote the federal minister indicating that you had expressed 
concerns and asked the federal government to investigate these allegations 
with respect to an alleged guarantee that we believed was not there but 
that was in the promotional material that you presented to us assuming the 
material was accurate.  We were concerned, and we have asked the federal 
government to investigate that particular matter.  So you know that there 
is no guarantee to the investor. 
 
You yourself have raised that point that there is to be no guarantee.  I 
agree with you.  It is risk capital.  There is no guarantee that the people 
get their money back in three years.  They know that when they invest.  I 
would ask them to choose wisely and they will have to take their chances.  
This is risk and the risk is in Saskatchewan. 
 
 DAnd I would expect that, for the most part, the risk isn't all that 
great, but I don't doubt that some people will lose money on their 
investment.  That is the normal situation in investing.  Hopefully, there 
will be many winners and just a few losers in that risk investment. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- With respect to that Omnivest Capital question that arose, 
Minister, I'm glad you mentioned that because there's another question that 
I had for you in connection with Omnivest.  Are there other situations or 
other funds that have any kind of direct Saskatchewan government 
involvement of the kind of what is referred to, in the letter that I sent 
across to you, as a guarantee, sort of support from the Saskatchewan 
government, besides Omnivest? 
 
And like does, for example, SEDCO play a role in any of the other funds?  
Because as I said to you and as you agree, the immigrant investment funding 
is risk capital situation, and that's what really astonished us about the 
material that we happened across in the Omnivest situation, including that 
letter that you've now referred to the federal government.  My question is 
whether there's other funds in the same . . . or in a similar kind of 
situation as Omnivest? 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- The question with respect to SEDCO would be best asked 
of the SEDCO minister.  To my knowledge, SEDCO is not involved in any 
refinancing of other funds, with the exception of the Saskatchewan growth 
fund matters. 
 
Now the only guarantees are . . . we don't guarantee it, but let's say that 
if you're an investor in Asia and you're investing in the Saskatchewan 
growth fund, you would have a better expectation of return and a better 
expectation that you will be dealt with fairly if you're investing in 
Saskatchewan Government Growth Fund.  So there is no guarantee, but I would 
say that there is less risk from the investor's point of view where the 
Government of Saskatchewan has its own government-sponsored fund. 
 
With the exception of that fund, the only other fund that I know of is the 
Omnivest Capital Limited Partnership where the federal government deemed in 
July of 1989 that SEDCO's mortgage commitment was for refinancing at a 
later date and not a guarantee to the investors.  That was the ruling of 
the federal government in July of 1989. 
 
I've asked them to confirm that ruling and investigate the allegations that 
you made, that this particular fund was advertising on the basis of a 
government guarantee, which the federal government had agreed there was not 
a government guarantee. 
 
So if the federal government investigates, they can deal with the matter 
accordingly.  They've been known to ask for changes in the operations of 
funds.  They've been known to . . . I don't know if they've cancelled 
funds, but I know that there are funds that after the federal government 
had a discussion with them about the rules, the funds have been withdrawn.  
So whether they were cancelled or voluntarily withdrawn is another matter.  
I know that has happened. 
 
So SEDCO has a commitment to refinance the project with Omni Capital 
Partnership.  SEDCO has made an ordinary business transaction there where 
they will be compensated in shares in part of a particular project in 
Regina that has tremendous economic potential for entrepreneurs in Regina, 
especially start-up people in an incubator business mall located right next 
to the airport where business people coming and going world-wide can see 
that these new businesses are in operation. 
 
So it has tremendous potential.  It fits into the mandate of SEDCO for 
economic development and they saw a business investment, made a business 
investment there.  Their part of the investment is the refinancing after 
three years. 
 
And so the only concerns we have is with respect to the allegations of 
advertising of a guarantee that you raised.  I've asked the federal 
government to investigate that. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- I have another question with respect to a different fund, 
Minister, and this is a fund called Capital 8 Investment Corporation, 
Capital 8 Health Fund.  And the offering memorandum on that fund has, under 



 

 

the heading "Investment Strategy", the following: 
 

 The primary investment by the manager is expected to be in a leasing 
organization devoted entirely to the leasing of capital equipment to the 
Saskatchewan and Canadian health care system.  Due to the nature of health 
care delivery in Canada, leases to this market will provide the required 
level of security and predictability as well as fulfilling the overriding 
goal of generating enough cash by year 5 of the leases to repurchase the 
shares of the investors. 

 
Now could the minister explain the government's commitment to this fund and 
its involvement in this fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- The government has no commitment to this fund.  The 
information I have given to me just now, and this is the first I hear of 
this particular fund, as you know there are 119 of them all total, and as 
minister I haven't approved any, so this is not one that I had any specific 
jurisdiction over.  This fund has a minimum offering of $5 million and a 
maximum of 30 million, and I would expect that their last amendment in this 
fund was with Employment and Immigration Canada on January 11, 1990.  It 
was approved as a tier 1 fund, so I'd expect that they're now trying to 
sell their fund in Asia, and I would expect that they would not have any 
money for investment for another year at least. 
 
So the government has no involvement.  I don't know if their fund will sell 
or not sell.  That's a matter that this particular company will have to do 
with respect to their marketing. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- I think you'd agree, Minister, that a very peculiar choice 
of words that they used here, where the primary investment is to . . . 
lease capital is to be used in leasing capital equipment to the 
Saskatchewan and Canadian health care system.  And I would ask you to . . . 
I think you've gone as far as you can today, but if you investigate that 
and find out any more information concerning any commitments that may have 
been made by the Saskatchewan government or discussions or talks that may 
have led to some understandings as to the relationship between this company 
and our Saskatchewan health care system, I would be obliged if you would 
make that public, or at least communicate it to me. 
 
Now I want to now go, Minister, to this business of the pork countervail 
that you and I opened in question period today.  This is, Minister, an 
outrageous subject.  This is an outrage to the pork producers of this 
province. 
 
The pork producers of Saskatchewan were very supportive of the free trade 
agreement on the basis of certain understandings that they had as to what 
that process would yield for them.  Indeed, there are many, many producers 
in agriculture and in all kinds of industries in Canada who were supportive 
of the free trade talks because of understandings that they reached or that 
they had from the federal government and from the various provincial 
governments, none more so than the Government of Saskatchewan who was 
behind this free trade deal right from the time negotiations started. 
 



 

 

It was a general expectation, fostered by the federal government and 
fostered by the proponents of free trade, that the free trade agreement 
would resolve the question, the problems that Canada was facing with 
respect to the application of the American trade laws, respecting 
particularly countervailing duties. 
 
Now anti-dumping duties were included as well, but that's of interest to a 
narrower range of people than is the fear of a countervail.  And a 
countervail, as the minister will know, is a trade weapon that the United 
States have to counterbalance what they perceive to be a subsidy in the 
country that is exporting material or goods and services into the United 
States. 
 
Now it was the understanding of many producers in this country, and none 
more so than the hog producers in Saskatchewan, that one of the outcomes of 
the free trade negotiations would be a clear agreement with the American 
government respecting this question of subsidies and this question of 
countervail.  And throughout the negotiations these statements were made 
and impressions created. 
 
And indeed, Minister, you will recall that in the final hours, when 
Canada's negotiator, Simon Reisman, walked away from the table, it was 
specifically because this question had not been wrestled to the ground and 
they were not able to get any movement from the American authorities that 
would satisfy the expectations in Canada. 
 
And finally at about five minutes before midnight on the last day on which 
the agreement could be reached, the Americans floated the idea of this 
bi-national dispute settlement mechanism -- this bi-national panel.  And 
we're beginning to see the results of that panel.  We're just beginning to 
see it.  But it is my theory, and I fully expect that events are going to 
substantiate my theory, that that bi-national panel is going to be an inept 
and ineffective mechanism for the protection of the interests of Canadian 
exporters. 
 
(1630) 
 
The expectation of the hog producers and others, Mr. Minister, is that the 
free trade agreement would result in a regime, if I can use that term, in a 
set of arrangements by which they would no longer be threatened by 
countervailing duties, a regime under which they would no longer have to 
fear the American trade authorities landing a duty on Canadian pork being 
exported into the United States.  And, Minister, the agreement failed 
entirely to deal with that subject.  The free trade agreement failed 
entirely to get any level of satisfaction with respect to that issue. 
 
The American trade laws are today in effect in every sense of the word as 
they were before the free trade negotiations even started.  In fact I think 
as a result of the free trade debate and the free trade negotiations, more 
American producers are aware now of the potential use of the countervail 
weapon than ever was the case before.  The free trade negotiations have in 
fact exacerbated the situation.  And the only thing we got in return 
besides this inept and practically useless bi-national dispute settlement 



 

 

mechanism is an undertaking to talk about the question of subsidies over 
the period of seven years from the date of signing of the agreement. 
 
We're going to talk to the Americans about subsidies.  Talk is cheap, my 
colleague says, and indeed to this point those talks have been very cheap 
-- very cheap.  They don't seem to have any priority in Ottawa, and I'll 
want to know from you later what priority they have in the province of 
Saskatchewan.  But those subsidy talks just have very little likelihood of 
producing any good news as far as the province of Saskatchewan is 
concerned. 
 
And so, Minister, every time we see a trade action directed against, for 
example, hogs in Saskatchewan, it angers us on this side of the House.  And 
it angers all of the many, many people in this province who are opposed to 
the free trade agreement.  It angers many of those people because we 
foresaw these problems.  And every time a countervailing duty is threatened 
or imposed, we say again, aha, the free trade agreement that was supposed 
to make these problems go away, failed to do it. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Don't say it with so much pleasure. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- And we're going to be after you, Minister, every time it 
happens.  Now you accuse me of saying it with pleasure, and I don't.  I say 
it with sadness.  But I say it with anger also because those hog producers 
were led to believe that the free trade agreement was going to resolve 
their problems in some way.  And it has failed to do that. 
 
In addition, Minister, the hog producers definitely had the impression that 
the free trade agreement, and the chapter on agriculture in particular, 
were going to reduce the border hassles.  They were going to make the 
border hassles go away.  No longer would they be faced with phoney American 
regulations that would keep out our livestock because we fed them a certain 
kind of feed or included a certain kind of additive in the feed.  And no  
 Dmore would we be stopped at the border with phoney inspections that would 
delay the entry of our meat products into the United States. 
 
Well what's happened?  What's happened is that there are more . . . there 
have been more of those border hassles since the free trade agreement than 
there was in the period before the free trade agreement. 
 
Now we've had a lot of outrage and a lot of complaints with respect to 
those hassles and some of them have been resolved.  Some of them haven't 
been satisfactorily resolved and it has done damage to the industry in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But I think that the biggest problem is the countervail.  The border 
hassles are important and they're aggravating beyond words, but the 
countervail is the one with the real bite.  And these countervailing 
actions was the central goal of our negotiations as far as our red meat 
industry in Saskatchewan was concerned. 
 
I just want to just remind you of the chronology of events as far as the 
countervail in hogs is concerned.  On May 8, 1989 the U.S. Commerce 



 

 

Department issued a preliminary ruling on the threat of injury to U.S. 
producers.  And they found that there was a threat of injury to the U.S. 
hog producers on account of Canadian exports or imports from Canada into 
the United States.  Our federal government did not appeal this initial 
ruling under the GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) as it had a 
right to do.  We don't know why, but it did not appeal. 
 
So on July 19, 1989, some two and a half months later, the American 
commerce department ruling . . . there was a ruling which upheld and in 
fact raised the duty on fresh, chilled, and frozen pork.  It was set at 8 
cents a kilogram, or 3.6 cents a pound on fresh, chilled, and frozen pork.  
Now in August 1989 this decision was appealed to the bi-national dispute 
settlement panel under article 1904 of the free trade agreement, and there 
it sits. 
 
Now as I say, that panel is, in my opinion, a useless and inept body.  All 
it can do is determine whether the American trade laws, the existing 
American trade laws were applied correctly and fairly.  In other words, 
nothing to do with whether or not there's a case in fact existing, a 
subsidy in Canada that they're entitled to countervail, but did they in 
fact follow the proper procedures: did they follow the American trade laws, 
did they make the inquiries.  But it is not, Minister, it is not an appeal 
on the merits -- it is not an appeal on the merits. 
 
Now I don't know how that registered in the minds of trade experts.  But 
you, as a lawyer, would know the difference between an appeal on the merits 
and an appeal in an administrative sense to determine whether the proper 
procedures had been followed and whether the law had been fairly 
interpreted.  It's the difference, Minister, between judicial review as you 
understand it on the one hand, and the review on the merits on the other.  
There is no review on the merits in connection with the bi-national panel. 
 
Now the situation right at the moment is that we are waiting for a 
decision, a final decision from this panel, and it has to be made within 
315 days, so we should have it by about a month from now, about mid-July. 
 
Now during all this time now that this has been happening, the 
countervailing duty has been collected in the United States and it has been 
. . . they've been doing that since September 13 of last year, and they 
continue to do that and it sits in the fund.  Now they're keeping that on 
deposit and if by some miracle this bi-national panel actually works and 
justice is brought to the case and that countervail is done away with, we 
get the money back.  But the chances of that happening, Minister, are just 
nothing.  They're so tiny they don't even count. 
 
Now it has bitten in . . . has hurt in Saskatchewan. The bite from the 
countervail has really hurt and you know that, Minister, because I've 
raised these questions in this House.  Moose Jaw Packers has laid off 20 
employees, more than half its staff, as a result of this inspection 
harassment at the border.  That was the trigger, but the real reason was 
the imposition of the heavy countervailing duty.  And Intercontinental 
Packers has announced that it would be cutting off . . . or laying off 60 
workers, bringing to 240 the total laid off since November of 1989.  And 



 

 

that was as a direct result of the countervailing duty. 
 
Now Mr. Mitchell -- no relation of mine -- the head of Intercontinental 
Packers, says quite correctly that it is not the fault of the free trade 
agreement in the sense that there's nothing in the free trade agreement 
that led to this damage or this insult. 
 
But my point is it was the failure of the free trade process, the free 
trade negotiations, to come to grips with this countervailing duty that has 
resulted in this problem.  It has interfered with the access of Canadian 
pork to the American market. 
 
And that, Minister, is exactly what we were after . . . Canada was after, 
in these negotiations.  It was triggered, you remember, by the softwood 
lumber dispute, by shakes and shingles, by Atlantic fish, and by Ontario 
specialty steel, and a host of countervailing duties that had been imposed 
by the Americans over the years. 
 
And we Canadians decided we had to resolve that issue, and we tried to do 
it and we failed.  Now, Minister, that is a sad, sad state of affairs, and 
that's why I raised the matter again today in question period and why I'll 
continue to do it. 
 
Now I want to pose a question to you to focus your answer, and it seems to 
me that there are two possibilities for us being able to recapture our 
initiative in this situation, to recoup our losses.  The first would be to 
revoke the free trade agreement, to give notice to the United States under 
the appropriate article that six months from now we're out of it because 
it's simply not working. 
 
I don't suppose that you're going to do that though, Minister.  I don't 
suppose you're going to be requesting your counterpart in Ottawa to do 
that. And they wouldn't do it anyway, because they still cling to the 
belief that they might be able to salvage something from this free trade 
agreement.  But the alternative is to get serious about these subsidy 
negotiations, to get really serious about it. 
 
Now all of the information that we've been able to get from Ottawa 
indicates that they're not serious about it.  They don't put any particular 
priority on it at all. They have a team of civil servants assigned to that 
task, which is not the A team, Minister. There's no Simon Reisman on that 
team.  There's no Gordon Ritchie on that team.  It is a B team.  To put it 
on its highest plane, it is a B team.  And it seems to me that that team is 
not being assisted by provinces such as Saskatchewan which have such a very 
high stake in the subsidy outcome. 
 
Now my question, Minister, is related to that last alternative, the 
alternative of really getting involved and placing a high priority upon the 
subsidy negotiations.  Just what position is Saskatchewan taking with 
respect to these subsidy negotiations and how are we involved in the 
process?  And if we're not actively involved in the process, then why 
aren't we?  And what steps are you taking and will you take to ensure that 
Saskatchewan producer interests are being protected during those subsidy 



 

 

negotiations? 
 
You must realize -- I know your department realizes the crucial nature of 
those discussions and their crucial importance to the export part of the 
agricultural industry in Saskatchewan, which is practically the whole of 
the industry.  These are vitally important talks as far as our future is 
concerned.  And I would like to hear from you just how you're participating 
or seeking to participate in those discussions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  When the free trade 
agreement was being negotiated, there was an attempt made to include with 
it a resolution of countervail arguments.  That doesn't mean that there 
won't be countervail arguments from time to time. 
 
The Americans did not wish to change their countervail laws and we did not 
wish to give up on our marketing boards.  And if the countervail issues 
would have been included in the free trade agreement, we would have had to 
make concessions on our marketing boards which we were not prepared to do.  
And so the end result was that the free trade agreement was signed with 
respect to tariff items. Tariffs are being reduced.  Countervail is a 
separate law and it's a law that lets you compensate your producer or 
punish the exporter into your country for subsidies they are receiving from 
their government. 
 
Whereas we know the world is full of subsidies, has been for many years, 
probably for two millennium, agriculture has been subsidized from the Roman 
Empire on to the Russian empire and on to western Europe and the United 
States and Canada to some extent.  And there's a constant world-wide debate 
on this.  And as a matter of fact the Uruguay round of the GATT 
negotiations are taking place right now. 
 
So countervail problems still exist where there are international arguments 
between countries with respect to subsidies being provided to producers 
when those subsidies are involved in export.  And if you are subsidizing 
for export, you are subject to countervail rules. 
 
The United States and Canada are in a dispute over whether this is the 
case, and let me give you a bit of background.  The United States imposed a 
3.6 cent per pound or 8 cents per kilogram countervail on imports of 
Canadian pork effective September 11, 1989.  Saskatchewan's exports of 
fresh, chilled, or frozen pork to the U.S. in 1988 were $51 million. 
 
(1645) 
 
Some of the provinces in the meat industry have jointly launched three 
appeals against the U.S. ruling.  The first appeal is an appeal of subsidy 
determination by the free trade agreement dispute settlement panel.  The 
decision on that is expected on July 3, 1990.  We have appealed the injury 
determination to the free trade agreement dispute settlement mechanism.  
The decision on that is expected on August 24, 1990. 
 
Contrary to what you have told us here today, we have appealed to GATT . . 
. we have appealed a subsidy determination directly to GATT.  That has been 



 

 

done, contrary to what you have tried to lead this committee to believe.  
We have appealed the countervail to GATT . . . (inaudible interjection) . . 
. Well you're saying you know that.  Well then, we agree; we have appealed 
the countervail to GATT. 
 
Now what you have is a situation where you ask, what are we doing about 
these matters?  We are constantly having Saskatchewan input in the federal 
position with respect to the free trade agreement.  We are constantly 
encouraging the federal government to use the dispute settlement mechanism, 
as they are in this particular case. 
 
The federal minister met with the provincial ministers in Ottawa about 
three weeks ago and Mr. Crosbie indicated that GATT is one of the key 
negotiations now.  And he invited the provincial ministers to join with him 
in Brussels in December to see what could be done with respect to 
straightening out agriculture matters at GATT.  The final negotiations will 
be in early December of this year.  Saskatchewan is invited, as are the 
other provinces, to go with Mr. Crosbie to make certain that our position 
is at the forefront with respect to Ottawa's position. 
 
Now your suggestion that we cancel the free trade agreement . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . revoke, I think, was the term you used, 
would be an expensive temper tantrum for Canada, and expensive for our 
citizens. Because contrary to your arguments that free trade has been bad 
for Canada, Saskatchewan's value added exports to the United States since 
the agreement has been signed have increased from about 600 million -- 598 
million to be exact -- to 700.417 million to be exact.  They have increased 
$102 million or 17 per cent since the agreement was signed.  You cannot 
say, and jump up and down with joy, that we told you so -- free trade would 
be bad for us -- when we have increased our trade on value added products 
with the United States by 17 per cent since the agreement was signed. 
 
Now by value added exports, we mean everything that is sold from 
Saskatchewan to the United States with the exception of sales through the 
Canadian Wheat Board -- sales of uranium, sales of oil, sales of potash.  
So this is not raw resources that we have increased our sales in, this is 
value added.  Processed and manufactured products have increased from 
Saskatchewan by 17 per cent in the first year of the free trade agreement. 
 
How can you say that free trade is bad for Saskatchewan?  How can you say 
that we should revoke $102 million of our business in this province?  Our 
people in this province cannot afford to lose $102 million worth of trade 
to the United States because you are ideologically bound against trading 
with the United States.  You are ideologically bound against Americans 
doing business in Canada or Canadians doing business in the United States.  
You are ideologically bound against accepting U.S. dollars in exchange for 
our products. 
 
Why are you against the free trade agreement when it has given us 17 per 
cent improvement in the first year? -- because it's your ideology?  I'm 
saying put that aside, accept the facts that we are a trading province and 
we need open markets to trade in.  We cannot trade in the United States if 
we don't have access to that market.  So accept that, or tell us what 



 

 

logical reason you might have for being opposed to trading with the United 
States. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Minister, Minister, where were you during the entire free 
trade debate?  I mean that you as a minister of the Crown should stand up 
and make the statement that you've just made, suggesting for a moment that 
it is our position that we shouldn't trade with the United States or that 
we're opposed to trade with the United States is not true.  It is not true 
at all. And I'm surprised that you don't know that, Minister.  I'm 
surprised that you would make statements such as that we were ideologically 
bound against trade or biased against trade with the United States. 
 
We want to trade with anybody who will trade with us.  We think it a 
mistake in this world that we're living in now, considering the 
geopolitical situation in the world, to put so many of our eggs in one 
basket.  So we would have preferred diversification.  We would have 
preferred an emphasis of trade into other parts of the world while 
continuing to trade with our closest neighbour.  We're not trying to cut 
off trade or to reduce trade with the United States.  We're trying to 
expand trade with all countries. 
 
Now you say that you gave me some numbers with respect to the operation of 
the free trade agreement in Saskatchewan and I'd like to see those numbers, 
Minister.  I wonder if you could send those numbers across to me so that I 
could see what they are?  And I hope that the document has the source of 
the numbers on it so that I can study them in some detail.  Because I would 
be very, very surprised if, as a result of the free trade agreement, the 
value of Saskatchewan exports to the United States increased at all -- 
increased at all, Minister. 
 
It may be that we're selling more hogs into the United States than we were 
in spite of the countervail.  It may be that we're selling more cattle into 
the United States.  But you know and I know that the duties on cattle were 
not affected by the free trade agreement and the duties on most pork 
products were not affected at all -- and those that were only by pennies. 
 
So I'd like to see your numbers of your value added numbers as you say, and 
do some analysis on them because as far as we can determine, so far as we 
can determine, the free trade agreement has been a complete bust everywhere 
in Canada -- everywhere in Canada. 
 
And the numbers from Ontario that I referred to in question period today, 
the numbers from all across Canada indicate that 165,000 jobs in 
manufacturing went somewhere, disappeared, vanished.  And the speculation 
is that a lot of them, a lot of them were as a result of changes that were 
forced on Canada by the free trade agreement. 
 
Now I want to get back . . . this question of subsidies and our approach to 
these subsidy negotiations, I find really, really frustrating.  I asked 
your predecessor in this House last year about this subject and he answered 
in terms very similar to yours.  You know, oh we're being consulted and 
we're going to meetings and we're talking to the minister and we're putting 
in our input. 



 

 

 
Minister, these subsidy negotiations under the free trade agreement are 
just absolutely crucial for the future of very large segments of western 
agriculture, for the very large proportion of Saskatchewan agriculture.  
And these subsidy negotiations are absolutely crucial.  And if we were the 
government, Minister, if we were the government, Mr. Minister, and someone 
on this side of the House is sitting in your chair, then those subsidy 
negotiations would have an absolute first-line priority in your department. 
 
And I don't get any sense at all, Minister, that you share that view.  I 
didn't get the sense that your predecessor, Mr. Andrew, shared that view, 
and I don't get any sense that you realize the urgency of that subject 
matter.  You just seem content to sit back and let somebody in Ottawa do it 
-- the B team, as I say, deal with this question of subsidies. 
 
Now we're not talking here about the GATT negotiations that you referred 
to, where you're going to send some representatives over to Geneva or 
elsewhere in Europe to attend the next round of GATT negotiations, try to 
get an agreement before the end of the present year.  That's a different 
subject.  That deals with subsidies, agricultural subsidies, on an 
international scale and how that whole regime will fit under the GATT 
umbrella. 
 
What I'm talking about here are the level of subsidies that refer to in the 
free trade agreement and the discussions that were to take place under that 
agreement over a period of seven years between Canada and the United 
States, to put some definition on this question of subsidies -- to try and 
define what is a subsidy, and to try and determine which subsidies are 
subject to countervail and which are not. 
 
And it's very complex, very difficult matter, and the Americans are 
prepared for those negotiations and they're ready and they're hard-nosed as 
they can possibly be.  As you observed yourself, they are after our 
marketing boards.  They're after particularly the Canadian Wheat Board.  
And they're after a lot of other agricultural programs.  And you know 
yourself, Minister, from your study of just the American decisions with 
respect to the countervail on hogs, that they understand nothing about our 
so-called subsidy programs. 
 
They will look at a program in Canada that you and I know is not a subsidy 
at all.  But they apply their own particular perspective to that situation 
and their own particular logic and their own particular ideology, and they 
extract from that situation a subsidy.  They decide there is a subsidy 
being paid in Canada and they countervail against it. 
 
And you and I sit up here and fret and fume and worry and say, that's not 
fair, and there isn't a thing we can do about it.  Now that question of 
whether or not what's happening here is a subsidy is the precise question 
that's being addressed in these discussions under the free trade agreement.  
And I find your answer very disturbing because I get no sense from your 
answer that it's a priority in your department.  You should have hard, 
thorough, comprehensive studies underway and position papers well-reasoned 
and get those down to Ottawa and get your people down to Ottawa and meet 



 

 

with this team of negotiators and make sure that they understand the 
importance of these things to the fabric of life in our province. 
 
These aren't just some kind of academic questions or little trade-offs that 
you can make with your American friends.  These are questions that strike 
right at the root of agriculture in this province and the future of our 
agricultural industry -- indeed, Minister, the future of our province.  And 
I can think of, I really can think of nothing on your agenda, the agenda of 
your department or the agenda of your government, that should have a higher 
priority than these subsidy discussions under the free trade agreement. 
 
Now please, Minister, stand in your place and tell me I'm wrong.  Tell me 
that you got the situation under control because you really recognize that 
it is a priority, and you really have dedicated the resources to this 
subject that I insist you have to dedicate to it and that we in 
Saskatchewan can feel secure that the federal government in Ottawa is 
actually going to negotiate this thing in such a way that Saskatchewan 
agriculture will survive. 
 
I don't have any confidence that that's happening at all.  Now would you 
comment on that, Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- I don't think anybody in Saskatchewan, Mr. Chairman, 
would doubt that both the Premier of this government, that the Premier will 
and has always stood up for trade rights for the province of Saskatchewan.  
You will see both the Premier and myself take an active role in trying to 
resolve the trade wars with respect to grain that are now being negotiated 
in GATT.  You will see the Premier and myself involved at all levels. And I 
told you I just came back from Ottawa from a meeting three weeks ago, where 
I made a very strong position with respect to what Saskatchewan has to say 
on the rules of trade.  Ottawa understands this.  Saskatchewan is a very 
large earner of foreign exchange for Canada, and Ottawa needs the cash that 
Saskatchewan generates in foreign trade -- in grain, in cattle, in pork, in 
other products, and now also in $700 million a year in value added 
products. 
 
We are taking a strong stand on the free trade agreement with respect to 
the federal government position.  Mr. Crosbie is very open to listening to 
Saskatchewan's position and advancing it, and has agreed that the federal 
position and the Saskatchewan position on agriculture are similar.  And 
that position will be advanced by our federal government on our behalf and 
we will be there. 
 
(1700) 
 
And I plan to go to Brussels with Mr. Crosbie. The Premier may go there if 
necessary, to work out these problems at GATT.  The United States is 
directing the agricultural subsidy problem arguments at the GATT 
negotiations.  They believe they should be solved world-wide rather than 
just between Canada and the United States.  For the most part, Canada and 
the United States do not export or import food to each other, other than 
vegetables and pork, but not the quantities that we export to other parts 
of the world from Saskatchewan and from western Canada. 



 

 

 
So we will take a very strong stand in favour of our farmers being able to 
trade freely in a world-wide economy.  It is going to be a difficult 
negotiation.  It has been difficult for five years since the Uruguay round 
started.  It will conclude at the end of this year and we will try, with 
Canada, to make as much progress as possible, to make whatever progress can 
be made to end the grain war in which our farmers are front-line victims. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Being past 5 o'clock, the committee will rise and report 
progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:03 p.m. 
 


