





























































Hansard: April 27, 1990


 

 

April 27/90 
 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure 
this morning to introduce to you, and through you to other members of the 
legislature, a group of 16 grade 11 students who are seated in your gallery 
from all across the province.  And this group of students, Mr. Speaker, 
will be leaving shortly for Victoria where they will be attending an 
interchange on Canadian studies conference.  The topic of this conference 
is dealing with the Pacific Rim. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I'm sure that all members would join with me in welcoming 
this group of students this morning, and also wishing them a successful 
trip to Victoria to attend this conference, and I look forward to meeting 
with the students a little bit later this morning. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swan: -- Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the member for Morse, I would like 
to introduce a group of students this morning from Wymark School in Wymark, 
Saskatchewan.  These are grade 8 students, 21 in number.  They are seated 
in the Speaker's gallery, and they are accompanied by their teacher, Mr. 
Knelsen, Sharon Saunders, Marg Neustaeter, Wanda Olfert, Mr. and Mrs. 
Howlett, and John Neustaeter. 
 
I would be very pleased to meet with the students about 11 o'clock for 
pictures and refreshments, and I look forward to a good time of questions 
and answers in room 218 a little later this morning.  Would you please 
welcome this group of students to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Agricultural Exemptions to GST 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  In the absence of the 
Minister of Agriculture and his associate minister, I wish to direct a 
question to the former minister of Finance.  And, Mr. Speaker, it has to do 
with the GST (goods and services tax), which we say on this side of the 
House is a very bad blow for all Canadians, and especially is going to be a 
bad blow for the farming community at this particular time. 
 
Mr. Minister, the Mulroney government has promised that it would produce 
publicly a list of exempted agricultural goods and services, exemptions 
from the GST.  Undoubtedly your government must have access to this list 



 

 

and input into its preparation.  Would the minister be kind enough to 
indicate to the House whether or not he has received such an exemptions 
list, what input the government has had into it, and whether he'd be 
prepared to table a copy of it today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I'm not aware of whether Finance or Agriculture and Food 
has received such a list.  I'll take notice of the question. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I have a new question which I direct to 
the former minister of Finance.  It makes it a little bit difficult in the 
light of the fact that he, quite properly I guess, took notice of this 
question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have in front of me here a document which purports to be a 
preliminary list of tax-free items for farmers and fishermen.  And some of 
the exemptions on this list, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, such as tractors 
and rock pickers are properly, one would say, on the list for farmers as 
being tax exempt.  But surprisingly, others are not. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister is this.  While you're taking 
notice will you be able to also take notice, or perhaps you can give an 
answer now, to explain to us why such other matters such as granaries, 
other farm buildings, chemicals, spraying equipment, harrows, vet supplies 
are not on the preliminary list of exemptions for the GST?  How can the 
government say that farmers will be exempt, yet farmers are asked to pay so 
many of the items not exempted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Again, as I've indicated, I'm not aware of whether the 
Agriculture and Food and Finance has any such list.  I do know that all 
provinces have been negotiating with the government in terms of what is 
going to apply to their provinces to try and get exemption lists.  Whether 
that's a current one or not, I can't tell you.  But I have taken notice and 
the appropriate minister will respond. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the responsible 
minister in this instance this morning, or anybody else who cares to 
answer.  May I say, Mr. Speaker, as a preliminary observation, as a 
preliminary comment to the question, that I find it a little bit surprising 
that the members of the Executive Council, namely the cabinet, would not 
have on their agenda at some point up to now a consideration of the 
proposed exemptions list for agricultural goods and services when the GST 
comes into play on January 1, 1991, given its importance to the 
agricultural community. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question to you is, especially in the light of the fact 
that you've taken notice of the two previous questions: is the government 
not monitoring this situation on an almost daily basis?  Are the officials 
not monitoring the exemptions list with respect to farmers?  Is it possible 
for us to believe that cabinet does not have a direct input into what is 



 

 

going to be taxable under GST and what is not, as far as the farming 
community is concerned? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Well again I've indicated to the hon. member, I don't 
know whether that's a current list, an early list, or whatever, and that 
the Department of Finance quite appropriately has been trying to take the 
position with the federal government of scrapping the tax. 
 
But having said that, Mr. Speaker, the specifics of what is going on any 
list or how the tax will be collected, what compensation will be paid, all 
of those details of course are being discussed by Finance ministers, and 
I'm sure, in the case of agriculture, the officials in the Department of 
Agriculture.  So I have taken notice. 
 
I just caution the hon. member as to taking a list to ensure that . . . 
because there are discussions going on, whether it's a current one or what 
the most recent one would be. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I have a new question, sir, to the 
minister, and I take to heart his words of caution.  But that's exactly why 
I'm up in question period, to try to figure out whether or not the list is 
accurate and what the government's position is.  And unfortunately I am not 
meeting much success here this morning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it's clear that the government's position on the GST is either 
overladen by what can only be described as incredible sloppiness or, in the 
alternative, indifference, or both.  And that's simply not good enough -- 
not good enough for this House and not good enough for the farmers. 
 
My question to you, Mr. Minister, is this:  even at this late date, can you 
tell us what steps you will undertake, apart from taking notice of these 
series of questions, what steps you will take today, immediately, to ensure 
that the exemptions list for farmers is expanded?  Or putting it more 
correctly, exactly what the exemptions list is, and to ensure that the 
exemptions list is expanded to cover all of the farmers' items.  And 
putting it more bluntly, perhaps even to expand it so that the entire GST 
position should be scrapped.  What steps will you take? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- We've stated for some considerable period of time what 
our preference is, and that is that the tax be scrapped.  And the Minister 
of Finance and others have given some of the disadvantages to a value added 
tax, particularly when there are two levels of taxation. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- You supported it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- No, that's not true.  As a matter of fact, the hon. 
member sitting in his seat from Regina is the one who stood up in this 
House and urged this government to make sure that we joined the GST, Mr. 
Speaker.  It's in Hansard.  It's on record.  The New Democratic position 



 

 

was that we were . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- He got fired. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Yes, he got fired . . . (inaudible) . . . right. He got 
fired. 
 
On record, Mr. Speaker, that the government should support the GST.  That's 
the NDP position in the legislature. 
 
Having said that, having said that, Mr. Speaker, as I've indicated, what 
our position is:  if the federal government insists on pursuing and 
proceeding with the GST, there have been discussions by governments across 
the country how to minimize the impact on all sectors within their 
province, including agriculture, including our resource industries, 
including the average person in this province, Mr. Speaker.  So we're 
trying to minimize the impact as much as possible if the tax, as much as we 
oppose it, proceeds. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question for the minister, and 
this will be the final question that I have on this topic this morning, 
given the fact that I've -- the word I have to use is the one that comes to 
mind -- been stonewalled on the questions, although I understand the 
minister may not have the direct knowledge. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a few days ago this side of the House attempted to introduce a 
motion by leave of the Assembly, urging the Assembly to pass the motion 
condemning the proposed GST tax in principle, and we were, as you will 
recall, Mr. Speaker, denied leave to introduce that motion by the 
government members opposite, the government saying that there would be a 
new motion, and still no new motion in sight. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question that I have for the senior minister on the front 
bench this morning: will you give consent today to a new motion opposing 
the GST and the farming issue that I've raised, a copy of which we're going 
to send over to you right away, in fact as soon as we can get one of the 
pages to do it?  Will you give leave and consent today to introduce this 
motion so that we can debate it and pass it unanimously and to concretely 
show our displeasure to the federal government about the GST.  I wouldn't 
even say displeasure, I would say our opposition to the GST and our 
opposition to this preliminary list of exemptions for agricultural 
products, something clearly which the government is caught unawares of.  
Will you give consent? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I certainly would support a common message from this 
Assembly to the federal government opposing the GST.  The difficulty on a 
cursory look at the motion, is you do make reference to exempt agriculture 
equipment. 
 



 

 

One of the difficulties with the GST is it has negative implications for 
other sectors of the Saskatchewan economy.  It's going to hurt some of the 
small businesses, Mr. Speaker.  We would like the motion, and I believe the 
proper course is the House leaders should get together, design one that 
both sides, small businesses, whether, Mr. Speaker, if the GST is imposed, 
whether the tax credits are adequate for various sectors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can go on and on and on of the difficulties with the GST 
which in my view would be a much stronger message to be put forward.  And I 
would certainly encourage and make the commitment, on behalf of the 
government side of the House, that the House leaders should get together so 
that next Monday or Tuesday or whenever we've got a common motion that 
would deliver a message that would deal with the real problems of the GST 
much more broad than agriculture, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm sorry; I'm prompted to ask one new 
question as a result of the minister's response, Mr. Speaker.  The motion 
that I have forwarded over to the former minister of Finance is two-part. 
 
First of all, it expresses its united opposition to the implementation of 
the goods and services tax.  Period. 
 
The second part expresses its opposition to the partial list of exemption.  
Period. 
 
The minister is open to amendment to this resolution.  It covers off all 
the points of his concern.  My question to you, Mr. Minister, is simply 
this: in view of the fact that the House Leader has thus far failed to 
initiate these talks or to introduce this resolution; notwithstanding the 
fact that he has indicated the government would do so; in view of the fact 
that somebody in Ottawa is working up an exemptions list for farming which 
is going to catch our farmers at a hard time; in view of the fact that the 
GST is right around the corner, why not accept unanimously and give us 
consent unanimously to express this opposition to the GST today?  Propose 
your amendments in the course of the debate, and if they make sense we'll 
adopt them, and let's get on with the business of telling the people in 
Ottawa that the legislature in the province of Saskatchewan unanimously 
opposes the GST, full stop, period. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I do think it would be appropriate 
that if we are going to have a joint expression of opposition to the GST 
that it would be appropriate that we identify those other sectors in the 
economy as well that will be impacted in a negative way by the imposition 
of the tax.  I think it only fair that small business, for example, be 
represented in our motion; that lower income people, if it is the view that 
the tax credit is not adequate; the ability to adjust to the collection of 
the GST; the cost that some of the small businesses will have in terms of 
computerization or programming.  And, Mr. Speaker, those have been 
identified generally by officials across the country. 



 

 

 
I believe that we could certainly come up with a motion which shows that 
Saskatchewan not only opposes the tax, but also why, Mr. Speaker.  And I 
think that that would be a more powerful message on behalf of the people of 
this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Goods and Services Tax 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to the 
former Minister of Finance, perhaps gratuitously in this case, Mr. 
Minister.  My question concerns an issue which . . . a policy which was 
formulated when you were minister and which I think probably eventually led 
to your removal as minister.  It was your support of the GST. 
 
Mr. Minister, earlier in this session the Minister of Finance said, the 
present law would dictate that the provincial tax, the existing provincial 
tax go on top of the new federal tax.  I recall you confirming that when 
you were Minister of Finance. 
 
The goods and services tax, Mr. Minister, as you know, has been 
overwhelmingly rejected by the public of Saskatchewan.  Your government, 
Mr. Minister, seeks to profit from this unpopular tax with a tax on that 
tax. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister: have you looked at other options? have you looked 
at amending the law such that you're not profiting from this unpopular tax? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I can assure the hon. member that I was removed from 
Finance because of old age, Mr. Speaker.  I know why the hon. member was 
taken away as finance critic -- because he stood up in this House and said, 
the reason that we're opposed to the GST was first of all we were going to 
lose money on it, and that's what he said in Hansard.   Didn't understand 
it then, doesn't understand it today, and that's why he was fired as 
Finance critic. 
 
Having said that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . He was.  Is he still?  
Oh boy, you're really in trouble then.  You're really in trouble.  I had 
some hopes for the hon. Leader of the Opposition that when he knew he had a 
big problem in front of it, he would deal with it.  You're going to have to 
deal with that very serious problem you had of the hon. member opposite, 
the Finance critic, who on the one hand says we're going to lose money and 
that's why we're opposed to it, and on the second situation said that we 
should make sure that there's only one tax and we should join the GST.  And 
that's in Hansard; that's the New Democratic Party position. 
 
Let me reiterate to the hon. member that the provinces have power of direct 
taxation under the constitution.  That is why the sales tax has been 
imposed on the top of federal taxes since the time that an E&H (education 
and health) tax was imposed, Mr. Speaker, some many, many years ago.  That 



 

 

policy, Mr. Speaker, has been consistent through government since the 
imposition of the E&H tax in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- New question, Mr. Speaker.  One thing the minister said 
had some credibility.  When he's confused about who the Finance critic is, 
it's easy to believe that he was removed from the post due to old age. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Minister, not all governments seek to hide in inane 
excuses.  Some governments in this country, Mr. Minister, are taking 
action.  The Finance minister in British Columbia said, and I quote: 
 

 I am announcing today that when the goods and services tax is implemented, 
the provincial social service tax will not apply on top of the federal 
tax.  The provincial tax will not apply to prices excluding the federal 
tax. 

 
Mr. Minister, as loath as I am to refer to the government of Bill Vander 
Zalm as an authority, the grim truth is that any government in this country 
shines in comparison to yours, Mr. Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Minister, will you take a lead from the second most 
unpopular government in the country and take this tax off the tax? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Well I won't talk about the popularity of the Government 
of British Columbia.  My understanding, Mr. Speaker, that they've had a 
dramatic upsurge in popularity, one of the reasons being that the NDP had 
no policy in British Columbia.  And it's become evident and the same thing 
is happening here in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So having said that, the policy in Saskatchewan has been since the 
imposition of an E&H tax, and I believe that that was a CCF (Co-operative 
Commonwealth Federation) government in this province, that it would be a 
direct tax under the constitution. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that would be Saskatchewan's position at least at this stage.  
I'm sure that there will be further discussions over time on 
implementation, assuming that a GST is going to be imposed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  New question.  It 
must be of some concern to the members opposite when interest rates in this 
country are higher than their rating in the polls.  That may have something 
to do with their unpopularity. 
 



 

 

Mr. Minister, one of the reasons perhaps why the Government of British 
Columbia is not in as sad a shape as it once was is that they have been 
speaking on behalf of the people of British Columbia.  I want to quote 
again from the Minister of Finance in British Columbia.  He said: 
 

 In 1987, British Columbia said no.  In 1988, British Columbia said no.  In 
1989, British Columbia said no.  And (Mr. Speaker) in 1990, British 
Columbia says no again. 

 
You might have used that with some alterations.  But in Saskatchewan it 
would have had to read: in 1987 Saskatchewan said yes; in 1988 the then 
Minister of Finance said yes; in 1989 they said nothing; in 1990, maybe. 
 
Mr. Minister, the province of British Columbia has said a tax on a tax is 
unfair, and it won't be a party to it.  Mr. Minister, can we assume from 
the fact that your government hasn't removed the tax, that you believe a 
tax on a tax is fair? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- One of the difficulties that the hon. member has as the 
spokesperson for the New Democratic Party, that in 1987 Saskatchewan 
Conservatives said no; in '88 they said no; in '89 they said no and in 1990 
they said no.  But in 1987, Mr. Speaker, the New Democrats said maybe, and 
in 1988 the New Democrats in Saskatchewan said join the GST so that there 
is only one tax to be collected.  That is on the record of this House, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I say to the hon. member there is only one political party in this province 
that has said on the record and publicly that they only want one tax, the 
GST, and they wanted the province to join the GST.  And that is from the 
member who was just on his feet, the New Democratic member from Regina.  
And they are the only party, I believe, in Canada, Mr. Speaker, that have 
said publicly that they want only one tax.  And, Mr. Speaker, they are the 
exception, not this government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- A supplementary to the minister.  Isn't it a fact, Mr. 
Minister, that the reason why you haven't taken the tax off the tax is that 
it'll bring in an extra $31 million?  And isn't it fair to say, Mr. 
Minister, that the interests of the public of Saskatchewan are not worth 
$31 million to this government?  Isn't that a fact? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I think, Mr. Speaker, the press are going to have a lot 
of fun doing a little homework and going back through Hansard, because in 
Hansard, Mr. Speaker, we have two rather interesting statements from the 
New Democratic Party. 
 
One, that the government should join the GST, Saskatchewan should join the 
GST so that there only would be one tax.  That's the New Democratic Party 
policy.  And that secondly, Mr. Speaker, the New Democratic Party said, I 
believe in 1988 in this House in Hansard, that the reason the government 



 

 

was against the GST is because we would lose money, Mr. Speaker.  That's 
what the NDP said two years ago. 
 
So obviously, Mr. Speaker, their information has no merit or validity 
whatsoever. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Workers' Compensation Review Committee 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I direct my 
question to the Minister of Labour.  Mr. Speaker, as the minister will 
know, April 28 is officially a day of mourning for workers killed and 
injured on the job here in Saskatchewan, as a consequence of a private 
members' Bill I introduced in 1988 and making us the first jurisdiction in 
Canada to do so. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- In light of that, Mr. Speaker, I ask the minister, that being 
the case, if you can explain just why it is that our government, that your 
government is still failing to live up to its statutory obligation, its 
statutory obligation to injured workers to set up a workers' compensation 
review committee.  Can you explain that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Speaker, yes, today is the official day of 
mourning for injured workers and workers who have been deceased on the job 
in Saskatchewan.  And we are pleased to say, but not happy, that in the 
last five years the average number of workers deceased on the job has been 
reduced to 30 per year from the previous five years of about 50 per year.  
Even the 30 is much too many people. 
 
With respect to the question about the committee of review, we have worked 
long and hard to put together the committee of review.  As the members will 
know, the workers' comp legislation is reviewed every five years by a 
competent committee.  And the main problem we have now is appointing the 
chairman.  We wish to have His Honour Judge Muir as the chairman, as he has 
been on the past four committees of review.  And he is acknowledged by all 
political parties and virtually all employers and employees in Saskatchewan 
as being a world-wide expert in this field. 
 
The difficulty is that recent developments in the judiciary are suggesting 
that judges, Canada-wide, should not sit on these kinds of reviews.  And we 
are trying to resolve the issue so that we could somehow accommodate the 
situation and have Judge Muir sit on this committee for the fifth straight 
time.  And I will, Mr. Speaker, discuss this matter further with the member 
from Fairview at the earliest opportunity, as the member from Fairview 
understands this situation and he and I will try to work something out. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 



 

 

Construction Schedule at Rafferty-Alameda Dams 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I rise today as 
minister responsible for the Saskatchewan Power Corporation.  Mr. Speaker, 
I'd like to take the opportunity to inform the members of the Assembly of 
the 1990 construction schedule for the Rafferty-Alameda project. 
 
As the members will recall, the only work that has been stopped is that 
which is specifically referred to in the January 26, 1990 agreement between 
Sask Water and the federal Minister of the Environment.  The construction 
work that has been halted is as follows:  all work on the Rafferty dam 
except that work specified by the independent Rafferty-Alameda engineering 
review board as being required to stabilize the structure and to ensure the 
safety of the public; the Rafferty boundary diversion channel, and all land 
acquisition and construction activities at the Alameda dam. 
 
I'm pleased, Mr. Speaker, to inform the Assembly that the engineering 
review board has completed its analysis of work required to stabilize the 
structure of the Rafferty dam and to ensure the safety of the public.  The 
engineering review board has directed that work be carried out on the 
spillway, the embankment, the embankment chimney drain, the instrumentation 
system, and surface grading of boro areas and other areas within close 
proximity of the Rafferty dam.  The Rafferty dam, currently 65 per cent 
complete, will be approximately 80 per cent complete after this work has 
been finished in mid to late summer.  I'm pleased to be able to table the 
two reports of the engineering review board from which I just quoted, and I 
have them here and I'll table them at the conclusion of my remarks. 
 
Other work on the Rafferty-Alameda project will continue.  It is important 
for everyone to remember that we have a valid licence under the 
International River Improvements Act, and we have the ability and the legal 
right to handle the flood of record on the Souris River. 
 
In the case of the ongoing construction activities on the project, some of 
the work such as causeways and downstream channelization must begin this 
year as it will require at least two years to complete.  These areas could 
be affected by flooding in 1991 or 1992.  With a valid licence and the need 
to store water for the Shand power station, it is essential that 
construction of these facilities begin this year.  Other work, such as 
mitigation of wildlife and community pastures, we are legally obligated to 
complete.  We have always acted within the law in this project and will 
continue to do so, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I'm only going to comment 
briefly on the minister's statement until I've had a chance to review the 
engineering report which the minister has promised to table here in the 
House today. 
 
But let me say this, Mr. Speaker.  The comments of the minister in regards 



 

 

to the completion schedule of the Rafferty-Alameda project once again shows 
the nature of the hypocritical stance that this government has taken in 
regards to environmental assessment. 
 
We have heard today in this House, the minister stand in his place and say, 
we are going to go ahead and complete all works associated with the 
Rafferty dam, Rafferty and Alameda dam project, regardless of the 
activities of the independent review process which is presently under place 
here in Saskatchewan. 
 
It is no wonder, Mr. Speaker, it is no wonder that the environmental 
assessment panel and the people who are in the process of dealing with the 
environmental assessment panel, including their own supporters of the 
Rafferty-Alameda project like the Souris Basin-Goodwater guys and that type 
of front group, it is no wonder that even they are upset at the nature of 
this government's actions in regards to Rafferty-Alameda and the nature of 
the statement which was signed between the federal government and the 
provincial government; a statement which this government has used as 
nothing more than a sham and a cover-up to go ahead and complete the 
Rafferty-Alameda project under the guise -- under a disguise and a guise of 
engaging in an independent environmental review process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am looking forward to seeing the contents of the engineering 
report, but it is clear to the people of this province that this government 
had no intention when it signed the statement with the federal government 
of halting work on that project. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

BEFORE ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm not sure whether it's a 
matter of privilege or not, but I'd like to correct the information that I 
gave to an answer yesterday from the member from Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
I indicated yesterday on the spending by PCS( Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, Inc.), allegedly on a golf course dues that the hon. member 
raised, that in fact PCS did not make the payments, Mr. Speaker, that they 
were made by IMC (International Minerals and Chemical Corporation (Canada) 
Ltd.), and that the policy of paying the dues of golf memberships is 
exactly that as when the NDP owned the corporation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- The issue the member has raised is not a question of 
privilege and I rule it out of order. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 39 
 

Opposition to the Goods and Services Tax 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day, I would beg 
leave of the Assembly to introduce the following motion, and it's seconded 



 

 

by my colleague, the House Leader on this side. 
 
By leave, I would ask the Assembly that the following motion be introduced 
and debated: 
 

 That this Assembly expresses its strong, united opposition to the 
Government of Canada's implementation of the goods and services tax, and 
further calls on the Parliament of Canada to revise the partial list of 
GST-exempt agricultural equipment to include all farm equipment and 
supplies, if such tax is implemented. 

 
Thank you. 
 
Leave not granted. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day I seek leave of the 
Assembly to make a brief statement on the day of commemoration, which is of 
interest to all members. 
 
Leave granted. 

STATEMENTS 
 

Day of Commemoration 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- I thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, as you know, the 
Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan in 1988 passed a private member's Bill 
which recognizes tomorrow, April 28, as a day of mourning for workers 
killed or injured in the work place.  We became the first jurisdiction in 
Canada to make such a declaration, so far the only jurisdiction to do so by 
statute.  And I am proud of this Assembly for that.  I also note that since 
that time other governing bodies across Canada, including the federal 
government, have given consideration to following our lead. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1989 there were 36 Saskatchewan workers killed in job 
related accidents, which is an increase from the 23 of the previous year.  
In the past decade in this province almost 400 workers have lost their 
lives in job related accidents, and this, Mr. Speaker, does not even 
include the many who were killed or injured in farm related accidents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it entirely proper that the province set aside a 
special day to honour these workers and that we order the flags to be flown 
at half-mast in their memory.  But if we are truly to honour their memory, 
Mr. Speaker, then there is one way and one way only to do that, and that is 
for each and every one of us in this province to recommit ourselves to 
doing all we can to improve occupational health and safety in the work 
place. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I am sure that I speak for every member of this Assembly 
when I say that when April 28 comes around next year, nothing would make me 
happier than commemorating this day with the news that there have been no 
work place related deaths reported in the preceding year.  That is truly 
something for all of us to work for.  That should be our legacy to those 
who have suffered death or infirmity in a work place accident. 



 

 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of the Assembly to join in a 
moment of silence in memory of Saskatchewan workers killed or injured in 
job related accidents. 
 
I thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As Minister of Environment 
and Public Safety, and on behalf of the government, I would like to 
acknowledge the statement made by the member opposite and the 
appropriateness of having a day of mourning for those people killed on the 
job in Saskatchewan. 
 
You will know, Mr. Speaker, that in Saskatchewan we have, I think, very 
much of a work ethic.  We have many tens of thousands of very hard working 
men and women.  We all know as well, Mr. Speaker, that some of the work 
that is conducted in Saskatchewan has a hazardous component to it.  Many of 
the jobs, whether it's in the oil patch or whether it's on the farm or 
whether it's in the industrialized sector in the fabricating shops around  
 DSaskatchewan or even in clerical duties, Mr. Speaker, there are hazards 
on the job. 
 
And I think it is very appropriate and very worthy of taking some time to 
recognize these hard working men and women, and those in particular who 
pass on in the line of duty, and just as importantly, Mr. Speaker, to those 
mourning families that . . . the tragic losses associated with a death, I 
think have effects that last years and years and years. 
 
I just commend the member opposite and I want to acknowledge the 
government's commitment to, as well, recognizing that day. 
 
The Speaker: -- The members of the House agree that the legislature should 
have a moment of silence in the memory of those who, on carrying out their 
work, have gone before us.  I think to do that appropriately, I would like 
to ask all members to rise. 
 
Thank you. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 46 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, last evening you 
agreed to send over some information, one being the franchise agreements 
with agents, a list of all the appointed agents; and the other was the 



 

 

principles involved in the consulting firm that screened the agents for 
you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Mr. Chairman, I have the list of all the agents and 
where they've been filled at and their post office and phone numbers and 
everything else here.  I have a copy of the contracts the agent signs.  I 
don't have it . . . I'll read out the names of the . . . I have the names 
of the associates.  I'll read them into the records because it's just in 
writing here, it's not typed.  And if one of the pages would take this 
over.  Thank you. 
 
The names, there's one principal . . . there's principals and associates.  
There's six of them altogether: Stephen Burkholder, Peter Chow, Fred Bates, 
Aldo Valerio, Mike Schonfield, and Walter Basler. 
 
(1045) 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister, for that information.  Mr. 
Minister, a few other questions I'd like to ask you.  Can you tell me, Mr. 
Minister, how many crop insurance employees do not live in Melville but 
commute to that city to work? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- We were just trying to figure out.  Nobody knows exactly 
for sure.  There's about 10 or 15 that don't live in Melville.  Some stay 
all week and go home to wherever they are on the weekend.  Some commute; 
they're very close; they're from Grayson and around the area; they come in.  
So there's a variance there.  About 15, I guess, total that would live 
around the edge of the city or as far away as Yorkton that would come in 
and out.  And there's a couple that still have their basic home here in 
Regina but spend the week out at Melville.  So it's a combination of 
different people from different places, but about 15 total that wouldn't 
have a home directly in Melville, a full-time residence in Melville. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Minister, I see that from your 
news release of April 6 that there is a new president of the corporation.  
I was just wondering, Mr. Minister, how you decided to . . . what was the 
criteria you used in selecting the new president?  And, Mr. Minister, if 
you could just give me a bit of his background. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- First, so how you know we went looking for a president.  
We run ads in all the major western papers for a couple months, and we had 
quite a few applicants but not, just not what we were looking for because 
it's a very, very major insurance company, as you know, and it's a very . . 
. and it deals with a lot of people.  We looked for people management 
skills; we looked for capabilities of financial management; we looked at 
capabilities for the type of insurance coverage that you have to deal with; 
we looked for people with agricultural knowledge. 
 
It was tough to find.  We advertised all over.  We advertised also down 
East in some of the major papers.  Then we went actually looking for 
people, asking people that we thought might be available.  We come up with 
a gentleman called Mr. Bill Dent.  He has been with Alberta Agriculture 
since 1958.  He graduated with a degree in agrology.  He worked all the way 



 

 

up from an ag rep all the way up to assistant deputy minister of 
Agriculture in Alberta.  He has a master's in agriculture.  He's lived in 
small town Saskatchewan.  He's worked for Alberta crop insurance.  He had a 
really vast knowledge; we were very much impressed with the gentleman.  He 
begins his work on May 7. 
 
I think it's fair to say we went through a large number of people who come 
in for interviews, but it was very, very hard to find a person with that 
wide range of skills that we needed to manage an insurance corporation 
dealing with 60,000 farmers at over $2 billion in liability coverage.  And 
to manage that with all the offices out there, we needed that kind of 
skills.  We are very, very fortunate, I think, and everybody, I think, will 
be very much impressed with the gentleman that's coming. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Chairman, with leave, I would like to introduce 
international guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to introduce to this 
Assembly, and through you, Mr. Chairman, to this committee, some 
distinguished guests from Taiwan and some people accompanying them.  They 
are all seated in the Speaker's gallery, directly in front of us here.  
I'll ask them to rise so we can see them, and then I'll give their formal 
introduction.  Thank you. 
 
As you can see, there's a large delegation, and I will ask them to be 
seated while I introduce them.  Thank you.  You can see now, there's a 
rather large delegation, and they are so important that I'm going to 
introduce them all individually by name. 
 
First of all, we have in the gallery the group present are the guests of 
the Taiwan-Saskatchewan Trade Association, and with them is Mr. Jeff Hu, 
the corporate secretary, and I'll ask Mr. Hu to rise.  Thank you Mr. Hu.  
And also with him is the mayor of Weyburn, Mr. Ron Barber.  And they have 
been . . . this delegation is comprised primarily of media, as we say in 
this country, journalists in television and print from Taiwan.  They are on 
a tour of Canada, touring British Columbia, Vancouver, Saskatchewan.  
They've been here for three days now and they're on their way to Toronto.  
And they will be reporting back on Canada, our life, our economy, our 
people.  And this is part of their tour.  They are attending here in our 
Legislative Assembly to get an understanding of the system of government in 
Canada and in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I know the members opposite . . . and I can thank them for paying close 
attention, but I know they are paying attention because these are media 
people as you see.  The people are from the United Daily News, Ms. 
Chang-Hwa Chen; from the Min-Sheng Daily News, Ms. Chin-Chin Liou; from the 
Economic Daily News, Ms. Chang-Yu Cheng; from the Commercial Times, Ms. 



 

 

Rong-Lin Chao.  And I am trying my best Chinese.  Being of a German origin 
I say everything with a German accent, so I'll try my best Chinese in these 
names.  From the Independence Morning Post, Ms. Mei-Li Chow; and some of 
them may not be available at this moment . . . (inaudible interjection) . . 
. I understand she's ill, and I wish her a speedy recovery.  From the China 
Television Company, Ms. Lin Chiang; from the China Television Company, Mr. 
Chung-Shi Lai -- he is a cameraman; yes, he's here with his camera.  From 
the Excellence Publications Co., Mr. Jih-Kuen Lin.  From the Taiwan 
Shin-Wen Daily News, Mr. Chih-Hsien Chang.  From the China Daily News, Ms. 
Chun-Ching Yang. 
 
We also have the president of King Interior Design Company and the Hai-Shan 
Recreational Development Company in travel, Mr. Chung-Lin Han; the general 
manager of Best Real Estate Co., Mr. Ta-Sung Chang; the vice-general 
manager of Taiwan Delight Travel Service Co., Mr. Keh-Teh Su; and the 
vice-general manager of Best Real Estate Co. and the Taiwan Delight Tour 
Service Co., an individual who has an MBA (Master of Business 
Administration) from Syracuse University in New York and has concentrated 
on international business, Mr. Terry D.T. Nieh. 
 
I hope we have everyone included, and if we have missed anyone from this 
honoured delegation, I would apologize in advance.  But the information I 
have is that these are the members present here. 
 
As you can see, members of the Assembly, these individuals are guests in 
this country, are here to learn, and are here to report back to their 
country, which has 20 million people.  So I would ask you all to welcome 
these individuals.  I would ask them to rise again as we welcome them, and 
I wish them a pleasant visit to Saskatchewan and Canada.  Thank you very 
much. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 46 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, not to drag out 
this point, but I just noticed that Mr. Dent has spent most of his life in 
British Columbia and Alberta.  And I just found it a little bit surprising 
that you had to go so far afield and that you couldn't find someone from 
within the province to fill that position.  However, we'll just leave that 
as it may be. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to ask you about an action that was launched against 
crop insurance company by a number of farmers in the south-western part of 
the province who sued the crop insurance for a forage insurance pay-out.  
Mr. Minister, can you tell us what the settlement cost the corporation? 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Mr. Chairman, we don't have it with us, the agreement.  
It was agreed to be confidential.  I am prepared -- only because the member 
is a member of this Legislative Assembly, and because that confidentiality 
is recognized in here -- I'm prepared to have it put together and submit to 
him within a week, first of next week.  We'll bring it in; I'll submit it 
to him personally, confidentially, for his review or for his knowledge of 
it, because he is a member of this Legislative Assembly.  And until such 
time that removal of the confidentiality Act or part of the clause is 
there, we're committed to that. 
 
But I'll send it to him under the closure of this Assembly and he can make 
his own judgement call on it. 
 
(1100) 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  That would be satisfactory. 
 
Mr. Minister, I'm wondering, though, about the out-of-court settlement.  
Now I see by the newspaper clipping of March 27 that there are other 
farmers who are taking the corporation to court on a similar basis.  Can 
you tell me what the status of that is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- To the knowledge of all the staff here, nobody has in 
any way filed a claim or suggested they were going to file a claim to us or 
against us so far.  Now they may do it through the legal system, which is 
what you do, but to our best of knowledge we've had nobody tell us or 
submit to us any claims. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Minister, according to the clipping of the Leader-Post 
of March 27, it says there are three other farmers with suits pending 
against the corporation.  Now if you're not familiar with that, I'm not 
sure why you wouldn't be.  But the point that I want to make here is this, 
Mr. Minister.  I think the reason that you decided to settle out of court 
is because it would be a precedent.  And I think the problem that you've 
run into is this Simfoy method of calculating.  And I don't know . . . I 
understand that it comes out of Ontario originally, or something like that.  
But it is not akin to Saskatchewan by any stretch of the imagination, and I 
think there are probably better models that you could use to rate the loss. 
 
Mr. Minister, is that why you settled out of court, to ensure that there 
wasn't a precedent for other farmers . . . set for other farmers to sue the 
corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Mr. Chairman, the first part of his comment was in 
regards to he was surprised we hadn't saw it in the papers.  And we do read 
it in the papers but I want to make it clear, I said we haven't had to the 
corporation any submission of claim in regards to a lawsuit or pending 
suit.  And I read it in the papers too, what was said in there. 
 
The second part was in regards to Simfoy calculations, and certainly 
nothing's perfect, and that isn't perfect and nothing is.  We know that.  
We have moved to individual coverage with your own production.  We've 
changed your also individual claim coverage under forage now so you don't 



 

 

go by just an area claim, you have to individually claim using the best 
knowledge we got for both the farmer yield and for the area yield.  It's 
based on as close as we can get it to real, average yields now. 
 
We've been using our agrologists in lands branch and through the Department 
of Rural Development to look at and help us put together the yields of the 
area.  We also have information from the farmers we've been gathering for 
the last couple of years, so we're getting somewhat of a data bank there.  
It's not a perfect one, but this year for forage you'll be individually . . 
. your area coverage with individual claims based on the best we can on the 
actual yield comparisons. So it's much closer.  It's not perfect yet.  
It'll probably never be perfect. 
 
So those are the areas that we made some changes in to make sure that the 
farmer, the producer, has at least realistic coverage related directly to 
his farm and not just necessarily the whole area, as it has been in the 
past. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Minister, is it fair to say that the Simfoy computer 
model caused the lawsuit that you had against you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- I think the Simfoy is one of the way that we calculated.  
I think the suit was basically, although it was Simfoy was talked about, 
was basically disputing amount of yields that we felt or it was felt that 
should have been there that was or wasn't there.  And that was what the 
dispute was about.  So you can calculate that in there however you want.  
But it's, you know, the Simfoy was part of the system we used to calculate 
it.  The dispute was with the producers out there, the amount of yields 
that we thought they should have received and what they thought they did 
receive. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Well then that would be due to the Simfoy computer model 
that you used to determine the yield.  Mr. Minister, now that you've paid 
these farmers out, had an out of court settlement with these farmers, I'm 
sure and I know that there will be many other farmers who are in a similar 
situation.  Because, you know, basically what you said was the Simfoy 
computer model caused the fact that they disputed the yields and you paid 
them out; therefore will you be compensating other farmers or will you be 
adjusting the method you use?  Or indeed, Mr. Minister, one more question, 
have you abandoned the Simfoy computer model? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- In 1989, we started looking at production yields and we 
had done some calculations on individual farmers back in '88.  We've used a 
lot of different stats, Stats Canada and a whole bunch of things, trying to 
put it together.  As you know, well-known in 1989, we paid out most of the 
producers one way or another in forage payments because of drought and 
other things. 
 
We have went to an individual.  We took it one step further because every 
time you do it on an area base it had created us some problem because some 
who got a really good deal still got paid on the area base and some who had 
a very poor yield in there only got the same amount.  And it seemed to be 
some unfairness there, so we went to an area base averaging for the 



 

 

coverage but an individual application.  So if you . . . you could be in an 
area and if you could have a loss and your neighbour could have a good 
crop, and yet then you'd be the one that would be covered, as you have been 
for grains for years.  So we moved to that type of model. 
 
And therefore the Simfoy is no longer needed because we're not using any 
outside calculations to work on it.  I did not say that the Simfoy worked 
or didn't work.  I said it was part of a calculations that was there that 
we used to calculate it. 
 
We used other things.  We used production yields we had in the data bank.  
We used some farmers where we done the estimation.  We had test plots out.  
We had a lot of things that we put into that whole package.  The amount of 
rainfall was part into there.  So those are the kind of things, and then of 
course the yield that was estimated taken on the area.  So there were a lot 
of things in that package. 
 
The dispute, particularly down in the south-west, was, as I said a minute 
ago, it wasn't whether one thing worked or another, although that was part 
of the discussion.  It was the amount of production that they thought they 
got compared to what the corporation had estimated they got. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Yes, but, Mr. Minister, in order to determine that 
production the Simfoy computer model was used.  And I will quote from Mr. 
Murray Walter, the lawyer, and it says in this article: 
 

 The case was based on two separate things, Walter said.  One was that 
Simfoy really didn't work,  

 D particularly in 1986, because it didn't take into account climatic factors 
that were necessary to do the proper estimate. 

 
And what I'm saying here, Mr. Minister, is you made an out of court 
settlement with 11 farmers from a case based on the fact that Simfoy did 
not work.  That was one of the pillars of their case.  Now what I'm asking 
you, Mr. Minister, is you, by making out of court settlement, admit that 
there was some fault there on your part, or the computer model was at 
fault. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, my question is, what about the other producers who were 
covered under forage insurance, who had their analysis done with the Simfoy 
computer model, what about them?  If it was faulty in one case, Mr. 
Minister, I ask you, have you done a review of all the other clients who 
have the forage coverage, and will you be considering restructuring of any 
pay-out they got to comply with the rules that was laid down in this out of 
court settlement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Mr. Chairman, I'll make it clear that we neither 
accepted whether it was right or wrong, and the Simfoy was part of the 
argument made by, I believe he quoted a Mr. Walter from Swift Current.  
That was Mr. Walter's argument he used, and that's fair.  Our agreement was 
a settlement out of court in regards to that.  The reason, like I've said 
earlier, the debate was not over whether necessarily the Simfoy worked or 
didn't work, whether all the other calculations we add in along there 



 

 

worked or didn't work.  The argument was based on production.  They thought 
they had less production than we thought they had.  So therefore it was 
based on that. 
 
And I'll be sending the entire details over to the member, as I promised, 
within seven days, and you'll have them, confidentially. 
 
I will say this in regards to any other ones.  If there's any complaint 
that comes in to us, informal or through a lawsuit, we'll deal on it on an 
individual basis on its own merit.  And that's the way it must be.  When 
you're dealing with any corporation, you must deal with it that way. 
 
So that would be the position that we would hold as a corporation with 
regard to any further areas, in regards to that of concern, or raised by 
the farmer or producer informally or through a lawsuit. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you say it was a discrepancy with 
yield.  Exactly.  What you used to determine that was the Simfoy computer 
model.  And all I'm saying is that I think you have a responsibility to go 
to review all those forage contracts.  Because by out of court settlement, 
you have admitted fault, that the Simfoy computer model did not work as 
well, because, as stated in the article, that it didn't take into account 
climatic factors that were necessary to do a proper estimate. 
 
So all I'm saying, Mr. Minister . . . I don't want excuses.  I don't want 
to have this corporation run on an individual basis -- if somebody has 
trouble with production records and they go in on their own.  It's 
incumbent upon you, Mr. Minister, to run the corporation in a proper manner 
to allow farmers to get the benefits they receive from the premiums they 
pay to the corporation. 
 
So what I'm asking you, Mr. Minister, is: have you undertaken a review of 
all the forage contracts to make adjustments for the error, which you 
admitted through the out of court settlement, in the Simfoy computer 
program?  And if you have not done that, Mr. Minister, will you do that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- In regards to have we went back and did everyone again, 
review every individual contract that was issued in '86, no, we haven't.  
We have went back and reviewed it on the area basis as it was paid, by the 
area base.  It wasn't paid by individual; you had to be in the area before 
you qualified at all. 
 
We have dealt with about 30 to 40 farmers or producers who've come in, and 
then went back and reviewed that, based on the area basis.  But we haven't 
just went and did every individual contract holder separately.  We've 
reviewed the area when we did in '87 when . . . went back over it all again 
to double check it, and we have about 30 to 40 individuals who have come to 
us or wrote to us or phoned us in regards to their individual contract, in 
regards to how much they got paid.  So those have been looked at on an 
individual basis and been responded to. 
 
(1115) 
 



 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I'm not sure that that's the right way 
to run things because I think it's your responsibility to look at each 
individual producer to make sure that they get fair treatment. 
 
In light of time, Mr. Minister, I want to ask you just a couple more short 
questions.  I see by the agency agreement that you have with crop insurance 
agents, that in article 11 on page 6, it says: 
 

 This agreement may be terminated by either party giving notice to the 
other party via registered mail or certified mail.  Written notice to the 
corporation shall be delivered to the the crop insurance address. 

 
Mr. Minister, is that all that's necessary for you to terminate an agent, 
and also for the agent in credit, just a simple letter to the corporation 
or from the corporation to the individual announcing that he has been 
terminated? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Mr. Chairman, that is the way it can be terminated by 
either one party, but in all cases it has to be reasonable grounds.  Not 
for the agent, he or she can decide they want to give it up.  As any major 
corporation or any individual you have to have reasonable grounds.  So it's 
there; it's part of the clause, but certainly that would be the process 
that they could go through if they wanted to give up their contract or if 
it wanted to be terminated. 
 
But for the corporation, as a corporation responsible to the farmer and to 
the people of Saskatchewan, you have to have reasonable grounds. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Minister, I was wondering, upon termination -- and we 
touched on this briefly yesterday, but I just want to know -- if there's 
any compensation other than a $20 buy-back clause, and I also want to know 
if it's guaranteed that you will buy back at $20? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- There is no additional compensation other than number of 
contracts you purchase and we'll purchase back at that amount, at $20, 
either way.  But there's a guarantee we will buy it back if they so wish to 
terminate their agreement with us.  We will buy it back from them. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Item 2 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Just one question, Mr. Minister.  The difference between 
the estimated 1989-90 of $9.572 million in the Estimates book and the 
$23.139 million in 1990-91 -- is that difference the result of you taking 
over the 25 per cent of the federal portion of the crop insurance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- The answer to your question is no, it's not to do with 
that. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Minister, two questions.  Can you explain, in item 2, 
payment to Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation for financing costs and 
increasing of some $13 million, and can you also tell me if there's any 



 

 

item in this budget that relates to the change in financing the crop 
insurance corporation between your agreement between you and the federal 
government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- A good part of the cost is based on, as a government, 
the reinsurance fund for carrying $180 million that we are carrying on the 
reinsurance premium program, and the interest on that is much greater than 
it was the previous year when it was only $100 million; so that there's an 
increase in there in interest and the interest rates have gone up, so our 
costs are even higher. 
 
In regards, I'll just make mention that under the new proposed agreement 
with the federal government, they will be reimbursing us within 30 days, 
any reinsurance money, their shares of it.  And that would help us somewhat 
if we get the agreement signed and start getting our reinsurance money back 
instead of carrying it, as I mentioned, for probably a year in some cases. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- And the other question about is there any item in the 
budget that relates to the funding arrangement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- No there isn't.  No. 
 
Item 2 agreed to. 
 
Item 3 agreed to. 
 
Item 4 -- Statutory. 
 
Vote 46 agreed to. 
 
               Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments                   
Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation 

Vote 161 
 
Item 1 -- Statutory. 
 
                         Supplementary Estimates 1990                    
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure                    Saskatchewan 
Crop Insurance Corporation 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 46 
 
Items 1 and 2 agreed to. 
 
Vote 46 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1990 
Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments 

Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation 
Vote 161 

 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 161 agreed to. 



 

 

 
Mr. Chairman: -- That concludes Saskatchewan Crop Insurance.  I'd like to 
thank the minister and his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd like to take this opportunity to thank 
my critic, the member from Humboldt, for his questions.  There was some 
very, very, good questions this morning.  I think they're relevant to our 
farming operations and he did a very fine job.  I want to say thank you to 
my officials for doing a good job year round, and to all the people who 
work for Saskatchewan Crop Insurance.  Many of them are out in the field 
who take a lot . . . they're front-line people who take a lot of . . . and 
have to deal with a lot of different problems.  They do it well.  We've 
faced a lot of droughts, Mr. Chairman, and things over the years and I 
think I want to say to all of them, you do a very fine job. 
 
I want to make mention, just while I'm up here, Mr. Chairman, of two things 
that I think are important.  I have two gentlemen here with me today, the 
vice-president, Jim Walters, who chaired the Saskatchewan Winter Games at 
Melville.  I think he done a very fine job there.  And directly behind me 
is Geoff Bartlam.  Yesterday he celebrated a birthday, 17 years with the 
crop insurance corporation.  I think those kinds of people deserve both our 
acknowledgement and certainly our thank you for both doing a good job and 
being with the corporation so long.  So to everyone I want to say thank you 
very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to 
thank the minister for the information he supplied in crop insurance.  It's 
a very, very important corporation to Saskatchewan farmers, and I think the 
points that we were getting to was to ensure that the corporation serves 
farmers well.  I would like to thank the minister's officials for supplying 
the good information.  Thank you. 
 
                    Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Parks and Renewable Resources 
Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 26 

 
Mr. Chairman: -- I'd ask the minister, as soon as he is ready, to introduce 
his officials, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to start these 
proceedings this morning, start by introducing my officials for the benefit 
of the members of the Legislative Assembly.  Sitting beside me is Doug 
Cressman who is the deputy minister of Parks and Renewable Resources.  Just 
to the back of him is Dick Bailey an ADM (assistant deputy minister) within 
the department, and in back of me is Alan Appleby another ADM.  As well I 
would like to inform the hon. members that we have a few directors who are 
here and are available as resource people. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I will 
start off with the regular questions for information with your department 
and your officials.  But I want to indicate to you, Mr. Minister, that 



 

 

being a new minister, and this is your first year of going through 
estimates, there probably will be some areas that you're not as familiar 
with as you should be or would be eight, 10 months down the road.  So if 
there's any information that you can't have and it's going to take a lot of 
time to compile that, if you would just agree to pass that over in the next 
few days in writing, then we can move right along. 
 
But first, Mr. Minister, I would ask if you would agree to send over, if 
your officials have that information available, would be that the staff 
that you have in your office.  If you could send me a list of the staff 
that you have in your office, your assistants, the wages, the names, the 
wages that they are paid.  If you could send over also the amount of trips 
that were made out of the province by yourself and your staff.  If you 
would provide me with that, and the destination.  And I would also like to 
have in writing, if you could send that over, the amount of moneys that 
your department paid out in advertising in this last year and the name of 
the advertising firm that did the advertising for you.  If you could do 
that, Mr. Minister, and send that over, then we could start working from 
there. 
 
(1130) 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, in just a very few moments I will 
be sending over the information to the hon. member. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. 
 
I want to start off with the Parks, and I want to first of all, Mr. 
Minister, turn to the Grasslands National Park.  And I wonder if you could 
give us an update on the Grasslands National Park as just what has taken 
place there in the last year as far as your department and the provincial 
government is concerned. 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- I'd like to answer that question in two parts, if I 
may.  The first, I would just like to give you a brief report on what the 
federal government is doing at the park within the last year.  They've 
opened an office in Val Marie.  They have five people employed there at 
this time, and the information we have is that it will be expanded to nine 
in the very near future.  And as well, they are in the midst of some land 
acquisitions. 
 
Now as it pertains to Parks and Renewable Resources, our department sits on 
the Grasslands advisory committee.  We are helping establish proper 
identification for water courses within that park area so that they could 
be named properly within the agreement. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Minister.  It's fair to say then 
that the park itself has not been completed yet; the size of the Grasslands 
National Park has not been completed.  There is still some land that will 
be taken in to that park.  Is this right? 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- Yes, basically that is true. 
 



 

 

Mr. Thompson: -- How much more land, Mr. Minister, is going to be taken in 
by the federal government and put into the federal park? 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- To the best of our information, they have now put 
together 84 square miles of that park. 
 
I think also I can give you just an additional fact that may be of interest 
to you.  The maximum area for that park, if it's all acquired, will be 300 
square miles.  Pardon me, I'll correct that figure, 350 square miles. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Right now it's 84 square miles? 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- That is correct. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- That park is not even a third completed.  There's still a 
lot of land acquisition to be brought into that Grasslands National Park. 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- Yes, in our conversations with them they feel they 
need about 150 square miles for the park to be a park. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- What is slowing down the process of land acquisition and 
completing that Grasslands National Park?  It would seem to me that this 
has been going on for a number of years now and there's got to be something 
that's holding them back.  Could you explain why the delay in acquiring 
this land? 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- Actually they are quite pleased with the 
negotiations so far.  They've dealt with 12 farmers and have, we're aware 
of -- that they've made agreements with nine.  And even that figure could 
have improved since we received our information.  So in our conversations, 
they feel really quite pleased with the progress. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Is there any date set for completion of that Grasslands 
National Park?  Do they have any dates in mind when it would be completed, 
any goal that they're working towards? 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- Not that we've been informed about, an exact target 
date, no. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Mr. Minister, in the last year I believe there has been 
some exploration taking place within that Grasslands National Park and in 
that area, regarding diamond deposits.  I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you are 
aware of this, or is it actually taking place?  And if so, I wonder if you 
could bring us up to date on what has taken place regarding diamond 
deposits within the Grasslands National Park. 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- I would like to inform the hon. member that we're 
not aware of any projects of that sort at this time.  But now that you've 
brought it to our attention, I feel honour bound to have my department 
check into that, just to be sure that no diamond drilling or anything of 
that sort is taking place.  We could possibly brief you when we get some 
information. 
 



 

 

Mr. Thompson: -- Mr. Minister, you indicate that your officials say that 
there's been no investigations in the last year regarding diamond deposits 
within that Grasslands National Park, absolutely none? 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- No, we're not aware of any, and nothing has been 
brought to our attention. But I once again want to repeat that certainly we 
would feel honour bound to double-check this for you. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Yes.  I would assume then, Mr. Minister, if there was 
exploration or any type of investigation into diamonds, that you would not 
be involved.  This would be with the federal Parks department.  Is this 
right? 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- I guess the answer to that is if the land is already 
within the park acquisition area, it is a federal responsibility.  But if 
the land is still at this time part of provincial Crown land, then it would 
still be our responsibility. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- I now want to turn to the Athabasca Sand Dunes, Mr. 
Minister.  In July of last year your department designated the sand dunes 
as a parkland reserve.  And for that reason, so that your department and 
your department officials could consider, you know, what to really do with 
that area or to make it a provincial wilderness park or a provincial park, 
Mr. Minister, could you indicate what steps have been taken, or if there's 
been any other progress taken in the Athabasca Sand Dunes on the south 
shore of Lake Athabasca? 
 
(1145) 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- What will happen in August of this year . . . 
there'll be some public consultation start.  It will start in August in 
Fond-du-Lac, in Stony Rapids and Uranium City.  As well this fall there 
will be consultations held in Prince Albert and La Ronge; it will be held 
with the local people as well as special interest groups.  As an example of 
a special interest group I could name you the parks advisory committee, 
would be part of the consultation. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I fully agree that there has to 
be some consultation because you designated that park and you set it aside 
as a reserve and already it has disrupted some of the individuals in the 
Fond-du-Lac and that northern area regarding fishing.  And I've indicated 
to you in writing that some of the traditional users who have trapped in 
that local area around the sand dunes and fished some of those smaller 
lakes, have now had the limits taken off the lakes or they have been 
restricted in that area. 
 
And I think it's important that before you make any moves on the sand 
dunes, that you do go in and discuss with the individuals who are most 
certainly the ones closely concerned and that would be the Fond-du-Lac and 
Stony Rapids, Uranium City, Camsell Portage area. 
 
They traditionally have used that area for many years surrounding the 
south, the west side, the south side, and the east side of the sand dunes; 



 

 

and of course the commercial fishery which takes place on the north end of 
the sand dunes. 
 
And as I've indicated to you, and I've indicated to you in writing, there 
has been some of the local users, traditional users, who have had their 
lives disrupted because of this, and I would just ask that that be worked 
out and especially in Fond-du-Lac.  I think it applies more to the 
Fond-du-Lac area.  As you know, the letter I wrote you concerned an 
individual who has trapped for many, many years, and his family is growing 
up and won't be using that area. 
 
Has Parks planning done any work on making the sand dunes accessible from 
the south?  If you're going to protect such a mass of sand dunes, I would 
think that you are going to have to do some planning.  And if there's going 
to be access put in there, then Parks planning, I think, are going to have 
to get in there and make sure that where the road is and how it's going to 
be accessed is planned properly.  And I just wonder, Mr. Minister, has 
there been any work done through your department to this effect? 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- As we said after the designation, we felt that the 
public consultation would be step number two, and we are very, very 
committed to raising that issue as part of those public consultations -- 
the southern access to that area. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- So there's been no plans from your department to access 
that area by land? 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- No, we felt that it would be much more beneficial to 
do it after some consultations. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Yes, I fully agree with that, Mr. Minister. 
 
Could you indicate, Mr. Minister, when you plan that . . . for the public 
hearings?  Specifically, let's just do one specific area.  When is the 
plans to go into Fond-du-Lac? 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- As I stated earlier, during the month of August we 
thought we would be into . . . or we would be into three areas -- 
Fond-du-Lac, Stony Rapids, and Uranium City.  During the month of August. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  And your department officials 
will make the individuals in that area aware that the hearings are going to 
take place and what the hearings are going to be about.  And I speak 
specifically of the councils at Camsell and Stony and Uranium City, plus 
the band council members, the chief and council at Fond-du-Lac and Black 
Lake. 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- Very much we will endeavour to do that.  In fact we 
will go so far as to make sure that you are very aware of those dates as 
well. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Minister.  Has there been any 
discussions in the last year on the interprovincial park, or any more 



 

 

discussions on an interprovincial park between Alberta and north-western 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- I could inform the hon. member that a committee has 
been formed between the two provinces.  They've held approximately three 
meetings, and as part of those meetings they are now in the process of 
developing proposals for specific actions on that project. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Your department is still looking at a joint venture with 
Alberta to create that interprovincial park.  Is this right, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- I'm going to apologize to the member for giving him 
some wrong information.  The information was correct but for the wrong 
location.  That was the Cypress Hills Park area.  You asked, I believe, 
about the north-west, not . . . the north-west Alberta one.  That is still 
only a project.  What's the word? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Concept. 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- It's only a project concept at this time, in the 
north-west.  That information I gave you was for the south-west, not the 
north-west. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- That's what we have Hansard for, Mr. Minister, and that 
straightens that out. 
 
On the Cypress Hills, you're going ahead.  You've had meetings with the 
Cypress Hills, and that's the Manitoba portion . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Pardon? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Alberta. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- The Cypress Hills, is that in . . . You say that's an 
interprovincial park with Alberta too, is it?  Okay.  Then the the Cold 
Lake area, there's nothing has been done on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- No, that is correct.  Your statement is correct. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- I want to turn to the provincial park at La Ronge, Mr. 
Minister, and some of the headlines are coming out that there's a major 
gold deposit in that provincial park.  Could you bring us up to date on 
what has taken place, what negotiations has taken place between the 
operators of that gold deposit in the provincial park at La Ronge? 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- We did announce a policy in provincial parks 
prohibiting any mineral development, with the exception of a few small 
areas within the La Ronge provincial park, and the only areas that are 
exempt from this policy are existing mineral claims in an area where some 
mineral development occurred before the Lac La Ronge Provincial Park was 
established in 1939.  Other than that, and the mineral exploration zone, 
there will be no mineral development in provincial parks. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Mr. Minister, you've changed the policy for Cameco and the 



 

 

group that's developing the deposit in the La Ronge Provincial Park.  You 
indicate you've changed the policy.  The policy was to prohibit any mining 
development to take place in the provincial parks.  You indicate that 
because there has been mining that has taken place in that area, could you 
not use that same criteria on any provincial park in the province and just 
use the province as an area?  If you were . . . just assume in the 
Grasslands National Park which is federal, but there's diamond deposits in 
there so the operators there would have to go through the federal 
department. 
 
The same would apply to any provincial park that we have in this province.  
You indicate that the policy is to prohibit, but yet the policy has been 
changed up there.  And you also indicate that you want to continue to go 
along with the old policy that no development take place. 
 
Mr. Minister, it would seem to me that if you can change the policy for La 
Ronge . . . and I'm not opposed to that development.  I think that any time 
that you want to develop within a provincial park, if the environmental 
impact studies are carried out properly and everything is done according to 
the rules and regulations of the province, I see nothing wrong with that. 
 
However, you have to go through all those steps first.  But I'm just saying 
that if you've given an exemption up there, why can you not do that any 
other place in the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- We feel that the only reason that there is mining 
allowed in that certain area is because it existed there.  We don't feel 
that's a change in policy.  I mean, it was just there before; it's that 
simple. 
 
And to answer your more direct question, I would give you a direct answer 
and say no, we're just not entertaining any; we just won't entertain any 
projects in any other provincial park. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- I don't want to belabour this, but could you just indicate 
to me what you mean by, it was there before? 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- The mine was there before the park was created. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- There is no mine there, Mr. Minister.  There's just 
exploration that's taken place, and there's a possibility of developing an 
ore body.  Somebody may have went in there and staked claims.  I'm not 
saying that there wasn't claims staked there, but most certainly there's no 
mine there. 
 
(1200) 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- I didn't mean to leave the impression that there was 
an operating mine at this time there.  What we were referring to is the 
Anglo-Rouyn mine site that was there before. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Yes, the Anglo-Rouyn mine site was there and that's mined 
out, just like many other mines around the world -- they get mined out.  So 



 

 

most certainly there's no mine there. 
 
Mr. Minister, has there been any other developments in any other provincial 
parks in the province, any major developments that have taken place, major 
expenditures in any of the other provincial parks in the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- Could you give me an example what specific type of 
development that you are referring to? 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Well has there been any major developments opening up, any 
new subdivisions, or has there been any campsites, major ones, that have 
been developed in the last year in a provincial park? 
 
If I could speed things up a little bit, Mr. Minister, for your officials, 
I asked you about any of the major developments in the provincial parks.  I 
do want to follow up with public campsites.  I want to know, you know, the 
number of provincial campsites that have been either leased out or taken 
back into the department or, you know, if there's been any change in that.  
And I just give you that to forewarn your officials that that's probably 
the next question that I will be asking is on the public campsites. 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- Thank you for bearing with us until we got a 
detailed list for you. 
 
The construction highlights for '89-90 were a water system upgrade to 
supply potable water to the golf course and marina at Elbow harbour rec 
site; complete renovations to the Chitek Lake headquarters; construction of 
a new lab and freezer building at Condie nature refuge; completion of the 
Rowan's Ravine administration building; construction of a new maintenance 
building at Greenwater Provincial Park; marina development at Greenwater 
Provincial Park; completion of the integrated sewer and water system at 
Duck Mountain Provincial Park; potable and irrigation water exploration and 
development at Moose Mountain Provincial Park; camp ground office 
completion at Cypress Hills Provincial Park; construction of a new visitor 
information centre at Fort Carlton historic park; construction of a new 
repair complex and renovations to the -- well this is with the fire control 
centre, but I can give it to you anyway -- construction of a new repair 
complex and renovations to the fire control centre at Nesbitt fire control, 
an operations complex in Prince Albert. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could provide me with this 
information in writing, those projects that you indicated and the amount of 
funds that you have spent on the projects that you just announced -- if you 
could provide me in writing the amount of dollars that were spent on all 
those projects that you have just indicated. 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- We would be very extremely happy and proud to do 
that, to advise the hon. member. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- You should be more co-operative, George.  Take a page out 
of Lorne's book. 
 
Mr. Minister, as I indicated, I wanted to know, have you leased out any 



 

 

public campsites in the last year to any individuals in this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- We are in the process of dealing with leasing five 
camp grounds.  They are the Maple Creek site, the Moosomin site -- four, 
I'm sorry, not five -- Borden bridge and Ramsay Bay.  Those are being . . . 
there's proposals, calls on those four. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Mr. Minister, what happened at the Borden bridge?  Did you 
have some problems there in the last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- The lessee is not returning, so therefore we are 
advertising it for a one-year lease. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- What amount of money did they pay to lease that site at 
the Borden bridge? 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- It is not our policy to release that information 
after the tender has been opened and awarded.  I would, though, for your 
information, give you a bench-mark; we do not accept any tender for less 
than $100. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- That's not the question I asked you, Mr. Minister.  The 
lessee that operated there last year, a group from Saskatoon, what did they 
pay the department in lease fees for that Borden bridge site?  I'm not 
asking you the question of what you're asking for in this tender; it's an 
open tender. 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- We normally just do not release that information. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I've got that information from other . 
. . Besnard Lake, you indicate . . . your department and the former 
minister indicated in estimates what that individual at Besnard Lake paid 
in lease fees -- that's public knowledge; at Little Amyot Lake, that's 
public knowledge.  We're dealing with public funds here right now, so I 
would assume that that should be public knowledge as to what the individual 
paid last year. 
 
We're not dealing with something that's up for tender or any secrecy there.  
This is moneys that were paid to the taxpayers of this province in . . . 
they paid that because they used a site, a facility that was owned by the 
taxpayers.  So I don't see how that cannot be public knowledge. 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- As a solution to this problem, may I offer the 
proposal of going to the person who had the lease, and if he's in agreement 
to release that information, we would be very willing to provide that 
information in writing to you. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Well, yes, you can provide to me in writing what they 
paid, and I don't think that the lessee should have any say into that 
matter.  We're here dealing with the taxpayers' moneys of this province.  
And I say to you in all fairness, Mr. Minister, that when you have an 
expenditure of moneys that come in from a facility that's owned by the 
taxpayers of this province, then I say that we in this legislature have a 



 

 

right to know how much funds were returned to this province for the use of 
that facility. 
 
And I just ask you to provide me with that information in writing, and 
that's fine, but absolutely no way should there be any secrecy around the 
amount of money that they paid to use a public facility in this province, 
owned by the province of Saskatchewan, owned by the taxpayers.  And I say 
to you in all fairness that there most certainly should be nothing secret 
about that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- Well in principle what we do is, which provides a 
lot of the information, is that we provide a global total of all these 
leases for you.  It is just not the policy to divulge the individual 
transaction or agreement between the government and an individual.  That is 
the only difference, but the total figure is provided for your use. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Well I'm not going to continue on this, but a global 
figure means nothing, you know.  We want to know the specifics when we're 
dealing with estimates in this House. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could indicate to me what negotiations has 
taken place in the last year and up to date at Anglin Lake regarding the 
public campsite that the department owns in Anglin Lake. 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- There was a proposal in that area which the 
department received.  The department will now facilitate whatever is 
necessary with some public meetings in June of this year so that their 
proposal can be publicly made, and at the same time, the consultations with 
other people take place.  So to answer your question more directly, no, at 
this time nothing has taken place. 
 
(1215) 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- But you do have a proposal before you to privatize the 
fairly large and substantial amount of land up there -- I believe that 
campsite encompasses about 11 acres -- and turning it over to a group from 
Saskatoon.  And you have that proposal before you, is this right, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- Yes, I once again will acknowledge that there is a 
proposal, and I also emphasize that nothing has taken place at this time 
regarding any sort of an agreement.  The next step is public consultation, 
directly involved with the people most concerned about the project in that 
area. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- So you're indicating that nothing will take place before 
there is public hearings held into the proposal.  Is this right? 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- That is correct.  The public meetings or hearings, 
whatever term you use to it, will take place in June of this year. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Could you indicate who the proposal was from, Mr. 
Minister? 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- For the benefit of not only this party but any other 
party that may want to make proposals, we have to treat it with confidence 
until it does go public.  They're just all treated that way. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Well I'm not going to belabour that one either, but I just 
want to make a comment.  You indicate that the proposal's there.  You're 
going to hold public hearings. 
 
How are you going to hold public hearings without indicating where the 
proposal comes from?  My gosh, if you can't make that public, I don't know 
what we're dealing with here.  If you're going to hold public hearings into 
the proposal that was put forward by the individual group, are you going to 
hold public hearings by a proposal from a group and not even indicate at 
the public hearings as to who is proposing to develop that 11 acres on 
Anglin Lake which is just 27 miles from Waskesiu? 
 
I think that to indicate that you can't make that name public is just not 
fair to this committee.  It's because you've indicated already that you're 
going to hold public hearings on his specific proposal.  And I'm just going 
to leave it at that. 
 
I now want to turn, Mr. Minister -- has any public campsites been taken 
back into the system in the last year, except, other than the one at 
Borden?  Have you taken any other ones in? 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- Just now my department is getting that information 
for you.  I wanted to comment just very briefly on your previous statement, 
because you make some good points there.  At the time of the public 
hearings the people that will be involved in this proposal will be made 
public.  In fact they will have to make their proposal.  So I think it's 
just a case of a little confidentiality until it formally happens.  But 
certainly there's no question that at the time of the public meetings, I 
don't think there'll be much left for the imagination. 
 
There were two sites that came back and became maintenance contracts that 
were . . . and those maintenance contracts were tendered out. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Could you indicate the two sites that were brought back 
in. 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- Peck Lake and Little Fishing Lake. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Minister.  I now want to turn to 
the provincial golf courses.  And I wonder if you could indicate if there's 
been any change in the status of the golf course on the provincial park at 
Cochin, on Jackfish Lake, I believe it is. 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- We have entered into a agreement with the Cochin 
conference centre to lease the golf course.  They are also, of course, 
going ahead with a proposal for a further expansion to the facilities 
there.  At this time they are operating the golf course. 
 



 

 

Mr. Thompson: -- You indicate that you are entering into  
 Dan agreement with the Cochin conference board to lease that golf course.  
You also indicate that there are plans for more development.  Who is going 
to . . . whose plans are you talking about, and what type of development 
are we talking about here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- Yes, the Cochin conference centre are going to do 
two things.  They're going to put in a conference centre, as the title 
would suggest, and as well, an accommodations project. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- And that . . . there will be no provincial money involved 
in this.  They are going to be putting up the 100 per cent of the funds.  
Is this right? 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- This department is not putting up any money at all.  
There are details to the financial breakdown which were made public.  And 
if you really require that information, it would take us a few minutes but 
we could get it for you. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Okay, let me rephrase the question.  Are you indicating 
that there's no provincial money being put into this operation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- No, I meant no money from my department, is what I 
meant. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Then you indicate that there is provincial funds going 
into this proposed project.  Is this right? 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- There may be some through the tourism subagreement 
that could be provincial funding.  As well, there is certainly some federal 
funding being provided. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Could you indicate who the principals are in this 
consortium, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- Yes, we'll provide that information, but it's going 
to take us a minute or two to find it. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- You indicate that the project that's going to go ahead at 
Cochin in that provincial park, is that they are going to take over the 
golf course which is now operated by your department.  And they are in turn 
going to build a conference centre and accommodations, and I'm presuming 
that you're talking about a motel type accommodations.  Are they going to 
build that right within the provincial park there at Cochin? 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- Yes, it is being built within the park boundaries.  
We feel it's simply an excellent joint venture with the Saulteaux Indian 
Band who are the principals in this agreement. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- So you're indicating then that the Cochin conference group 
is a group of natives from the Saulteaux Reserve just adjacent to the park.  
Is this right -- solely that one reserve? 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- The Saulteaux development corporation and the other 
principal shareholder, or the other shareholder, is Ray Ahenekiw. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- And you're not sure . . . Could you indicate how much the 
proposal is.  Do you know what the proposal that's been put before you, 
what the total cost of that facility is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- We'll give you an approximate figure.  These things 
can change as projects are designed, but tentative the proposed figure was 
$2.35 million. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Mr. Minister, is your department going to be running that 
golf course for the duration of this summer?  Or has that now been turned 
over to this group? 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- It has now been turned over to that group.  We've 
had nothing to do with the running of the golf course at all this year. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Okay, thank you very much, Mr. Minister.  Are there any 
other golf courses in the province that you are negotiating to lease out? 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- No, we are not negotiating on any others at this 
time at all. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- And has there been any taken back into the system in this 
last year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- No. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Mr. Minister, I now want to turn to the ski hills that you 
have within the park system in Saskatchewan.  And I wonder if you could 
indicate if you have negotiated for, or have leased out, any provincial ski 
hills in the province, or have you taken any of them that you have 
negotiated before back into the system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- We have three.  They are all leased, and Cypress 
completely for the first time this year. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Could you elaborate on that?  Being completely, was that a 
joint venture last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- I guess what I meant to say was that it was really 
leased for the first time this year on a formal lease. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- So there's been no other golf courses or ski hills that 
have been brought in or negotiated out this last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- No, that is correct. 
 
(1230) 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- What is the lease at . . . just out of Saskatoon there, 
Blackstrap, is that a five-year lease? 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- It was leased in 1986 for five years and there is a 
10-year renewal option. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- 1986? 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- 1986. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- And there was no other ski hills that were involved in the 
department this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- Yes, within the provincial park system those are the 
only three. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Mr. Minister, I now want to turn to another item and 
that's regarding your participation with Ducks Unlimited.  And I'm just 
wondering, Mr. Minister, what work has been done in the province and how 
much money that your department has put out into Ducks Unlimited?  I 
believe it's your department is responsible for the provincial Ducks 
Unlimited.  Is this right? 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- No, that's not quite correct. Though we work very 
closely with them and do a lot of joint ventures, we're just not 
responsible in any direct way to them.  They are very much an individual 
group. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- So Parks and . . . your department have no financial 
responsibilities to Ducks Unlimited.  What department does that fall under, 
Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- They are a private, non-profit organization that is, 
well, for instance very well-known throughout North America. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Yes, I know that.  I'm aware that Mexico, the United 
States and Canada are involved.  I'm also aware that there's projects 
within the province that are also involved.  And there's Landis taken 
place; there's the Ross Lake project up in Green Lake and areas like this.  
Does your department not have any responsibilities, financial 
responsibilities for the provincial portion of Ducks Unlimited? 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- Well I think our relationship is limited to joint 
ventures. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Okay then, Mr. Minister, before I get into some of the 
forestry in the department, I want to turn to another item and get that out 
of the way, and this is the game farms that we have in the province.  I 
wonder if you could indicate if there has been any new licences issued this 
year for game farming in the province; and also could you indicate if there 
has been any game farms that have closed their doors, closed down in this 
last year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- Mr. Chairman, I've informed the member that that 
type of information would be better acquired from Agriculture and Food 



 

 

because it is under their jurisdiction, the game farms. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- You're indicating that your department has nothing to do 
with licensing or how these game farms work in the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- Our department really is only concerned with 
interprovincial movement of animals. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Mr. Minister, I thank you for that information. 
 
I want to, Mr. Chairman, now turn to some forestry.  And the nurseries are 
under your jurisdiction? 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- That's right. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you could indicate how many 
trees that were planted last year by your department in the province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- In the past year there's been a total of 12 million 
seedlings planted, and I'll take it one step further and give you the 
breakdown.  It was 4.8 by government, 6.5 by industry, and .7 by 
miscellaneous -- that's things like Arbor Day and Boy Scouts, Girl Guides 
type of thing. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- There was 12 million trees planted last year in the 
province.  Mr. Minister, could you indicate where those 12 million 
seedlings came from?  Did they all come from facilities that belonged to 
the province, or were any of those seedlings brought in out of the province 
in the last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- All those seedlings were Saskatchewan produced. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Could you indicate how many contracts that your department 
let out for tree planting in the last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- There was a total of nine contracts given out. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- And how many of those contracts were awarded to 
Saskatchewan firms? 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- All of them. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Okay.  Mr. Minister, there was a firm up at Jans Bay who 
were bidding on a contract to plant trees, which they were unsuccessful in.  
Could you indicate who received that contract that they were bidding on? 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- There was the contract at Hawryluk Creek and Roots 
Reforestation received the tender. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Where are they from, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- To the best of our information, we think they are 
located at Big River. 



 

 

 
Mr. Thompson: -- You're not sure where they're located? 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- We just don't have that exact information.  I'm 
going on what the staff think is the location. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- And you will provide me with that information then, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- Absolutely no problem in providing that location. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could indicate, you say 
there was 12 billion seedlings planted in the province last year, and I 
know you'd have to give me this in approximate figures.  Could you indicate 
how many trees are being extracted in a year out of the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- There's a total of approximately 14 million that 
were harvested. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Are you indicating that there was only 14 million trees 
taken out of the forest in Saskatchewan last year?  That's the total amount 
taken out of this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- That's our best estimate on what was harvested. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Mr. Minister, how would you determine that?  Are you 
taking . . . when you use the figure of 14 million trees, are you using the 
figure of 14 million trees that were harvested for commercial use?  Or are 
you talking about all the smaller trees and everything?  When you clear-cut 
a forest, are you taking into account all those trees that would be in a 
square block that is clear-cut in this province and come up with a figure 
of 14 million trees? 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- Yes, we feel that's a very close estimate on what we 
consider trees of commercial value. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Mr. Minister, if I could rephrase the question then for 
your officials.  I wonder if you could indicate how many trees that they 
feel, in approximate, that are extracted from the forest in Saskatchewan 
from all purposes, whether it be firewood or Christmas trees, whatever it 
may be.  I wonder if you could give me, in round figures, the number of 
trees that were taken out of the forest in Saskatchewan in one year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- That figure that we gave you earlier, the 14 
million, was included.  Anything that was permanent on the small scale -- 
the Christmas trees you refer to -- we feel that's our best estimate on 
total commercial use. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Okay.  Mr. Minister, then you indicate that we're 
extracting approximately 12 million trees out of the forests in 
Saskatchewan . . . 
 



 

 

An Hon. Member: -- 14 million. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- . . . 14 million.  Last year, you indicate that the 
department seeded 12 million, or they're going to seed this year the same 
amount.  Is this right, approximately? 
 
Could you indicate to me what the recovery rate is or what the success rate 
is?  When you plant 12 million trees, what percentage of those trees grow 
to maturity? 
 
(1245) 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- Our best guess is that 70 per cent of the seedlings 
survive and that 50 per cent reach full maturity to the point where, well, 
they're done. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Mr. Minister, how many inspectors do you have within your 
department that go out in the field and inspect the trees that are planted, 
to make sure that when a tree is planted, that it's planted properly; and 
not only when they're planting, but to see what happens a year later, you 
know, a year after? 
 
How many inspectors do you have on your staff so that they can go around 
and make sure that those trees . . . and you indicate that 70 per cent of 
them are successful and 30 per cent of them are dying.  That seems to me 
that that's quite a high rate of loss there, especially when you're dealing 
in 12 million trees. 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- To answer your question, I'd kind of like to do it 
in two parts.  We have an assessment crew of people who do one-year and 
five-year inspections, who are, you could say, at it on a sort of more or 
less a reasonably full-time basis.  But besides that, we have all our 
forestry people at different times of the year involved in an evaluation.  
Our regional forestry people, for example, are quite involved. 
 
So to give you a specific number would be extremely hard, but . . . if you 
were loose and free with the figures, you know, I could give you a large 
number.  But that wouldn't be fair because it wouldn't be full time.  So I 
would rather just say that it's an ongoing evaluation by many, many people 
within the department. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Yes, that's fine, Mr. Minister.  I wonder if you could 
indicate what type of a project you have going just north of Green Lake 
there, where we had the major fire approximately 20 years ago.  And I see 
that there's a major project going on there of clearing out the rows again 
for replanting or . . . I'm not too sure what's going on there.  There's a 
lot of work been done there this year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- Rather than give you some information that may not 
be correct, with your co-operation we would like to take notice of that 
question and obligate ourselves to a written answer to you on that one. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, that's a pretty major project and I 



 

 

would think that that has to be in the hands of your foresters and your 
department officials.  That project went on, there was a lot of money spent 
there this year.  A contractor was in there with crawler tractors clearing 
all that land.  All the wind-rows are cleaned out.  And I would indicate to 
you, Mr. Minister, that that is the type of information that if you can't 
bring it to me today, then most certainly on Monday I would like to have 
that information brought back.  To me that is a major project. 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- Certainly.  There'd be absolutely no problem in 
providing that for you by Monday. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- You indicate that of the 12 million trees, 70 per cent 
survive and 50 per cent survive to maturity.  I wonder if you could 
indicate if that 50 per cent to maturity is 50 per cent of the 70 per cent, 
or is that 50 per cent of the 100 per cent or of the 12 million trees? 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- Those percentages we gave you were based on the 
original seeding totals.  So it would be 50 per cent of the 12 million. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, when you take a look at the program, 
we know that we planted 12 million trees last year.  We're extracting 14 
million through the forest industry.  We're not counting the losses in 
forest fires that we have in this province where we lose millions and 
millions of trees.  And you indicate that only 50 per cent of the trees 
that are planted reach maturity. 
 
Now if we are going to develop a sustainable forest industry in this 
province, I just don't see how you're going to do this if you're going to 
clear cut the land.  You're going to replant that area and only 50 per cent 
survive to maturity.  It just stands to reason.  You're going to have a 
hundred acres and you replant it, only 50 acres are going to have forest on 
it.  The other 50 acres are going to be desert. 
 
And if we're going to keep clear cutting in the province and extracting the 
forest the way we're going right now and putting back the way that we're 
going, at 50 per cent, and if you take a look at how long it takes for a 
tree to mature in the province of Saskatchewan, with the climatic 
conditions the way they are in this province, the chances are that those 
trees will never reach maturity for 70, 80 years. 
 
So the chances of a sustainable forest industry in this province get dimmer 
and dimmer all the time.  We end up with a situation like we have over in 
Hudson Bay, where Simpson Timber, who had contracts there and have logged 
for 25 years and have clear cut, now are moving out because they've 
depleted all the forest in that area, in their forest management lease. 
 
And I think that, Mr. Minister, if we're going to continue clear cutting in 
this province and exposing that land to the type of climatic conditions 
that we get in this province, and the rains come and they wash that fragile 
topsoil off that land, the 50 per cent maturity right now, I would say down 
the road -- 10, 20 years from now -- you'd be lucky if you get 10 per cent 
of those trees that you plant to maturity. 
 



 

 

Because we're going to . . . through these climatic conditions we are going 
to lose all that topsoil, and those trees are never going to reproduce, and 
we're never going to have a sustainable forest in this province.  It's the 
same thing that's happened in British Columbia and Alberta, any place that 
they're clear cutting on the mountains. 
 
It took millions of years to create that fragile topsoil so that they could 
grow a tree on those mountains.  Now they clear cut them and the rains come 
down and they wash all that fragile soil which took millions of years to 
build up.  They close off creeks, they disrupt the animals in the area, 
they disrupt the spawning grounds for the fish. 
 
And I think that if we're going to continue down this trail, then we're 
going to see a complete disaster in the forest industry in this province.  
And you're going to see federal regulations, or global regulations are 
going to come in and start regulating how we operate in this province 
because of the situation with the greenhouse effect where we have to have 
greenery on this planet or we just won't have a planet. 
 
And we most certainly are not going to have a green planet, and especially 
we're not going to have a green Saskatchewan and in our forested areas if 
we're going to continue to take out our trees at the rate that you indicate 
we're taking them out, and the rate that we're putting them back and the 
rate of success that we're getting.  Because if we're getting 50 per cent 
success right now, as I indicated, all that clear cut land and rain coming 
in and washing that off and the climatic conditions that we have, within 
10, 15, 20 years you'll be able to grow nothing on that soil. 
 
And I say we have to look ahead for generations to come.  We just cannot 
continue to operate the way that we're operating in this province, albeit 
Saskatchewan may be a small province, but I'll tell you we've been leaders 
in many fields in this small province and we should continue to be leaders.  
And this is one way that we can continue to be a leader, and that is to go 
back and to use the timber cruisers and go out and selectively take our 
forest.  You can plant all the trees you want and you're never going to 
replenish that forest. 
 
I just tell you, Mr. Minister, it's going to be the same thing as happened 
in Hudson Bay and is starting to come back to haunt us in this province.  
And that's only a small, small development.  If you have a major forest 
fire, that's all regenerated because of that fire.  Don't have to worry so 
much about that because that is all replanted and that comes up very fast. 
 
And most of that is done in jack pine stands.  But if we're going to 
continue to log and we're going to continue to take everything out of that 
tree, we're not going to leave a nursery crop like we've done for years.  
We've had successful logging operations in this province ever since the 
province began.  And they selectively cut.  You go in with smaller 
equipment; you have your timber cruisers go through there.  They cruise 
that timber, they cut out the mature timber, and they leave the other ones.  
If there's a tree that's 20 years from maturity or 30 years from maturity, 
you leave it and it's there.  And it becomes a nursery and it protects the 
fragile topsoil that we have. 



 

 

 
But if you're going to take those trees that are 10 and 20 years away from 
maturity and you're going to destroy all that soil through clear-cutting . 
. . and one just has to go up there now.  The winds are getting hold of it, 
it's starting to whip the sands up, and I suspect you're going to find out 
in Green Lake where you're spending a bunch of money again to reforestate a 
burn that took place over 20 years ago, that you're going to run into the 
same problem. 
 
And if we are going to develop a sustainable forest in this province, then 
I say to you, Mr. Minister, we have to change the policies.  We have to 
change policies that will protect your children and my children and our 
grandchildren for centuries to come. 
 
But the way we're doing it right now, we're talking about centuries being 
lost.  And it's fine if you want to take a look at the economics right now.  
The large corporations will come in -- MacMillan Bloedel in British 
Columbia.  They don't mind going in and extracting all that forest and 
clear cutting those beautiful mountains.  But never, never again in our 
time and in any of our relations' times will we ever see a mature forest on 
those mountainsides.  That area has been destroyed for life. 
 
And we are doing the same thing on a smaller scale in Saskatchewan.  We are 
literally destroying this province with the type of harvesting operations 
that we are involved in, in this province. 
 
And I say, Mr. Minister, that this is a policy that has to be changed.  And 
I know you as a minister, and I know you're responsible and that you're the 
type of an individual that believes in this province.  And these are the 
policies that you, sir, are going to have to address and are going to have 
to make some major decisions, and they're tough decisions to make.  You're 
going to have to make those decisions.  Somebody has to if we're going to 
have a green province. 
 
We can expand our nurseries in this province; we can take more seedlings.  
And we should be promoting more reforestation in the southern part of this 
province and get the trees growing around these farms again.  I say that 
the nurseries in this province, if it's handled right, are too small.  We 
can produce a lot more trees in those nurseries, but we should make sure 
that we're bringing those trees down to the southern part, into these 
farming areas, and encouraging these farmers to replant, and the 
communities and the cities and the towns. 
 
The forest that we have up there right now, I say we have to maintain that.  
And that can only be done by selective cutting and keeping those healthy 
young trees that are there as a nursery crop, same as the farmers would do 
in the South.  If they want to plant alfalfa, they'll maybe the first year 
they'll put a nursery crop in with oats or barley, whatever farmers raise 
as a nursery crop. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order, please.  It now being past 1 o'clock, we'll rise 
and report progress. 
 



 

 

The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 1:03 p.m. 
 


