





























































Hansard: June 08, 1990


 

 

June 8/90 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: -- According to order, I have reviewed the following petition and 
find that it is in order and is therefore to be read and received: of 
certain residents of the province of Saskatchewan praying that the 
Legislative Assembly may be pleased to urge the provincial government to 
reverse its decision to relocate the Saskatchewan liquor board store from 
its present location in the Market Mall to a new location on Eighth Street, 
Saskatoon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I 
shall on Tuesday next, move: 
 

 That this Assembly regrets the continued steady decline of Saskatchewan's 
rural communities, as is evident by the alarming rate of rural 
depopulation, education cut-backs and lay-offs, and business bankruptcies 
on main street. 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Through you and to the members 
of the Assembly today, Mr. Speaker, we indeed are privileged to have two 
guests with us that are on a journey across Canada under the sponsorship of 
Bicycle Canada, 1990. 
 
They are seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, and I would ask them to 
stand.  They are Mr. Nooral Ahmed and Douglas Bell.  They left Victoria, 
British Columbia on May 13, Mr. Speaker.  They are going right across 
Canada on this journey.  I understand that they had the opportunity to 
visit the Alberta legislature, and today we are indeed honoured to have 
them with us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, their goal in this exercise is one that we would all like to 
be able to do, and that is to experience Canada as a country and the people 
within it.  They are going to be travelling the untrod path visiting rural 
communities, urban communities, and getting to know their fellow Canadians.  
And in the spirit of a green Canada, Mr. Speaker, Nooral and Doug will 
leave nothing behind except their shared experiences, and it is their 
intention to take with them nothing but their memories. 
 



 

 

We wish them, Mr. Speaker, a safe journey.  We welcome them here today and 
I would ask all members to join me in that. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- Mr. Speaker, I have the honour today to present to you 
49 grade 4 and 5 students from Dickson School in Swift Current, along with 
their teachers, David Frantz and Gerry Regier and Brenda Clark.  They also 
are accompanied with some parents, Mr. Speaker: Laura Wiens, Pam Williams, 
Delorie Flaterud, and John Bowers.  Mr. Speaker, I will be meeting with 
these students at approximately 11 o'clock and I would ask all members to 
welcome them, and may you enjoy the question period today. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would also like to introduce a 
group of grade 7 and 8 students from Deshaye School, approximately 27 
students I believe, who are here this morning to visit the legislature and 
listen to question period.  I will be meeting with them after for pictures 
and drinks.  And they are accompanied by their teachers, Mr. Todd Schwartz 
and Mr. Ross Mahoney, Mr. Speaker.  And I'd ask the members to join me in 
welcoming these students to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great 
deal of pleasure to introduce through you and to the members of the House, 
our legislature, some 18 students from the Watson Elementary School, grade 
5 students.  They're seated in the Speaker's gallery.  They're accompanied 
by their teacher, Mr. Chris Hancock; and parents, Eugene Eggerman and 
Therea Graf.  Mr. Speaker, I too will be meeting with the students.  I ask 
members of the House to join and extend a warm welcome to the group from 
Watson. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Changes to Millar Western Project 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is directed to the Minister of 
Environment.  Mr. Minister, it's reported today in the news media that 
Millar Western pulp mill in Meadow Lake is making a substantial change to 
its plans in its project, a change which I submit will have a very 
significant environmental impact.  And that change, Mr. Minister, is that 
the plant is no longer going to draw water from the aquifer, which the 
environmental impact statement said it would, and instead now wants to draw 
water from Meadow Lake itself.  Can you explain, Mr. Minister, how this now 
impacts on the authority that has been given by your department for Millar 
Western to proceed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The hon. member is quite 
correct.  I have learned only very recently that the company has made a 
proposal to the Department of the Environment to make a change in its water 
supply source. 
 
I want the hon. member to know that the issue has been referred to my 
department, to the technical environmental experts and professionals in the 
Department of the Environment.  They are at present conducting a technical 
review of the proposal.  It will be given very thorough consideration and 
examination and looked at from all perspectives of the environment, and a 
proposed change such as this will be subject to the environmental impact 
assessment Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Minister, section 16 of that environmental impact 
assessment Act states that when a proponent is proposing a change, you can 
require that proponent to actually do a full environmental impact 
assessment and statement on that aspect of that report, or a full 
environmental assessment statement.  In this case, obviously this 
environmental assessment statement and study was not adequate. 
 
Will you give your assurance to the House today, Mr. Minister, that you 
will be asking for a full environmental impact assessment and statement 
which will be made public as it applies to this major and very significant 
change in the procedures that the company is going to now apply? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I give the hon. member the following 
commitment: that I and the professionals in the Department of the 
Environment will give this whole issue very close scrutiny. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to emphasize that at present this is only a proposal, 
and we may say yes, we may say no.  Mr. Speaker, I can only tell you that 
it will receive significant consideration by the department. 
 
The hon. member will know the history of this project, that this is not the 
first change.  There were other changes, Mr. Speaker, that were demanded by 
myself with respect to this particular proposal.  Mr. Speaker, you will 
recall that the proponent initially wanted to go zero effluent after a 
couple of years.  Mr. Speaker, you will recall that this minister required 
public meetings.  Mr. Speaker, you will recall that the public attended 
those meetings.  The public were heard; the public were listened to, Mr. 
Speaker, and changes were required. 
 
I make the commitment, Mr. Speaker, that this same type of a proposal here, 
which is only proposed at this time, will receive the same type of due 
diligence. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- A new question, Mr. Speaker, to the minister.  Mr. 



 

 

Minister, what you have just said underlines why the problem is there.  
There were not appropriate public hearings.  There were public relations 
meetings sponsored by your department to sell the project rather than put 
the environmental impact statement up to scrutiny. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- This is an environmental impact study and statement 
which is inadequate and is incomplete.  And it's now becoming clear, Mr. 
Minister.  The study showed in this case, my question, that the underground 
water proposed to be used in the project was not suitable.  That's what the 
study showed.  You knew that, Mr. Minister, and yet you authorized the 
construction contract, the licence.  You were totally unconcerned about the 
environmental impact and just wanted to bull ahead with the proposal. 
 
Mr. Minister, since day one the major environmental concerns with this 
project have been water.  Surely given this major change in the project, 
even you can see the need for a full environmental impact process which 
includes public hearings.  Will you make a commitment to this House today 
that you will now initiate public hearings so that other shortcomings in 
that environmental impact study can be questioned, and therefore the 
company has to justify what it is proposing and so do you and the 
Department of the Environment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, you may rest assured that the proponent 
of this proposed change, the Millar Western corporation will have to 
justify in every sense of the word this proposed change.  Mr. Speaker, it 
would be terribly unfair of me to make any firm commitments on exactly what 
decisions are going to be taken today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have only been informed recently of this proposal, Mr. 
Speaker.  I stress once again, it is a suggestion by the company, a 
proposal that has been put forward.  I think, Mr. Speaker, as a minister 
should, he should review this issue.  He should have all of the facts and 
figures before him.  He should have good discussions with his environmental 
experts in the department and, before making any hasty or rash decisions, 
have all of the facts before him, Mr. Speaker.  And I give you that 
assurance that that process will take place. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- New question, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, had you had 
public hearings as you should have under The Environmental Assessment Act, 
these problems would not now be probably before us.  Mr. Minister, it's not 
the first one.  This is not the first time.  Initially the company -- and 
you approved verbally -- said that they would dump for two years effluent 
into the Beaver River.  Under questioning, the one time questioning was 
allowed, the company said that there was absolutely no other way in which 
that's possible.  They had to have the two years of dumping.  You then 
issued a licence, Mr. Minister, saying that that will no longer be 
required, even though the company said that there was no other way. 



 

 

 
I ask you then, Mr. Minister, in light of that contradiction and in light 
of what's happened here now, why do you persist in doing this analysis and 
review behind closed doors, in secret between you and the company, and not 
involve the public of Saskatchewan who has a right to know and has a right 
to ask some questions because they will be very severely impacted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to clearly outline the process and 
the history of this development.  Mr. Speaker, this proponent made 
proposals to the Department of the Environment; this proponent followed the 
environmental assessment process to a T.  Mr. Speaker, this minister asked 
for public meetings.  The public wanted input into this process, the public 
were given that opportunity, and the public spoke, Mr. Speaker.  The public 
spoke and asked for changes; they had input into this process. 
 
Those changes took place.  Mr. Speaker, this proposal has been scrutinized 
throughly.  It has been looked at by professionals in the department and 
the public at large, and it's been given approval. 
 
Now today, Mr. Speaker, something new has come across our desk -- a change 
to the project.  I think that's fair and reasonable.  If companies want to 
make changes, that's fine, Mr. Speaker, but they are also subject to the 
letter of the law and they will be given very close scrutiny, Mr. Speaker.  
And I don't think the members opposite should really have anything to 
complain about in that respect. 
 
If, Mr. Speaker, the case is simply that the members are against 
diversification of our economy, if the members opposite are against the 
jobs and opportunities that are associated with developments, that's 
another story, Mr. Speaker.  But, Mr. Speaker, if they want true 
environmental management of this issue, that's what they will get. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Effects of GST on Agricultural Insurance 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the 
Minister of Agriculture, I'll direct my question to the Associate Minister 
of Agriculture.  Mr. Minister, I have a copy of a letter which was sent to 
all insurance brokers in this province and it concerns the Saskatchewan 
farm insurance manual.  And it states, and I quote: 
 

 To recap, all property rates have been increased 4 per cent to compensate 
for the forthcoming goods and services tax. 

 
Now, Mr. Minister, at this time last year when your government was speaking 
in favour of the goods and services tax, were you aware that it was going 
to have this kind of impact on Saskatchewan farmers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm going to take notice of the question. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Well, Mr. Minister, new question.  While the minister is 
taking notice of that one, I think that's very indicative of the kind of 
performance and the position this government has taken on the goods and 
services tax. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- At this time last year you were too busy defending it to do 
a study of the goods and services tax and the impact.  This year you're too 
busy hiding from it to do the study of the impact.  And our farmers simply 
can't afford these increases due to the goods and services tax, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to know what you're intending to do about this, and 
will you be bringing forward to this House a complete analysis of the goods 
and services tax and its effect on farmers and present it to this House?  
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, the goods and services tax as it relates 
to agriculture is under constant review by not only the Department of 
Agriculture, but by the Department of Finance.  And as we go into the last 
part of this year we will be finding out that there are more and more of 
the things happening in relation to the tax that we haven't got answers for 
today.  And so as we go through that we will be providing to agriculture 
and to the farmers of the province, exactly what they will have to be 
paying and why they will have to be paying it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Well, Mr. Minister, just let me explain to you.  This is a 
letter from Saskatchewan Mutual Insurance Co. to all Saskatchewan brokers 
re: the Saskatchewan program.  And it states, and I quote: 
 

 Enclosed is a complete reprint of a Saskatchewan Habitational Manual 
incorporating the premium increases announced in our letter of May 11.  To 
recap, all property rates have been increased by 4 per cent to compensate 
for the forthcoming goods and services tax. 

 
Now, Mr. Minister, I ask you, if you had not been in Brian Mulroney's 
hip-pocket for so long, if you had not been doing your dodge and bob and 
weave performance in this House, you may have known that these types of 
increases would have been the result of the goods and services tax. 
 
If you had been opposing the tax in 1988, you would have had a plan to deal 
with this.  Obviously, you haven't.  So, Mr. Minister, I ask you: why did 
you spend so much time singing the Hallelujah Chorus to Brian Mulroney 
instead of standing up for Saskatchewan farmers, joining the opposition, 
the workers, and the farmers of this province in opposing the goods and 
services tax? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I have, as I have indicated earlier 
in this House, farmed under three administrations.  I have farmed under 
Liberals and NDP and Conservatives, and I think Conservatives are better. 
 
The other thing that I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, is this: that since 
1985, the federal government have provided to the province of Saskatchewan, 
$6.6 billion.  Now, who's hip-pocket . . . I think it was in the left-hand 
hip-pocket of the federal government we were in.  Exactly.  And they were 
paying to us $6.6 billion to the province of Saskatchewan in those five 
years. 
 
Now, as it relates to GST (goods and services tax), this government has 
consistently said that we have been against it, and that's what we continue 
to say on the basis of our review in agriculture and our review as the 
Minister of Finance has indicated over and over again -- this one and the 
ones we've had before. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- New question, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, I can tell you 
for every cent the federal government has given Saskatchewan farmers they 
have taken one away.  They have taken away $270 million and the two-price 
wheat.  They have taken away $27 million in the . . . for the cash advance 
program.  They have taken away $400 million in the rail line rehabilitation 
program.  They have taken $273 million in the western grain stabilization 
that hasn't paid out in the last couple of years -- $424 million dollars 
from Canadians . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  It seems that we have a situation where 
questions and answers are becoming debate and I'd like to bring that to the 
attention of the member from Humboldt. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Well I think, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, the list stands 
for itself and you know what the cuts have meant to Saskatchewan farmers 
because 10,000 notices of foreclosure. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Minister, just to refresh your memory, on April 10 of 
last year in this House, the then minister of Finance in a response to a 
question from our leader, said, and I quote: 
 

 With all respect to the Leader of the Opposition, the national sales tax 
can be imposed in ways which mean a reduction for farmers. 

 
That's what he said last year.  That was your position. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, would you care to explain to this House today how this 
tax, exactly how this tax is going to mean a reduction for farmers. 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, as we've looked at the opportunities in 
relation to agriculture that we have initiated with the federal government, 



 

 

if you take a line on net farm income since 1985, 1986, 1987, 1988, 1989, 
and 1990, all from net farm income have been at a minus position, every one 
of them.  And every one of them, Mr. Speaker, if you look on a line, have 
had a positive cash flow in each one of those years and again in 1990.  And 
all of that money was supplied to the province of Saskatchewan by the 
federal government.  And that's a fact, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Community Development Bond Program 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is to the minister responsible 
for Economic Diversification and Trade.  Mr. Minister, you'll know that 
when you announced the community bond program, we expressed some concern 
about the fact that the bonds were exempted from the Securities Commission, 
and now I see that the chair of the Securities Commission shares that 
concern. 
 
My question to you is: will you bring in an amendment to the legislation 
when it next comes before this House to ensure that the bonds are subject 
to the scrutiny of the Securities Commission which after all is there to 
protect investors? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Chairman, the answer is no.  The role of the 
Securities Commission is to regulate within their jurisdiction, and their 
jurisdiction does not include politics, so that they are to do their duties 
within their jurisdiction and the politics will be in the legislature.  
We've already passed the Bill and there will be no amendment. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Minister, it's not a question of politics; it's a 
question of protecting investors, and the chair of the Securities 
Commission has expressed concern.  He feels the commission has a role to 
play in those cases where people choose to trade bonds for equity in the 
companies in which investments are made. 
 
Now since your guarantee of the principal amount of the bonds does not 
cover, does not cover those conversions, and the investors are taking a 
risk at that point, surely they're entitled to the protection offered in 
law by the Securities Commission.  Now why would you deny them that 
protection? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Speaker, these bonds are, firstly, guaranteed by 
the province of Saskatchewan in principal.  Secondly, there is a review 
committee established under the Act to review the activities of the 
community bond corporations.  Thirdly, the regulations will soon be 
available and will give further details of the powers of the review 
committee.  And fourthly, there's a limit to how much bureaucracy we can 
establish when we are trying to develop small industries in small 
communities throughout Saskatchewan. 



 

 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- A new question, Mr. Speaker, to the same minister.  Mr. 
Minister, the Securities Commission is already there.  You don't have to 
establish any new bureaucracy to take advantage of their services. 
 
Now isn't it true -- and you mentioned the word -- isn't it true that the 
real reason behind this is simply politics?  Isn't it a fact that you're 
remembering the Saskatchewan energy debacle where you attempted to 
advertise those shares for political advantage, and when the Securities 
Commission wouldn't let you, you brought in a cabinet order to exempt those 
shares?  And isn't it a fact, Minister,  
 Dthat you want to do some more political advertising at taxpayers' expense 
-- and I raised this question with you during consideration of the Bill -- 
to try to get some political mileage out of the bonds, and you don't want 
any more interference from the Securities Commission?  Isn't that what's 
really behind this position? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Speaker, it's clear that the opposition wants the 
community bonds economic strategy to fail.  It's clear that they want to 
throw up more bureaucratic hurdles before the communities which wish to 
develop themselves.  It is clear that the opposition is more interested in 
politics than the economic health of rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Aurum Dump Site 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a question for the Minister of the 
Environment.  Mr. Minister, on May 30 I attended public hearings held by 
the city of Edmonton with respect to the Aurum dump site.  At that time I 
presented a case on behalf of the people of the cities of Prince Albert and 
North Battleford, communities of Nipawin and other areas along the North 
Saskatchewan River who are concerned about the Aurum dump site and the 
effects on their water and on the North Saskatchewan River. 
 
And they're asking me, Mr. Minister, and I'm asking you, why their Minister 
of the Environment wasn't attending those meetings to speak on behalf of 
those people.  Can you tell me why you weren't there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- I think the hon. member would know the history as well 
of this particular issue, and I think it was made abundantly clear what 
Saskatchewan's position was.  And when I say Saskatchewan's position, Mr. 
Speaker, I'm not speaking just of me personally, I'm speaking of the mayor 
from Nipawin, I'm speaking about the mayor from your city of Prince Albert, 
and I'm talking about the mayor from the city of North Battleford, as well 
as the mayor of the city from Lloydminster. 
 



 

 

Mr. Speaker, these mayors, myself, all together have expressed a unified 
position, a position that has said the proposed site is not acceptable to 
Saskatchewan.  The proposed site should be reviewed, Mr. Speaker, but we 
also felt extremely comfortable that there were processes and laws in the 
province of Alberta that would take this issue to a natural conclusion 
where the public could be well heard.  Mr. Speaker, I feel Saskatchewan has 
made their statement well.  I believe it's been a unified position, Mr. 
Speaker, and I think most of those people in those communities would very 
quickly recognize what their mayors and what this provincial minister has 
stated in the past. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I have another question to the minister.  
Mr. Minister, no one will take your word on this.  Initially you said you 
had no concerns, then you told us in this House that you would make 
representation to the city council, and now you tell us what you've done is 
good enough.  And I say to you, it's not good enough. 
 
I want to know, Mr. Minister, don't you realize it's your job to make as 
strong a representation as you can on behalf of the people along the North 
Saskatchewan River, and it's not your job just to ignore environmental 
concerns.  I ask you again, and I want to ask you one more time why you 
weren't there, and you know that these meetings are going to be reconvening 
on June 13, and I'm asking you today, will you make sure that you are there 
to represent the concerns of the people along the North Saskatchewan River, 
or will you not? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I will inform you and the House of what I 
am interested in.  And, Mr. Speaker, I am interested in making clear 
Saskatchewan's position with respect to environmental concerns.  This is a 
prime example. 
 
I am not interested, Mr. Speaker, in grandstanding and holding an issue up 
like this just to gain political attention, Mr. Speaker.  I'm interested in 
truly protecting the environment, Mr. Speaker.  If the member was genuine 
in his remarks, he would have consulted with his mayor and the people of 
Prince Albert who know full well what the position of the Saskatchewan 
government, together with all the mayors that I have previously listed, Mr. 
Speaker.  That position is abundantly clear.  I'm interested in making that 
position known.  I am not interested in political grandstanding per se. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 
At 10:34 a.m. Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the Chamber, took 
her seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent to the following Bills: 
 

Bill No. 16 --      An Act to amend The Mortgage Protection Act 
 



 

 

Bill No. 17 --     An Act to amend The Education and Health Tax Act 
 
Bill No. 18 --     An Act to amend The Stock Savings Tax Credit Act 
 
Bill No. 23 --     An Act to amend The Corporation Capital Tax Act 
 
Bill No. 01 --     An Act to amend An Act to incorporate Mennonite 

Brethren Church of Saskatchewan 
 
Bill No. 02 --     An Act to amend An Act to incorporate the Millar 

Memorial Bible Institute 
 
Bill No. 03 --     An Act to amend An Act to incorporate Grey Sisters 

of the Immaculate Conception of Pembroke 
 
Bill No. 2 --     An Act respecting Family and Community Services 
 
Bill No. 28 --     An Act respecting Investments by Saskatchewan 

Residents in Support of Community Diversification and 
Environmental Protection 

 
Bill No. 9 --     An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Housing 

Corporation Act 
 
Bill No. 14 --     An Act respecting Certain Payments to the Meewasin 

Valley Authority, The Wakamow Valley Authority and the 
Wascana Centre Authority 

 
Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 10:37 a.m. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Saskatchewan Water Corporation 
Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 50 

 
Mr. Chairman: -- Would the minister introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman.  I have with me today Brian 
Woodcock, the president of Sask Water Corporation; and Wayne Phillips on my 
right here; and Wayne Dybvig from the administration. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to welcome the minister 
and his officials to the examination of the water corporation estimates, 
with a particular word of welcome to Mr. Woodcock who has very recently 
taken over as president of the water corporation.  And I know I speak for 
all members on this side of the House in saying we wish you well in your 



 

 

new work and appointment. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to plunge right into questioning regarding some of the 
activities of the water corporation.  First of all, just a very short 
question about the water supply utility portion of Sask Water.  Through the 
water supply utility, Sask Water supplies water to a variety of industrial, 
municipal, and other uses for water.  Mr. Minister, does Sask Water have a 
basic charge, a fee structure, a charge for providing water to an 
industrial development? 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, we have a standard rate for raw water 
and we have a basic standard rate for treated water. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I want to know what the rates are.  
What is the rate for raw water to an industrial site? 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, the rate for raw water is about $1.56 
and treated water is $3.50 per thousand. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Per thousand, Mr. Minister.  Will you complete the 
sentence.  What is the rate for raw water to an industrial site -- $1.56 
per thousand what? 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Per thousand imperial gallons. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Minister, it's my understanding, and you can correct me 
if I'm wrong, that Sask Water will be responsible to provide the water to 
the Cargill fertilizer plant being proposed for Belle Plaine.  Mr. 
Minister, will you confirm that it will be Sask Water's responsibility to 
build and install the pipeline to the Cargill fertilizer plant at Belle 
Plaine? 
 
(1045) 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, the Sask Water Corporation was asked to 
provide water to the Saskatchewan fertilizer plant.  The treated water is 
being put in this summer and at the treated water rate, and the design of 
the raw water-line is being made at this point. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- So, Mr. Minister, you're confirming that Sask Water is 
putting in the raw water-line from Buffalo Pound Lake to the fertilizer 
development at Belle Plaine.  You're confirming that this morning. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you confirm that the pipeline from the lake to the plant 
will be 20 kilometres in length, that it will be buried three metres below 
ground surface, and that it will be an 18-inch pipe? 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, as I indicated, the design is being 
drawn up, the engineering components are being drawn up. You're close on 
your kilometres, you're close on your depth, and you're close on your 
estimate of the size of the diameter of the pipe. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Then, Mr. Minister, for the committee will you then tell 



 

 

the committee how much this will cost Sask Water for the pipeline, the 
installation of the pipeline, all of the design work and so on.  And I 
assume that with the pipeline will be the pumping station at the lake.  
Will you tell the House the total cost of this project to the water 
corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, when the design is completed and the 
engineering works are completed, we will have an exact cost of that and 
then we will be asking for submissions for the products that we're going to 
be using.  And at that point in time, we'll be able to tell you what the 
price is going to be. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Well, Mr. Minister, can you tell the committee this morning 
an estimated cost?  I don't need it to the exact cent, but surely you must 
have an estimated cost for this project. 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- For both of them, our anticipated cost is between 4 
and $5 million.  It's about four and a half. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- So you're saying, Mr. Minister, that for this pipeline from 
Buffalo Lake to the Cargill fertilizer development, it will cost Sask Water 
somewhere in the neighbourhood of $4.5 million.  The product that you're 
delivering of course is raw water from the lake, and for that product 
you're receiving $1.56 for every thousand imperial gallons, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, how much water will be taken from the lake through the 
pipeline for the development, on a daily basis? 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, the volume of water that they anticipate 
using is 720 million gallons annually, and that amounts to about 2 million 
gallons per day. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Minister, could you have your official translate that 
into cubic metres? 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, there are 330 decametres. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- 330 decametres.  Mr. Minister, I have in front of me some 
of the documents tabled by the Minister of Environment in regards to this 
plant.  I have in front of me here the final project proposal for the 
proposed nitrogen fertilizer plant at Belle Plaine, Saskatchewan, prepared 
for Saferco Products Inc. and submitted to your government, sir. 
 
Within this document, page 11 of section 3, this document would indicate 
that the quality of water required would be approximately 15,000 cubic 
metres per day.  Does that, sir, correspond with what you've just told me 
in saying that there's going to be 2 million imperial gallons per day? 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, if it's okay with the member opposite we 
will submit those exact numbers.  We're having a little bit of difficulty 
translating gallons to cubic feet per second to decametres here and we will 
be prepared to provide those answers to you. 
 



 

 

Mr. Calvert: -- Well, Mr. Minister, what I need to know this morning is 
which figure is accurate?  The material that the Minister of the 
Environment provided for this House, in the initial proposals the project 
called for somewhere in the neighbourhood of 10,000 cubic metres of water 
on a daily basis.  Then later in those same documents, we find a proposal 
that talks about 14,000 cubic metres on a daily basis. 
 
In this, which I believe is the final proposal dated August 10, 1989, I see 
a figure of 15,000 cubic metres per day.  Mr. Minister, can you just 
confirm for the committee what is the actual water demand?  Is this the 
actual figure?  Is this the correct figure that Sask Water is being asked 
to supply to the Cargill fertilizer plant? 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, one of the things that we have to think 
about when we're discussing this, we have a minimum and a maximum volume of 
water that will be consumed.  Our design suggestion from the Saskatchewan 
fertilizer plant has been that it is going to be 720 million gallons per 
year at maximum.  That's the maximum volume intake they will have.  So as 
they reduce production they will reduce the volume of water required. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Minister, I want to know if the figure that was put 
before this House through this project is the accurate figure.  Now this is 
the maximum demand figure -- 15,000 cubic metres per day.  Is that the 
figure that Sask Water is working with?  Sir, have you seen this report?  
Have you read it?  Is this the figure that Sask Water is working with?  
That's what I need to know. 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- We're putting 2 million gallons a day maximum into the 
Saskatchewan fertilizer plant. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Minister, does 2 million gallons a day translate into 
something like 18,000 -- 18,000 cubic metres? 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, we have indicated to the committee that 
the expectation by the Saskatchewan fertilizer plant on the delivery and 
the design of water from us will be 2 million gallons a day.  That's the 
maximum that they will be taking in on raw water. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I think I'm asking a very 
straightforward question.  You have your officials with you.  I need to 
know what that means in cubic metres. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Well figure it out yourself. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- No.  Mr. Minister, what does that mean in cubic metres so 
that we can talk apples and apples.  We're dealing with a report here, a 
proposal that deals with cubic metres.  Now please, Mr. Minister, translate 
the figure into cubic metres for us. 
 
(1100) 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm going to tell the committee again 
that I don't know of the report that he's reading from.  However, we have 



 

 

been asked by the fertilizer company, Saskatchewan fertilizer plant, to 
provide for them 2 million gallons per day.  That's what we've been asked 
to provide.  Now if you want to convert that, you can go and convert it. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I think I heard you say that you have 
never seen this document.  Now that shocks me, Mr. Minister.  Obviously a 
major component of this project is water -- a major component of this 
project is water. 
 
The person the corporation charged with delivering that water, the 
corporation that has agreed to deliver that water at a cost of 4.5 million 
to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan in construction and development, is the 
water corporation.  And you, the minister responsible, have not even seen 
the document, the project proposal from the Cargill fertilizer plant.  Mr. 
Minister, that's a shocking admission on your part. 
 
Mr. Minister, then have you done these calculations?  Given that you've 
admitted to the House this morning it will cost Saskatchewan Water 
Corporation somewhere in the neighbourhood of $4.5 million to install this 
pipeline, given that you'll be charging $1.56 per thousand imperial gallons 
delivered to the project, how long, Mr. Minister, do you expect it will 
take to pay this project off? 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, the taxpayer is not going to be carrying 
any of the cost of this.  The project is likely to be breaking even in the 
second year and will have paid for itself in 10. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Minister, you're saying that this project at delivering 
raw water at $1.56 per thousand square metres will pay for itself at $4.5 
million -- the $4.5 million project will pay for itself in 10 years.  I 
want to just confirm what you've just said. 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- The calculation of the industrial water use is on the 
basis of a thousand gallons, and that will pay for itself in 10 years. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Minister, how are you going to pay for the development 
of this project?  Will you be borrowing the funds to do this project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Yes. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- And, Mr. Minister, in your calculations then, it's going to 
be paid out in 10 years.  Have you taken into account the interest charges 
on $4.5 million? 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Yes. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Minister, will you confirm that Sask Water has been 
asked to provide, you say, 2 million gallons a day.  My calculation, Mr. 
Minister, since you wouldn't do it, shows that that's more accurately 9,090 
cubic metres -- 9,090 cubic metres.  That's what you've been asked to 
deliver; that's what you've said to the House today.  And yet within the 
body of this project report, it's indicated that the plant will require 
some 15,000 cubic metres per day.  How do you explain that difference, Mr. 



 

 

Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- In order for me to interpret the numbers, I would have 
to see whether that was a future expansion that the plant wanted to have or 
whether it was for the initial start-up, and it all relates to that volume 
of water provided.  We have been asked to provide a capacity for 2 million 
gallons per day. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Well, Mr. Minister, since you haven't seen this document or 
taken the time or trouble to read it, let me just quote it to you.  On page 
11 in section 3, "Water Supply, Storage, and Treatment:" 
 

 Raw water from Buffalo Pound Lake will be delivered directly to the site 
by a pipeline to be constructed by Saskatchewan Water Corporation (Sask 
Water).  The quantity of water required will be approximately 15,000 cubic 
metres per day at the maximum with the quality being directly related to 
Buffalo Pound Lake.  Saferco will treat the raw water on site. 

 
That's a quote.  I don't think that can be interpreted in any other way as 
to say that the maximum demand during the normal operation of the plant 
will be 15,000 cubic metres per day.  You're telling the House today that 
you've only been asked to deliver 2 million imperial gallons.  And it 
simply doesn't jibe, Mr. Minister.  So can you explain the difference? 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- What they're likely talking about is absolute peak 
production and when we design a project like this, we design it at an 
average volume pressure, all of the components taken into place on an 
average basis so that we can supply to the Saskatchewan fertilizer plant 
the $2 million a day.  And to be cost-effective you provide the . . . on a 
curve, you provide it on a basis where it's going to give you the most 
cost-effective way of delivering the water.  If later on they expand the 
plant to include a higher production than they are anticipating on an 
average basis, it may in fact hit that volume. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Well, Mr. Minister, if we take your figure of 2 million 
gallons a day, roughly 9,100 cubic metres a day or if I take the figure 
from the proposal document, of 15,000 cubic metres a day, no matter which 
figure we take we are talking about a substantial, a substantial quantity 
of water being taken from Buffalo Pound Lake for this project. 
 
Mr. Minister, you will know, or perhaps you don't, but I'll tell you that 
the average daily consumption for the whole city of Moose Jaw, the daily 
consumption for the whole city of Moose Jaw is 20,391 cubic metres.  If we 
use your figure this morning, you are being asked to deliver to the 
fertilizer plant, 50 per cent of the total consumption of the city of Moose 
Jaw on the same day.  If we use the figure included in the proposal 
submitted, that's in fact three-quarters of the total consumption of the 
city of Moose Jaw on a given day. 
 
Mr. Minister, I understand that Sask Water conducted some study related to 
this volume of water coming out of the Buffalo Pound Lake in the Qu'Appelle 
system regarding these volumes. It's indicated in the report here that the 
study concluded that this is an acceptable draw from the Qu'Appelle system 



 

 

in the Buffalo Pound Lake.  Mr. Minister, would you table for the committee 
this morning that study? 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- We can, Mr. Chairman, provide that internal review 
that we had, the information that we had, we can provide that to you.  We 
haven't got it here with us today.  It dealt with the source as Diefenbaker 
Lake and the volumes of water that could be provided through Buffalo Pound, 
the impact it would have on the flow below the dam, the volume in the 
Qu'Appelle system, and all of those factors.  And we can provide that to 
you.  We haven't got it with us here today. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Minister, how soon might I expect to receive that 
information? 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- This information was provided in an open house we had 
in Moose Jaw for people to come and view this, and we would be able to 
provide you with that probably next week some time. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Minister, I'm not asking for the results of your study.  
I would like the documentation behind the study, the entire documentation.  
Is that . . . I hope that's what you're committing to provide, not simply 
the result of the study.  I would like to see the documentation that goes 
around the study. 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, this internal review . . . we just went 
through the various aspects, as I indicated, to draw the information 
together.  And we will provide the internal review document that we set 
out. 
 
The allocation of Diefenbaker Lake is only allocated between 45 and 50 per 
cent, so there's high volumes of water left to . . . or open for 
allocations from Diefenbaker Lake, and so it's not really going to cause 
any serious problem there.  And I think we have to take that into 
consideration. 
 
But we will provide the review document that we put forward for you next 
week some time. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, in terms of waste 
water from the development, there have been, through the documents provided 
by the Minister of Environment, I see there has been several in the course 
of these discussions, several proposals for the waste water.  What is the 
final proposal to deal with the waste water from the industrial process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- The waste water component of the plant is not within 
the jurisdiction of Sask Water Corporation.  That's a question you'll have 
to address to the Minister of Environment, and he will deal with that and 
its relationship to the plant. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Well, Mr. Minister, one of the initial proposals was to 
discharge the waste waters into the Moose Jaw River.  Another of the 
proposals would have seen the waste water put in an underground aquifer.  
Are you saying that Sask Water has no concern or interest in this matter 



 

 

then? 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- The review is made by the Department of Environment, 
and they will tell us the water quality and standard that has to be met.  
And when we get a chance to see that, we'll take a look at it.  But we 
haven't been given that through the process yet. 
 
(1115) 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Minister, are you saying to the House this morning that 
when a proposal was before the Department of the Environment, a proposal 
that would have seen some of the waste water -- and I don't believe that's 
the current proposal but it did exist in 1988 -- that some of that water 
would find its way back into the Qu'Appelle system through the Moose Jaw 
River or into the underground aquifer. 
 
Are you saying that the Department of the Environment did not consult with 
Saskatchewan Water Corporation who is charged with the management of water 
in our province when those proposals were being discussed?  Are you saying 
that Sask Water never did any investigation or study into those proposals? 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, we are charged with the responsibility 
of measuring the water, licensing the water, but we're not committed or it 
hasn't been given to us, to manage the quality of the water.  And therefore 
the Department of Environment does that and that's what their 
responsibility is. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Minister, this morning in question period it was 
revealed that the Millar Western development has now changed its plan, and 
rather than taking water from the aquifer, will be taking water from the 
Meadow Lake.  Did the water corporation, has the water corporation done any 
study in regard to taking water from the Meadow Lake to the Millar Western? 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, the Millar Western asked us to do a 
review of the Meadow Lake, and we have assessed the hydrology of the lake 
and the area and our review has shown that there's no adverse impact on the 
lake. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Then, one, Mr. Minister, will you table for the committee, 
will you provide to the committee the documentation around that review, as 
you have agreed to table the information regarding the review for the 
Cargill plant?  Will you today or as soon as possible table that review 
regarding the use of the Meadow Lake for Millar Western? 
 
And secondly, Mr. Minister, do you anticipate that Sask Water will be 
engaged in providing any kind of a pipeline facility in the Millar Western 
example? 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- We can provide the information in the review to you 
next week too.  And your second question was whether we had been asked to 
provide facilities to move water.  That hasn't come to that point yet and 
we have not been asked yet. 
 



 

 

Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Minister, in the Millar Western example, would you be 
willing, if asked, to provide a pipeline or whatever is required to deliver 
water to that plant? 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, we will provide if we're asked.  The 
kinds of things that happen in an industrial water use is that they become 
very effective in paying themselves off and provide a positive cash flow 
for the water corporation. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Well it's obvious, Mr. Minister, that your government needs 
some examples of positive cash flows, and that's for sure. 
 
Mr. Minister, I'd like to spend just a few minutes on another cash flow 
that isn't quite so positive and that regards to the payments committed by 
the federal government. 
 
Regarding the Rafferty project, it's my understanding that $10 million has 
been promised by the federal government to your government.  Mr. Minister, 
have you received any of that federal money promised in regard to the 
Rafferty project and the withdrawal of the licence? 
 
 DHon. Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, we have received three payments from 
the federal government and they have all been on schedule. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Minister, how much did those payments amount to? 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- They were $1 million each. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Minister, what have you done or what is to be done?  
What are you doing with that $3 million, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, it's being held by the water corporation 
in trust and it's been invested in deposit. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Minister, what is the ultimate use of these funds that 
you have received from the federal government, and hopefully will receive 
the other $7 million from the feds?  What is your intention, the long-term 
intention for this money? 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- It is our intention, Mr. Chairman, to hold the volume 
of dollars until a decision by cabinet has been finalized and the project 
payments have been made as per scheduled. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Well, Mr. Minister, what options is your cabinet 
discussing?  What options are before you for this money? 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Number one, we have not been in completion of the 
agreement because the money has not all been brought forward.  When the 
money is brought forward we will then make a decision about what we're 
going to be doing with it. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Minister, it's not news that this money is coming -- $3 
million already has arrived and you've banked it, you've invested it.  Are 



 

 

you saying to the House this morning that you really don't have any plans 
for this money at this point?  Mr. Minister, we'd like to know what's going 
to happen to that $10 million. 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, the cabinet will make the decision when 
the project is completed and when the money is all in.  Then cabinet will 
make a decision about where the money will go. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Minister, the statutory funding for the Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation this year is cut by more than 50 per cent.  I recognize 
that a major cut in that funding has to do with the well drilling program 
and I think I can accept your explanation there that the demand on that 
program is much lower. 
 
But I have with me this morning, Mr. Minister, information that you 
provided to me regarding the farm dug-out pumping assistance program, for 
which I assume there is an ongoing and regular demand.  The information 
that you provided to me indicates that you have jacked up the rates on the 
rental of pumps and equipment and pipeline very significantly in this last 
year for farmers and landowners in the province of Saskatchewan.  Mr. 
Minister, can you explain to the farmers and landowners in the province of 
Saskatchewan why this dramatic, dramatic increase in the rates for the 
dug-out pumping assistance program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, the rates had only modestly increased 
from 1980 to 1986, and they remained constant from '86 to '89.  And during 
the '88 and '89 drought period, they were decreased by 50 per cent because 
of the demand and the sensitivity to the incomes of producers. 
 
And so now what we're doing -- and you mentioned this before about cash 
flow, that we needed to address some of these things -- and that is what we 
did in order to bring it back up to standard.  We brought it up to a 
reasonable rate to return back on the investment some of the money that we 
put into the pumps and the pipelines. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Now, Mr. Minister, you've said that the reasons that the 
costs were kept down were in a sense twofold -- because of the demand 
during the drought times and because of the farm income situation. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, the drought that we experienced in the past few years 
may be alleviated somewhat, but I tell you, the income situation on the 
family farm in Saskatchewan is not, and you know that, sir.  You don't need 
me to tell you that. 
 
Farmers across Saskatchewan have asked, why in the world is our water 
corporation doing this to us at this time in what are obviously difficult 
times?  When farmers across the province have seen their governments, 
provincial and federal, cutting any number of programs that have been of 
value and support to the farmers of our province, along comes Sask Water -- 
and not a large program, but yet another cut that directly affects the 
family farm in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, how can you justify to the family farmers of Saskatchewan in 



 

 

these times when you know well, sir, the price of grain in the province, 
when you know what the commodity prices are like, how can you justify in 
these times this kind of an increase on an extremely important and valuable 
service to farmers and landowners in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, when we were looking at 1988 and 1989 as 
it related to the drought in the province.  And a lot of the dug-out 
pumping is because of drought.  We took a serious look at whether we pay 
for an interim measure that would have an investment focus for the people 
who were going to be prepared to make an investment of moneys into a 
permanent water supply.  And we put $23 million in two years into putting 
permanent water supply in rural Saskatchewan, and that served 23,000 
people. 
 
Now the volume of that is going to reflect in the volume of use in the well 
pumping or the dug-out pumping program, and it's going to have a 
significant impact.  And we did that.  And I suspect because of more rain 
this year that we're going to have a lot less of that being used.  But I 
submit that I think we've dealt fairly with the producers in relation to 
the pumping and the drought assistance that we provided to them. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Minister, in the Crown corporation review of the water 
corporation, I left you that day with a number of questions and asked for 
your written response to those questions.  Mr. Minister, how soon might I 
expect a written response to those questions which I asked in the water 
corporation committee? 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, we've drafted some of the responses 
already and we probably can provide them to you next week, along with the 
other review material that we've suggested. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- I would appreciate that very much, Mr. Minister.  Then one 
final and relatively specific question. 
 
Mr. Minister, I had the opportunity earlier this week to visit in the south 
and west corner of our province.  And I'm aware that in the Val Marie and 
west Val Marie irrigation projects, the farmers down there have reseeded 
several hundreds acres of land into hay.  Given that the land is perhaps 
better suited for hay, I think the local farmers agree to that and indeed 
Sask Water has supported that move. 
 
But it's my understanding that this spring, Mr. Minister, some of those 
farmers have been forced to take water allocations and to irrigate this 
newly seeded land, in spite of the fact that it maybe already too wet.  
Sask Water, I understand, has forced those local farmers to do this, 
ignoring the objections that they've raised.  Mr. Minister, do you have 
information about this situation, and can you explain why Sask Water would 
be doing this in that west Val Marie irrigation area? 
 
(1130) 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- I guess, Mr. Chairman, I'm not sure exactly what you 
mean because I've been there.  I'm not too far away from there, and I've 



 

 

not heard anything about this.  Number one, I don't think that we run that 
water there because I think that's a PFRA (Prairie Farm Rehabilitation 
Administration) project.  And number two, we never force people to take 
water that they don't want to have. 
 
So they might have been putting water on ground down there that they had 
just seeded to grass in order to make it germinate because it was not wet 
enough. And you have to understand one other thing about the Val Marie 
flats is that they need a lot more water than normal because of the high 
clay content, and they will need to perhaps do that. 
 
Now we haven't heard anything from producers, but we would be prepared to 
investigate the observations you've made. 
 
Mr. Calvert: --  Mr. Minister, I'm happy to hear you say that and I would 
just ask your commitment that you would be in touch with those landowners 
in that area to discuss this concern with them and to do that as 
immediately as possible. 
 
Mr. Minister, with that I think we can move onto the votes. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 50 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1990 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Saskatchewan Water Corporation 
Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 50 

 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 50 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Funds Loans, Advances and Investments 
Saskatchewan Water Corporation 

Vote 140 
 
Items 1 and 2 statutory. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- I would like to thank the minister and his officials. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, I would also like to thank the minister and 
his officials who are here in the House today, and through those officials 
who are here today to thank all of those who are working with and for Sask 
Water all across the province of Saskatchewan.  They provide a valuable 
service to the people of Saskatchewan.  And if I may just add, Mr. 
Minister, those Saskatchewan Water Corporation employees who are located in 
the community that I'm privileged to represent, do indeed play an active 
role in our community and we welcome each one of them and thank them for 
their contribution to the city of Moose Jaw. 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, I would also like to thank my officials 
that are here, and also those people who work for Sask Water.  I believe, 
and honestly believe this, that they do an excellent job throughout the 
province. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 12 -- An Act to amend The Municipal Hail Insurance Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  In Bill 12 I am proposing to 
amend The Municipal Hail Insurance Act.  Copies of explanatory notes to 
this Bill outlining and explaining the proposed amendments, have been 
distributed to all members. 
 
The Municipal Hail Insurance Act first came into force in 1917.  Since that 
time rural municipalities wishing to participate in hail insurance have 
owned, operated, and controlled their own organization, the Saskatchewan 
Municipal Hail Insurance Association.  The Act regulates the terms and 
conditions under which municipalities may provide hail insurance.  The 
association writes about 40 per cent of the acres insured in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments are mainly in response to the association's 
requests for changes.  Hon. members will appreciate the importance of 
providing greater protection for farmers who insure through the 
Saskatchewan Municipal Hail Insurance Association, and whatever can be done 
must be done to protect our farmers at this most critical time in the 
history of agriculture in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan farmers will be better protected by the new Act 
in four important respects: firstly, through increased coverage to be more 
in line with farmers' actual production costs.  And I'm glad that the 
member from the opposition is paying attention to his rural constituency.  
Secondly, it broadens the definition of insurable crops to include canola, 
alfalfa, and other field crops which it may be necessary to include.  
Thirdly, by allowing specified crops to be exempt from assessment where 
coverage is already sufficient or not required.  And finally, by extending 
the period of indemnity for loss or damage as a result of fire, the crops 
which are still in the field beyond the normal cut-off for hail loss 
coverage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these changes mean enhanced protection, more realistic 
indemnity coverage for Saskatchewan farmers, and it's one more example of 
the government's unqualified support for our embattled agricultural sector.  
The proposed amendments do not affect the civil rights of Saskatchewan 
citizens, nor will additional administrative or other public costs be 
required. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now move second reading of Bill No. 12, An Act to amend The 
Municipal Hail Insurance Act, and I invite all hon. members to support 
these amendments. 



 

 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'd just like to say 
a few words on this Bill in regards to how it affects . . . how this 
government has been affecting agriculture in the last few years. 
 
Although there have been many, many minor changes and some small 
improvements, as along the lines of this Bill, I would just like to say 
that, you know, this government came up with about 80 cents an acre for a 
drought payment for Saskatchewan farmers after many, many months of 
dragging out the programs.  And a Bill like this, when the minister stands 
up and says how important it is to farmers and all the important things 
farmers have benefitted from from this government, it's a bit hypocritical 
because we have seen the number of foreclosures. 
 
And I would just like to ask the government, you know, there are many, many 
things that farmers are looking for, and one is leadership; one is 
long-term stability. 
 
Now Bills like this, although they help to some degree with, you know, 
marginally in changing names and there might be some minor improvements, 
the main thrust of the agriculture in Saskatchewan is the fact that there 
is no long-term stability or debt restructuring.  And I'd just like to say 
to the government that I would hope that they would get their act together.  
They can stand up and say how great they're doing by bringing in 
legislation, but the fact is, the most important part, the most functional 
part of agriculture is stability that is needed in rural Saskatchewan.  And 
that's what this government is simply not providing. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, although I have no problems with this Bill, I would just 
simply urge the government to reconsider their approach of deregulation, 
privatization, and actually eliminating population in rural Saskatchewan.  
There's 64 per cent of the towns and villages have lost populations last 
year, and that's indicative of the policies and the approach this 
government has taken. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I have no conflict with the Bill, but I would simply 
encourage the government to change its wrong-headed policies with regard to 
agriculture.  So I'll be willing at this time to let the Bill proceed. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee 
of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 30 -- An Act respecting the Saskatchewan Heritage Foundation 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- Mr. Speaker, the purpose of Bill No. 30 today is to 
establish a Saskatchewan Heritage Foundation, to assist the preservation 
and development of Saskatchewan's heritage resources and to build the 
province's heritage industry. 
 
The concept of a Saskatchewan Heritage Foundation, Mr. Speaker, was 
identified during a very lengthy public consultation process held over the 



 

 

past 18 months.  The process ended in the publication of the Heritage 2000 
strategy paper which was released at the Saskatchewan heritage conference 
in February of this year.  This strategy paper outlines, Mr. Speaker, the 
direction that the government wishes to proceed in the heritage field and 
also identifies the Saskatchewan Heritage Foundation as a very important 
component in protecting and developing the province's heritage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while governments at all levels work to protect and to develop 
their heritage, it is becoming evident that significant new sources of 
investment and revenue generation must be found in order to develop the 
heritage resources.  A major vehicle to create these opportunities is the 
Saskatchewan Heritage Foundation, similar to those that are now in 
existence in British Columbia, Alberta, and Ontario.  There they have 
proven to be very effective economic instruments for managing and 
developing the resources, and also, Mr. Speaker, for stimulating heritage 
tourism.  A Saskatchewan foundation will provide a bridge between the 
activities of government, the private sector in developing our province's 
heritage at the community level. 
 
(1145) 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a major role for communities to play in preserving 
this heritage and this is where the strength of the foundation lies.  By 
working with communities the foundation can provide support through the 
co-operative efforts of corporate sponsors and local initiative and 
government in order to preserve and to develop Saskatchewan's heritage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during the 1970s and the 1980s the emphasis of heritage 
programs in Saskatchewan has been on conservation and regulation to 
preserve our heritage.  In the 1990s Saskatchewan can now take a major 
initiative to develop those heritage resources which will benefit the 
province and its communities, both socially and economically. 
 
Reserved and developed sites, both at the provincial and local level, which 
tell Saskatchewan's story and symbolize its  accomplishments, will increase 
the province's visibility in the global market-place.  It will attract 
visitors, Mr. Speaker, from neighbouring provinces and the rest of the 
world.  And it will also help provide the citizens of Saskatchewan with a 
renewed and a strengthened sense of provincial pride. 
 
With those few comments, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 30, 
The Saskatchewan Heritage Foundation Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to make a few 
remarks with respect to this Bill.  And I would like to on the outset 
endorse the concept as outlined by the minister, and I would like to flag a 
couple of concerns that we have about the Bill and suggest a couple of 
improvements to it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would say that we are endorsing the principle of the Bill 
because of what it is set out to do, as indicated in the last few moments 



 

 

by the minister in charge.  The minister indicated that there have been 
successful models in Alberta and B.C., and I would say that anybody that's 
been to the British Isles has also . . . would bring back the concept and 
has noticed how this concept has been used in the British Isles with the 
National Trust that has been established to do a very similar thing on a 
much larger scale. 
 
So I think it is quite well founded to put a foundation like this into 
place to be sure that it . . . we are in this province laying the 
foundation for something that could eventually become our national trust 
here in Canada. 
 
As the minister mentioned, there's many ways of justifying the 
establishment of such a foundation.  It can be used as a teaching tool, it 
can be used as an attraction for tourism, certainly is something that helps 
us develop our pride in our province because it is something that we can 
use to preserve our culture.  It certainly can be used as something that'll 
draw business as well here to Saskatchewan. 
 
In order to do all that and to do it properly, I would think that we would 
want a foundation of this type to be independent.  Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to bring to the attention of the House and the minister and the 
general public, that there is already a vehicle in place to do exactly all 
of these things that I've mentioned and that the minister has mentioned.  
And all of that can already be done under the existing Heritage Property 
Act, the difference being that under the existing Heritage Property Act the 
minister has all the powers to do these things, to purchase heritage 
properties and to set up heritage properties; whereas under this Bill, it 
is given to a foundation which would be independent, and I can see . . . 
which could be independent. 
 
And I can see the advantage of having a foundation which would be 
independent, particularly when it comes to receiving bequeaths.  There may 
be people who would prefer to donate heritage properties or have heritage 
properties managed by government, directly under the minister, and there 
may be others who would prefer to have it managed by a foundation which is 
independent of government. 
 
So my concern then rests with some of the provisions in the Act, which 
prevent this Board from actually becoming and being completely at arm's 
length and completely independent.  And I would ask the minister, and 
perhaps we could have a conversation some time, whether she would consider 
amending this legislation so that the board would be completely at arm's 
length from the government.  That way we would have two vehicles in the 
province of Saskatchewan -- one directly under the purview of the minister 
and one completely at arm's length. 
 
Now let me relate how this Act now prevents that board from being 
completely independent.  In the Act there is provision for appointment of 
the board.  That board is to be appointed directly by cabinet.  There is no 
other provision as to who the nomination should come from or whether it 
should be broad based, and therefore any board that's appointed will be 
responsible to cabinet directly, as opposed to being responsible to the 



 

 

people of Saskatchewan through the agencies that are now in existence that 
have an interest in preserving our heritage properties. 
 
I would think that it would be an excellent move on the part of the 
minister to put right into legislation, that nominations be made to such a 
board by organizations which have been quite well established in 
Saskatchewan and who would have an interest in this. 
 
There is another provision in the Act here that gives the treasury board an 
override on this particular board and forces this board to abide by any 
directive pertaining to financial matters that the treasury board might ask 
for.  Once again, this provision makes this board responsible to cabinet -- 
or through the treasury board, that arm of the cabinet -- rather than being 
responsible to the board itself, rather than having autonomy. 
 
Let me flag some of the problems that can occur if this is not done.  If 
the minister appoints a board without any powers of independence, then this 
board can be . . . it has a possibility of being used, first of all, simply 
as a buffer.  If there are tricky decisions to make as to which property 
should be purchased or who should get funding through the board, the 
minister might want to direct . . . Instead of the minister taking the 
responsibility or the flak for the decision, the board is used to absorb 
that. 
 
Now that might be comfortable for the minister, but it's not necessarily 
comfortable and it's not comforting to us as a government . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- As a legislative body. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- As a legislative body here in Saskatchewan and as a people 
in Saskatchewan.  Thank you to my colleague from Moose Jaw. 
 
The corporation has the power to borrow money just by virtue of it being 
established as a corporation.  I would hate to see the government set up a 
system where they could sell existing properties of the government to gain 
cash flow to this particular board, which could conceivably happen under 
the way it's set up.  I would think that those checks and balances should 
be put into place so that that could never happen by just a government 
decree. 
 
There should be an independence to that board that would prevent any of 
that kind of thing happening.  See, there is a provision for the funnelling 
of, or the directing -- I'll reword that -- there's a provision that this 
board can accept moneys from the lottery funds.  There is also provision in 
this Act that the treasury board can direct moneys coming to this board to 
be diverted or placed in any particular place, could even be paid back to 
the government. 
 
Again, there's no check and balance in there, and the only balance that I 
can see that can be put in, and the most secure balance that I can see that 
can be put in to prevent any of that kind of thing happening, is to make 
sure that that board is completely at arm's length.  By putting the board 
completely at arm's length, not by direct appointment of anybody the 



 

 

minister chooses, would erase any suspicion of appointments being done on a 
patronage basis where the people that go in are actually party members as 
opposed to somebody that's directly interested in the heritage properties.  
We wouldn't want to see that happen. 
 
I want a board in particular that's -- I would flag this from our own 
experience of the last two years -- I want a board that's independent, 
that's prepared to speak up for the foundation against government policy 
when necessary.  We have had experience this year of a couple of boards 
that have been appointed directly by the government in the cultural field, 
and I'm thinking of a board -- the Western Development Museum Board and the 
Arts Board, Saskatchewan Arts Board -- which have had to cut their funding 
because of government mismanagement.  They have had to cut their programs 
because of government mismanagement and where the government has cut 
funding to the particular board. 
 
If that board had complete independence, it would not be hesitant 
whatsoever in putting a lot of pressure on the government and doing it 
publicly, which is what a board of that type should be able to do.  But if 
you are shackled by an appointment directly from the government without any 
other scrutiny, and shackled by directives from the treasury board, then 
you cannot be independent.  So, Mr. Speaker, I thank you for the 
opportunity to make my remarks on this particular Bill.  We are going to 
let this Bill proceed through because I do believe it has some . . . there 
are some positive things that can come of it. And I would like to be able 
to speak to the minister and ask her to consider making a couple of 
amendments or considering a couple of amendments to this Bill to make it 
100 per cent rather than just a 75 per cent Bill.  Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee 
of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 40 -- An Act to amend The Dangerous Goods Transportation Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Petersen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise today to move second 
reading of amendments to The Dangerous Goods Transportation Act and I want 
to outline for the hon. member some of the background to this Bill. 
 
In the 1980s governments enacted laws to regulated the movement of 
dangerous goods.  These laws set out requirements for shipments of 
dangerous goods to carry appropriate labels and placards.  In addition, 
documentation identifying the type and amount of the good was to accompany 
all dangerous goods shipments.  Safety training courses are mandatory for 
individuals involved in the handling or transportation of dangerous goods. 
 
Most of the responsibility for the regulation of dangerous goods 
transportation rests with the federal government.  The federal government 
controls all movements of dangerous goods by all modes except road.  In 
1985 Saskatchewan enacted its own law to regulate actual on-highway 
movement of dangerous goods.  In order to make the regulation of on-highway 
shipments as uniform as possible we adopted the federal regulations by way 



 

 

of reference. 
 
We left the regulation of the shippers and receivers to the federal 
government.  We hope to sign formal agreements with the federal government 
to divide the day-to-day responsibilities for inspecting dangerous-goods 
shippers and receivers; however, the federal government was precluded from 
signing an agreement to cover our interprovincial shippers as it would have 
offended the equal application sections of the Charter of Rights and 
Freedoms. 
 
(1200) 
 
As a result, federal regulations are not being applied to shippers of 
dangerous goods solely within Saskatchewan.  This is as a result of last 
year Ontario court rulings which struck down federal regulation of many 
interprovincial shippers.  The decisions indicated the legislation did not 
apply to a company using its own trucks.  Transport Canada has advised they 
can only regulate shippers who use common carriers.  The federal government 
is working on changes to their law to cover all shippers, but it will take 
up to two years for this to occur.  Even then they may have legal 
difficulties extending their jurisdiction to shippers whose dangerous goods 
do not leave the province. 
 
The Bill before us fills the gap in dangerous-goods coverage created by the 
court decisions and the absence of administrative agreements.  The Bill 
extends the application of transportation of dangerous goods Act to 
shippers of dangerous goods in Saskatchewan.  I'd be pleased to answer 
members' questions in detail when we are in committee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of an Act to amend The Dangerous Goods 
Transportation Act. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise only to adjourn the debate.  This 
Bill was just very recently tabled in the House -- I think yesterday or the 
day before -- but I want my colleague, the minister in charge of Highways, 
who'll be asking pointed questions and maybe speaking to it in second 
reading, to have an opportunity to review the Bill.  So I would ask for 
leave to adjourn. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 31 -- An Act to amend The Urban Municipality Act, 1984 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Would the minister care to introduce her officials. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- Thank you. Mr. Chairman.  Today I have with me the 
deputy minister of Human Resources, Gerry Meier, who is secretary of the 
Women's Secretariat; I have behind him, Norma Reynolds, our senior policy 
analyst; and beside our deputy minister is Pat More, the chief financial 
advisor.  Joan Peterson, the director, will in all likelihood be joining us 
later. 



 

 

 
Mr. Chairman, it is our mistake.  We are not into the estimates for the 
secretariat.  I will bring in the other officials. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Would the minister care to introduce her officials to us 
please? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have with me the assistant 
deputy of the Department of Urban Affairs, Mr. Keith Schneider, and behind 
him I have Mr. Jim Anderson. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, the other 
day in discussion on second reading, Hansard shows an hon. member 
interjecting during the debates saying that, in reference to the Bill, "It 
has nothing to do with shopping."  Can I ask you what prompted this Bill? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- Mr. Chairman, as I recall the discussion between the 
two members and the issue that came up, I think what we were discussing 
that day as I recall was second reading, and it had to do with by-law votes 
and petitions.  I think that was the point to be made by the hon. member 
from Regina South.  And I think it was a very valid point.  Any petitions 
can be on various items not necessarily store hours. 
 
Having said that, what has brought us to this point today, in looking at 
this legislation, is in fact the petitions that are now before Regina city 
council and the vote to be taken that arose out of the store hour 
situation.  So I guess in summary, Mr. Chairman, I think both members were 
right and I didn't see it as a big point of argument at all. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Well neither did I, Madam Minister, but I did want to 
get that clear because I thought for a sec here that we were discussing 
different Bills. 
 
In your explanation you indicate that the amendments will enable a council 
to structure all the conflicting by-laws on a single ballot.  And the 
emphasis here is on enabling a council to structure the conflicting 
ballots.  Alternatively, as I understand it, council can continue to use an 
existing provision of The Urban Municipality Act which allows a council to 
apply to the court for an order to more clearly express the intent of 
petitioners. 
 
So on the one hand, if there's a conflict in by-laws, a council can 
structure the ballots; on the other hand, if there's some confusion about 
the wording of a petition, then the councils shall go to the courts if they 
feel that a by-law needs clarification. 
 
And the question that I have is why wouldn't you be consistent in this 
matter. That is to say that if a council wants to structure by-laws, why 
not have them go to the courts for that as well? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I'm not sure, and I would think 



 

 

that the member, having sat on Regina city council, would want greater 
flexibility than simply putting everything to the court.  I mean after all, 
you as an elected councilman or alderman in a responsible position of local 
government, surely to goodness should have the leeway to be making some 
decisions. 
 
Now the court, when it comes to the wording of some petitions or by-laws, 
may very well be useful for a council.  But to say that all of it should go 
to the court, I think takes away from the flexibility and does not 
recognize in fact the differences that councils may face at a variety of 
times on petitions before them.  If it is a matter of interpretation of a 
petition that is unclear in its wording and it's one petition, you may 
think that the court is the best place to go for that. 
 
In terms of this case, we looked at not being able to change the wording of 
the petition but simply allowing council to put a preliminary question if 
in fact there was going to be conflicting petitions that would arrive at 
that by-law, and you could conceivably end up with no vote . . . or no 
direction at all coming out of the vote. 
 
So in fact what this does, it's not a matter of restructuring or changing 
the wording on the petitions, but it is a matter of letting council put a 
preliminary question up there that would in fact give direction on 
conflicting petitions. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Well I indicated earlier that I'll support the Bill, 
but I did want to get some clarification of this issue because it seems to 
me, whether you're structuring ballots or whether you're seeking to clarify 
the intent of wording, both are designed to do the same thing, and that is 
to clarify the choices for electors so that the electors will have a clear 
choice and that there is less doubt than there might have been on the final 
outcome of any ballot. 
 
Whether it's a single ballot or whether it's a . . . that is to say a 
ballot with one question or a ballot that has a number of different 
questions on it and also a preliminary question, the intent is to clarify 
the choices for electors.  And whether that's in wording or the structure 
of a ballot, both are intended to do the same thing. 
 
And in the one case you're saying to the councils, well you should refer to 
the courts on the wording; in this case, you're saying you should go to the 
councils. 
 
And I don't necessarily have any strong feelings on that, but I'm just 
wondering about the discrepancy in the two.  I think one might reasonably 
argue that as with the wording of a ballot where it's seen necessary that a 
council should refer to the courts because a council may have a heavy 
investment in the existing order of things, the council, or a heavy 
political investment in the existing order of things . . . council has 
worked over years to structure things in a certain way; have a heavy 
emotional, a heavy time investment in the status quo. 
 
This is now being challenged by a petition from a group of citizens.  



 

 

Obviously the intent of the legislation here is that maybe a council should 
refer to a third party if there's some confusion about the wording so as to 
make sure that there can be no sort of potential for conflict between a 
council's own political investment in the status quo and a challenge to the 
status quo as being posed by a petition from a number of citizens.  It 
seems to me that the same points would apply to the matter of structuring a 
by-law.  And that's why I'm raising the question. 
 
Again, like I don't have any strong feelings on that, but I am trying to 
understand what seems to me to be a minor discrepancy now in the 
legislation. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- I don't believe that there are in fact discrepancies.  
I think it's two different situations. 
 
For example, the petitions that are now before Regina council, if you read 
them, are very clearly stated.  There is no need to send them to court 
under the present legislation that talks about, when the council is of the 
opinion that a change in the wording of a petition received, would more 
clearly express the intent of the petitioners.  I think the intent of the 
petitioners is very clear on each of those petitions.  So going to court to 
clear them up would not be appropriate.  They are clearly stated. 
 
The issue before us today and before the Regina city council is the fact 
that they have three conflicting petitions that you, conceivably at the end 
of the day on the vote, come up with no clear direction to city council as 
to the by-law. 
 
(1215) 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- I guess we could debate this one for some time.  A 
council may also, in their best interests, say that even though it may be 
apparent to some that there's a conflict in by-laws being put to the 
electors that they don't perceive any such by-laws in their own interest, 
may decide that we're not going to structure the ballot in that way. 
 
I mean, one could argue that.  But I hear what you're saying, I hope that 
you hear what I'm saying and, again, I've said that I support the Bill and 
this side will support the Bill, but I simply raise the points. 
 
The only other question I have today is:  why has it taken you so long to 
come up with the legislation recognizing that the city of Regina had been 
going through very difficult discussions at their council level about how 
to deal with the matter of the conflicting by-laws they had; when would be 
the best time to conduct a vote, would it be this spring, would it be this 
fall.  How should they deal with the outcome of the ballots and so on.  It 
seems to me that you could have saved them a lot of time and trouble if you 
had signalled your intentions sometime sooner than this about yes, we're 
prepared to assist you with an amendment to the Act as the one that we're 
now discussing.  Recognizing that, as I understand it, the amendments that 
we have before us are in large part are not a reinvention of the wheel but 
are amendments that are in place in other provinces and, therefore, it 
shouldn't have taken you six months to get this matter to the stage that 



 

 

it's at now. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- The member is right, Mr. Chairman, it has been what 
seems like a long time, particularly for Regina city council that was 
trying to sort this out and knowing that they had to go to a vote.  There 
are several reasons.  You may debate the reasons; nevertheless, it's a 
reality of the situation. 
 
I believe it was sometime early winter when this was first raised with me 
-- towards the beginning of 1990 by the Mayor and others from Regina city 
council.  And we had a very good discussion on it.  At that point in time I 
said that I would look at the petition and the situation they were in and 
go back and review with the officials what was presently in legislation.  
However, I was not going to raise their hopes.  I was of the mind that one 
should not second guess how the voters are going to react to any question 
put before them. 
 
We also had within that review an opportunity to look at the question of 
petitions that could have been left off the vote.  That in fact they were, 
for all technical reasons were not valid, whether it was that they didn't 
meet the 5 per cent or there was a couple of other technicalities.  And we 
looked at that: what happens if they only have one petition if in fact 
there were two that didn't have to be on there. 
 
I had some discussion with some other elected people outside of Regina 
council as to their views on petitions and what might fix the situation.  
And at that point I had indicated to Mr. Archer that my preference was to 
not bring in anything at this time, that I was going to hold on not making 
that judgement on how the voters would vote. 
 
A short time after that it was raised with me again.  And some papers were 
shown: what happens if you vote this way on this petition, what happens if 
you vote this way  
 Dand that way. 
 
And so it was back to the discussion table not only with the officials, but 
with Mayor Archer.  At that time I acknowledged that in fact it was going 
to probably be a problem, and in our discussions with the Department of 
Urban Affairs officials I had asked them to look at the alternatives or 
options to how this might be corrected so that in fact Regina city council 
wasn't left holding the bag in error and that the voters were not left 
having voted and wondering what they had voted for. 
 
At that point, Urban Affairs officials went to work in consultation with 
some of the officials from Regina city hall, and recommendations were 
brought forth to my office, and the recommendation being that we draft some 
legislation.  And at that point the member will know that I was gone for 
approximately four to five weeks and the matter was dealt with after my 
arrival back.  I know that it put Regina city council in some short time 
lines but that is the situation as it happened. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 



 

 

Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 32 -- An Act to amend The Local Government Election Act 
 
Clauses 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 31 -- An Act to amend The Urban Municipality Act, 1984 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 31 be now read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 32 -- An Act to amend The Local Government Election Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 32, item no. 9, be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Women's Secretariat 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 41 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Would the minister introduce her officials. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  With me today is Gerry Meier, 
the deputy minister of human resources and secretary to the Women's 
Secretariat.  Beside him is Pat More, the chief financial advisor.  And 
immediately behind Mr. Meier is Norma Reynolds, our senior policy analyst. 
 
Item 1 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.  Well I'm glad to see that 
the government is involved in parity with respect to staff to the Women's 
Secretariat. 
 
Mr. Chair, the point I wish to make this afternoon is the fact that this 
government has been silently reorganizing the functions in government that 
pertain to women and which served the interests of women since 1982.  And 
in the process it has in effect been downgrading issues relating to women.  
And while they have been juggling positions back and forth between 
departments, they've lost a clear focus on the issues and problems facing 
women today.  And we will be illustrating that as we go through the 
estimates on this particular area. 



 

 

 
I would like to give a little bit of history as to what has happened to the 
Women's Secretariat over the years.  And this was very aptly set out by the 
Saskatchewan Action Committee on the Status of Women recently, and I just 
want to use their documentation in order to put an analysis of the . . . or 
a statement of the historical facts with respect to the juggling that has 
gone back and forth with respect to this division, on the record. 
 
In 1982, Mr. Chair, the women's division had 18 staff positions.  When it 
was abolished and reorganized in 1983, two positions were lost and the rest 
of the branch was divided up.  Two positions went to the labour standards 
branch, six positions went over to the Public Service Commission, and eight 
positions went to the women's services branch in advanced education and 
manpower. 
 
In 1984 the Women's Secretariat was created.  It had five staff positions 
-- a director and four professional staff.  In January 1986 the women's 
services branch of advanced education and manpower was transferred to the 
employment development agency.  In April 1986 the women's secretariat 
amalgamated with the women's services branch and the revised women's 
secretariat had a staffing component of 13.  In February '87 the women's 
secretariat moved into the Department of Human Resources, Labour and 
Employment.  In April of the same year it lost four positions at roughly 
the same time.  The employment equity branch within the Public Service 
Commission was abolished and five positions were lost. 
 
(1230) 
 
In July '87 the secretariat was renamed the women's directorate to reflect 
the changes that occurred.  Between '82 and '87 the number of positions in 
government serving women's interest were reduced by half, from 18 to 9. 
 
In its '89-90 budget, the directorate received a substantial budget cut and 
lost more staff.  And in October '89 when the directorate once again became 
the Women's Secretariat, the staffing component was 7.5 person-years.  
However as I understand -- and the minister can clarify this -- only six 
positions at the agency are presently filled. 
 
Now I believe, Mr. Chair, that this very short history illustrates two 
things:  a lack of commitment on the part of this government to women's 
issues in terms of human and financial resources, and an utter lack of 
continuity in policy direction.  Because of all the shuffling that 
occurred, countless of dollars of public money have been spent simply on 
changing letterhead, Mr. Minister. 
 
In 1982, Mr. Minister, the women's division had a budget cut -- Mr. Chair, 
rather -- the women's division had a budget cut of 800 . . . had a budget, 
I'm sorry, of $886,400, and in 1990 the Women's Secretariat has only 
$539,600.  After eight years of Tory government, spending on women, Mr. 
Chair, is down by approximately 39 per cent.  And I think that indicates 
that this government does not have a real commitment to women's issues and 
to matters that concern women. 
 



 

 

And I believe that that's evidenced in the fact that we have, for example, 
no real policy with respect to the high, shockingly high rate of teen 
pregnancies in this province; no real policy with respect to the 
single-parent mothers who are heading families and who are having 
difficulty putting food on the table; no pay equity plan or any indication 
of a game plan with respect to pay equity, Mr. Chair, in this province.  We 
see very poor conditions with respect to child care. And the list goes on 
and on. 
 
And that's simply, Mr. Chair, because this government has had no real 
policy direction, no real initiatives to solve many of these problems, and 
simply has not made women's problems a priority. 
 
Now I would like to ask the Madam Minister whether or not she can tell us 
what the department intends to do with its budget allotment this year. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- Mr. Chairman, I have some appreciation for the hon. 
member's comments. I say that with caution.  I think one has to take 
perhaps a deeper look at the history of women in this province as it 
relates in particular to government, government services, and the role that 
government plays regarding women. 
 
The member has been fairly critical of the Women's Secretariat and where it 
is today, and I'm not sure if it's because she has not looked at the entire 
history where this started out and where it has moved to.  I would like to 
state that prior to 1981, the women's bureau . . . and that's what we had, 
the hon. member from Saskatoon Fairview may well remember back in those 
days if he was deputy minister.  In fact, it was established to enforce 
equal pay.  That was its purpose, to enforce equal pay at the time that it 
was started.  Later, maternity leave legislation I believe was added and 
came under that umbrella. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I think that as the movement goes and as society goes, 
that in fact followed what was happening in society and what the issues 
were that were facing women in terms of priorities at that time.  In 1983, 
Mr. Chairman, the women's division in the Department of Labour in fact was 
reorganized.  The member can say it was shuffled here and there -- it was 
reorganized.  Because after a thorough review, and I think if the member 
were to be honest within herself, a lot of women including women that at 
one time were in the Saskatchewan action committee group and other women 
groups in the province had stated that they often felt isolated from the 
main stream of government policy, development, and decision making. 
 
So we reviewed the matter in consultation with various people and some 
groups.  And the question that I asked myself as a woman -- at that time 
there was five in the Legislative Assembly; I believe five were on the 
government side at that time -- do we want to keep this approach?  Has it 
in fact served its purpose, and is the purpose now much broader than simply 
the issue of enforcement of equal pay or for that matter maternity leave?  
And I believe, Mr. Chairman, that the answer to that question, yes it is.  
It's a much deeper issue than simply equal pay and women's access to 
government, and all the other issues that have been put into women's 
issues, Mr. Speaker, is much more than equal pay or legislation on 



 

 

maternity leave. 
 
So in looking at that review, Mr. Speaker, it was January 1, 1984, that the 
Women's Secretariat was established.  And yes, it did not come with all the 
positions.  I believe there was 16 positions in '82.  In 1980 there were 
18; by 1982 there were 16 positions in the Department of Labour, and I'm 
sure the member from Saskatoon would remember that too. 
 
Those positions did not all go to the secretariat, Mr. Chairman.  We took a 
look at what we wanted to set out to do, what the goal was, and to work 
within government.  It became very clear, Mr. Chairman, that there was some 
antagonism.  There were some brick walls up in government, for whatever 
reason as it related to women moving through the public service into middle 
management and more particularly into senior management.  There was a 
problem, Mr. Chairman, with the number of women that were on boards and 
commissions.  You know, when I came into this government in 1982 I found 
out to my amazement that there was only on boards and commissions, 9 per 
cent of the total boards and commissions in this province consisted of 
female -- 9 per cent.  Today, Mr. Chairman, it is almost 33 per cent in 
1990. 
 
Now how do we get so that we even get close to having a fair say?  Nine per 
cent of the population of boards and commissions, Mr. Chairman, is not a 
lot; 33 per cent, it could be better -- 40 per cent or 50.  That equal 
balance, Mr. Chairman, is a worthwhile goal in fact to be pursuing. 
 
But we looked at some of the issues.  The one thing that was made clear in 
talking to various people, men and women in the civil service back then, 
Mr. Chairman, was that there was the perception that the women's 
directorate within the Department of Labour at that time was felt to play a 
very adversarial role in working with other government departments.  In 
fact, Mr. Chairman, I would go so far to say there was not a whole lot of 
co-operation between many departments and the Department of Labour and the 
women's bureau when it was in the Department of Labour. 
 
One of our goals in fact was to bring this out of the adversarial arena.  
Many of them felt that the women's bureau had become a watch-dog.  As 
opposed to putting forth something very positive and something that 
everybody could come together on to discuss and have a common goal, it was 
felt to have a watch-dog approach.  So all those factors, Mr. Chairman, 
were taken into consideration in looking at whether it remain the women's 
bureau in the Department of Labour or moving it into the secretariat. 
 
The secretariat I think served its purpose in terms of facilitating within 
government departments and playing a fairly high profile role in getting 
departments to understand the issues that were directly of concern to women 
and also to men, to ensure that some changes took place. 
 
I think in the beginning of the secretariat, that worked well, and I think 
of things like working with the Public Service Commission and putting into 
place some affirmative action programs in dealing with middle management 
and in fact senior management, the educational leave.  You know, Mr. 
Chairman, why was it that if there were educational leaves to take place or 



 

 

there were seminars to go, there was not a lot of women that got to go to, 
for example, increasing your organizational skills at the administrative 
level.  It might be something else -- writing skills.  Very seldom would it 
include anything to do with the budgetary process of government or what 
some would say the hard-line administrative functions.  And of course women 
needed that experience in order to be able to get into that senior 
management area. 
 
Along with working in the Public Service Commission, Mr. Chairman, we took 
a look at some of the issues, for example the violence against women, 
violence within families.  We brought together for the first time the 
Department of Health, Department of Social Services, Education, in dealing 
with that issue along with the Department of Justice. 
 
There was a multitude of responsibilities around government departments and 
also outside agencies such as law enforcement, the RCMP, health 
institutions, the emergency wings, the professionals that deal with them, 
transition houses, community groups -- not only for the victims, Mr. 
Chairman, but also for those people that found themselves on the other end, 
counsellors. 
 
Policy was developed in conjunction with institutions, outside agencies, 
and various departments.  Now I don't know how the member from Regina 
Lakeview would approach in getting issues that impact on more than one 
department and recognizing the preventive side of it, which is where the 
issue of education came in, but that was the approach that we took. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, I believe it was relatively successful.  I think today 
the work carries on and in fact you are seeing more and more of the 
initiative come from those people that deal directly with either the abused 
or the abuser.  And that is as it should be, Mr. Chairman. 
 
I think about the issue of education and I believe that that's where the 
emphasis must remain in dealing with women's equality.  It is on education, 
Mr. Chairman.  And only through education and that awareness level, 
including the formal educational opportunities that women can have, are 
they going to get to that point where indeed there is some pay equity and 
there are no more ghettos that women are working in and that the work that 
they do is recognized as valuable as the man working next to them. 
 
(1245) 
 
Mr. Chairman, when the secretariat was in place, there was another issue, 
as I recall, in getting various departments to work together, and it was on 
the issue of pensions.  And along with the Department of Finance, the 
Department of Social Services, the senior citizens' advisory council, and 
others, the issue of elderly women and poverty . . . Mr. Speaker, up until 
that point, I believe there had been several years running where there had 
been no increase on the Saskatchewan supplement for seniors. 
 
When you look at the payments of what we call Saskatchewan income 
supplement, Mr. Chairman, the statistics will show you that in fact the 
majority that collect that supplement are elderly women, single.  We took a 



 

 

look at what happens in the future.  We all live longer, ageing population, 
those kinds of issues, Mr. Chairman, and we took a look at women, say, from 
40 to 55, a much different generation than what we see today.  Many of them 
have been in the home for a very long period of time, no work skills, often 
are faced at the end of a long marriage, either separation or widowhood, no 
money, no way of supporting.  And eventually they come to the basic 
pension, and that's where the issue of can we do better on those that are 
not in the work-force, do not have access to a government pension plan, 
civil service pension plan, teacher pension plan or whatever. 
 
Granted there are more women in the work-force than there are home-makers.  
The home-makers make up, though, a fairly hefty . . . I think it's about 25 
per cent of the female population.  And that's considerable when you think 
that those are often the very women that in fact end up at an older age and 
in poverty. 
 
We looked at the issue of the income of women, women that are not actively 
in the work-force.  We looked at the women that are in fact maybe part-time 
clerical.  Pay isn't particularly high; in fact, it's low, and no pension 
plans. 
 
And so the pension plan came into being, Mr. Chairman, the first in Canada.  
And I might add for the benefit for this Legislative Assembly, it has had a 
great deal of interest from many provinces in looking at how they might 
address that very issue.  That pension plan, Mr. Chairman, is not just for 
women.  There are also men that are not in pension plans, don't necessarily 
have that opportunity.  Low income can benefit with the government match. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, in terms of the approach of the secretariat, it has been 
one of facilitating; it has been one of bringing people together in a 
non-adversarial arena.  And if the issue of equity for women is ever going 
to be addressed, it will not be in an adversarial arena, but something much 
different. 
 
And I believe the issues have moved along.  I believe that the member from 
Moose Jaw North has no difficulty in terms of women's equality and women 
working along beside him.  I can say the same thing with the member from 
Regina South.  But I also know, in realistic terms, that there are still a 
lot of people around, Mr. Chairman.  There is still some room to go, Mr. 
Chairman, until it's 100 per cent. 
 
The upcoming activities over this next year with the secretariat, I will go 
over with the member.  I have asked the secretariat some months ago to take 
a look and a thorough review of the situation in Ontario and Manitoba as it 
relates to pay equity.  It's interesting to note that Manitoba is, I 
believe, having some difficulty with it, and we do not know why yet, but we 
will pursue further discussions to find out.  Ontario is not without some 
difficulties also. 
 
And I have not had an opportunity yet to sit down with the respective 
ministers from those two provinces nor the minister from Alberta, I 
believe, who was also looking at a system of pay equity.  I think the 
member knows that pay equity is also defined in different terms depending 



 

 

where it is.  And I will be looking at the various programs, because there 
are a variety right across North America -- not all the same, but some of 
them having different points. 
 
This year, Mr. Chairman, the focus within the secretariat, besides 
reviewing that issue, there will be several others.  The emphasis will 
continue to remain on education, but our focus will be targeted to young 
women -- young women through the education system; young women graduating 
from grade 12 going into university, the career counselling that goes with 
it; young women in high school in terms of the electives that they choose 
to take, the encouragement of the mathematics and the sciences.  And of 
course that will be done in conjunction with the Department of Education. 
 
Those are the two areas that are of most concern in terms of a list of 
priorities, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I thought I might intervene in 
response to some of the remarks made by the minister with respect to the 
development of the women's program within the Department of Labour during 
the 1970s.  Because, Madam Minister, your facts are not entirely accurate, 
and I think it probably important that I make this intervention not only 
for the public record but for your information, so that you can better 
understand the roots of what you're now attempting to administer. 
 
The women's bureau that you referred to in your remarks had existed in the 
Department of Labour for quite some long period of time, and you are 
correct in saying that the women's bureau was charged with the specific 
function of administering that part of the labour standards that dealt with 
the equal pay for similar work as well as for maternity leave provisions.  
And that was the case from the time that those standards were first 
introduced into The Labour Standards Act. 
 
In 1976 or 1977 -- and I've just forgotten as I stand here -- in 1976 the . 
. . You were correct, I was the deputy minister, and the government of the 
day made the decision to dramatically expand the women's program in the 
department of labour.  As part of that reorganization, it is correct that 
the responsibility for enforcing the equal pay provisions of The Labour 
Standards Act and the maternity leave provisions were given over to the 
women's division. 
 
But, Minister, the function of that division was much, much larger than 
that.  The mandate of that division was cast in very broad terms, and the 
division was concerned with a great deal more than the mere enforcement -- 
I say mere -- I mean, than the enforcement of the equal pay provision.  And 
one of the features of the women's division that was so much admired by 
governments across Canada was the fact that in Saskatchewan this women's 
division, this women's organization, had not only the responsibility for 
policy development with respect to women's questions and for activities 
involving the community and the promotion of the interests of women and the 
heightening of consciousness, but, Minister, it also had that enforcement 
arm in it, that responsibility to specifically enforce those labour 



 

 

standards that were specific to women.  And you, I think, would accept my 
word for it, Minister, that this was much much admired by provinces such as 
Ontario, Quebec, British Columbia, and Manitoba -- to name four that I can 
specifically remember.  Much admired for that. 
 
But I do want to emphasize that the women's division, as it developed in 
the Department of Labour from 1976 to 1979, when I was there and in the 
subsequent years until 1982, had a very broad and extensive program, a 
program designed to heighten the consciousness of Saskatchewan people with 
respect to women's issues, to bring to the people and to all of the 
government agencies and departments and indeed all groups in our society a 
lot of information with respect to women's issues -- discrimination against 
women, pay problems, home care problems.  I mean the list goes on and on 
and on.  And your officials, at least two of them, were around at the time 
and will recall these programs quite specifically. 
 
And I must say, Minister, that of all of the things that I was involved in 
in my five years with the Government of Saskatchewan, I believe that the 
formation of the women's division in the Department of Labour was certainly 
my proudest, my best achievement, my proudest achievement.  And I couldn't 
help but rising and interfering in the discussion between you and my 
colleague from Regina Lakeview to correct that record because I believe in 
fairness. 
 
You would agree that it was quite a dramatic move for its time -- we're 
talking about 1976 -- and that the program, while we were not universally 
loved, we were at least respected for doing very, very significant work in 
the promotion of the status of women in employment and in the home and with 
respect to a wide variety of problems that women face in our society.  And 
I wanted to intervene to make those comments, Minister. 
 
I also want to say that one of the things that surprised me was the early 
moves by this government with respect to that division.  And I refer 
specifically to the firing of the executive director of that division, 
Lynne Pearson.  Lynne Pearson was the first executive director of the 
women's division and she was in that position for about six years, I 
believe. 
 
And you will recall, Minister, when your government came to power, one of 
the first things it did was conduct the most broad-ranging and severe 
firing of civil servants that has ever occurred in the history of this 
province.  And one of the victims of that brutal policy was this same Lynne 
Pearson. 
 
Lynne Pearson's one of the least political people that I've ever met, in 
the sense of being a partisan supporter of any party.  To this day, I have 
no notion of what her politics were, but I do know that she was one of the 
finest civil servants with whom it was ever my experience to work.  And 
proof of that is that after her firing she was picked up by the federal 
government where she's had a spectacular career, Minister.  You will recall 
that she was the director of the Western Development Office in Saskatoon 
for some years and she has now been transferred to Ottawa, and she's a 
rising star in the bureaucracy of the federal government. 



 

 

 
I wanted to record that because it's my first opportunity to do that with 
respect to Lynne Pearson, who as I say, was one of the finest public 
servants with whom it was ever my pleasure to work. 
 
Now, I want to say also, Minister, and I want to ask you whether you're 
aware of this, that one of the problems that we were studying in the 
women's division in the 1970s, during the period from '76 to '79, was this 
problem of pay equity, was the question of the use of various techniques in 
order to ensure that pay discrimination against women ended.  And the work 
that we did did not result in any legislation, but was very important 
pioneering work in this area. 
 
And finally, I want to respond to your remarks about whether this provision 
was universally loved.  That's my term and not yours.  But you were making 
reference to that, and I have to admit that we were not.  And that was 
deliberately so, Minister, it was part of our mandate to be very aggressive 
about these questions because the road-blocks in society are so high when 
it comes to women and the problems that they face.  And the road-blocks 
have been there so long and the prejudices so deep and the discrimination 
is so ingrained, so ingrained that most of us don't even realize that we 
have these prejudices and that we carry them around with them.  And to 
tackle those obstacles are -- and I know that know you this, Minister -- a 
formidable task, a formidable task. 
 
And so when we launched the women's division in the Department of Labour, 
it was specifically intended that this would be a program that would be 
aggressive, that we weren't just some kind of facilitators that would get 
people together in meetings and have little discussions and that sort of 
thing, but rather that we would try and lead the way, that we would try and 
create pressure, that we would try and change long-standing traditions and 
long-standing habits. 
 
(1300) 
 
And we did that, Minister, and I'm sure that when you came along you found 
that there were significant parts of the Government of Saskatchewan and the 
Crown corporations that had run up against the women's division and had 
been shaken up by it and were really quite pleased if the new government 
would do something about this aggressive band of individuals who then 
numbered some 18. 
 
And, Minister, the final point I want to make is that of those 18 people, I 
believe that only two or three of them were concerned with the enforcement 
of the equal pay standard.  Now that was certainly the case in 1979 when I 
left.  And all of the other bodies, all of the other 15 or 16 bodies were 
concerned with issues that were not the enforcement of equal pay, that were 
in fact engaged in research and outreach activities and educational 
activities covering the broad, broad range of women's problems. 
 
Now, Minister, the question that I have, as I sit down, is: to what extent 
is your secretariat involved in education and outreach activities in the 
community outside government?  To what extent are you carrying the torch, 



 

 

as it were, for change that will result in elimination of discrimination as 
far as women are concerned, and in the solution of some of the very 
formidable obstacles that women still face in our society? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- Mr. Chairman, I will just briefly . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- It now being past 1 o'clock the committee will rise and 
report progress. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 1:04 p.m. 
 


