















































Hansard: March 27, 1990


 

 

 
March 27/90 
 
 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It gives me a great deal of pleasure 
today to introduce to you, and through you to members of the Legislative 
Assembly, 22 grade 11 students seated in the Speaker's gallery, your 
gallery, sir.  These 22 students are from Thom Collegiate in the great 
constituency of Regina North.  Their teacher is Ms. Hubbs.  I will be 
meeting with these students for pictures at 2:35, refreshments, and 
hopefully to entertain any questions they may have at that time. 
 
Please join me in welcoming this group from Thom Collegiate. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would also like to welcome some 
of the students . . . or all of the students from Thom Collegiate.  Thom 
Collegiate is located actually on the west . . . across the street on the 
east side of my constituency, on the west side of Regina North.  And some 
of the students here today do live in Regina North West, so I'd like to 
welcome the students here this afternoon and wish them a very pleasant 
afternoon.  And I hope that you enjoy the question period that you'll be 
witnessing in the next 25 minutes.  Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Report of Commission on Directions in Health Care 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of Health or, in 
his absence, the Associate Minister of Health.  Mr. Speaker, we heard 
originally that the Murray commission report would be completed some time 
towards the end of 1989.  I think it was December of 1989.  We subsequently 
heard that it was going to be postponed until some time in March.  It's now 
March 27.  We still haven't received the report.  It appears that as the 
date for an election moves ahead, Mr. Speaker, the date of the release of 
this report is also moving ahead. 
 
So my question to the Associate Minister of Health is whether or not he can 
give this House a commitment today as to a firm date that this report will 
be released to the public, or is he going to politicize this report by 
withholding it until it's politically expedient to release it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd just like to say that I'd like to 
commend all the people of this province and the people across this province 
that made reports to the commission.  As you're probably aware, they made 
those reports to the commission over the course of two years.  The 
commission has worked very hard to put together a report to give us a sense 
of direction and a choice of policies for the future. 
 
I'd like to say that the report is a tribute to the people of this 
province, and we anxiously await for that report to be made available to 
us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, a number of health care professionals have been 
touring this province . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  It seems that there are a number of people 
want to enter today's question period.  They'll have their opportunity.  At 
the moment it's the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  We have been anxiously awaiting the 
release of this report, Mr. Minister.  The date for its release is 
constantly being postponed.  Can you give this House a firm commitment 
today as to the date of the release of this report to the public?  We want 
to know, Mr. Associate Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd just like to say that I'm very pleased 
that the member opposite is now requesting the report that I understand she 
opposed being put together.  I'm very pleased to see that she's requesting 
that it be brought forth too, and I would hope that the report will be made 
available to us and to the public in a short period of time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Associate Minister, I have here a document which 
purports to be part of your department's budgetary request for this year 
regarding your public affairs and the Murray commission report.  In this 
you are asking apparently, according to this document, for $750,000 to 
spend in promoting this report. 
 
Now, Mr. Associate Minister, why does your department want three-quarters 
of a million dollars of the health care budget for more public relations?  
Is this the best way that your department can find to spend this 
three-quarters of a million dollars, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd just like to say to the members 
opposite and to the people of this province that I know that there are 
those people across this province, and especially amongst the members 



 

 

opposite, who would choose not to consult, who would choose not to take to 
the people what is probably one of their highest priorities, and that being 
the health care system of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Minister, the Murray commission budget was approximately 
$1.8 million.  You've spent $1.8 million dollars having a number of health 
care professionals listen to the people of this province.  They've now put 
together this report.  Are you not satisfied with this report, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
This is a totally self-serving political exercise on your part, contrary to 
what you promised in the throne speech last week.  Don't you think, Mr. 
Associate Minister, this $750,000 would be better spent, this three-quarter 
of a million dollars, in dealing with nursing shortages, shortages of 
public health nurses, shortages of dental care services in rural 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Mr. Speaker, I sense that the member opposite probably 
hasn't done her homework again.  And she talks about pieces of paper and 
things that are being presented, and I know that in the past we've had 
pieces of paper presented to this House and to the people of this province.  
And I remember a letter that was sent to the people of my constituency, 
another piece of paper that talked about closing hospitals.  And I don't 
know if the members opposite need to be reminded of that. 
 
She talks about $1.8 million for a study to look at the health care system 
of this province and to come up with a direction in the future.  And I want 
to remind the members opposite that the health care system of this province 
is a tremendous responsibility.  It's also a tremendous expense for us all 
-- some thirteen hundred million dollars, fourteen hundred million dollars 
a year in the current year.  And I think that $1.8 million put to studying 
direction of the health care system an appropriate amount and actually 
money that's probably very, very well spent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Minister, after you've spent $1.8 million, why would you 
be asking for a further three-quarters of a million dollars to advertise 
what your interpretation of this report is? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Mr. Speaker, there are those opposite who would choose 
not to consult.  There are those opposite who would choose not to discuss 
such things as the use of drugs and the fact that drugs and more drugs may 
not necessarily mean better health. 
 
But we choose to consult.  We believe that if health care is a high 
priority, and it is a high priority for us; the people should have a say, 



 

 

Mr. Speaker. And we should take the report to the people and we should have 
their comments before anything is done with it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Goods and Services Tax 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- My question is to the Premier on the subject of the 
goods and services tax. 
 
Mr. Premier, the Saskatchewan public's most serious criticism of your 
leadership, or perhaps I should say lack of leadership on the subject of 
the GST (goods and services tax), is not the fact that you have been 
hesitant to voice their concerns, although you certainly have gone to any 
lengths to avoid a public discussion. 
 
Their bitterest criticisms concern the fact that you apparently say one 
thing in Saskatchewan and something quite different in Ottawa.  Their worst 
suspicions were confirmed again yesterday when none other than Michael 
Wilson, on a hot 
_line show, in answer to a question about his response to your opposition, 
said, they have been sitting around a conference table for two years 
helping design the tax, and then he went on to say: for them to suddenly 
say this tax is all wrong is a little disingenuous; I mean, if it was all 
that bad, then why did they waste their time and mine sitting around the 
table for two years? 
 
Couched in diplomatic language, Mr. Premier, what the federal Minister of 
Finance is saying that you have been blatantly dishonest, not only with the 
federal government but the public of Saskatchewan.  Isn't that a 
self-evident conclusion from his comments? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, we have continuously said in the 
legislature and across Saskatchewan, and indeed across the country, that 
the GST proposal is too high and it's too complex and it's too poorly 
defined to be implemented, and that they should either scrap it or they 
should redesign it, or both. 
 
As a result of our continuing to put pressure on them, they've already 
dropped it.  And, Mr. Speaker, we are continuing to put pressure on them to 
make sure that they do make the changes appropriate so that the business 
community and the farming community, as you know, and others across this 
country will benefit from a reformed tax system. 
 
The last time that you and I talked about it here you were suggesting that 
we have one tax.  And that was the NDP proposal.  So that you say if you're 
going to have it anyway, then combine the provincial tax with the federal 
tax so that there's only one. 
 
Now we had some discussion about that here.  We have taken the arguments 
about its complexity and about its level all across Canada, Mr. Speaker, 



 

 

and we'll continue to do that, so in fact they redesign it and define it in 
a manner that is appropriate for Saskatchewan as well as Canadian people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- New question, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, I hear what 
you're saying.  It's just so inconsistent with everything that you're 
doing. 
 
Mr. Premier, it's your ill fortune to live in the day of the printed word 
when some record is kept of what you've said.  I want to quote from you two 
headlines from the Regina Leader-Post.  "Devine stands ground in support of 
sales tax."  That seems to me to fall just a touch short of opposing it.  
Again, "Devine, odd man . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Devine odd man out. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Well that much is accurate.  "Devine odd man out among 
the premiers on the GST."  Mr. Premier, Michael Wilson has a varied 
reputation, but he's not thought of as either stupid or dishonest.  He says 
you passed up your best opportunity to make your opposition known when the 
tax was being drafted.  Why on earth should the public believe you, Mr. 
Minister, when you say it wasn't so? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, we have been making recommendations to the 
federal government on the tax and the tax proposal.  From the outset when 
they suggested they could take off the thirteen and a half, we said, as 
members opposite in the legislature said, we would like to see the tax 
reformed.  We would like it lower, and we'd like it simple, and we'd want 
to make sure it increases productivity and jobs here in Canada. 
 
We have continued to make those representations to Ottawa, and as a result 
of that we've seen them reduce the tax.  They now consider making it 
simplified, Mr. Speaker, and we're making sure and want to make sure that 
any changes that the farmers ask for are being delivered. 
 
Now the hon. member stands in his place now and says that he's changed his 
position.  He is no longer in favour of one tax.  Well then he'd have to 
stand and deny what he said here on the record, because it's in Hansard.  
The NDP support one tax, the GST plus the provincial sales tax together.  
Now that's what you said in this legislature, and it's on the record, and 
we can go back and read that over and over again.  So you could stand there 
and say, well, for heaven sakes, this is tax reform, Mr. Premier, and you 
encourage tax reform. 
 
I'll only say one more time is that you've stood here in the legislature 
and said you support one tax, which is the GST plus provincial sales tax at 
one time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



 

 

Mr. Shillington: -- Well since the Premier seems to be suffering from 
amnesia, let me quote from you; let me quote for your benefit from an 
article in the Star-Phoenix.  The paragraph says, the headline is, "Devine 
odd man out among premiers on the GST," and a paragraph reads: 
 

 The exception was Premier Grant Devine who stood his ground throughout the 
weekend, challenging critics to come up with a better alternative to the 
Wilson scheme. 

 
That doesn't sound, Mr. Premier, like decisive, hard-hitting opposition.  
It doesn't seem to be what's being described. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Premier, you have an opportunity, however, to do 
better.  During last year's session we put on the order paper a motion 
opposing the goods and services tax and your government wouldn't call it.  
My question, Mr. Premier, is whether or not you will instruct your House 
Leader to call motion number 10, which now stands in my name and which 
expresses this House's opposition to the Goods and Services Tax?  Will you 
instruct your House Leader to call that motion or bring forth a similar 
worded one of your own? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member knows that I have been 
very much against the federal sales tax, which is thirteen and a half per 
cent.  And the hon. members on that side of the House are not against the 
federal sales tax -- they've been encouraging it -- which is now up to 
thirteen and a half per cent.  And they haven't said one word about 
reducing that tax, which has an implication for consumers and business, 
manufacturing and farmers.  I have always said I'm against that thirteen 
and a half per cent tax, and I am looking for alternatives. 
 
Now the member opposite stands in his place and says, well for heaven's 
sakes, he now supports the fact that he would have a federal sales tax at 
thirteen and a half; he has no alternative. 
 
I will ask all members of this legislature or parliament: what's the 
alternative to the thirteen and a half that's there now?  I believe, Mr. 
Speaker, we should look for alternatives because that is an unfair tax.  
And I will continue to ask the federal government to come up with better 
ways to reduce that tax burden on farmers, businesses and consumers in this 
country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- New question, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, perhaps the 
third article to which I did not refer best summarizes your behaviour 
today.  The sub-headline is "Divine flip-flops on earlier stance."  Mr. 
Premier, we know you're in desperate trouble when you want to get the 
subject of the sales tax -- something you once said you'd abolish and now 
stands at 40 per cent higher than it ever was. 



 

 

 
The subject, Mr. Minister, is the goods and services tax.  Will you make 
common cause with us and take a simple, effective step.  Pass a resolution 
of this House stating this Assembly's opposition to the goods and services 
tax.  Will you take that simple, effective step? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member has made his proposal in 
this legislature, and I'll go back and review it as I find it in Hansard 
with respect to him proposing one tax -- the GST plus the provincial sales 
tax as one tax -- and we will review that and we'll see if in fact that's 
the position that the NDP wants to take in Saskatchewan now, or indeed 
across Canada.  And I also will review the record, Mr. Speaker, with 
respect to what the other NDP counterparts have said across Canada as well.  
If you're in favour of the federal sales tax and the GST plus the 
provincial sales tax in one position, Mr. Speaker, we'll certainly find out 
and perhaps you'll have your opportunity to stand and defend that here in 
the legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Travel Expenses of Cabinet Minister 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is also to the 
Premier.  Mr. Premier, I have here a list of out-of-province travel from 
the '88-89 fiscal year of travel that was taken by that old Liberal that 
sits to your right there.  And for the six trips that were taken on this 
sheet that was put up by the Department of Finance, the minister spent 
$99,816 -- $99,816!  In one trip alone to London, Mr. Premier, after you 
exclude the airfare, it would have worked out to about $3,000 a day.  Now 
can we expect this type of extravagant spending to stop, Mr. Premier? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I'm very pleased to respond, Mr. Speaker, because what 
that information shows -- and the opposition has referred to it now at a 
couple of times -- is they have said that the minister spent that amount of 
money, that I spent that amount, or my travel costs were that amount.  In 
fact that is simply not true.  And if you read the information that was 
tabled before the Assembly, that those trips included all the staff that 
attended the various meetings, all the staff that had attended the 
meetings, and there were several . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Now I had to interrupt the minister in the 
midst of his answer because some hon. members just refused to stop 
interrupting him.  It was difficult to hear him.  And now I'm going to give 
him an opportunity to finish his answer if he so desires. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I indicated that the material 
that was given to the hon. member during estimates last year about the cost 
for my travel, included that of the officials that attended the various 
functions . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes it did.  And if you take 



 

 

a look at the information, the hon. member, take a look at that information 
and it lists the number of officials that attended as well and I think 
you've been . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I'd like to bring to the attention of the 
hon. minister that, you know, we can carry on debates with people in their 
seats who make a comment. However, that's certainly going to drag out the 
answer to an unknown length and is certainly not conducive to question 
period.  Next question. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- New question to the Premier.  I don't know why the minister 
gets so defensive.  Of course there were other people.  We know that he 
wouldn't be able to travel on his own anyway.  In fact, on the trip to 
England there were four people. 
 
But I want to ask you, Mr. Premier, in light of what you're saying in the 
throne speech, will you assure us that this type of extravagant spending 
will stop and that you will table today the guide-lines where you refer in 
the throne speech of saying restrictions on travel and advertising have 
been implemented. 
 
So will you today tell us, Mr. Premier, what those restrictions are, what 
are the guide-lines, and can you table them for us here today so we don't 
have a minister spending almost a hundred thousand dollars a year on travel 
from out of province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Fortunately I've just been handed a copy of the 
information.  I didn't believe that the hon. member would pursue it if he 
had fairly read the information.  And right, the total figure is 
$99,816.72.  The number of persons accompanying the minister during the 
total of those trips was 20 -- 20, Mr. Speaker, in total, in total.  Mr. 
Speaker, including myself, we're dividing 24,000 into that; it's 
considerably less number than the hon. member indicated. 
 
So I don't think you have fairly interpreted the numbers.  That in fact 
those meetings were with financial community in the various centres set 
out, and the information given during estimates.  And I suggest to the hon. 
member, in fact, that our meetings with the financial community has been to 
the benefit of the province, and we've had the hon. members raise borrowing 
issues in the past that we have got as a very preferred rate as a result of 
our contact with the investment community. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- If that many people travelled with you, what we want to 
really know is, who stayed home? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Elimination of Travel and Advertising 
 



 

 

Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Premier, I direct my question to you.  In all 
seriousness, will we expect this kind of spending to continue by ministers?  
You said in your throne speech restrictions on travel and advertising have 
been implemented.  So will you table today those policies, the guide-lines 
that you're issuing to your ministers, to your legislative secretaries, so 
that we can know what these restrictions are?  We want to know that you're 
taking a new, co-operative approach and curbing the expenditures. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- I have said to the hon. members that we have cut our 
salaries, and we have reduced the size of government, and we will define 
the amount of travel.  And we have set up a monitoring mechanism under the 
Deputy Premier to do just that, Mr. Speaker, and we'll be staying with it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- A new question.  How can you be believeable, Mr. Premier?  
What we want to know is what the guide-lines are.  You say you've reduced 
your down-sizing, but yet on throne speech day the line-up of cabinet 
ministers was so long they hardly get across the front of the room.  I 
mean, your benches were empty.  You've taken no one out of the cabinet.  
You've reduced the number of departments.  Will you table today the 
regulations and the guide-lines that are curbing the extravagant spending 
by your government.  Where you refer to, I say again, in the throne speech, 
"restrictions on travel and advertising have been implemented . . . 
 
Will you table those regulations here today or not, Mr. Premier? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I can only say to the hon. member that we 
have reduced the size of cabinet; we have cut our expenditures and our 
salaries; we have, Mr. Speaker, reduced the size of our government; we have 
caused savings . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The Hon. Premier is attempting to answer the 
question.  He can't answer if he's consistently being interrupted.  He 
can't do that; nobody can.  I think we should show of him the courtesy of 
allowing him to answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I was just saying to 
the hon. members that we have cut our salary, and that we have reduced the 
size of government, and we have reduced the size of cabinet, Mr. Speaker.  
And I'll point out to the hon. members, we have a smaller cabinet than the 
NDP administration had in the early '80s, Mr. Speaker.  I make that point 
again.  This is a smaller cabinet than the NDP had in their administration, 
Mr. Speaker.  And we will be constraining and are constraining travel, 
particularly out-of-province travel, Mr. Speaker, and will continue to do 
that. 
 
But the hon. member says, well, show me.  I have already shown him that we 
have cut those kinds of expenditures, and we have cut our salaries. 



 

 

 
Let me say one last thing, Mr. Speaker.  When interest rates were 21 per 
cent in this province, I didn't see any cuts on that side of the House, Mr. 
Speaker, not one cut in salary and not one reduction. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- I don't know why the Premier would want to live in the past 
like that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What we want to know is what you're going to do about the extravagance of 
your government.  You say you cut your salaries.  That cut in salaries 
wouldn't make up 10 per cent of the interest that we pay on the debt every 
day -- every day -- not 10 per cent of what we'd we pay in one day.  It's a 
miniscule amount. 
 
You said that you have guide-lines and we want them tabled in the 
legislature.  I would have to assume that you don't have any guide-lines or 
regulations to curb your extravagance in your government because if you had 
them, you'd table them.  It's deceitful to do that. 
 
The other thing that we want to know, Mr. Premier, is in regard to your 
polling, the political polling that's done by your government.  Decima has 
very good contracts with you.  Are you considering also putting polling 
into that category where you refer to in the throne speech: "restrictions 
on travel and advertising have been implemented . . ."?  Would you put 
polling into that as well? 
 
And finally, one last time, if you have those regulations, are you going to 
table them in this House, or are you just throwing yourself on the mercy of 
the Saskatchewan people, saying, believe me? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, in my discussions with the people of 
Saskatchewan, when we say that we are cutting our salaries and we're 
reducing the size of government, he may say that it's nickels and dimes, 
but if you look after the nickels and dimes, then the dollars look after 
themselves.  And that's what people are telling us, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I will say to the hon. member as well: when they want 
protection in terms of interest rates, when they want their family 
protected and their home protected and health and education expenditures 
there, Mr. Speaker, they expect us to play our part and they expect all 
administrations to have played their part. 
 
I'll remind the members opposite, when they had a very, very large cabinet, 
interest rates were running 21 per cent, and I didn't see one dime taken 
out of their salaries, not one cent, not one nickel, not one quarter.  And 
they stand over there now, Mr. Speaker, and say, well, for heaven sakes, 
you have cut your salaries; I want to see, are you going to cut the rest of 
it?  We have, Mr. Speaker, and the people appreciate that. 
 



 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in reply which was 
moved by Mr. Toth and the amendment thereto moved by Mr. Pringle. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's an honour for me to have 
this opportunity to briefly address the Legislative Assembly regarding the 
Speech from the Throne for the fourth session of the twenty-first 
legislature. 
 
I think it's only proper to begin by congratulating the member of the 
legislature for Moosomin on moving of the throne speech, and as well, the 
member for Nipawin on his seconding of this throne speech address.  These 
two members particularly articulated and expressed the many important 
elements that were contained in the throne speech that we heard a few days 
ago. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, let me extend my appreciation to the Lieutenant 
Governor for her address and support of the Speech from the Throne, and it 
was particularly well delivered. 
 
This legislative session and the address from the Speech from the Throne 
both mark a crucial time in our history, Mr. Speaker.  We have entered a 
new decade, a decade which has already seen extensive and unprecedented 
upheaval around the globe. 
 
Just look at East Germany, Mr. Speaker.  A little over one week ago the 
people of East Germany literally voted to end the existence of their 
country.  When I had an opportunity to be visiting with Berlin people, Mr. 
Speaker, about trade, the MTN, the multilateral trade negotiations, one of 
my officials was at the wall in Berlin. 
 
And if we want to talk about the change in attitude world-wide, I can't 
think of a better example and an illustration than I'm about to present to 
you.  This official that was with me has relatives that are in Hungary, Mr. 
Speaker. And you might be somewhat close to that situation.  And when he 
was visiting with an East German border guard and they were talking at the 
wall -- which is unique enough in itself -- the East German border guard 
took off his cap, took off his badge, and he handed it to the Canadian that 
was standing there, from Hungarian descent. And he says, it's yours for 20 
West German marks.  He sold them his cap and he sold them his badge.  And a 
few months earlier, if he'd been that close to him, he'd have shot him. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the changes that are going through the world today towards 
democracy, towards free markets, towards freer trade, towards openness, the 



 

 

glasnost, the perestroika, to put it in Soviet terms, are extremely and 
historically significant.  We see changes in South Africa moving towards 
democracy.  We see elections all over the world where they didn't used to 
have elections.  And people are voting for democracy, they're voting for 
openness, they're voting for liberalized borders, they're voting for 
markets. 
 
You just have to pick up a newspaper any one of the few days that . . . in 
recent days, and you see the headlines that speak for themselves, Mr. 
Speaker.  Today in The Globe and Mail -- Hungary has voted, and Hungarians 
have voted for not only democracy but they've voted for free markets and 
free trade world-wide.  The headline in the paper says, "Free market wins 
support of Hungarians in elections."  "Vote in Hungary routs out (the old) 
left."  Dramatic change that we didn't think was believable a few weeks ago 
or a few months ago. 
 
This is February 20.  A party preaching capitalism could win power in the 
Soviet Union, the editor there says.  Because there's no longer a monopoly 
on power.  They've opened it up to democracy.  And in fact, imagine in the 
Soviet Union the newspaper there is quoting a headline saying that a party 
preaching capitalism could win power. 
 
Another headline.  This is The Globe and Mail, March 19.  Conservatives win 
in East Germany by a wide margin.  People have voted literally to cancel 
the country.  It's the end of East Germany.  They voted for democracy, for 
markets, for trade, and for openness and to build and productivity. 
 
In the Soviet Union here's another one.  And it just says: Gorbachev seeks 
to end monopoly.  He wants to compete democratically.  The Communist Party 
has come to an end as the only single party.  The Soviet multiparty system 
ahead, as communists give up monopoly.  That's in The Globe and Mail as 
another headline in recent times. 
 
In East Germany here's a headline that says: East Germany enshrines freedom 
of the media for the first time in East German relations for the last 40 to 
50 years.  The love for democracy is quoted in the Star-Phoenix and the 
Leader-Post.  In Bulgaria the new party leader is calling for an overhaul 
before they have a May election so that in fact democracy can move ahead. 
 
Very interesting things here, Mr. Speaker, and I'll just touch on a couple 
others.  In the Soviet Union they plan to restore the private use of land, 
particularly for farmers.  Now imagine in the Soviet Union, since the 
revolution of 1917 they haven't had the private ownership of farm land, and 
they're thinking about that in the Soviet Union. 
 
One that I found particularly interesting and this was in The Globe and 
Mail of March 7: the Soviet Union plans to legalize the private ownership 
of factories.  Mr. Speaker, what we're seeing here all over the world . . . 
and here's one: the draft plan to sell Polish state companies, and they're 
going to allow the privatization of companies in Poland.  And this one is 
in the Financial Times, March 7: an East Germany moving towards 
privatization as a result of recent elections. 
 



 

 

My point is, Mr. Speaker, we haven't seen this kind of change in world 
politics and world economics and world social systems like this maybe ever, 
and certainly for the last 100 years.  That kind of change is dramatic.  
That kind of change is happening every day.  That kind of change is causing 
all kinds of modifications and ramifications even right here in the 
province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are not left untouched by what's going on in Europe as a result of their 
move towards free trade in 1992; 12 countries, 300 million people, they are 
moving towards a common market, a free trade agreement.  We're not left 
untouched by what they do to our commodities, our prices, our life-styles, 
what they do in the environment, a combination of things. 
 
We will not be left untouched by what they're doing in the eastern European 
blocs either.  We must be prepared to manage change, Mr. Speaker, and this 
Speech from the Throne talks about us managing change in the 1990s and the 
21st century.  That's what it's about.  Either we will stand by and be 
independent victims of change, or we will unite and manage that change to 
our benefit. 
 
And make no mistake about it, Mr. Speaker, what we see happening in the 
world wide is not going to stop.  Change is here.  And the people of 
Saskatchewan know that and they want a government, members of the 
Legislative Assembly, that understand change and that will work with people 
in building a consensus to find out and to strategize how to best manage 
that change, because as sure as we're standing here, change is here. 
 
In Saskatchewan, farm families probably know better than anyone else that 
the international subsidy wars, the impacts of high interest rates, and 
trade restrictions and trade policies, internationally, affect us right 
here at home in the towns and villages and the farms.  They'll be the first 
to tell you, as they did me yesterday, for example, that we must be 
prepared to manage those changes. 
 
The economic and political restructuring of the East bloc countries and the 
economic restructuring world-wide presents major challenges for our 
province.  But I also believe that there are many opportunities to be 
captured by Saskatchewan people if we're prepared to manage that 
environment we see today. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I'm very pleased that the Speech from the Throne 
gives us a framework in which to plan the direction of Saskatchewan's 
social and economic future well into the next decade.  It is a framework 
that draws upon our traditional strengths of government working in a 
partnership, in a co-operative way with people through consultation, and it 
is a framework that provides clear and innovative ideas to capture new 
economic opportunities. 
 
Imagine the opportunities, Mr. Speaker, that might be there with 400 
million people in the Soviet bloc. 
 
Our relationship with the people in Kazakhstan is one that is just 
beginning.  They have 20-some million people, Mr. Speaker, and they're 



 

 

prepared to trade with us, do joint ventures with us, and they're opening 
up. And they say, we want to move towards democracy, markets, freedom, 
capitalism.  And I'm not being at all partisan.  They want a mixed economy 
of people owning farms and factories and businesses and having the 
opportunity to trade world-wide in a free basis.  All men and women 
world-wide want that. And look at the opportunities for Saskatchewan in our 
capacity to produce food, paper, petro-chemicals, manufactured goods, with 
a good relationship. 
 
We must, Mr. Speaker, be prepared to take advantage of these changes.  In 
my consultation with the people of Saskatchewan, they've identified four 
fundamental priorities that they want us to address in a partnership with 
the people and government and the private sector.  These include the 
following. 
 
First, an expansion and the diversification of the Saskatchewan economy.  
They've said to me clearly, and I'm sure they've to members opposite, we 
just can't afford to only grow wheat and expect it's going to be good all 
the time.  We need to have alternatives. 
 
If we're going to process forestry, we're going to have to make paper.  If 
we're going to process our natural gas, we're going to have to make 
fertilizer.  If we're going to process our meat, we're going to have to 
make bacon.  If we're going to process our heavy oil, we're going to have 
to make gasoline and diesel fuel and petro-chemicals.  And they've said to 
that to us, Mr. Speaker -- we must diversify and we must broaden our 
economy. 
 
Second thing they've said is that their community is just as important as 
their family.  They want their communities protected.  They want to see new 
growth in their communities.  They want to see opportunities for them to 
control the destiny of their community, rather than just leave that 
community's future up to the slings and arrows of international trade or 
international political movements that we see world-wide that are causing 
the changes we see today. 
 
Third, they want to see an awful lot of opportunity for young people in the 
province, the growth and the well-being of Saskatchewan people, that human 
resource.  We have educated and exported a million people since 1935 -- 
educated and exported a million people.  No other jurisdiction in Canada 
can say that.  Our population is about the same as it was in 1935, and 
we've had a Liberal government, a CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth 
Federation) government, NDP government, and Conservative government, and 
our population is about the same as it was in 1935. 
 
We have educated these children, but what we have failed to do is take the 
educated individual and combine it with investments so that you could have 
the job and the opportunities here. 
 
We've spent more time arguing about it than we have building it, Mr. 
Speaker.  And you can look to Alberta, you can look to Ontario, you look 
into British Columbia, you look into Quebec, you could look at the whole 
country.  Canada's population has doubled since 1935.  It was 12 million 



 

 

people; it's 25 million now.  Saskatchewan's is about the same. 
 
What's the difference?  We have had the oldest, longest political wars that 
you can imagine, right here.  But we spend more time arguing about whether 
we should build it than actually build.  We've been blessed with resources, 
communities, and people.  And we've educated a million young people and 
we've exported them all over Canada and the United States and every place 
else. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, what the people are telling me is that yes, educate 
them, but also bring investment in so that you can combine that beautiful 
young resource, the mind, with investment capital, and create the 
opportunities and the prosperity so people will not only live here but they 
will stay here and move here and move back here to the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Fourth, they've said they want to see efficient management of resources.  
And we talked about it here in question period today.  They want to see 
managing our own salaries; they want to see managing our own travel; they 
want to make sure that we do not waste resources, whether it's in health or 
education or in highways or in agriculture, wherever it may be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to guide the development of Saskatchewan's future in relation 
to these four key areas that people have talked about, people have said to 
me they want even greater involvement; they want to participate in how we 
arrive at these four areas and implement these plans for diversification, 
for community stabilization, for opportunities for young people, and the 
management of resources. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the throne speech emphasized the previous success of this 
process, the process of Saskatchewan people working in a partnership to 
govern and to strengthen the province.  A history of co-operation and 
working together. 
 
We look now at the fact that even when we provide equity opportunity 
participation programs, we can raise almost $2 billion from Saskatchewan 
people if it's for Saskatchewan projects. 
 
And we've offered bonds from power bonds to potash bonds and telephone 
bonds, and some of them convertible to shares.  Saskatchewan people, 
because it's for Saskatchewan, have put up almost $2 billion.  Now that, 
Mr. Speaker, is taking education and combining it with investment to create 
those opportunities.  As a result we see our manufacturing sector up 600 
per cent.  Six hundred per cent increase in processing, manufacturing, and 
diversification in just the last little while in our history, the last 5 or 
6 years, as a result of us taking education and combining it with 
investment opportunity, capital, and putting it to work to create new 
opportunities.  And $2 billion of that -- almost $2 billion -- raised by 
Saskatchewan people themselves. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne says if we can get employees 



 

 

involved in new initiatives, labour-sponsored venture capital programs or 
other targeted tax things that would allow people in towns and villages, 
farmers to invest, then in fact we can create our own diversification in 
stronger communities. 
 
Well from our experience, Mr. Speaker, and from what we've seen in the last 
few years, indeed Saskatchewan people are prepared to invest in their 
future, in their children, and in their communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as announced in the Speech from the Throne, the creation of 
Consensus Saskatchewan is clearly a brand-new and innovative mechanism in 
which Saskatchewan people can rightfully be part of the decision-making 
process. 
 
Some critics have said about Consensus Saskatchewan that if you're asking 
all these people to come in and design the strategies for diversification 
and for protecting community and developing that human potential and 
managing resources, then obviously you don't have the ideas yourself.  
Well, Mr. Speaker, we have ideas, and you've seen diversification, public 
participation, natural gas processing and manufacturing.  What the people 
have said to us is, it's only the tip of the iceberg. 
 
We want to be involved in how we carry those strategies right down to our 
town and our community. 
 
The biggest single argument and criticism that I've heard about paper mills 
or upgraders or fertilizer plants in Saskatchewan is that they're not in 
every single town and community.  That's the biggest single criticism.  
They want to see it in Rosetown.  They want to see it in Melfort.  They 
want to see it in Kindersley.  They want it in Yorkton and they want it in 
Midale.  They want it in Torquay.  They want it in Caron, Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the biggest single criticism is that there are not enough of 
them.  We want them all over the province.  We want to see that 
diversification, that processing.  Take those young people, those capable 
young people, and put them to work in the local community with investment, 
and then create the opportunities.  That's the criticism. 
 
They waited and waited and waited for 50 years, since 1935, to finally say 
we could process our natural gas and make fertilizer for the province that 
has half the farm land in Canada.  And we should, Mr. Speaker.  We should. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- And they waited 50 years, 50 years, Mr. Speaker, to 
say, why couldn't we finally process our forestry industry and make paper?  
And, Mr. Speaker, they've said, we've waited and waited, and finally in the 
last few years we are now making our own paper.  And they're saying, can't 
we make other products from that paper or from the forest industry?  Can't 
we involve independent operators?   Can't we involve smaller communities 
and towns and businesses and expand that operation?  And the answer is: of 
course! 
 



 

 

Do you know what they say to us?  Let us be involved in that; let us be 
involved.  Not in a handful of projects, but in projects that involve 
people and communities all across this great province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Consensus Saskatchewan is going to the people and saying, yes, there's 
strategy; yes, there's economic opportunity; and yes, we have strong people 
and strong resources.  But the strongest one is the people working 
together, building a consensus, implementing that strategy, and making sure 
that we catch up to other provinces in the next decade.  That's what 
Consensus Saskatchewan's all about.  That's what's in the Speech from the 
Throne. 
 
The fact that some people, and I can understand why that we . . . normally 
governments don't get many bouquets from the opposition, but the fact that 
people or critics would even say we shouldn't involve the people, and I've 
been hearing that for some time.  I mean, even in our agriculture programs, 
they say, well we did this in '84 and '85 and '86 and '87 and '88 and '89, 
and every time we involve the people in getting consensus on agriculture 
programs or on diversification the critics will say, well you're only doing 
it because there's an election. 
 
We don't have an election every year, Mr. Speaker.  We've been doing this 
and doing it.  And right now the people tell me that they want to be 
intimately involved in this strategy with all the change going on around 
the world.  They want to know what the options are. 
 
The Minister of Finance had his meetings with people all across this 
province.  You know what they told him and they've told me.  They said: Mr. 
Premier, under these conditions I'm not so sure that we can afford the 
grants and the subsidies that we have had over the last few years, and 
until times change, turn around, I think you're going to have to cancel 
those or postpone them.  And I did. 
 
Now that was a province-wide consensus.  And people told me and told my 
ministers and told people from all across this legislature on the 
government side, that's what they better be doing because under these 
circumstances we can't afford it.  Now that wasn't easy for me to do, but 
it was the right thing to do.  And it came from a consensus. 
 
So anybody opposite or anybody any place else that says, I don't think they 
should be consulting with the people, or Consensus Saskatchewan is not a 
good idea, well you ask the people.  And I'll dare say, Mr. Speaker, the 
people want to be involved.  All over the world they want to be involved 
right now, like we've never seen before, and not only in the Soviet Union, 
and not only in the Warsaw Pact countries, and not only South America or 
Latin America, Nicaragua or the Pacific Rim -- everywhere.  With the 
technology and the communication and the speed of change, people want to be 
intimately involved in all the decisions that are going on. 
 
In this government, with this Speech from the Throne, Mr. Speaker, the 
people will be involved in Saskatchewan.  That's what Consensus 
Saskatchewan is all about.  I think they will be disappointed in the 
critics who say people don't count or listening to them doesn't matter. 



 

 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the building of this province goes well beyond political 
careers, as you and I know.  The members opposite should know, if they're 
really sincere about diversifying and building in their towns and 
communities and cities, whether it's Moose Jaw or Prince Albert or Estevan 
or Weyburn or North Battleford, then they should be thinking about the 
kinds of things that the people want to build.  And I'll tell you, Mr. 
Speaker, they want to see growth and diversification. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out this province was built on the 
process of people working together through co-operation and consultation.  
And we are on the verge of a major and significant economic diversification 
breakthrough in this province -- 600 per cent increase in the last few 
years.  The key ingredients are fundamental to the strength of our society 
and our economic future.  Co-operation and consultation: these are the 
foundation stones upon which we will overcome the challenges of the future, 
the challenges of international change, the challenges of weather, and 
certainly, Mr. Speaker, the challenges of the odd political career that 
pops up in the history of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am therefore very pleased that the development of Consensus 
Saskatchewan will strengthen the process of consultation and co-operation 
and allow for Saskatchewan people, all of Saskatchewan people, to have a 
mechanism where they can be, and eventually be, active participants in that 
process. 
 
Let me just say a couple of words about the four main things that people 
have said to me, Mr. Speaker.  The first is agriculture and 
diversification.  It is extremely important that a province that holds half 
the farm land in this country, has 65 per cent of the people in this 
province living outside the two major cities, all across this province in 
towns and villages, that we understand and respect and treat with a great 
deal of sincerity rural life and rural families in a way of life that I 
believe is unique in all of North America, maybe the world.  We've 
developed dry land agriculture and dry land farming in rural communities, 
and a life-style that is absolutely unique any place in Canada, and 
certainly in many parts of the globe. 
 
We stressed in our Speech from the Throne that the farm family and those 
rural communities are extremely important.  I don't know how anybody could 
do otherwise.  I have been disappointed in previous administrations because 
they did not, but I think they've paid the price. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we can't turn our backs on these towns and villages and 
smaller cities that are based in producing food as something so close to 
the good Lord that I don't know how you'd get any closer.  These are good 
people doing good work, providing one of the strongest sources of economic 
activity provincially and nationally and internationally that you're going 
to find. 
 
There's no substitute for food.  Agriculture and food is the largest 
industry in Canada, and indeed the world.  We all need food all the time.  
And we've got a way of life that is precious to that industry.  And we 



 

 

cannot and should not and we will not abandon that way of life or those 
people. 
 
Saskatchewan farm families need help because they're taking on other 
treasuries, and I've spoken on that before in a resolution in the House.  I 
would just say again -- when a Saskatchewan farmer outside of Regina or 
outside of Meadow Lake or outside of Tisdale is forced to take on the 
German treasury, the French treasury, the Great Britain's treasury, the 
United States treasury and others, alone, it's not fair. 
 
And we cannot let those individual farmers take on those international 
conditions by themselves.  It's not fair.  I've described in this 
legislature what I saw when I was in Europe -- European farmer: very 
inefficient, small little plots, getting $700 a tonne for wheat and we get 
150.  And the difference is subsidized from the treasuries.  And the 
consumers there spend 20 to 25 per cent of their disposable income on food; 
we spend 10 to 11. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we can't let our farmers be forced off the land by German or 
French or British treasuries so that we don't have hardly any left, and 
then they can charge us what they like.  We can't let that happen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, international interest rates, international wheat prices, the 
exchange rates, all have a major impact on our industries and particularly 
our farmers.  The Speech from the Throne, and you'll see in our budget, 
directs our focus and our attention to make sure that there is fair play 
internationally.  Just as the Soviets and the Hungarians and the 
Czechoslovakians and others want fair play -- in democracy and politics and 
trade and social and economic policy -- we want and deserve the same. 
 
And it's not good enough just to stand up and say, well it's all easy to be 
fixed, and you can stay right at home and if I'm in Europe . . . You know, 
some people will say, well he shouldn't be in Berlin or he shouldn't be 
talking in Brussels and Geneva.  I will only say, the farmers that I took 
with me didn't say that. 
 
We heard people in the Soviet Union and in the Eastern bloc countries sound 
an awful lot like western Canadian farmers, saying what the western 
Europeans and the United States is doing is totally unfair.  We're taking 
on their treasuries.  They wreck our prices.  They drive up interest rates.  
They hurt our exchange rates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will not abandon them.  This Speech from the Throne puts 
our shoulder, our heart, our soul, and our head right behind rural 
families.  And it's going to stay there, because we will win.  You'll see 
the Saskatchewan farmer and rural communities come out on top of this 
because we'll eventually get those subsidies turned around internationally.  
If it takes all the political will and the whole Legislative Assembly to 
get on a bus and go East, or in fact key members going jointly all the way 
to Geneva and Brussels, those kinds of things may be necessary to make 
those changes, but we have to make them. 
 
Well we have no choice but to help them and we're going to help them.  Our 



 

 

priorities certainly include, in our motion here, to have money and 
restructuring and the kinds of economic and financial programs here to help 
Saskatchewan people survive -- $500 million now, $400 million later, a 
billion dollars in a contingency fund.  Just increase the initial price of 
wheat a dollar a bushel.  Try that on for size.  If the federal government 
just stood in its place and said, the initial prices for wheat will be up a 
dollar a bushel for 1990-91, look at the change in the attitude in 
Saskatchewan, and that still would only be pittance compared to what they 
get for wheat in Europe and in the United States in terms of their 
subsidies. 
 
Just try that.  Lower interest rates, a better exchange rate, higher priced 
wheat -- and that's what the market is prepared to pay -- that's what we're 
asking for.  In this Speech from the Throne and the budget you'll see that 
over and over again. 
 
(1500) 
 
I will say that our own restructuring will be there, Mr. Speaker.  In terms 
of our agriculture credit corporation there are things that we can do.  I 
have asked the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities to work 
with us as a board of directors in managing change in the agriculture 
credit corporation.  And the SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) has agreed to that, and I really appreciate that. 
 
Senior members of our municipal governments from across the province have 
agreed to sit down and say, yes, we'll help you change your ag credit 
corporation.  Well that's exactly what . . . A consensus, Mr. Speaker, a 
consensus of municipal councillors from across Saskatchewan, through their 
board of directors, saying, this is the way you should run the provincial 
bank.  We've asked for that; they've agreed to participate.  It's a first, 
and we're going to continue that consensus, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The second thing is that I've met with agriculture groups recently, as 
early as yesterday -- or as late as yesterday -- and the same thing comes 
up.  They say there's not one simple answer.  You have to go at cash, you 
have to look at restructuring, you have to help some people that are in 
trouble -- a whole combination of those things. 
 
The ministers of agriculture from the neighbouring provinces also formed a 
consensus, as did this legislature -- a consensus, a new, brand-new, solid 
consensus that we would say to the federal government on interest rates and 
on prices and exchange rates: that's squarely in the federal bailiwick and 
that's where it belongs. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne has caused those things to 
begin to take place, the Consensus Saskatchewan, municipal consensus, a 
legislative consensus, ministers of agriculture from across the Prairies, 
farm groups, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now that's the history of Saskatchewan.  And it's a history, Mr. Speaker, 
from time to time that has been very successful.  That's why we are 
reuniting and rekindling that flame of co-operation.  If you can get people 



 

 

working together in a co-operative fashion, then they are very, very 
strong. 
 
A word about the stabilization of communities, because you're going to hear 
more about this in the budget, but the Speech from the Throne touches on 
it.  We are going to -- and I'm sure you've heard, Mr. Speaker -- introduce 
the concept of community development bonds. 
 
Let me just say a couple of things about them.  What people have told us is 
that often, as we're diversifying and building and we've seen in the past, 
we've used too much debt.  Farmers have used too much debt.  Communities, 
when they do projects, will come to SEDCO or some other people and they 
borrow too much money; then they can't pay it off.  And then when you owe 
the money, what happens to the interest rates often?  They go up and down, 
and usually go up.  Haven't seen them come down recently. 
 
People have said to us, as we travel across the province in this 
consensus-building exercise: why don't we use our own money?  Why do we 
always have to take our savings and our pensions and give it to some 
pension manager and he ships it down East so they buy shares in the Royal 
Bank or some other institution?  And it all goes out of the province.  And 
when we want to build something, what do we do?  We borrow it back and pay 
the interest. 
 
And people will say to me over and over again: you know, this is getting a 
little ridiculous.  Look at the debt in the farm community -- 5 billion, $6 
billion.  Look at the debt in other organizations.  Why don't we use our 
own money?  We've got billions in pensions money.  We've got billions in 
savings.  Why don't we invest in our own community? 
 
Well, so he said, well that's a good idea.  How do we do that?  They said, 
well if you're prepared to lend us money, maybe if we come up with our own 
and you're prepared to back it up and go into a joint venture with us, and 
we won't owe anybody any money; we'll just build it on equity. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that got our attention.  I'll tell you, that really got 
our attention.  That's how the co-op movement built their refinery over 
here in Regina.  Not on borrowed money; on cash.  The whole community 
participated on the strength of the local people building themselves. 
 
And the community development bonds, Mr. Speaker -- the hon. member says 
I'm glad I realize it -- I will say to you, Mr. Speaker, the largest 
project in the history of Saskatchewan is the upgrader in Regina, which is 
a joint venture between this government, the Co-op, and the federal 
government, Mr. Speaker. And I'm very proud of that project because it's 
based on us taking a strong equity position, taking the base of the 
refinery that was there, and taking some brand-new technology. 
 
That's what people have been waiting for for generations.  That upgrader 
should have been built years ago, years and years and years ago. But it 
wasn't. But it takes that kind of foresight, that kind of co-operative 
attitude, and that kind of courage to build. 
 



 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will say the community equity bonds, the development bonds 
that are there, will be managed by the local community.  If you put up some 
money, and I don't know all the towns where you've lived, Mr. Speaker, but 
if you found one where you live, say Cupar or something, and if Cupar wants 
to build a project and if the people are prepared to put money into a 
project there, the Government of Saskatchewan will guarantee the safety of 
that money.  We'll guarantee it. 
 
And they put that together with the business idea and a plan and build a 
processing or manufacturing plant like you've heard at Dysart -- 
manufacturing furniture held together by velcro.  It's the people's money 
and the Government of Saskatchewan puts its reputation behind it and backs 
it.  Guaranteed.  No borrowed money.  We take solid equity and put it in 
there. 
 
Now they may go to Sedco or a local bank for cash flow on operating any 
other kind of business. But every community says it's for their community; 
it's for their kids; it's for their future, managed by them and backed up 
by the government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, think how much stronger that is than borrowing money from New 
York or borrowing money from banks or borrowing money from somebody else 
and paying all that interest that leaves the community.  Just think where 
the interest is going to go.  It goes back to Cupar. 
 
If people finance the power project in Nipawin -- say it's $300 million Mr. 
Speaker. We used to go to the banks.  I would say, with the greatest 
respect, the NDP and the other administrations used to go to the banks and 
borrow $300 million in New York. And they'd say, well I'm going to build a 
power project. At 10 per cent money, that was $30 million a year that left 
Nipawin, or left Saskatchewan and went to New York.  At 20 per cent money, 
that's $60 million a year that left this province and goes to the 
international bankers -- 60 million a year! 
 
And that's where the interest rates were when the previous government was 
in here.  Twenty per cent interest rates and they were borrowing money from 
international bankers to build or buy -- they didn't build; they bought 
things -- but just the principal alone, just think of it. 
 
What if you had local people put up their money and you paid the interest 
to them?  Three hundred million dollars we did on a Power bond. We said to 
the people of Saskatchewan, with no support from the critics on the other 
side -- they said, we'll offer a Power bond for Saskatchewan people so we 
can build the power project, and we'll give you 10 per cent return on your 
money. 
 
What happened?  Well despite the critics, Mr. Speaker, I'll tell you what 
happened.  The people of Saskatchewan bought Power bonds like you've never 
seen.  They were dying for that opportunity -- $300 million worth. And at 
10 per cent return, 30 million a year goes where, Mr. Speaker?  To New 
YorK?  No.  To Toronto?  No.  To Tokyo?  No.  To the people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 



 

 

That's what the equity will do and that's what every community can do.  You 
raise your money, we'll back it up, and the return goes into the community 
so one, it's for your community alone.  You manage it, it's for your future 
and your kids, and you're not paying the interest outside the province. 
 
That's consensus.  That's a history of the province of Saskatchewan.  
That's diversification; that's building. 
 
All those people, Mr. Speaker, can have an opportunity to build, and you 
can go to town after town after town, and you can say to them, would you 
like to see some building?  And they'll say, yes, sir.  And you say, join 
me.  You invest in your town and the province will back it up.  And you 
will see building like you've never seen before and no interest going 
outside the province; all the return going to the people of that town and 
that town only. 
 
Now people have told me, yes, Mr. Premier, we've had some difficult times 
in agriculture.  Interest rates up, drought. We've had low prices, we've 
had grasshoppers. But your idea of building with local people's money on 
equity and cash rather than debt is the right way to go. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I believe in that so much.  I believe in that as an 
economist, as a parent, as the Minister of Agriculture, and as the Premier 
of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
People want to build in their communities with their money under their 
control.  And they're going to get it.  From this Speech from the Throne 
and the budget you're going to see, they're going to have every single 
opportunity to put as much money as they want into their communities for 
the 1990s and the 21st century. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the diversification of communities, just a couple of other 
points.  I was really happy to hear the Lieutenant Governor introduce the 
40-40 plan for telephone subscribers, with 40 minutes of toll-free calling 
to exchanges within a 40-mile radius.  Forty minutes, no long distance 
calls in a 40-mile radius.  Imagine what that means to rural people, towns, 
and the villages.  You're phoning for repairs, you're phoning for the 4-H, 
you're looking at your hockey schedule.  All of those things.  Mr. Speaker, 
they have been waiting for that, and with new technology and the kinds of 
leadership that you can have in technology, that's possible. 
 
We will continue with the rural gasification program, Mr. Speaker, and 
individual line service, because natural gas to towns and villages and 
farms does what?  It encourages that diversification that there will now be 
money to build on.  If you've got natural gas coming into your community, 
and many do now as a result of our program, they can have manufacturing and 
processing at costs that are competitive with anybody in the world.  Now 
that's taken $300 million, but, Mr. Speaker, it's obviously the 
infrastructure that's necessary. 
 
The same thing, Mr. Speaker.  We will be initiating, and continue 
initiating, novel and new programs for social and economic well-being of 
aboriginal people.  And I've had some very good discussions with Chief 



 

 

Roland Crowe and other members of the aboriginal people that I believe will 
bear fruit for not only a year or two or three, but obviously for decades 
to come. 
 
Let me just say, with respect to health and education, the kinds of 
programs that we're prepared to finance and initiate, Mr. Speaker, are 
substantial.  New base hospitals, the fact that we're prepared to make 
rehabilitation centres, drug rehabilitation centres, our focus on 
preventive medicine, on mental health.  The fact that we're prepared to 
take on and address many of the issues of the day, including some of the 
social problems and social diseases like AIDS (acquired immune deficiency 
syndrome), Mr. Speaker, is something that I raised three or four years ago, 
and some would scoff at and some critics would say, well, you know, you're 
a little bit out of line, Mr. Premier.  Mr. Speaker, I was not out of line. 
 
It must be addressed and it is being addressed.  We have the possibility of 
helping families and people.  Our family foundations and our forums on the 
family, which will include 150 meetings and forums, will be particularly 
important for making sure that we have health care that is delivered right 
into the hands of the people of Saskatchewan, wherever they live, rural and 
urban. 
 
I'm particularly proud too, Mr. Speaker, of the tremendous increase in our 
technical capacity and growth in our base hospitals in Regina and 
Saskatoon, particularly.  And the new expansions, the technology, the 
specialization, and combined with Dr. Murray's report, I believe that you 
will see Saskatchewan at the very leading edge of health care technology 
here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
With respect to the efficient management of resources, Mr. Speaker, the 
fact that we will include the people of Saskatchewan in managing and being 
prepared to deal with all the resources we have and deal with the 
priorities; the fact that we have said the family is extremely important, 
the farm is very important, the community and health and education -- those 
five -- help us manage our resources so that we can do a first-class job in 
those areas is something that is extremely important and will require the 
partnership of Consensus Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to ensure that we have a partnership for social and economic and 
technological development that will be surpassed by nobody, not a single 
province, not a single administration in this country. 
 
We are going to implement a set of guide-lines for ethical conduct of 
cabinet ministers and legislative secretaries.  I want to investigate the 
benefits of access to information rules and laws for the privacy of 
personal information.  Press Ottawa to fully assume its responsibility for 
services for Indians, particularly in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, the steps that you see in the Speech from the Throne, 
and the steps that you will see in the budget, show that the government has 
laid out a format that can ensure a prosperous future and a relevant future 
for the towns and the villages and the people in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 



 

 

 
This government proposes to lead the province through the next decade and 
into the next century on an agenda that is driven by the people of 
Saskatchewan, developed through broad consultation with people from towns 
and villages, farms, urban, rural, in all corners of the province. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I will inform you that I will not be supporting 
the amendment on the motion but I strongly support and will be voting in 
favour of the motion, Mr. Speaker.  Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It is my pleasure to enter 
into this debate in response to the Speech from the Throne for the fourth 
time, Mr. Speaker, and to bring some thoughts to this debate on behalf of 
the constituents of Moose Jaw North -- people, Mr. Speaker, who I think can 
be quite accurately described as the salt of the earth; people who have got 
their feet solidly on their ground and have their heads somewhere below the 
clouds, Mr. Speaker; people who have an understanding of what it takes in 
this province to have a government that responds to the people and to the 
needs of the people today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'd like to begin first of all by extending my compliments to 
Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor for her presentation of the Speech from 
the Throne.  It was certainly her presence that added dignity to the 
tradition that has been long-standing in this House, and the dignity 
unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, which was not reflected in the content of the 
speech.  And I understand it is not Her Honour who writes the content. 
 
Obviously in my remarks today, Mr. Speaker, I will be addressing some of my 
disappointment in the contents, but do compliment Her Honour on the 
presentation and the continuing of a fine tradition in this democratic 
process that we all celebrate here. 
 
I also want to compliment the mover and the seconder, Mr. Speaker.  It is 
an honour that is envied, and I compliment them for having had that honour 
in bringing their views of this Speech from the Throne to this Assembly. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to make some reflections on the remarks of the 
Premier just presented in this House before presenting to this House some 
of my own observations about the Speech from the Throne.  And as I listened 
to the words of the Premier brought to this Legislative Assembly, as the 
Premier outlined his enthusiasm for this supposed statement of vision, a 
statement of political blueprint, of action, Mr. Speaker, I have to say, in 
all honesty, that I stand here with a bit of sorrow in my heart. 
 
It was a sad day, Mr. Speaker, when we had the Premier of the province, the 
leader of the government addressing his government's statement about their 
vision and about their blueprint; that he stood in his place for 45 
minutes, and in that entire 45 minutes he only received support of applause 
from his own colleagues once, half-hearted.  Their most enthusiastic 



 

 

response, Mr. Speaker, was when he was done and he sat down and left.  And 
I say, Mr. Speaker, that is a sad statement for the government and its 
failure to project vision. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- But it's kind of typical; it's kind of typical, Mr. Speaker, 
because it is my view, as I've looked at this process of the Speech from 
the Throne and the response and the presentations from all members on that 
side, including the Premier, that what we have just heard today, just 
before me, Mr. Speaker, is that we have heard a sorry Tory, a sorry Tory.  
We have heard from the sorry Tory.  Mr. Speaker, we have just finished 
listening to the leader, the man charged with the responsibility of leading 
the sorry Tory strategy for re-election.  That's what we've heard. 
 
And I'll comment on that later because this, Mr. Speaker, this whole 
exercise is a reflection of the sorry Tory strategy for re-election.  
That's what it's all about. 
 
It was kind of interesting, the Premier began his remarks, Mr. Speaker, in 
the same way as every other member on that side of the House by making 
reference to the eastern bloc in East Germany and what is happening in that 
part of the world, and some more directly than others and some only by 
implication, Mr. Speaker, implying it is a vindication of this government 
that we have here in Saskatchewan today. 
 
Well, I say, Mr. Speaker, I say that there is some accuracy in the analogy, 
and there is some implication with what is going on in East Germany for 
those of us in Saskatchewan today.  But I point out, interestingly enough, 
Mr. Speaker, that when polls have been done through Eastern Europe and 
throughout Europe, the people in that part of this world are saying, we've 
had it with extremes.  We're tired of extremes.  Communism is dead and I 
agree, Mr. Speaker, and I say hurrah.  The fact of the matter as well, Mr. 
Speaker, is that in the western world unfettered capitalism is also dead 
and I say hurrah. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Speaker, it seems interesting to me when I read and I 
look at the polls of what the public opinion takers in the eastern blocs 
are looking for the opinions of the people, what are they saying?  What 
they're saying, Mr. Speaker, is that what they want in that part of the 
world is social democracy.  Social democracy.  Mr. Speaker, the people in 
that part of the world are saying they've had it with the extreme.  Where 
they want to go is where Saskatchewan has been from 1944 to 1982.  They 
want to go to social democracy.  That's where we've been until this 
government came to power and, Mr. Speaker, not only the people of Europe 
but the people of Saskatchewan want to go there again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Speaker, when we look at the consequences of governments 
that govern with extreme ideologies, it's interesting.  Some of the 



 

 

political scientists will say politics is a circle and the extremes at both 
ends are really just beside each other in a circle.  And I think there is 
some truth to that, Mr. Speaker, when you look at what happens when 
governments govern with extreme ideologies. 
 
In the eastern bloc, Mr. Speaker, with communism, and here in Saskatchewan 
with this PC Party's version of unfettered capitalism called piratization 
today, we have had people experiencing the same negative impacts, the same 
devastating effects in their lives, and responding in the same way.  What 
do they want to do?  They want to change their governments, Mr. Speaker, 
and they have a desire to leave. 
 
And perhaps it is with more wisdom than we sometimes appreciate that the 
most common riddle being asked in Saskatchewan today -- it was quoted on 
the CTV (Canadian Television Network) show W5, and the news media across 
the country are saying it as well -- we've all heard it a thousand times.  
People in Saskatchewan across this province and across this country are 
saying, what's the difference between East Germany and Saskatchewan?  And 
we've all heard the answer.  The answer of course, Mr. Speaker, is that 
East Germany doesn't have a PC government and they can still leave by 
train. 
 
That's what they're saying.  That's what they're saying across this 
province and in our country.  And, Mr. Speaker, I think there is some 
wisdom about the response of the people to governments of extreme ideology.  
I find it interesting as well, Mr. Speaker, when I listen to the Premier 
and his talk about democratic reform, as he says, that's what's going on in 
East Germany; that's what's going on in the eastern bloc today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is one party, one political party in this province that 
stands for democratic reform.  It is a political party which released two 
weeks ago a paper entitled Democratic Reform for the 1990's.  It was 
released by my colleague for Saskatoon Eastview.  There is one party in 
favour of democratic reform in Saskatchewan, and that is the New Democratic 
Party of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Democratic reform. In the Assembly here today in question 
period, the Premier, who claims to have already implemented some 
guide-lines that cut government waste, refused to lay them on the table for 
the members of the opposition and for the media and for the people of 
Saskatchewan.  He says, trust me.  Trust me. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if this government had a record of open government, perhaps 
people would be inclined to say okay when he says, trust me.  But what's 
been the record?  We've seen over the years that I have served in this 
Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker, in my view, a clear erosion of the 
principles of democracy. 
 
We've seen this government attack the auditor.  We've seen this government 
attack the Legislative Counsel.  We've seen this government sabotage public 
accounts and Crown corporations by refusing to meet.  We've seen this 



 

 

government gerrymander the boundaries so that in the next election they 
will hope to have a natural advantage based on their historical strength.  
We have seen, Mr. Speaker, in Bill 5, on the first days that I came to this 
Assembly, a move to take business out of this Assembly, out of the people's 
Assembly, and to move it behind closed cabinet doors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have seen for the first time in Saskatchewan history, in 
the last legislative session, closure used to end debate, and then not only 
that, followed only hours later by the motion to use closure on closure, 
the second time in Saskatchewan history, within hours by this government. 
 
We have seen this government refuse to answer questions for over two years.  
Mr. Speaker, I say there is clearly only one party in Saskatchewan for 
democratic reform, and that's the New Democratic Party of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, this is a government that for some strange 
reason has experienced an amazing coincidence.  Since it has been in power, 
there have been people to blame all over the place, everybody but them.  We 
saw it.  First of all, Mr. Speaker, it was the poor that were to blame for 
our problems in Saskatchewan.  And so we cut social services.  And we had 
the minister of the Crown only months ago say, our children aren't going 
hungry in Saskatchewan. They're not there. 
 
We saw then this government say, well, in addition to poor people we've got 
other problems . . . other people that are causing our problems in this 
province.  It's the workers.  And we saw changes, Draconian changes to the 
labour legislation in this province. 
 
Ah, Mr. Speaker, then we went on to say, but we've got other people causing 
problems for us.  It's those seniors, those seniors that keep going to the 
doctor.  And when he gives them prescription, they go home and they get 
their medicine and they take it.  And that's part of our problem.  Oh, 
we've got to cut into that one. 
 
Then they said, in addition to the poor and to workers and to seniors, 
we've got some other problems here.  They're the cities.  They're soaking 
up too much money from the province and so we have to cut back the funding 
to the municipalities and the school boards. 
 
Ah, Mr. Speaker, and then they said, but in addition to the poor people and 
the workers and the seniors and the people in the cities, we've got 
students.  Those are part of the problems.  We're going to have to restrict 
their access to post-secondary education. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, in this Speech from the Throne repeated by the 
Premier here today, now we have got the ultimate attack -- we're under 
attack by the world.  Not only from within, we are under attack by the 
world. 
 
Well I say, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier, there will be people who say that 
you are looking paranoid.  There will be people who say that you look like 



 

 

you're on the run.  But I've got some good news and I've got some bad news, 
Mr. Speaker.  The good news to the Premier is this: Mr. Premier, you are 
not paranoid.  Mr. Premier, the bad news is this, is that the people of 
Saskatchewan really are out to get rid of you and your government and the 
waste and mismanagement, and on that there is consensus. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- And on that there is consensus. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the Premier, the great hero of agriculture in 
Saskatchewan, didn't have a whole lot to say today.  But as my colleagues 
and I travel this province trying to understand the plight of those in 
rural Saskatchewan and what they look to their leaders, their political 
leaders to respond, there's one clear statement that we keep hearing over 
and over and over again.  They keep saying, for heaven's sakes, take the 
politics out of agriculture.  Take the politics out of agriculture. 
 
Look at agriculture and the problems that we are facing today as a problem 
that needs solutions, and it needs to be addressed in this Assembly every 
year and not just in the year of an election. 
 
You know, it's kind of interesting, Mr. Speaker, when we reflect on 
Saskatchewan history.  Since Saskatchewan became a province in 1905, there 
have been only two times in our history in which we had a Conservative 
government in Regina and at the same time a Conservative government in 
Ottawa. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we saw premier Anderson in Regina and prime minister Bennett 
in Ottawa take Saskatchewan into the Dirty Thirties.  And then again, Mr. 
Speaker, we saw the Premier, the member from Estevan, and Prime Minister 
Mulroney take Saskatchewan through the horrendous eighties. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this may be a coincidence.  This may only be a 
coincidence.  It may be only an amazing coincidence.  But I tell you, Mr. 
Speaker, what the farmers of Saskatchewan are saying.  They're saying 
they've had enough of politics in agriculture.  They've had enough of PCs in 
Regina and Ottawa at the same time, and they're not going to take the chance 
again.  That's what they're saying, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1530) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I listened very carefully to the words of 
the Premier.  There was one word I was specifically interested in hearing 
from him.  And, Mr. Speaker, I'm referring of course to the P-word. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when I got the Speech from the Throne and I opened it up 
and I looked through and I read it; couldn't find the P-word.  Took the 
thing and gave it a big shake and the P-word didn't fall out.  It's not in 
there.  And I listened very carefully to the words of the Premier, and from 
his mouth did not utter the P-word.  In fact, Mr. Speaker, if you want to 



 

 

get the Premier and the ministers of the Crown today to say the P-word, 
you've got to take them up to the top of a 15-story storey building, hold 
him out over the edge and then they just squeak the P-word out. 
 
Because you see, Mr. Speaker, contrary to a year ago, to the last 
legislative session in the Speech from the Throne, in which the Premier 
predicted that this was the Alamo for the NDP -- this was going to be the 
bitter end, the cry of the people, the people were crying out, he said -- 
the people have consensus.  They have a government which wants to charge 
forward and give them the P-word. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the word privatization did not utter from the Premier's 
lips.  It did not not.  It is not in the Speech from the Throne because pure 
and simply, Mr. Speaker, there is a consensus.  There is a consensus, and 
the consensus is that the people have had way too much of privatization and 
they're not going to have anything more to do with it or the government that 
brought it to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- And so the Premier says, the Premier tells us, he says the 
P-word's on hold.  The P-word's on hold.  We can't say the P-word.  It's on 
hold.  Shhhh.  No more P-words. 
 
Well simply put, Mr. Speaker, simply put, when the Premier says that the 
P-word is on hold, I don't believe him.  And you know why I don't believe 
him, Mr. Speaker? Because I know that in May of this year, May 13 to 16 in 
Saskatoon is a major, a major international conference on the P-word. 
 
Now Maggie was going to come.  We all know that this was organized by that 
Tory front group, the institute for private enterprise.  Yes.  We know that 
Maggie Thatcher was going to be there to come and tell the people of 
Saskatchewan about the wonders of the P-word.  Maybe she'd get around to the 
poll tax.  But unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, it seems that Maggie won't be 
able to make it.  She's a little preoccupied with the people and her own 
cabinet, and her own P-word back in the U.K. 
 
But do you know what?  When I opened up the brochure advertising this major 
conference on privatization, what should appear but the smiling face of the 
Premier and a little message to the people of Saskatchewan.  And let me tell 
this Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan what the Premier has to say 
about the P-word.  Now this must have been written . . . I suspect this was 
written before the P-word, the P-word edict was issued.  But under the 
provincial coat of arms, under the title Premier of Saskatchewan, what does 
it say?  It says this, and these are the words of the Premier.  He says and 
I quote: 
 

 As Premier of Saskatchewan, I am pleased to invite you to the 1990 
International Privatization Congress (oh, he said the P-word) in 
Saskatoon, May 13-16, 1990. 

 
And then he goes on to say: 
 



 

 

 The Institute for Saskatchewan Enterprise plays an important role in 
promoting valuable discussions on privatization.  (There's the P-word 
again.)  Saskatchewan is the leader in Canada . . . (Listen to this.)  
Saskatchewan is the leader in Canada encouraging public participation 
(which we all know is the public . . . that's the polite P-word.)  
Saskatchewan is the leader in Canada encouraging public participation in 
new areas of our economy.  We are excited about the economic renewal this 
participation is creating.  Delegates from around the globe . . . (This is 
our new world-globe-trotting Premier.)  Delegates from around the globe 
will gather at this conference, testimony to the timeliness of the 
world-wide interest in privatization. 

 
There's the P-word again.  Oh, if the writer in the Premier's office could 
dash around Saskatchewan with an ink eraser, Mr. Speaker, these would all be 
gone. 
 
And then he concludes by saying: 
 

 I invite you to come to Saskatchewan to continue the dialogue on the 
merits of privatization (the P-word slipped out again) and to share your 
nation's experience in that area.  See you in 1990. 

 
And then there's a signature over the words, Grant Devine, Premier of 
Saskatchewan.  The brochure goes on, Mr. Speaker, to list the Premier of 
Saskatchewan as a keynote speaker. 
 
The super minister for the economy has said within the last few days that 
the piratization of SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) is still on go.  
And I say to this House and I say to the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, that the battle against piratization is not over.  The battle 
against piratization will not be over until the PC government is gone and 
the seat for the Premier of Saskatchewan is held by the member for 
Riversdale as premier in charge of the helm of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, that's my response to the Premier's 
comments today. And as I look at this Speech from the Throne and conclude 
obviously that it is in abject failure in terms of providing a vision or a 
plan of action, a political plan of action for the government, I have to say 
in all honesty, Mr. Speaker, that I'm not surprised. 
 
Because what we have seen in the Speech from the Throne is nothing more than 
a continuation of a political strategy that was hatched last September -- 
when the Premier called together his major Decima polling folks who had 
taken their humungous polls at cost to the taxpayer of our province, and 
Nancy McLean, his medium adviser from Toronto, and he got them together and 
he said, tell me what to do. 
 
And they looked at the polls, and his eastern media adviser said to him, Mr. 
Speaker, she said, Mr. Premier, the people of Saskatchewan don't like what 
you're doing.  And then she said, Mr. Speaker, if you keep telling the 
people of Saskatchewan what you want to do, come the next election they're 



 

 

going to tell you where to go. 
 
And then she said, Mr. Speaker, she told the Premier, Mr. Premier, you have 
only got one option, and that is to go back and revisit 1985 if you have any 
hope at all of being re-elected.  For heaven sakes, don't tell people what 
you're going to do.  For heaven sakes, don't tell them what you've done.  
Mr. Premier, you are going to have to become as sorry Tory, a sorry Tory. 
 
And so what was hatched, Mr. Speaker, was the sorry Tory strategy for 
re-election, and that's what this speech is all about.  And we saw the 
evidence of it last fall.  Last fall he said, we've heard from the people 
and we're sorry.  And he said, just to show that we're going to be 
different, because we're not going to be the same, we're going to be 
different, and he kicked out four of his cabinet ministers.  Out they went.  
And just to show how in touch he was with the people of Saskatchewan in came 
eight new ones, Mr. Speaker, eight who had managed to hide their light under 
a bushel for years.  All at once he discovered eight of them, eight of them, 
just sitting there waiting to give a new direction to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, then what did they do?  They all got into their new 
cabinet, great big, cabinet minister cars and airplanes and they went off to 
Maple Creek, went off to Cypress Hills, and they got fitted with hearing 
aids.  They must have because the Premier came back home and he called a 
news conference.  He called a news conference like one has never been called 
in the western world by any political leader before.  He called a news 
conference and he said, my cabinet ministers are going to return phone calls 
now.  What an announcement.  What an announcement.  He said, not only that, 
if you write them a letter, you're going to get one back.  And he said, not 
only that, we're going to be doing more listening because we've got more 
ears, more ears, more listening. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, then to show how in touch he was with the people of 
Saskatchewan he took Graham Taylor and he took Bob Andrew and he sent them 
off to Hong Kong and to Minneapolis at $100,000 a year -- $100,000 a year, 
and they've got their ears open in Minneapolis and Hong Kong. 
 
Ah, but, Mr. Speaker, somehow we're supposed to believe that this is a new 
look.  This is a new look.  This is the new repentant sorry Tory government, 
and somehow things are being done different behind those closed cabinet 
doors in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, one gets the impression as the Premier travels this 
province these days with this new sorry Tory strategy, and his speeches to 
the people of Saskatchewan go something like this: he always introduces 
himself by saying, hi, I'm your PC Premier and I'm sorry.  I'm a sorry Tory.  
I'm sorry I cut your prescription medicine plan.  I'm sorry I took away your 
school-based children's dental care program.  I'm sorry about the flat tax 
and the sales tax and the lottery tax -- really sorry about that lottery tax 
-- and the gas tax, and that I said the goods and service tax was a good 
idea. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



 

 

 
Mr. Hagel: -- He says, I'm sorry about health cuts and education cuts and 
social services cuts and ignoring the environment and the roads falling 
apart.  I'm sorry about hungry children and poverty and bankruptcies and low 
minimum wage and high unemployment and people leaving Saskatchewan. 
 
I'm sorry I piratized the highways' workers and the dental therapists and 
Sask Minerals and Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation and Saskoil 
and the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan.  I'm sorry I said I'd piratize 
SGI and SaskPower. 
 
I'm sorry about GigaText and the way we treated the auditor and about Chuck 
Childers being a half a million dollar man, and now about STC (Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company). 
 
He's says, I'm sorry.  I am sorry that the minister of privatization 
resigned, couldn't get himself a job in the private sector and so I had to 
appoint him to a fat government job.  He's saying, I'm sorry that I said as 
long as there was a sales tax they would never pay tax again.  Then I put it 
back on, then I gave back, then I increased it, then I kept half of it, and 
now you're paying it all, only more.  But golly gee, isn't a guy entitled to 
make a few mistakes? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Besides -- he goes on to say, Mr. Speaker -- besides, we were 
way out ahead of the people, way out ahead of the people.  But I'm as sorry 
as I can fake it, and won't you please forgive me till the next election? 
 
Well I say to the Premier, I say to the Premier, Mr. Speaker: Mr. Premier, 
you are not half as sorry as the people of Saskatchewan.  You say you're 
listening.  You say you're looking for advice.  If you're listening, I've 
got one word of advice, one word of advice and the word is this: resign!  
Resign and let the people decide! 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, we in Saskatchewan have paid dearly.  We 
have paid dearly for this government's ideological experimentation called 
piratization.  We have paid in the most expensive price possible -- with our 
people. 
 
We came to the end of 1989, Mr. Speaker, with 8,000 fewer people working in 
this province than just a year before.  We finished 1989 with a unique 
distinction, Mr. Speaker.  In 1989, in all of Canada, there was only one 
province in all of Canada that had actually a reduction in the size of its 
labour force.  One in all of Canada last year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And who was it?  Was it Prince Edward Island?  No.  Must have been Nova 
Scotia then.  No.  No, it wasn't them.  Well then surely it is that 
perennial poor sister of our Canadian federation, surely the only province 
that lost, that had a reduction in its labour force in 1989, was poor old 
Newfoundland. 



 

 

 
Some Hon. Members: -- No, no. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, my colleagues are right.  It wasn't Prince 
Edward Island or Nova Scotia or Newfoundland.  In 1989 only one province had 
a reduction in the size of its labour force, and that province was 
Saskatchewan -- Saskatchewan, the home of piratization -- the only province 
in all of Canada that saw its labour force reduced. 
 
Not only that, Mr. Speaker, in 1989 we saw a human tragedy take place in 
this province.  In 1989 we suffered the second greatest loss of people this 
province has ever seen.  In 1989, Mr. Speaker, there were 23,700 people more 
who moved out of Saskatchewan than moved in, over half of them between the 
ages of 15 and 34.  Our best and our brightest and our boldest with the 
greatest amount of initiative -- our newly educated, our creative citizens. 
 
And I hazard a guess, Mr. Speaker, when I say there is not a single person 
in this room today whose life has not been touched by the loss of people 
from our province, every one of us has had a relative, a son or a daughter, 
a best friend, a next door neighbour leave Saskatchewan because they gave up 
on our Saskatchewan. 
 
What a price to pay for this right-wing experiment in ideology called 
privatization.  And since privatization hit the government benches all 
hell-bent for leather, Mr. Speaker, in 1985, this province has lost.  We 
have had a net loss of over 65,000 of our citizens, 65,000 more who left 
Saskatchewan than came in.  Simply put, Mr. Speaker, that is a tragedy 
equivalent to taking the cities, the entire cities, our third and fourth 
largest cities in our province, Moose Jaw and Prince Albert, and putting 
them to a huge moving truck and taking them over one of the Saskatchewan 
borders.  What a tragedy.  What a legacy.  What a statement about the 
accomplishments and the impact that this government has had on the people of 
Saskatchewan! 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it hasn't stopped this year.  In the first two months of 
this year we have lost a net . . . we've had a net loss of another 3,000.  
The indictment goes on and the people of our province are paying the price.  
And I say, I say, Mr. Speaker, it's time.  It's time we say to the people of 
Saskatchewan, stop packing your bags, and it's time that we all get together 
in a true consensus and send the Premier from Estevan and the PC Party 
packing from the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to bring to this Legislative 
Assembly a few brief remarks on the one and only new, brilliant, creative, 
innovative idea in the Speech from the Throne.  It's a wild and woolly 
exercise, Mr. Speaker, called by the government Consensus Saskatchewan, and 
called by the people of this province, con Saskatchewan. 
 
Now what did the Premier have to say before he got sat down by Nancy and 



 

 

Decima back in September that hatched this sorry Tory strategy?  Mr. 
Speaker, our Premier had to say, back in October of 1987 . . .  He was a 
little bolder in those days.  Back in those days he was willing to say what 
he thought.  And what did he have to say then? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I quote from an article in the Star-Phoenix entitled "Despite 
protest, Devine vows to stay the course."  The article leads off with these 
words: 
 

 Premier Grant Devine says he was elected to make decisions and that is 
just what he intends to do. 

 
And then he goes on to say, and I quote again.  This is the Premier 
speaking: 
 

 There are some choices that have to be made that are not always not 
popular in everybody's eyes (boy, he had that one right).  The question I 
always have to ask myself is: if you don't make these decisions, what did 
you get elected for? 

 
And then, Mr. Speaker, in the latter part of the article, the Premier says 
again, and I quote: 
 

 While many people are having difficult times, they have to believe that 
you have a vision about where you're going and about where the province 
could go, and if they believe that, then they'll stay with you. 

 
Well, simply put, Mr. Speaker, when the pollsters and the media advisers sat 
down with the Premier, they said: Mr. Premier, that's your problem in 1990 
-- they don't like your vision and they aren't sticking with you.  You want 
to get re-elected, you're going to have to fake it.  And that's what con 
Saskatchewan is all about, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- So now he's singing a new tune; the Premier's singing a new 
tune.  He says, we're going to have to take the politics out of politics.  
Well we're going to take the water out of ducks . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well we won't diverge to what the Premier had to say 
about ducks.  It's not relevant to this discussion. 
 
But what does the Premier say, Mr. Speaker?  He says we've got to take the 
politics out of politics.  Well of course he wants to take the politics out 
of politics.  You see, when politicians talk about their differences, people 
compare them.  People say, there's politician A, politician B.  There's the 
member from Estevan; there's the member from Riversdale.  When they compare, 
they say there's party A, there's party B; there's the PCs, there's the New 
Democrats.  Of course he wants to take the politics out of politics because 
every time the people of Saskatchewan compare the two, he comes out the 
loser. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- And so he says, I'm sorry, but we're listening.  We've got our 
ears open and we've got more ears in cabinet than we ever had before, and 
they're all open.  And we won't do what the people don't want.  We won't do 
what the people won't want, he says, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this Speech from the Throne, they formally announced a 
miracle of modern medicine -- a miracle of modern medicine.  They announced 
that the PC cabinet and the PC government has gone into rigor mortis before 
it died, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, what is this brilliant new idea called con 
Saskatchewan?  What's it all about?  Well let's take a look.  We've aroused 
the interest of the Deputy Premier, and unfortunately she's been saddled 
with being responsible for this.  So what has she told us?  What's this 
committee all about?  What's this con Saskatchewan all about, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Well what they've told us is that they're going to get together 100 people 
who are all going to come together and tell the government where to go.  In 
my home city, Mr. Speaker, they had a radio call-in show.  They asked 
people, are you in favour of con Saskatchewan or do you think it's a lousy 
idea?  Mr. Speaker, they were opposed 4:1.  Twenty-one people said they 
thought it was a lousy idea; five people said they thought it was a good 
idea. 
 
One of the ones who thought it was a good idea said he thought it was a 
great idea.  They should get these hundred people together and then they can 
all agree and tell the government to call an election.  That was one of the 
supporters for the idea. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Well, we're going to have a hundred people from around 
Saskatchewan.  They're going to have 12 chairpersons, 12 chairpersons.  
Nobody can be a community leader.  Nobody can be there if they've ever been 
elected to something.  They all have to be people who represent nobody, they 
represent nothing, but have more vision about the future of Saskatchewan 
than the PC cabinet. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I point out to the Premier, there is a 
committee that exists in Saskatchewan already.  It is a committee that has 
64 members.  They come from all walks of life.  They come from all over the 
province.  They are already being paid by the taxpayers.  If you ask their 
spouses, they'll tell you they're meeting with people 26 hours a day.  
They're meeting daily in this building, and they're called members of the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Well, Mr. Premier, I point out as well that of those 64 there 



 

 

are 30 who get extra pay to make plans and to make decisions and to show 
leadership.  They sit on that side of the House and they are called cabinet 
ministers and legislative secretaries.  And I say, Mr. Speaker, to the 
Premier, if you can't figure out a way to get this committee of 64, led by 
your most brilliant 30, to solve the immense problems facing the people of 
Saskatchewan, then it's time to let the citizens of this province choose a 
new committee with a new consensus and a new mandate.  That's called an 
election, and you have a responsibility to call one. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, clearly Consensus Saskatchewan is nothing 
more than a public relations gimmick, and a shallow one at that, hatched to 
try to save the Premier's hide.  And it's quite accurately called con 
Saskatchewan by the people of our province.  And at the end of the day it is 
merely a symbol of a government that's out of touch, either out of touch or 
afraid to say what it wants to do.  You can draw no conclusion other than 
that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'd like to turn to one other matter in the Speech from the 
Throne.  The Speech from the Throne was very well presented, and it was 
basically a serious exercise, but it had a joke in it, Mr. Speaker.  It had 
a joke.  On page 14 of the Speech from the Throne it had a joke.  It said, 
and I quote, "Waste will not be tolerated."  Mr. Speaker, it got not a bad 
laugh that day from every corner of this Legislative Assembly. 
 
And let me point out just a simple example.  We have in this Legislative 
Assembly today four more cabinet ministers than when we left at the end of 
August last year -- four more.  Each of them gets an extra $36,000 more than 
they made when they left in August of last year, plus of course they all 
have their staffs and their offices and their cars and so on.  And now we're 
putting them to good use, the Premier tells us, because he's got one of 
those cabinet ministers, is working full time to prepare for the election.  
He's not consulted with us.  The member from Souris-Cannington has not 
consulted with us -- best I can tell, Mr. Speaker, this is a cabinet 
minister paid for by the people of Saskatchewan to organize the PC campaign, 
at an extra $36,000 a year plus office staff and expenses. 
 
Well then, Mr. Speaker, in addition this has been a government of firsts.  
They like to tell us how much they are a government of firsts.  Well they 
got another first, Mr. Speaker.  For the first time in Saskatchewan we have 
a new kind of minister -- it's called an associate minister.  And associate 
ministers, as best as we can understand, are there to help the real 
ministers.  They also get extra money and they get offices and staff and 
cars and the rest of the wad. 
 
Now how many we got?  Remember now, this must be an experiment.  I am sure 
the Premier has consulted and all across Saskatchewan people are saying, we 
need some more ministers to help the real ministers.  So how many we got in 
this little experiment in Saskatchewan?  We got one?  No.  We got two?  No.  
No, no. We got three associate ministers, four more ministers than when we 
left in August, one assigned full time to work in the PC campaign, three to 
help the real ministers. 



 

 

 
(1600) 
 
In addition to that, Mr. Speaker, we've got 10 legislative secretaries.  Now 
what's a legislative secretary do, besides collect another $8,000 a year and 
have a staff and an office and stuff?  Well I point out as well, Mr. 
Speaker, that most provinces will have one or two legislative secretaries; 
we've got 10.  We've got 10.  One of them is snoozing over in the back there 
and I am sure that he's . . . I won't accuse him of sleeping; I think he 
looks as though he's having great thoughts at the moment. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we've got 10.  We've got 10 legislative secretaries.  
What's a legislative secretary supposed to do?  They are supposed to help 
ministers.  Now just let me get this.  Just a second here.  We've got 
associate ministers who are supposed to help ministers, and we've got 
legislative secretaries.  We have three associate ministers, 10 of those 
legislative secretaries, and they're supposed to help ministers. 
 
So what does that mean, Mr. Speaker?  What that means is that we have 
ministers' helpers helping ministers' helpers help ministers!  Ministers' 
helpers helping ministers' helpers help ministers. That's what we've got in 
Saskatchewan.  That's a lot of ministers needing a lot of help. And so is it 
any wonder that we got con Saskatchewan?  I conclude that the sentence, 
waste will not be tolerated, as nothing more than a cruel PC joke on the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, there are some things that the throne 
speech didn't say.  We've got massive population loss in Saskatchewan today. 
No plan.  We have a critical need for stimulation of jobs in Saskatchewan. 
No plan.  We have students who will be looking for work as soon as a month 
from now. No plan. 
 
People are irate about the federal PC government's intention to introduce 
the GST.  And in opposition to that, here in Saskatchewan, we have no plan.  
People are already paying more taxes than they can handle.  They're looking 
for tax relief, and what do we give them in the Speech from the Throne?  No 
plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we've got the insidious flat tax that has affected people in my 
constituency and they're telling me about it now, as they're filling out 
their income tax returns.  We find, for example, somebody in my constituency 
with $25,000 income paying provincial income tax rate, not of the 51 per 
cent officially, not at 51 per cent, but 73 per cent when you factor in the 
flat tax; 73 per cent provincial income tax for somebody with a $25,000 
income. 
 
Somebody with a $40,000 income that's been by my office, Mr. Speaker, has 
said, now it must be more, right, because they're making more.  No, they're 
paying 65 per cent, still more than the 51 per cent officially, but less 
than the person with $25,000 income.  The flat tax is unfair; it's 
insidious.  And what do they say about the flat tax?  No plan. 



 

 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, I conclude by expressing, as I did at the beginning, my 
disappointment in the Speech from the Throne.  People in Saskatchewan are 
looking for hope.  They're looking for hope and instead they got hype.  
People in Saskatchewan are looking for substance, and instead they got 
fluff.  People in Saskatchewan are looking for leadership.  Instead they got 
a government whose battle cry is, "Don't just do something, stand there." 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne is clearly a speech without vision, 
a speech which lacks any kind of a sensible blueprint for political action 
in the interests of Saskatchewan people, and I will take my place indicating 
to this House that I will be voting against the motion and in support of the 
amendment moved by my colleague, the member for Eastview, adding the words 
to the motion that this House, 
 

 . . . regrets that the provincial government has betrayed Saskatchewan 
families and Saskatchewan communities with the sham of its Consensus 
Saskatchewan proposal; by its continued wasteful mismanagement of the 
province's finances; by its failure to provide jobs and strengthen the 
economic base of all Saskatchewan communities; by its failure to develop 
an economic strategy which protects the environment; by its abject failure 
to provide long-term financial security to Saskatchewan farmers; and 
furthermore, has failed to protect the province by following the lead of 
the Federal Government on the policies of free trade, privatization, 
deregulation and the goods and services tax. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I will stand for that amendment against the motion, and I will 
be happy to stand, at some time in the not too distant future, in support of 
a Speech from the Throne which will be led from a government, which will be 
read from that seat, Mr. Speaker, when there is a government in that side, a 
New Democrat government lead by the member from Riversdale.  Thank you very 
much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am pleased also to be entering 
into the throne speech debate.  It's been quite some time since we've had 
the opportunity to exchange debate in the legislature, and I'd like to start 
off by congratulating a couple of our members who have been married since 
the last session: the member from Souris-Cannington and the Speaker.  I'd 
like to congratulate them on that. 
 
I'd like to congratulate the new appointments to the cabinet and the mover 
and seconder of the throne speech -- in fact congratulate all the cabinet, 
all cabinet and legislative secretaries, all 30 of them.  And I'd also like 
to congratulate the appointment of our Clerk, which has happened since we 
last met.  And I'd like to also welcome the pages to this Assembly.  I hope 
that your experience here is a fine one and one that you remember for many 
years to come.  Even though the debate in here sometimes has much to be 
desired and the decorum sometimes has much to be desired, it's an important 
part of the way our society works and our system works, and I hope you do 
have a very good time here. 
 



 

 

I would like to mention briefly the content of the throne speech itself.  
Part of the problem was, Mr. Speaker, is that the throne speech started off 
on a false premise.  It started out by saying that the rest of the world had 
declared economic war on Saskatchewan.  And that's totally a false 
statement.  So the the whole throne speech, I think, is suspect after 
starting out and making a comment that the rest of the world had declared 
economic war on Saskatchewan.  That's totally wrong.  The whole economic 
system throughout the world is struggling, and those countries where they're 
accusing . . . where this government accuses them of declaring economic was 
on us are struggling for their survival, struggling for their own very 
survival. 
 
And at least they stand up for their people; they listen to what their 
people are saying to them.  This government does nothing.  This government 
sits back, sits on its hands and accuses people from outside of our own 
country for the economic problems and the ills and the woes in the province 
of Saskatchewan.  It's hypocritical, Mr. Speaker, because there is no 
question that the blame lies solidly on the shoulders of the members 
opposite, the members of this Conservative government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- What's happened is that this government, Mr. Speaker, has 
lost all of its credibility.  It has no credibility with people in the 
province of Saskatchewan.  And why doesn't it have credibility?  Because 
it's just not believable.  It doesn't matter whether it's a cabinet minister 
that speaks or whether it's the Premier that speaks or whether it's a 
document that comes out in the form of a budget, what's true today may not 
be true tomorrow.  If they want to change it in Decima through Nancy McLean 
and Allan Gregg, those pollsters from Toronto say it should be changed 
because the public reaction is bad -- oops, they change it; whoops, oh boy, 
got to change that.  Another change. 
 
The deficit budgets, every budget that they've brought in has been a deficit 
budget.  And they haven't met their projections.  They can't even have 
credibility on the deficit.  The deficit is always higher than what's been 
projected by this government.  And I predict that the budget that comes down 
on Thursday night will be yet another deficit budget that our future 
generations are going to have to pay for because of the waste and 
mismanagement of this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- The broken promises, the deficit budgets, the scandals, and 
now corruption; this government cannot have credibility with the people in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
You look at the Supercart issue.  They're in court now.  I thought Supercart 
had long since passed; it happened early in the administration.  But now 
Supercart is in court -- one of the crown jewels of this government. 
 
You look at GigaText.  Well GigaText should have been in court.  Guy 
Montpetit was in court, who was the principal of GigaText, in Montreal for 



 

 

defrauding someone out of $39 million.  And he defrauded, I maintain he 
defrauded the Saskatchewan government as well, in collaboration with members 
of the cabinet, but we can't get our money back.  They won't tell us where 
the money's been spent. 
 
Look at the dental therapists.  The dental therapists ended up in court and 
beat the government in a court case.  They got a settlement from the court. 
 
The bribery, the bribery of officials within STC, the alleged bribery that's 
there going on in a Dallas court-house over the past couple of months.  
Kickbacks, under-the-table deals. 
 
The government has no credibility with the Saskatchewan people.  How can 
they establish credibility?  They don't stand up to the federal government.  
Let's look at agriculture for a few moments, Mr. Speaker.  I think everyone 
in Saskatchewan recognizes that agriculture is in crisis.  And it's not 
because of economic war being declared on Saskatchewan, it's war declared by 
a Tory administration that is unsympathetic.  They've declared war on the 
people in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now we remember a while ago there was a deficiency payment went out to the 
agricultural community, a billion dollars put out into the agricultural 
community.  It helped saved the Tory government in the last election.  
There's no question about that. 
 
But they're going to get all that money back.  They're going to get every 
cent of that money back from the farmers.  And I'll just review a list here 
of some federal cuts and new costs to farmers that are between the year 1989 
and 1982.  Freight rates, $40 million; branch line rehabilitation, $48 
million; commodity-based loans, $14.5 million; dairy export programs, $7 
million; livestock feed board, 1.7 million; crop insurance, 200 million; 
advance payments now that the interest is coming on to them, $81 million; 
western grain stabilization levy increases, $273 million; fuel tax rebates 
on the excise, $250 million, and on the sales portion, $174 million.  That 
totals $1.1 billion, Mr. Speaker.  Does the figure ring a bell?  Is that not 
the same amount that they got from the deficiency payment?  The farmers, is 
that not the same amount they got?  Now they're getting it all back. 
 
In addition to that, Farm Credit Corporation has just increased their 
interest rates on their loans.  The farm production loans were given out a 
while ago, $25 an acre.  The Tory administration said, we're going to help 
you, we're going to give you money.  So they gave them $25 an acre; now 
they're foreclosing on their farms, Mr. Speaker.  Six billion dollars worth 
of debt in Saskatchewan, $6 billion worth of farm debt.  Chartered banks 
hold about 1.6 billion, federal government holds about 1.5 billion, the 
provincial government holds about 1.5 billion, the credit union holds about 
a billion.  And does this government do anything about the farm debt?  No.  
Over 50 per cent of the farm debt in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, is held by public institutions, Farm Credit Corporation with the 
federal government, Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan with the 
provincial government. 
 
And they're trying to blame it on someone else.  It's always someone else's 



 

 

problem.  It's never their problem.  So how can they have credibility?  They 
don't stand up for Saskatchewan people.  If the federal government wants 
Meech Lake passed, they will pass it.  If the federal government wants to 
take away from the farmers in Saskatchewan, that's okay, they accept it.  If 
the government wants to put through the goods and services tax, that's okay, 
our government accepts it.  They don't stand up for Saskatchewan people and 
they have no credibility with the Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- The agricultural problem is a complex one, Mr. Speaker, and 
I think that most members of this Assembly would know that -- a very complex 
problem.  But there are solutions.  And some of the solutions are: one, to 
restructure the debt, and this government would have influence over 50 per 
cent of that debt. 
 
Secondly, farmers need some kind of an assured income.  They can't have 
their yo-yo jerked every time this government wants to make political 
mileage.  Farmers now have to take into consideration the political climate 
and the political mood of this government to do their budget projections on 
their farm.  That's not good enough, Mr. Speaker.  We need income stability 
for farmers in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And thirdly, Mr. Speaker, we need intergenerational transfer of farm land.  
I've talked to far too many farmers who want to retire.  They set up their 
children in farming.  They were debt-free themselves, but because they put 
up their land as security for their children to farm, they lost their own 
farming operations as well.  And that's not good enough, Mr. Speaker.  We 
want intergenerational transfer of farm land in the province of 
Saskatchewan.  We don't want the banks and the government foreclosing on 
people and destroying their hopes and dreams as this government has done. 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the long-term solutions to agriculture are more complex than 
that, and we recognize that. But this government is brain-dead in terms of 
new ideas for agriculture.  They talk about diversification, but what do 
they do about diversification of agriculture?  They want to build a bigger 
and bigger agri-business. If it keeps going the way it's going we'll have a 
serf system, so the Cargills and the Continental Grains and the huge, huge 
food chain companies of the world can come in here and have our Saskatchewan 
people work as serfs for them. And that's not good enough. 
 
Diversification in agriculture has to be more than new ways to deal with 
wheat.  We have to look at non-traditional things in agriculture.  We have 
to look at combining grain farming and livestock with other things that'll 
make that farm operate. But does this government think of that?  No, they 
don't. 
 
They've lost their credibility with rural Saskatchewan.  They've lost their 
credibility with urban Saskatchewan, and they will try and re-establish 
credibility by putting money into the hands of farmers before the next 
election, much needed money. But it won't work this time around.  The 



 

 

Saskatchewan agricultural community was bought in 1986, and they will not be 
purchased again to go to the polls and vote for a Tory government that has 
decimated the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Consensus Saskatchewan is a joke. And already the member who 
spoke before me, the member from Moose Jaw North, pointed out the lack of 
understanding to put in something like Consensus Saskatchewan.  ConSask is 
right. People believe that they've been conned in the province of 
Saskatchewan.  People say what do the back-bench members of the Conservative 
Party do?  Well I say first off, there aren't any back-bench members.  
They're almost all cabinet ministers or legislative secretaries. 
 
And secondly, Mr. Speaker, when they do go out and try and listen, they 
don't like what they hear, because the question that's most often asked in 
the province of Saskatchewan today is, when is there going to be an 
election?  And when you tell people that this government could go until 
October of 1991, it sends shudders down their spine.  They turn pale and 
they think, oh my goodness, we thought it would be sooner than that because 
they're into the fourth year of their mandate. 
 
The people in Saskatchewan want an election.  Consensus Saskatchewan is not 
going to be telling this government what they want to hear.  It's not going 
to be telling them what they should hear.  It's a public relations exercise 
for a government that has really gone astray.  Bankrupt of ideas, 
brain-dead, desperate to hold on to power, but without the ability to do it, 
because you've destroyed your credibility with Saskatchewan people. 
 
There is not a one of you on a provincial scale that has credibility in the 
eyes of the public.  Some individuals may have credibility with people they 
know in their own ridings, but as a government you have no credibility.  You 
don't have credibility in the North.  You don't have credibility in the 
business community.  You don't have credibility in the farming community.  
You don't have credibility with seniors.  You don't have credibility with 
youth.  You don't have credibility with wage-earners.  You only have 
credibility in your own minds, ladies and gentlemen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are some very important things that we have to deal with 
in Saskatchewan.  One of them I've already mentioned is agriculture.  
Secondly is the environment. 
 
 DThe environment is a crucial question that must concern all of us, Mr. 
Speaker.  It must not only concern people in this legislature but people 
throughout the province of Saskatchewan.  Every individual must make a 
commitment to do what they can about the environment.  The environment 
could well not sustain life on our good planet earth for many more 
generations to come, Mr. Speaker, because of the way that we have treated 
it as a society, as a consumer-oriented society. 
 
We have to look at sustainable development.  And this government that's so 
keen on building a pulp mill in Meadow Lake -- I say, Mr. Speaker, don't 
bother building the pulp mill.  Let's look at some kind of sustainable 
development to recycle paper. 
 



 

 

Mr. Speaker, do you know that office quality paper, if you want to get 
recycled office quality paper, you have to purchase it from the United 
States of America.  Paper that's collected in Canada for recycling, 
anywhere where they collect for recycling, they send it down to the United 
States of America, they recycle the paper, they send it back up here and we 
have to buy it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say we have to look at sustainable development in terms of 
putting that mill in Meadow Lake as a recycled paper mill and not a pulp 
mill, Mr. Speaker, not a pulp mill that's going to have unproven 
technology.  There is proven technology in recycled paper and we have to 
look at those types of things for our future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I challenge this government to start using more recycled paper.  Reams 
and reams of paper come out of government, Mr. Speaker.  Reams and reams of 
paper are used every day by the Government of Saskatchewan.  How many trees 
we have to chop down, the clear cutting of our forests that we have to 
completely wipe out to put that paper onto the desks of government.  This 
government should be using recycled paper, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'd like to close off by talking a bit about something that's 
very dear to me, and that's the sense of Saskatchewan community.  I think 
if anything else this government has done that's an atrocity, it would have 
to be the sense of destroying the Saskatchewan community. 
 
This government, more so than any time in the history of our province, has 
taken away the ability of people to control their own lives.  The 
small-business people, the youth -- anyone in Saskatchewan has less control 
of their own lives now than what they did when this government came into 
office in 1982. 
 
Rural Saskatchewan is withering on the vine; urban Saskatchewan is 
experiencing severe socioeconomic problems.  Crime rates are up; people 
live in poverty; people don't care about anyone but themselves because 
they're struggling for survival.  The sense of Saskatchewan community is 
struggling for survival, Mr. Speaker.  And I don't believe that we can 
stand by and allow this government to destroy the sense of Saskatchewan 
community. 
 
It used to be that Saskatchewan people could stand up and do things for 
themselves, but with this government you can't do anything for yourself any 
more.  They talk about the East bloc countries and the death of communism. 
And I say congratulations, hurrah to the death of communism. 
 
But I also say, Mr. Speaker, that greed and incompetence and raw capitalism 
will do the same thing in North America.  And the people are saying in 
North America, set us free of this system as well.  They don't want to be 
dominated by a government that rather than letting Saskatchewan people do 
things for themselves, they bring in Chuck Childers from Chicago; they 
bring in the Weyerhaeusers from Tacoma, Washington; they bring in the 
Cargills to dominate our agricultural sector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people want to do it for themselves.  They can do 



 

 

it for themselves because they have the capability and they have the 
desire.  But they can't do it right now because this government has taken 
away their means to do it for themselves. 
 
Saskatchewan people can achieve anything they want, and Saskatchewan people 
can be anything they want to be, given the opportunity.  But the 
opportunities are closing.  Many opportunities have completely closed 
because of the policy of a government that doesn't have a plan for the 
future.  They don't care about the future.  They care about power and they 
care about today. 
 
Well we care about today as well, Mr. Speaker, but we care about the future 
because we want Saskatchewan people to do it for themselves.  We want 
Saskatchewan people's aspirations and desires to reach the highest pinnacle 
they can, not to be decimated and downtrodden by a government that is 
turning into as bad as any of the East bloc countries would turn into. 
 
They even have their own way of presenting themselves.  And do you know 
what the biggest joke in Saskatchewan is today, Mr. Speaker?  It's when one 
of the members opposite comes to a person and says, I am from the 
government; I'm here to help you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if we don't find ways of putting back the sense of 
Saskatchewan community, we're doomed to failure of the people.  They've 
destroyed trust in government.  They have destroyed the perception of 
politicians in Saskatchewan because they want us all lumped together. 
 
But there is a difference; there is a difference in terms of how 
Saskatchewan should be developed.  The public in the province of 
Saskatchewan know what they want, Mr. Speaker.  They know that they don't 
want a Tory government any longer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- The days of the Saskatchewan community are rapidly passing 
us by.  The time is here where you don't stop and pick people up on the 
road any more.  If someone has a flat tire, people are scared to stop and 
help them change the tire on the road.  People have to lock their doors in 
every place in Saskatchewan now.  People don't join together in a sense of 
community, not like they used to.  They're fighting and struggling for 
survival. 
 
It used to be when the barn burnt down everybody would get together and 
rebuild the barn.  Now they sit around and wonder whether or not the 
government's going to come along and promise them a new barn. 
 
Saskatchewan people feel like they're dangling on a chain.  The wedge 
that's been driven into the Saskatchewan community by this government 
between the rural and the urban has been a vicious, shameful attack on 
Saskatchewan people.  They've tried to divide people.  They want to keep 
people ignorant, because an uneducated public or a deceived public can't 
make informed decisions. And we all have a role to play in ensuring that 
people have quality education and access to information. 



 

 

 
The credibility of this government is gone economically, it's gone 
politically, and it's gone morally, Mr. Speaker.  The sense of Saskatchewan 
community will be redeveloped, not by us as government, but by Saskatchewan 
people given that opportunity, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to close by saying that we have failed future generations if we 
do not get back on with the job of developing our sense of Saskatchewan 
community.  We have failed people if we don't get back to that, Mr. 
Speaker.  And I don't know how we can with this government in control of 
power, because that's all they appreciate is raw, crass, unblatant power -- 
blatant power.  What's leadership today is something else tomorrow. 
 
The time has come, Mr. Speaker, not for Consensus Saskatchewan, the time 
has come for the people in the province of Saskatchewan to rise up and 
throw this party out of government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Speaker, I don't feel I want to take any more time here 
today, but I do look forward to the debates on the legislative agenda and 
the budget.  We don't know what the legislative agenda is going to be yet, 
Mr. Speaker.  We don't know what the budget's going to be.  But I do look 
forward to that and I look forward to a more productive session of the 
legislature than we've experienced in the past. 
 
When the government talks about more co-operation, about listening, I think 
it's a big sham, Mr. Speaker, but we want to give that an opportunity to 
work.  And, Mr. Speaker, if it doesn't work, it'll just entrench more and 
more what the people in Saskatchewan think about this government. 
 
If this government does not work in co-operation and consensus building in 
this legislature when we hand out an olive branch to them, it'll even 
further destroy their credibility.  And I guess the court that'll take care 
of them will be the people's court in the province of Saskatchewan that 
will throw them out of office with a resounding defeat come next election 
time. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I welcome the opportunity to 
take part in the throne speech debate today, Mr. Speaker.  It, needless to 
say, is often educational, it's informative, and considering the last two 
speakers, I would add the word, entertaining. 
 
I have to say, particularly in listening to the member from Moose Jaw 
North, there were moments when I thought I was in something called the gong 
show, and I say that with a degree . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . In 
keeping with the good sense of humour that the member from Moose Jaw North 



 

 

is portraying, Mr. Speaker, I would say that I felt like I was in the 
audience and perhaps he was the participant.  However, it was entertaining, 
to say the least. 
 
One of the things that disturbs me, Mr. Speaker, in listening to the throne 
speech and the last gentleman's remarks has to do with what I call 
attitude, pure and simple.  Doesn't matter what political stripe it is, 
it's called attitude. 
 
And it has to do with what you believe people can do, and in fact what they 
should be doing in a democratic country like Canada, and like Saskatchewan; 
and how you perceive the strengths of the people, their role to government 
role; how you look at the democratic process itself, and what each one of 
us can contribute to it no matter what our political philosophies or our 
leanings. 
 
And I would never go so far as to suggest that every member on the 
opposition benches should be sent packing out of this House or packing out 
of this province; or that each and every member over there is crass and has 
nothing but the meanest of intentions in dealing with policies for 
government.  How on earth have we got to this stage in Saskatchewan in 1990 
when we have a political party that believes that of other political 
parties? 
 
There is one word for it, Mr. Speaker, and it's called intolerance.  
Intolerance of other people's ideas, intolerance of their political 
philosophies, intolerance and lack of acceptance that each one of us with 
different ideas and different political philosophies can come together and 
in fact agree upon a direction for Saskatchewan in the future.  That 
attitude I think, Mr. Speaker, overall is foreign to the people, young and 
old, male and female, in Saskatchewan.  I think it is very much a foreign 
attitude. 
 
I go back to the days of my grandmother, the pioneers of this province, and 
they had tough, tough times.  They were isolated. Oftentimes, no technology 
-- such things as telephone; for sure no electricity, gas, rural 
gasification, those types of things.  But they had a sense of community, 
and they did not have any degree of intolerance for the community that 
lived around them. 
 
So I find it interesting in the year 1990 to sit in this great institution 
and hear that kind of intolerance coming from some members, Mr. Speaker.  I 
think it's a sad day, but I also think it says something about what we as 
Saskatchewan people have to do for the future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to address my remarks today to a topic that has been 
mentioned upon several times today, Consensus 100 in Saskatchewan.  And I 
want you to know that I indeed support the framework that the throne speech 
lays out in creating a partnership, facilitating a partnership for people 
in this province, from the workers' side to the business side to the 
corporate side to housewives, to moms, to dads, old and young -- a 
framework for a partnership for the future. 
 



 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that in fact that partnership in the future is 
going to be indicative of the kinds of new opportunities that are going to 
present themselves to our residents within Saskatchewan and in fact 
determine whether they are ready to accept those opportunities or not. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this partnership is also going to ensure that some very sound 
objectives are met through sound management of our province's financial 
resources.  We've spent a fair amount of time, as have my hon. colleagues 
across the way, in talking about fiscal responsibility.  We've also spent a 
lot of time in talking about the financial position that this province 
finds itself in, why it is there, what it's going to take in order for us 
to get out of this financial situation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there's been a lot of discussion over the past couple of days, 
or the past several days, on what Consensus Saskatchewan is all about.  
And, Mr. Speaker, if I had to put one word to Consensus Saskatchewan it 
would be this: change, pure and simple -- change. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- It's a change all right.  Short change. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- Well the member says short change.  Consensus 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is about change.  Not change in one sector but 
change right across the province -- change within people, change within our 
communities, our institutions, perhaps our laws, the way we do things.  
Changes outside of our boundaries that are taking place that affect our 
students, where they will be going in the future; our farmers, our business 
people, both men and women, and, Mr. Speaker, our politicians.  Our 
politicians should never be excluded from this discussion of change in the 
world and change in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Consensus Saskatchewan, it's about changing the way that 
governments do things.  It's about changing government systems to make them 
more flexible with other changes that have been happening around them.  
It's about change and being responsive to rapidly changing times in which 
we live. 
 
We've seen changes in the world.  We only have to turn the TV on at night 
or pick up a newspaper or turn the radio on at least once a day, and you 
will hear about changes that are happening, and reforms -- sometimes 
government reforms, but for certain, change.  From Russia to Romania, South 
America, South Africa, Germany, both East and West, and provincially in 
Canada from one province to another, you will see things being done that in 
fact indicate change is taking place in that province. 
 
But the changes in the world, Mr. Speaker, I think it sends a message and 
it says that people all over the world are demanding a greater say in their 
government and their government systems, that they want to have a say in 
decisions that affect their lives, not only at home but in their work 
place, in their homes, their communities. 
 
And along with that they're also demanding equality. 
 
If there is one interesting thing to note when you look at the changes that 



 

 

are taking place in the world, Mr. Speaker, whether it's technology, 
transportation or something else, the one thing that has become clear is 
that the larger and the more set the institution, the more unlikely it is 
to accept change in an orderly fashion. 
 
And I would say today that there are a lot of people in our province that 
would say one of the slowest factors of change are politicians and, in 
fact, government, partly to do with its size or perhaps some inflexibility 
that is built into the system, but nevertheless they do not change. 
 
There are also experts and people around in looking at this factor that 
would say people are ahead of the politicians when it comes to knowing the 
changes that are going to be happening in their future and their acceptance 
of those changes now. 
 
Last week, Mr. Speaker, I listened with a great deal of interest to the 
Leader of the Opposition and his remarks in reply to the throne speech.  I 
have to tell you I had some surprise with some of his remarks.  He 
suggested that somehow consulting with the people of the province was not 
an appropriate function of a democratically elected government, and I 
invite his members to go back and read Hansard. 
 
He also suggested that the only consultation necessary was in the 28 days 
of an election campaign.  Now most of you people have been in an election 
campaign.  I mean, you tell me about consultation on a 28 day campaign, one 
on one basis with each member in your constituency, and you would have to 
go a long way in exaggeration to have anybody believe that in fact that is 
the very best mechanism of doing it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that more than ever the people of Saskatchewan need 
an ongoing say in government processes.  I also believe that their futures, 
Mr. Speaker, their futures will have a say on government, final decisions 
on government policy, government financing, and those things that affect 
them on a more regular basis.  I think if the public are involved in those 
kinds of decisions, Mr. Speaker, that the decisions can only be stronger 
because of the broad consultation that will take place. 
 
Consensus Saskatchewan and the idea of giving people more input into the 
decisions of government, Mr. Speaker, is consistent with a number of 
changes that have developed and are continuing to develop, not only in our 
province but in Canada also, and world-wide, Mr. Speaker. 
 
For example, Mr. Speaker, we have the trend toward reforming government.  
We have the movement towards decentralization.  Now that's a word that we 
often debate, toss around back and forth, opposition to the government 
side.  I'm not sure that any of us have set aside the politics long enough 
to really sit down and discuss the benefits or, if you want, perhaps the 
down sides to decentralization.  We never seem to get by the political 
philosophies in talking about what is best for Saskatchewan and the 
contributions that can come from the people out in the communities. 
 
The movements that have been taking place, Mr. Speaker, have been 
transcending all national boundaries, all governments, political parties.  



 

 

In fact there are those who would suggest that the trends are marking the 
end of a time that has seen what can only be defined as very hard line 
political philosophy. 
 
Over the past several years, Mr. Speaker, we in Saskatchewan have been in 
several consultative processes, and they have been an ongoing process.  But 
I believe we are seeing the acceleration of consulting, the need for 
building consensus. 
 
For example, Mr. Speaker, I go back to several years ago in education.  
There was the development of a core curriculum.  It's one of the few 
programs in Saskatchewan, and in fact went through two stripes of 
government. The NDP -- I think the member from Regina Centre will remember 
some of the discussions that were prior to our government coming in to do 
with directions and the review and the reform in education. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, not much changed when the government changed, on that 
issue.  We knew that it was needed.  The people, the parents, students were 
saying that you needed to do a review within education. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that consultation process dated back in fact to 1981.  A 
committee had been established, and in 1983 there was another committee put 
into place and in fact held approximately 40 consultation meetings 
throughout the province.  And they collected briefs, they held public 
meetings. 
 
A questionnaire was also distributed and I believe they had, out of the 
total that were sent to parents and teachers within the system, about 
26,000, mostly parents, took the time to fill out those questionnaires on 
what they thought the education system should be for their child today and 
for children in the future. 
 
(1645) 
 
All of those consultations, Mr. Speaker, resulted in something called 
Directions, the final report, and that was released in February of 1984.  
The process, Mr. Speaker, was in fact one of coming to a consensus.  Of 
course not everybody agreed on everything that people saw, but there in 
fact was a point where that consensus took place, and it was developed 
around the issue of the basics, as many people refer to, or core. 
 
And while you and I may know the basics of reading, writing and arithmetic, 
there were some elements that were added for the future, and one was of 
course computer literacy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there has been a consultation process in the health care 
sector.  The government will soon be releasing the report of the health 
care commission, and that also conducted public meetings in order to find 
solutions to many very difficult questions that are facing our health care 
system for the future.  I know from attending a couple of them that they 
were attended by members of the opposition, and I think that's good, Mr. 
Speaker.  You had both the opposition and government members in meetings 
with the public, being conducted more or less by the public. 



 

 

 
Many of our ministers, Mr. Speaker, have been holding public meetings, 
including the Associate Minister of Economic Diversification and Trade.  
Those have been going very well.  People are interested.  People want a 
voice. They want a say.  They want to share their ideas of what is 
happening in their community and where they think it should be going. 
 
We have had exactly the same process in agriculture, the environment.  
Member from Regina Rosedale is interested in the environment . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Rosemont, I'm sorry, you're right; I'm not 
sure where the other one is.  The point is that, Mr. Speaker, the mechanism 
has been there and they have been targeted to various issues, but nothing 
as an umbrella over several issues, and the impact on government finances 
concerning them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Consensus Saskatchewan will hold open town hall meetings in 
communities all across the province in order to give the people of 
Saskatchewan a say in the decisions that will affect their lives.  Those 
meetings are public, Mr. Speaker.  We have given our commitment to the 
opposition that in fact they are public, and that will be upheld. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there's some tough decisions to be made.  The agriculture 
industry is at a crossroads.  The world trend towards self-sufficiency and 
grain production has led to the loss of many of our very best customers.  
We find ourselves in the cross-fire of trade wars between Europe and the 
United States, and that has had the effect of lowering the value of our 
agriculture production to less than what it cost to in fact produce it.  
And those begged the question, Mr. Speaker, how do we support the need for 
diversification into food processing and other agriculture related 
industries, while at the same time maintaining the level of support to the 
farmers that they need? 
 
The health care system.  We've seen tremendous advancements in medicine to 
do with technology over the past few years, but we also know that that has 
come with escalating costs.  How do we deal with those ever-increasing 
pressures that quality health care places on our financial resources?  How 
do we deal with the ageing population, knowing full well that the future is 
going to see fewer workers supporting more people like you and I that will 
be retired? 
 
The same financial pressures exist in our education system.  As we move 
further into the information age, it is clear that quality education is an 
investment in the future.  Education is costly.  But, Mr. Speaker, if 
anyone has ever thought it is too costly, I would suggest that they perhaps 
consider the cost of ignorance.  How do we ensure that our province's young 
people will continue to receive the sound educational footing that is going 
to create opportunities for them in the future? 
 
Diversification of our economy; the creation of new opportunities for 
people; people creating new opportunities, particularly young people.  And 
how do we do that in our rural communities? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, those are only a few of the main questions to be asked.  



 

 

There are many, many more.  And it is also only a few of the pressures that 
many of the public services are feeling. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I believe as government, when you step back and you look 
at the questions that are facing you, the needs of the public and what the 
public are saying, there is a choice to be made.  Government could step 
back and they could make all the decisions, unilaterally, on behalf of the 
people of Saskatchewan, or we could simply let the people of Saskatchewan 
have a say in the decisions that directly affect their lives. 
 
The other day, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition somehow suggested 
that listening to the people is an abdication of power, an abdication of 
power.  He also said that is really not the role of a democratically 
elected government.  Well, Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House 
believe that that is in fact the opposite. 
 
Consultation is indeed the role of a democratic government, and 
consultation for democratic governments in the future will even become more 
important than they are today.  Mr. Speaker, it is a role which is 
complementary to the functions that MLAs and cabinet ministers already 
perform.  And when I say MLAs, I include the opposition MLAs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the years ahead governments will act not so much on behalf 
of the people as in conjunction with the people.  I believe, Mr. Speaker, 
that the 1990s will see a movement from representative democracy to 
something called participatory democracy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today we live in a representative democracy.  Our people in 
our constituencies vote for us and they send us in here and we vote on 
issues in here representing our people.  In other words, our people in our 
constituencies have elected someone to do the voting for us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we created a representative democracy about 200 years ago, and 
it was a practical way to organize democracy.  Direct citizen participation 
was simply not feasible, and so we elected people to go off to the capitals 
in the world, to represent and to vote, and then they would come back and 
tell them what happened.  The representative who did so was probably doing 
a good job and probably got re-elected.  The one who did not was probably 
turned out. 
 
For 200 years, Mr. Speaker, that system has worked well, and parts of it 
will continue to work well.  Communications, travel and technology have 
changed; that it is going to reform our democratic system and move it, not 
only from representative democracy but one, in fact, that individuals will 
have an opportunity to participate at a much more direct level than what 
they do today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the world has changed, the world is changing, and that 
changing is coming at an accelerated pace.  We as politicians must adapt to 
keep pace with the change.  The people in fact are ahead of the 
politicians.  And the member from Quill Lake, you know, sits back and 
laughs, and if there was ever one dinosaur in this Assembly it has to come 
from the likes of the member from Quill Lake. 



 

 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- Change at the best of times is difficult Mr. Speaker, 
but the people of Saskatchewan have constantly lived with change. 
 
Mr. Speaker, reforming government is another change that society is going 
to go through.  Mr. Speaker, we have been seeing the changes, the reforms 
taking place in other governments.  Who are we to say that that will not 
take place in our own government system in the province of Saskatchewan 
when we see it happening around the world?  It doesn't make sense.  We 
stand back and in our arrogant manner that the NDP are suggesting we are 
isolated from the world around us when nothing is further from the truth.  
Nothing is further from the truth, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are part of the world, and the world is closer to us than it has ever 
been before in its entire history of civilization.  Politicians today have 
to face that reality and have to put in the mechanisms that they are going 
to be able to deal with those changes, and that, in part, includes 
democratic changes to the government system, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, these reforms, these reforms, not only do they give 
people a say in the system, not only is it a sharing of ideas the 
government can pick up from the people, but it can bring more public 
accountability and accessibility to government.  And, Mr. Speaker, that is 
needed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are seeing more public hearings and inquiries.  You know, 
the other day the Prime Minister, for example, he just announced that there 
will be . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Fortunately, two members who have already 
spoken in this debate still had more to say.  Unfortunately they'll have to 
wait for the next time around.  At this point the Deputy Premier is 
speaking. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, we noted the 
other day the announcement of the Prime Minister -- there was going to be a 
public hearing.  It has to do with the discussion going on in Canada right 
now on Meech Lake.  The New Brunswick proposal on Meech Lake was one in 
fact of calling for public hearings, and the Prime Minister has agreed to 
do that. 
 
I think what that says, Mr. Speaker, to all of Canada, that public 
participation in decisions to be made by governments at all levels in fact 
is what the public are demanding, and that in fact is what governments are 
going to have to move towards, because after all, governments are a 
creation of those people if people vote for them, put them there, and they 
expect the best of their assistance. 
 
And when they think that it's time for these systems to change, in part, 
the public will dictate that, and that's what the public have been doing 
for a couple of years, Mr. Speaker.  They are demanding a greater say of 



 

 

what happens in their government, how their government works, and the 
systems to be put into place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are those across the way who say that, you know, the 
MLAs in here, or the government, is elected to make these decisions.  On 
one hand that is true.  On the other hand, being a democratic society, Mr. 
Speaker, we pay heed to the opinions of the people that in fact elected us.  
I see in no manner whatsoever that this is an abdication of 
responsibilities.  The responsibilities are drawn clear.  And in fact, Mr. 
Speaker, I would suggest to my hon. colleagues, the opposition across the 
way, that leadership, as defined in 1930 or 1940, is going to have a much 
different definition in the 1990s.  And what you are going to be seeing is 
leadership that knows how to listen, when to listen, and when to follow, 
and to be able to facilitate as to what they will be saying, Mr. Speaker.  
That will be the 1990s. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that greater participation by those involved in 
government is the way of the future in all types of organizations.  I 
believe that it is happening around the world, it is happening in other 
governments . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- It being 5 o'clock the House stands recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


