





























































Hansard: June 05, 1990


 

 

June 5/90 
EVENING SITTING 

 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Health 
Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 32 

 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.  Just before supper the 
minister was talking about some of the things that he feels were very 
innovative and forward-thinking health care programs implemented under his 
government and while he has been Minister of Health. 
 
One of the things he referred to, Mr. Minister, was the computerized health 
care card, and the Wascana Rehab Centre, the facility.  He indicated that 
it was very important to have these facilities, even if they weren't 
properly staffed, because obviously the facilities would attract more 
people.  And with respect to the computerized health care card, Mr. Chair, 
the point I would like to make is that I'm not saying the card is not a 
useful item but when the minister has to point to a computerized health 
care card as his innovative health care program, and a facility that may be 
a very good facility but isn't properly staffed, as his achievements in 
health care, I think it tells you where he's at with respect to health 
care. 
 
However, Mr. Chair, we have to look at things like the number of public 
health nurses in the province of Saskatchewan, the shortage of public 
health nurses; the shortage of nurses in hospitals; the fact that hospital 
services is one of the lowest expenditures in Canada, the expenditure in 
hospital services in Saskatchewan, according to the most recent statistics 
that we have. 
 
Those are the true criteria by which one judges the performance of a 
government, Mr. Minister -- not a computerized health card, even though it 
may have a useful purpose.  It certainly isn't such a laudable innovation 
that the minister holds it up as the thing for which he is going to be 
known in history, is the computerized health card.  I think that says 
something about where this particular government and this minister is at, 
Mr. Chair.  I want to make that point. 
 
The minister says that we are worried about change and I just want to 
respond to that.  We're not concerned about change.  He says that we talk 
about scare tactics.  We're not concerned about change.  We want to know 
what type of change this minister has in mind because we know he intends to 
change the health care system.  We know that and we want to know what type 
of change, Mr. Chair.  That is key.  Change is not a problem but the sort 
of change can be. 
 
The dental plan was a change, Mr. Chair, and I think we very fairly 
represented the voice of the people of this province when over 100,000 



 

 

signatures were tabled in this legislature saying that the changes that 
this government made to the health care system, the prescription drug 
changes, the dental plan changes, the underfunding of hospitals, Mr. Chair, 
that those changes were not acceptable. 
 
That kind of change we are very suspicious about and yes, we are worried 
that this government will change health care in the province of 
Saskatchewan to such an extent that it is no longer the medicare that we 
understand it to be. 
 
And the government will tell you in this pre-election year, oh no, this is 
scare tactics; we're not going to do anything.  But if they're ever 
re-elected over there, Mr. Chair, if they're ever re-elected -- and I doubt 
that that's going to happen; I sincerely doubt that -- but if they were you 
can be sure that there will be major changes to the health care system.  
And those changes will be ideologically consistent with the Tory right wing 
party in this province.  They praise the free-market system.  They are bent 
on privatization across this province in every area of the public sector, 
and even though they've said in the past, oh no, we aren't going to 
privatize the utilities, we know that they are trying to privatize the 
utilities.  It was evidenced in this legislature last year.  And even 
though they say, oh we're just waiting for the public -- that's what we're 
hearing now: oh we're waiting for the public to catch up to us.  That's 
what the Tories are saying.  Can you imagine?  They're waiting for the 
public to catch up with them.  What conceit.  What conceit. 
 
And that has come from members of the Tory bench, not from the Minister of 
Health.  To be fair to him, that is not a comment made by the Minister of 
Health, but that has come from some of his colleagues in the front bench.  
And I say that is conceit, and I say that is totally out of touch with the 
people of this province, totally out of touch.  I think the members 
opposite would serve themselves well if they listened to the people of this 
province and if they heard what the people were saying with respect to 
privatization.  Not a simple majority, but an overwhelming massive majority 
and it will apply in the same manner to health care in this province, Mr. 
Chair. 
 
So when we talk about change and our concern with PC change, that's 
precisely what we're talking about -- their right-wing policies to move the 
public sector to privatization in this province.  And so when I ask the 
minister questions about change, I want to scrutinize the change that he 
proposes, because if there's any change to undermine our health care system 
as the people of Saskatchewan want to see it, as New Democrats want to see 
it, you can be sure that we will be closely monitoring it and bringing it 
to the attention of the public, Mr. Chair. 
 
Now my question to the minister was asked before supper and I'm going to 
ask it once again, because he didn't answer it before supper.  The question 
was that he referred to only minor structural changes had been made in 
health care heretofore.  I want to know what structural changes the 
minister has in mind, because by clear implication he's considering further 
structural changes. 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Chairman, the references in my . . . the opening 
remarks in these estimates that I made to the changes that are taking place 
in the demographics of the province, the changes are taking place not only 
here but across Canada and elsewhere, as it relates to new health 
technology. 
 
So those are the things that I was talking about.  And if the member will 
go back in her mind and remember and recall the things I talked about 
there:  the changes that drug therapies allow us to now do; and 
deinstitutionalization is a trend that must take place and that is taking 
place in the health care world; the movement towards emphasis on health 
rather than only on health care; those kinds of things. 
 
The very fact that the Premier appointed the Murray commission in health 
care to look at our system, and he and the commissioners to look at our 
whole health care system. And the response, I guess I could say, the 
response of the people of the province and of the people who work in the 
health care field across the province in the various sectors, to that 
commission, indicates the belief by the wider public that there will be a 
need to re-examine, a need to examine very closely the system that we have, 
and whether or not every aspect of that system is poised to go into this 
1990s decade and to go beyond into the next century.  Those are the kinds 
of things that I referred to when I talked about change. 
 
And when I say to the hon. member and to others who will often belittle, I 
guess is the word, the suggestion or any discussion of change, it's 
important that we don't do that.  And what I was really saying is that we 
have a responsibility.  We being the government, all the people in the 
Department of Health here, and others out in the health sector, whether 
they be in the institutions or in the community-based programs, whether 
they be members of the legislature on the other side, whoever -- whoever is 
in a position of responsibility has a responsibility to exercise and that 
is to recognize the changes that are upon us, many, many changes. 
 
And I'm sure we'll get into some of those as we get into the specific 
questioning that I'm sure the member is preparing to get into.  So that's 
what I was referring to when I referred to change and I'm sure we can get 
into as we deal with the specific aspects of this very large department. 
I'm sure we can get into some of those views of change -- my views and the 
critic's views and so on. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I think when you referred to the Murray 
commission that that is the structural changes that you probably had in 
mind, because I don't really see drug therapies as a structural change.  
One usually considers a structural change some sort of change in the 
framework in the bureaucracy of the system.  But you did refer to the 
Murray commission report in these remarks, and therefore I'd like to ask 
you a specific question. The specific question being: the Murray commission 
report recommends that the province be divided into 15 regions or 
divisions, Mr. Minister, 15 regions or divisions -- 10 in rural 
Saskatchewan.  And, as you know, it further recommends that these regions 
be divided into subdivisions or subregions and that the subregions elect 
two representatives to send to the regional board, and the regional board 



 

 

will then receive a global budget allocation from the Department of Health 
to administer all the health care services in that region. 
 
The Murray report further recommends that local boards . . . this would 
remove the need for many of the local boards and representatives at a local 
level.  Instead the subdivision would send two representatives to the 
regional board, and a regional board would consist of maybe 10 to 12 
representatives and they would run the health care in the entire region.  
For example, Yorkton regional board would run it for Langenburg and 
Esterhazy and so on in that large area. 
 
The Murray report also recommends that all publicly funded health care 
facilities, the ownership of those facilities would be transferred to this 
divisional board or regional board.  It makes an exception for religious 
organizations and some corporate organizations, but publicly funded health 
care facilities would be . . . the ownership of these facilities would be 
transferred to the regional board. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, with respect to this form of regionalization, which is 
decentralized out of Regina but centralized in the regional board, it's 
centralized for small rural communities.  Could the minister please give us 
his opinion on this form of regionalization and whether or not he's 
intending to implement it? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Before we get into that, when I said in my last remarks 
here about . . . and I used the example of drug therapies and being a . . . 
contributing to structural change.  The member took some exception to that.  
What I meant and what is the fact, all over, throughout the health care 
sector, is that the new innovations, the new inventions in drug therapies, 
have served to change the way in which people with mental illness are 
treated. 
 
It served to change the length of stay of people, of citizens, of patients 
in hospitals -- all of those kinds of things which do bring about 
structural change in terms of the length, in terms of the need for hospital 
beds, the number of hospital beds needed for various aspects of curative 
health care.  So that's what I was referring to and it does indeed 
contribute to structural change on that basis. 
 
(1915) 
 
Now we get into the Murray report.  And as the member has outlined in a 
brief sort of way, the Murray report, from all of the reaction -- I think 
it's fair to say -- all of the reaction so far, well, there have been some 
differences of opinion on the Murray report or some differences of opinion 
as to how far Murray has gone with some of the recommendations.  There have 
been some very positive comments from people throughout the health care 
sector as it relates to the depth to which this report has gone and looking 
at the very structure of this system that we have and that we take some 
pride in as I've said earlier today. 
 
The concept of regions, which is, as you will know, the recommendation -- 
1.1 -- the very first recommendation.  And it's structured in such a way 



 

 

that almost all other recommendations follow directly from that -- is 
something that's worthy of consideration.  And it's worthy of consideration 
because it's very difficult to just rule out of hand, for example, the 
concept of elected people at a regional level having some control, or 
empowerment and control at some local levels.  But there will be 
significant debate, and there is now going on in the province . . . there 
is significant debate going on as it relates to just how far will this go. 
 
The member raised a couple of points.  One being the ownership issue as it 
relates to the facilities, the institutions that are now out there; that 
are now union hospitals or nursing homes owned by the contributing 
municipalities in a community or in a region. 
 
The Murray report says, for example, -- and this has become now a subject 
of some debate among hospital administrators certainly, and among people 
who are trustees or appointed board members of these hospitals -- The 
Murray report recommendation makes a distinction between institutions which 
are owned, say, by a religious order, Esterhazy or St. Anthony's in Moose 
Jaw or, you know, whatever -- St. Paul's Hospital in Saskatoon, a very 
obvious one, religious order. 
 
They say well if they're owned by a religious order or a privately owned 
institution like, to use an example, Extendicare facilities which are in 
various locations in the province, that they would see -- this as the 
Murray report now, speaking of this -- they would see that as . . . those 
institutions could be contracted with or you could enter into contracts, 
the regions could enter into a contract for those services.  Whereas the 
other publicly held ones or community-held ones would be owned by the wider 
region. 
 
Now that's going to be a significant debate in and among health care 
administrators and among trustees in the province.  But that will be a 
healthy debate, that will be a very healthy debate.  And what you don't see 
very much of out there is, so far at least, is outright opposition to the 
concept of elected boards.  Whether or not 15 is the right number, whether 
or not these regions are too large, these are all questions that will go on 
as this debate carries forward. 
 
Let me just say clearly at the outset though, as we go into . . . because 
now we're speaking of recommendation 1.1 as I outlined and there are 
260-some-odd recommendations.  While the member will say the Minister of 
Health and the Department of Health and the government or whatever, we have 
not responded directly to this report and said, at the outset: this report 
will be implemented or this recommendation will be implemented, whatever. 
 
We've done that for a very good reason and we believe we've done that for a 
very responsible reason.  We sent out, my colleague and I, the Associate 
Minister of Health, the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg and myself, have 
sent out letters to more than 600, almost 700, groups and organizations in 
the province who have a direct stake in the health care system.  And we've 
asked them and they've been very receptive to these letters, by the way.  
And we've asked them to give their thoughtful and reasoned responses to the 
recommendations of the report in its widest sense and also their responses 



 

 

or their reactions to those portions of the health care . . . of the Murray 
commission report which deal directly with their area of expertise, if you 
will. 
 
Now we've had some letters back which are just saying to us, we're now in 
the process of going through this in some significant detail.  We've, you 
know, almost as though these are just acknowledgements of our letter.  And 
they're saying, give us time to go through this, our council is meeting, 
say the SRNA (Saskatchewan Registered Nurses' Association) in this month of 
June.  That's one example.  Others have sent similar letters that say our 
council is meeting or our executive committee or whoever, and we're going 
through this with a fine-tooth comb.  So they're asking us for the 
opportunity to be heard and we are giving them that opportunity, and I 
think that is the responsible approach. 
 
So I'm not taking a hard and fast position on any of this, but as it 
relates to the very direct question that you asked me about the regions and 
what is our response to that, I would say that, once again, there will be 
significant debate surrounding this.  But it merits consideration by all of 
us when you consider that what they're recommending is elected boards to 
have more, sort of local decision making out there in the province.  And 
that shouldn't be rejected out of hand certainly. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Minister, when do you expect to have compiled all of the 
responses such that you can give us your opinion on this? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- I can't give you a hard and fast time when we'll be 
ready with this because . . . and I know that warrants an explanation.  And 
I can see by your look there that you expect a distinct explanation to 
this. 
 
The groups in the province and the professional associations and the SHA 
(Saskatchewan Health-Care Association) and others, I think some of them 
will be holding regional meetings of their membership.  Some of them will 
be having significant debate about various recommendations of this at their 
annual meetings as they go on in the fall.  Some of them have indicated to 
us that that is the case and they want to be able to get into some debate 
at their annual meetings in the fall. 
 
So I guess what I could say is that the Murray report's come in; he's 
unleashed this report on the public, and I think we have to give those 
organizations a chance to look at this in the kind of detail that they've 
indicated they want to, and it is our intention to do that. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- In other words, Mr. Minister, you won't have an opinion 
before the next election.  Isn't that in effect what you're saying? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- No that is not what I'm saying, and I want to make it 
absolutely clear to you that it is not what I'm saying.  And I'll make it 
very clear to you, tonight, that that is not what is driving the time frame 
on this.  Okay?  That is not what's driving the time frame.  The time frame 
will be driven by when those responses come back and when they are all 
compiled and then when we can have the follow-up discussions with these 



 

 

organizations and so on.  And it is not what's driving it. 
 
Now I know that's what drives the nature of this House, and the kind of 
debate we're in here tonight will bring that suggestion to the fore.  But 
that is not what is driving the reactions to the Murray commission by any 
of those organizations out there, certainly, and it is not what is driving 
our agenda or our schedule as it relates to replying to the Murray 
commission. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Well, Mr. Minister, the Saskatchewan Health-Care Association 
has said quite clearly that the proposals in your task force report are too 
revolutionary, and that they remove community control and community input.  
Now the Saskatchewan Health-Care Association represents many, many health 
care facilities across this province.  They are the spokesperson for health 
care facilities across this province.  Now you are going beyond the 
Saskatchewan Health-Care Association, stalling, I might say, because you 
are looking for further comment and debate.  And I think that you're just 
putting off making a decision, because you don't want to face up to making 
a decision in this particular matter. 
 
Mr. Helmsing is quoted as saying, in the Star-Phoenix on May 3 '90 that: 
 

 We didn't envisage them proposing a structure (and this is a quote, Mr. 
Chair) that would eliminate community health boards . . . It's too bold a 
step.  It's a quantum leap from what we have now . . . (It's) too 
revolutionary. 

 
 If you suddenly remove community health boards, you're not giving those 

communities the input we feel is required. 
 

Now I find it very interesting that this report talks about community input 
and community involvement and so on, and I would like to know, Mr. 
Minister, how there will be more community input by removing boards from 
rural Saskatchewan in small communities and replacing it by only two 
elected officials?  I'm not debating whether they should be elected or not.  
I'm saying two people as opposed to numerous people.  How is this going to 
increase community involvement?  Could you explain that to me please, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Well the organization that you've picked out, for 
example, the health-care association -- obviously a very large player in 
this and as it relates to this first recommendation -- the one I've elected 
boards and so on.  I think it's fair to say that the commission report went 
further than the health-care association went in their suggestions to the 
commission when it was doing its work out there in the province.  The 
health-care association made recommendations for a regional type of system. 
 
When you quote from Mr. Helmsing, who has said -- and I'm not sure where 
you quoted from; I think it was a Star-Phoenix article -- where Mr. 
Helmsing had said, on behalf of the health-care association that it was . . 
. I think he used the word revolutionary.  And I know in a conversation 
that I've had with him his suggestion was that there are ways to accomplish 
elected boards by more of an evolutionary process rather than this 



 

 

revolutionary process.  And that's the way in which the health-care 
association is approaching this at the regional meetings and the regional 
sort of discussions that they are intending to have from what I understand 
so far. 
 
The health-care association, for example, is one that has said to us: we 
need time to consult with our regional bodies and with the various boards, 
the many, many, many boards who are members of the health-care association.  
So that's one group and it's the one that you've raised here, a very large 
one obviously.  But it's one group that has asked us for time to really go 
into this in depth, and we have agreed with them that they will have the 
time that they need.  You know, not in an undue way, to drag it out for 
ever and ever, but they will have that time. 
 
And as I say, once the report was released to the public -- and I think 
it's worthy of note that the day that that was released to the . . . at the 
very time it was released to the Premier it was released to the public in 
the same way, which is the way that our Premier wanted it to be so that it 
becomes the wide public debate that this kind of a structural study 
deserves.  And I don't know what more I could say than that, except to say 
that we will give them the time that they require. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Minister, with respect to the SHA, they made a proposal 
to the Murray commission that talked about districts and regions, but it 
wasn't nearly as far along as this particular proposal.  You have led us to 
believe in the House here tonight that the SHA may be agreeing with your 
task force's proposal.  They may be agreeing with it.  That is not the 
case, Mr. Minister.  I would beg to differ. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- No I didn't say that. 
 
(1930) 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Okay if you didn't say that, fine; then I misinterpreted 
what you said.  They are not agreeing with the proposal.  It's not simply a 
question of the way in which it is implemented.  That's not the issue here. 
 
The issue here is that this proposal goes too far.  It wipes out community 
control and community ownership.  It takes ownership of the health care 
system away from the people in spite of the fact the rhetoric says it 
belongs with the people.  I want you to tell me, Mr. Minister, because I'm 
sure you've discussed this with your task force, how wiping out local 
boards increases participation of individuals at the local level.  I asked 
that question once before; please answer it this time. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- First of all, you know, to use language like "these 
boards will be wiped out" or whatever it is -- and remember, we're speaking 
here of according to the commission report of Dr. Murray and Mr. Podiluk 
and Mrs. Farr and others -- they haven't said that in the report.  There's 
no place in that report where it talks about local boards being wiped out 
or even to use a more reasonable term . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Replaced. 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- No, there isn't anything in there that talks about 
that.  There's a thing that talks about regions and so on.  But let me be 
very clear.  When you say the health-care association, or that I was 
suggesting that the health-care association is in agreement with chapter 
and verse of what has been said by Murray, I didn't say that.  In fact I 
know that they are not and that's what I had said in my earlier remarks.  
They aren't in agreement but they don't reject the concept of a change, a 
change toward regionalization at all, and they've asked for an opportunity 
to debate this internally. 
 
And, you know, when I say internally as it relates to the health-care 
association, we're talking about a very wide public debate among board 
members from institutions all across the province, large and small.  So 
it's not as though it's some, you know, internal in a negative sense of 
that word. 
 
And as far as, you know, for you to characterize that this is my report and 
I'm either here to defend it or to reject it, that's not the case.  I've 
said that we'll give them a chance, the health-care association and others.  
And many others have asked for an opportunity to give their reasoned and 
thoughtful responses and we want to give them a chance to do that. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Minister, do you believe that the proposals of the 
Murray commission report improve consumer input into the health care 
system? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Well I note that in the report itself it talks about -- 
and it uses that very phrase that you've used -- about consumer-controlled 
health care system, and you've rephrased it slightly to ask if consumers 
would have more input into the system. 
 
I think there are aspects of these recommendations which may contribute to 
that, that consumers or the public, the users of the system out there, our 
citizens, may have some more input into the system.  At least I believe 
that the commission has that intention in mind.  I believe that they are 
sincere in that. 
 
But the debate that I referred to earlier, that the health-care association 
and others are now into as it relates to the size of regions, the structure 
of regions, the way in which the relationship of the regions, which they're 
proposing to be rather large, with the community hospitals and nursing 
homes that are now in existence -- there will be some significant debate 
about that in the province.  There's no question about . . . because it 
depends on what form the small hospitals or the hospitals that are not in 
the same community where the larger region might be centred . . . it 
depends on the input of local people and how those local people become to 
be members of the boards of those smaller hospitals.  And that's not 
absolutely clear here and that's the subject of the considerable debate 
that will go on within the health-care association and beyond that within 
the public. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- As I understand from the Murray report, Mr. Minister, the 



 

 

regional board, the centralized regional board will be hiring the staff for 
local hospitals, for example.  There's a clear implication in the report 
that as far as the Murray commission is concerned, there are too many 
boards out there and there's a need to replace them. 
 
Now I know you'll say, oh it doesn't say that.  But we know very well what 
the implication is, Mr. Minister, and we know where this is going to take 
us.  It's the same thing as Elmer Schwartz, who did not say rural hospitals 
should be closed in his report, but he said it several months later to the 
health-care commission, exactly what he was thinking and which was there by 
clear implication in his report. 
 
Now other people have interpreted the Murray report as saying that many of 
these local community boards will be eliminated and that this is a 
reduction in consumer input in community involvement.  And I agree with 
that opinion, Mr. Minister.  And that's the opinion that we hear as we 
travel throughout the province in small communities.  And the small 
communities are very concerned, Mr. Minister, because they believe that the 
regional board will put the emphasis on the regional hospital as opposed to 
their small hospital, Mr. Minister.  That concern has been expressed to me 
on a number of occasions and to my colleagues as well. 
 
Now you will say, that's not in the report, but people have to read between 
the lines and they have to extrapolate through their real life experience 
and what they know takes place.  And that's how they come to these 
conclusions.  It may not be in the report that a small hospital, let's take 
an example, in Esterhazy or Langenburg, will be underfunded.  But it 
doesn't take people long, in rural Saskatchewan, to realize that there is a 
possibility of the funding when the global funding goes to the regional 
board, being centralized in the regional centre, i.e., Yorkton, Swift 
Current and so on. 
 
And this concern has been expressed to me, Mr. Minister, immediately upon 
the release of this report.  It did not take three weeks or a month or six 
weeks for people to realize what was happening out there -- took them 30 
seconds, Mr. Minister.  And that's why I'm so surprised at the fact that 
you have absolutely no opinion on this matter, when it's such a crucial 
thing from the point of view of the life and breath of our rural 
communities, who depend upon hospitals in their small communities, Mr. 
Minister, for health care reasons and other reasons, Mr. Minister. 
 
Now the Murray report does not say that rural hospitals would be closed.  
It says hospitals with an acute daily census of less than 10 would be 
transferred into community health centres.  But let me tell you, Mr. 
Minister, people in rural Saskatchewan are interpreting that as leading to 
the eventual closure of their hospital.  And I want to know, Mr. Minister, 
whether you support that proposal and what you intend to do to make sure 
these hospitals remain viable if indeed you implement the Murray commission 
recommendations. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- I think it's fair to say that everyone who has read 
this report has indicated so far that it's very comprehensive and that it's 
very detailed in many of these areas.  So, you know, to say, well we're 



 

 

reading between the lines and there's some interpretation here, and . . . 
You know, Mr. Chairman, there is only one person that I'm aware of who's 
involved with the health care sector who had a response to this very 
comprehensive report within 30 seconds, as was just suggested here, that 
all the people across rural Saskatchewan have a response in 30 seconds.  
They knew; they read between the lines and they knew what was wrong. 
 
The only person who had a response in 30 seconds was the hon. member 
herself, and that's widely noted across the whole of the health care sector 
-- that it is not responsible to take something as comprehensive as this 
and just reject it out of hand within a matter of a few minutes, or hours I 
suppose, to be fair.  Now the comment was made that the commission has 
said, or has intimated at least, that they believe that there are too many 
boards in the health care sector across Saskatchewan.  And I think that 
that's true.  I think that this commission report has basically intimated 
that and they've, even more than that, they've basically said that.  And I 
have said that in a public way for some time, that there are too many 
boards in Saskatchewan in the health care system. 
 
And just let's think about the way in which our system has developed as new 
programs have come on to the stream and have essentially been add-ons.  We 
had a good system of hospitalization and then as we moved into, as our 
demographics changed -- some of the discussion that we had here a little 
earlier -- as our people aged, as there was more and more need for longer 
term care, the evolution from what we once called in all of our communities 
the "old folks home" and now it's the long-term care centre and it's more 
and more of what we call in the jargon, level three and level four -- all 
of those kinds of things.  We have boards for these level three and four 
homes which are really health care service boards whereas once the old 
folks home board, you know, I use that term because it was the way in how 
we described these places at one time in our history.  And at that time 
they were basically a housing board and now they're very much a delivery of 
. . . they're very much a board involved with the delivery of health care. 
 
And then home care, for example, came onto the scene, also in a response to 
that ageing population, whatever.  But I mean we can, we don't have to get 
into all the reasons for it.  Home care came in and there were districts 
set up for home care and boards for home care.  And they were add-ons.  If 
one would take . . . any citizen of this province was to look at the map of 
Saskatchewan with all of the boards for hospitals superimposed on top of 
it, and then as we tend to do now with these overlay sheets, roll down the 
overlay sheet with all of the boards for nursing homes, and then put down 
another overlay on top with all of the boards for home care, you would see 
a maze there that doesn't make any sense at all. 
 
And then we have ambulance boards which are not exactly in line with the 
district of the hospital at which this ambulance is actually centred.  And 
the ambulance board very often is the same as the hospital board, in terms 
of the people who are on the ambulance board, but without having the same 
district as the hospital serves.  Some of those things don't make sense. 
 
And those are structural things that were being addressed by people in the 
department over a good numbers of years before we came to office and in the 



 

 

term of government of the former government and probably many of these 
kinds of discussions went on with the government before that.  So this is 
not something that's just all of a sudden, out of the blue, the Murray 
commission has said there are too many boards, or at least that the boards 
without having coterminous . . . some kind of semblance of a coterminous 
boundaries didn't make any sense. 
 
So I agree with that recommendation, if there is in fact a recommendation, 
and I don't think it is.  But I agree with that suggestion that there are 
too many boards and that there will be a need for some type of 
streamlining.  That's what the SHA basically said to the commission in any 
case. 
 
(1945) 
 
Now let me just quote here, a person who's concerned with health care in 
Saskatchewan.  Now with respect to the concept of regionalization, I think 
it's important to note that we do have to co-ordinate services and 
integrate services, health care services, in Saskatchewan on some sort of a 
district level. 
 
Now that quotation is from the Health critic for the NDP, speaking on May 
4, I believe, on CBC radio.  And it's right, it's the co-ordination kind of 
thing that's being suggested.  And it's being suggested not only by 
yourself in that interview and at other places, not only by myself and my 
colleague and other members of our government, people in the public service 
in Health -- it's been suggested by a lot of people.  Now the questions is, 
and this is the key question: how do we get there? 
 
The Murray commission has suggested what's been characterized a very sort 
of a revolutionary way, a very radical sort of way, if you will.  And 
others have suggested along the way -- and that's what has sparked the 
debate that will go on now for some months -- and it is, how do we get 
there in a more evolutionary sort of way, or do we need to go as far as the 
Murray commission has suggested?  And I think those are very valid 
questions and I'm waiting for those answers from a good number of people 
who are involved every day. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Minister, it's not a question of how do we get there.  I 
know what you're saying, but I want to clarify it.  I do not like the 
Murray commission regionalization proposal.  Regionalization a pà la Bob 
Murray.  I do not like that proposal, it goes too far.  It's not a question 
of getting there in my mind, Mr. Minister, and I want to make that point 
perfectly clear. 
 
There is a need for co-ordination and integration of health care services 
across the province.  There's no question about that.  But the 
regionalization a pà la your task force report a pà la the commission 
appointed by you, that's why I call it your task force report, goes too 
far.  And I want to make that point perfectly clear.  And if it means 
eliminating large numbers of community boards, then it is reducing 
community input which is one of the things that is so important to our 
health care system that we want to maintain and retain in our health care 



 

 

system, and improve upon because it has been so critical to our health care 
system thus far. 
 
Now the minister said, well there was only one person who had a reply in 30 
seconds.  I know you would have liked me to take one month to reply to the 
matter -- or three weeks or two weeks -- but the fact of the matter, Mr. 
Minister, whether I had taken three days or half a day, I would have come 
to the same conclusion.  It didn't take more than a reading of the report 
to come to this particular conclusion.  You have to remember I have 
travelled this province with this health care commission, and let me tell 
you, without having actually counted the briefs, that over 50 per cent of 
the briefs were against the concept of regionalization, Mr. Minister. 
 
And I don't recall any brief -- and maybe there was, but I don't personally 
recall any brief -- that went as far as the Murray commission with respect 
to regionalization.  Now there may have been, but I certainly don't recall 
it.  I am very cognizant of what the arguments are out there, Mr. Minister. 
It doesn't take three weeks for me to respond to this.  And nor does it 
take the man in small-town Saskatchewan, or the woman in small-town 
Saskatchewan, long to figure out what the implications of some of the 
recommendations are, Mr. Minister. 
 
That's the point I wish to make.  Meanwhile you are sitting and not taking 
an opinion; not giving an opinion or taking a stand.  Well you're 
consulting -- and this is the new PC government -- consulting right across 
this province.  Well I believe in consultation too but, Mr. Minister, I 
wish you would have consulted with the dental therapists; and I wish you 
would have consulted with Saskatoon health care professionals before you 
proposed a major integration.  You didn't even consult with your own 
commission in that case, and therefore I'm rather suspicious about your 
consultation in this particular case.  But as I recall, you didn't even 
consult with the Murray commission before you made that particular 
proposal. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, there is another proposal in the task force report that 
caused me concern, and that was the 5 per cent taxing authority.  And what 
the Murray report does is it allows for the regional boards to levy a 5 per 
cent tax on the global budget for that particular region, for special 
programs, etc.  Now I don't know what that's going to come to on a regional 
basis -- probably about $5 million, if we do a very rough calculation of 
the health care budget of 1.5 billion, Mr. Minister.  Now the concern that 
I have and that many others have with whom I have spoken with respect to 
this taxing authority, is that it opens the door for off-loading, for the 
provincial government to off-load onto municipalities and property 
taxpayers because this new taxing authority will have the right to tax 
property taxpayers up to 5 per cent. 
 
Now it could be 5 per cent in the Murray report, Mr. Minister, but 10 years 
from now it might be 20 per cent.  We know from experience with the goods 
and services tax in other countries that it went from 7 per cent to 21 per 
cent in some countries.  This could happen here as well, Mr. Minister, not 
to mention the fact that this government has a practice of off-loading to 
municipalities and municipal property taxpayers, off-loading in the area of 



 

 

education, off-loading to municipalities, off-loading to health care.  Mr. 
Minister, the concern is that this proposal opens the door for the 
provincial government removing its responsibility with respect to funding 
health care.  Do you agree with that concern, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- The member will remember well that when you first 
raised this issue of taxing authority in the light of, as though it was 
something brand-new, and I responded to you at that time that you were 
entering into . . . well a phrase that I've used before, in a scare tactic 
sort of thing on it. 
 
And let me just say what's happening here.  The fact is that in 
Saskatchewan now all of union hospital districts have taxing authority.  
This is not something new.  The concept of taxing authority for hospitals 
in Saskatchewan is not new at all. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- This is different, George, and you know it. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Now the member says to me, this is different, and I 
know it; says this is different.  Well it might be different, but it isn't 
different in the sense that there is taxing authority now in the union 
hospital districts and there is significant taxing authority.  There are 
some hospitals in this province that have a levy of as high as 18 mills, 
and the average is in the range of 4 to 5 mills. 
 
Now that doesn't take place in either of Saskatoon or Regina or in the case 
of religious hospitals, although there is and has been for a number of 
years a lobby by those religious hospitals.  You used an example earlier of 
Esterhazy in the region, and the hypothetical example of that region.  
Esterhazy is a privately owned hospital, owned by an order of sisters of 
the Catholic Church.  Now they don't have taxing authority, but union 
hospital districts in Saskatchewan have taxing authority. 
 
They have taxing authority and they apply that to construction.  I'm not 
sure of the percentages but it's a significant percentage of any kind of 
renovations.  At least half of renovation cost on capital construction, all 
those things, are through the local tax base, including the towns, 
villages, and RMs that are in that union hospital district. 
 
So it's not something new but it was presented in the earliest stages of 
this debate -- not the debate here tonight but the debate on the Murray 
commission when it was first released -- by yourself as something new and 
revolutionary, this whole concept of taxing authority for hospitals.  And 
it isn't new and revolutionary but it would be for the two largest cities.  
There's no question that that's true. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Minister, this is a taxing authority for the total 
global budget which is a lot different than taxing with respect to 
hospitals only, Mr. Minister.  There's a huge difference here and you know 
it. 
 
There's no point -- Are you saying it's the same taxing authority, Mr. 
Minister?  Is that what you're saying and that it's going to come to no 



 

 

more than $5 million?  Are you saying this five million is less than what 
hospitals tax now, Mr. Minister?  And are you saying this 5 per cent taxing 
authority is no broader than a hospital levy? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Just to make it very clear.  Here are recommendations 
as it relates to the financing out there that -- and I'm just going to put 
another example that's in the report into this mix and then just give you a 
couple of comments as to how I feel about it.  There's also a 
recommendation in this report that says 100 per cent of all furnishings and 
equipment should be paid by the province.  That's one of the 
recommendations made.  For example, I'm not sure that I think that that's a 
reasonable recommendation when you consider the context of what has 
happened over many years in Saskatchewan and what people have been for a 
long time, especially in union hospital districts and in more recent years 
in the foundations that have been set up by the large base hospitals, and 
very successful in their fund raising for specific pieces of very high-cost 
equipment and for furnishings of hospital wards. 
 
The hon. member, I know, has been in many of the facilities around the 
province.  I have.  All of us who have been in these facilities, whether 
they be large ones or small ones, will recall wards and rooms of the 
hospital or pieces of equipment that have a little plaque on them that say, 
this room was furnished by the Elks and the Royal Purple of this community.  
This room was by the Kinsmen and Kinettes, or whatever.  Those are the 
kinds of local fund -raising activities that people in the various 
communities take great pride in and frankly have . . . and my experience in 
raising funds in the Lions Club and in other service organizations has been 
that those become the projects which are the easiest, you know, to use that 
term, the easiest to raise money for because people want to donate to these 
kinds of facilities. 
 
So there's a recommendation, for example, if I put it into this whole mix 
of the funding of the way in which the Murray commission suggests funding 
be done, I think that there's a whole picture here and this is an area that 
the member's identified here tonight and rightly so; and it's also an area 
that the SHA has identified to us and I'll just be forthright of that.  And 
that's an area of significant debate that they're going to carry on within 
their regions about how they would like to see this happen. 
 
People in the base hospitals, for example, will tell us and as they did.  
And the reasons for these foundations coming up in the large cities, for 
example, were, they said, if rather than charge us 15 per cent from the 
local fund-raising base or from the local base here, rather than charge us 
15 per cent or levy 15 per cent for the capital construction costs of these 
very large hospitals, the government should pay for the capital costs and 
they would pay for equipment and furnishings because, for the very reasons 
that I've cited earlier, they felt that was money which they could raise 
because they had something to point at, and fund raise for a particular 
piece of equipment and all the kinds of things that go on in those 
fund-raising activities. 
 
And none of those are new concepts in this province or anywhere else in 
Canada.  So that whole concept of how this funding would take place is the 



 

 

subject of debate and will be over a period of time here. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister, for acknowledging that maybe 
there is some legitimacy to our concern with respect to the 5 per cent. 
 
(2000) 
 
An Hon. Member: -- I always have acknowledged that. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- No you don't, Mr. Minister, often times you say it was scare 
tactics.  That's what you said in the House here -- we're using scare 
tactics.  We weren't using scare tactics.  We were raising a deliberate, a 
logical, and an honest concern.  But your reply to our concerns is always 
that it's scare tactics, Mr. Minister, because you're afraid of debate on 
these issues, that's why.  And you think that by saying that you're going 
to shut us up and stop the debate.  It's not going to work, Mr. Minister.  
We are going to continue to raise our concerns.  And we're going to press 
to make sure that our concerns are heard by you regardless of the 
accusations that you throw across this House. 
 
Now with respect to the 5 per cent, I also want the minister to know that 
the public, members of the public, are concerned that this will result in a 
two-tiered health care system and by that we mean that richer regions that 
can afford to raise the money will be able to afford better health care 
than poorer regions.  And that is a concern that has been raised by us and 
by others in this province. 
 
And the other concern, as I pointed out earlier, is that this 5 per cent 
could increase and become 20 per cent in the future some time, Mr. 
Minister, which means that even a larger portion of the health care costs 
will be off-loaded by the provincial government onto the backs of municipal 
property taxpayers.  And let me tell you, that's a concern for the people 
of this province, and it's a concern for many of the people I've spoken to, 
that what the report does is set up a system that would allow a provincial 
government to off-load onto municipal property taxpayers. As New Democrats, 
we oppose that type of proposal. 
 
The other concern that has been raised is that this system is designed so 
that the provincial government does not only off-load responsibility with 
respect to funding, but off-loads a large portion of its decision-making 
ability at this time which will have the effect of creating disparities in 
various regions in this province.  The decentralization will result in 
disparities across the province, Mr. Minister. 
 
Now can you tell us today, can you tell us today, Mr. Minister, what 
measures you would implement to make sure that that did not occur if this 
system of regionalization was implemented under your government? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Well, a couple of things here.  The commission report, 
and I know the member will acknowledge this, the commission report also 
talks about and is very specific in dealing with, provincial standards 
would have to be in place for all regions of the province and those kinds 
of things.  And that makes eminent sense.  If you need that assurance in 



 

 

terms of where I would stand or the government, you know, what we would 
believe in that area, there's no question that we would stick with that.  
There's no question about that. 
 
Now I have heard members of the commission publicly saying, as it relates 
to your point that you've raised about off-loading or more specifically 
your point about wealthier regions and less wealthy regions and the 
opportunity for those wealthier regions to have better facilities and so 
on, and I've heard commissioners talk about this publicly and I think the 
hon. member knows that that's the case. 
 
Where they use the example of the school system that we now have in the 
province, that has division boards and all those kinds of things out there, 
where there is an equalization system in place so that there is no such 
thing as, you know, some regions of the province having access to school 
facilities that are better or school programming that is more advanced than 
another region that may not have the same tax base. 
 
And that concept is there and I've heard commissioners acknowledge that.  
And that would be a principle that I don't think there would be any 
disagreement with in this House.  So that point. 
 
Let me come back to the context, you know, in our first little discussion 
here earlier about the context of raising the five per cent taxing power 
and in my characterization of it as a scare tactic and so on. 
 
This debate during the estimates is an ideal place for us to share sort of 
thoughts in a more reasoned way.  And that's as it should be.  But I still 
characterize pulling out of a taxing authority 5 per cent, without 
discussion of some of the other things that I added to that debate here 
earlier with the reference to the 100 per cent expenditure of the 
provincial government as it relates to capital facility, that sort of thing 
as it relates to equipment and furnishings, all of that has to be together 
when we discuss the financing aspects of health care as is advocated by the 
Murray commission.  All of it has to be in that context, and so when we do 
it in this kind of context, it's reasonable in my view. 
 
When we do it . . . and I understand how this system works and how question 
period comes along and you only have so long before Mr. Speaker says, you 
know, you're too long in your question.  And I only have so long to give my 
answers, and I always would like just a little longer to be able to give 
those answers to you in a more thorough way.  I'm not allowed to have that 
time. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- We was wishing it was a little shorter. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- And I know the member from Regina Centre would 
appreciate it if I had a little longer as well.  So I thank him for that. 
 
But in any case, the wide context of funding, the funding of the system as 
is advocated by Murray, is and must be a wider debate than what you and I 
will be able to have here. 
 



 

 

Ms. Simard: -- Well, Mr. Minister, it's a debate that should take place in 
this House because that's what this House is for, is to raise those 
concerns, bring them to the attention of the public, have it debated in the 
public and in this House. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, with respect to the ownership of publicly funded 
facilities in the regional board, you can appreciate that that is creating 
considerable amount of concern. 
 
Another concern that has been raised with me, an individual who raised it 
with me over the weekend, is that this could lead to the privatization of 
health care facilities in the province, of hospitals, sectors of the 
hospital, or probably the entire hospital because the decision would no 
longer be made by the provincial government in many of these cases.  But 
your regional board would be running all the health care facilities, 
publicly funded health care facilities in the region. 
 
So that concern has been expressed to me, Mr. Minister, just within the 
last five days.  And I'm raising it with you and I would like to hear your 
opinion on it. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- I'm waiting for the question.  Will this lead to 
privatization?  Is that the question? 
 
Ms. Simard: -- The question, Mr. Minister, is -- if I can be more specific: 
the concern has been expressed that giving the power to regional boards to 
own and run all health care facilities in the region could result in 
privatization of some of the smaller hospitals in the region inasmuch as 
the board would privatize aspects of the service like housekeeping or the 
linen or various aspects.  Or perhaps if they couldn't fund the hospital 
out of their global budget, make the decision to put it in the hands of the 
private sector or to close it. 
 
Now what guarantee, Mr. Minister, would you implement that these small 
hospitals would not be closed or turned over to the private sector? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Just let me just say, because from what I know of the 
people on this commission, and all of them, it's not the intention and 
there's nothing in this commission report for any of them to say or to even 
suggest that what they would . . . I mean they're not talking about . . . I 
suggest to the member, and I believe that you do have some people in your 
party who would suggest that whatever happens is some kind of a scheme for 
privatization. 
 
But if you use the logic that you just used, for example, housekeeping or 
janitor services or whatever, I mean in this province right now we have a 
school system that has division boards and those division boards approached 
those kinds of services for their schools in different ways. 
 
Some that I was involved with in my other life, before I came here, had 
contracted janitor services where a family, a man and his wife and a couple 
of their children or whatever, would contract to do the cleaning in the 
small school in the community.  And that's the kind of thing that you're 



 

 

saying might happen with one of the small hospitals in Saskatchewan.  And 
then you would stretch the bow even further and say, that's privatized 
health care.  And I don't believe that it is. 
 
And I make that point because that's the sort of example that you use.  But 
there is nothing in this report and there is nothing in the suggestion of 
regionalization that points to a privatized health care system. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Minister, we never indicated that the report did that, 
suggested that these systems be privatized.  We're not making that 
suggestion.  What I'm saying to you is that the concern has been expressed 
to me that with the provincial government abdicating its responsibility 
with respect to the administration of many of these health care facilities, 
that it could open the door to the rural hospital closure or to 
privatization if they couldn't be funded. 
 
And this concern has been expressed to me not by a member of our party, but 
by a member of the public at large, Mr. Minister.  You may not think the 
concern is important.  I think that that means this person has sat down and 
thought about some of the implications and possibilities and that this 
concern warrants attention. 
 
Now you may not agree; you may think it's a frivolous concern.  I don't 
believe it's a frivolous concern, Mr. Minister, not having regard to what 
we've witnessed in this province in the last few years.  The attempt to 
privatize SaskEnergy, just an example; the privatization of the dental 
plan, another example, and so on. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, what I'm asking tonight is what guarantee can you give us 
that this will not happen under your government? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- The example that the member used, if you want to get . 
. . you have to get more . . . a better example.  I mean the example of 
services and the kitchen services and the laundry services in the health 
care facilities, you won't get a guarantee from me that those services 
won't be done by contractors in Saskatchewan.  No, never. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Will the hospital be sold? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- And will the hospital be sold, the member says from her 
seat, will the hospital be sold?  And I would say to the member, there's 
nothing in the report, and she's acknowledged that there's nothing in the 
report, that would suggest that regional boards, whether they be 15 in 
number or 30 in number, are there to sell hospitals.  That's not the point 
of the whole thing. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Will it be closed? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Well we first of all don't know if there will be 
regional boards.  And that's another debate and that's the one that has to 
go on, and we've talked about that.  So for me to stand here and say . . . 
you know to speculate out into the future, I won't do it. 
 



 

 

Now the member mentions privatization.  I've made this argument to her 
before.  I'm going to make it one more time.  Privatization of . . . she 
says the dental plan is now privatized.  I've heard her say it on many 
occasions and in many places around the province.  The dental plan is 
privatized but medical services are not privatized.  That's what they have 
been saying for a long time -- medical services in Saskatchewan aren't 
privatized but the dental plan as is now there for children in the 
province, is privatized. 
 
Now explain to me please -- and here's an opportunity for you to do this -- 
explain to me please the difference between a citizen of Saskatchewan who 
happens to be of the age to go into the dental plan, so 12-years old, who 
goes to a physician and the government pays the physician on behalf of the 
citizen of 12-years old -- that's not privatized.  But the citizen of 
Saskatchewan who's 12 goes to a dentist and the government pays the dentist 
on behalf of the same citizen -- that's privatized.  Now what's more 
private about that then what is the case with the physician?  Make your 
arguments about that; I'd be interested to hear them.  There is no 
difference, there is no difference. 
 
(2015) 
 
And so, you know, we hear this, you know, the privatizing this and that.  
Frankly the member knows, and the member knows it very, very well, the 
citizens of Saskatchewan are not concerned about the services, in fact they 
are just the opposite -- they are very happy with the services that their 
children receive from the dentists of Saskatchewan right now. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Minister, the citizens of the province of Saskatchewan 
are very upset about the privatization of the dental plan.  Now I'm not 
surprised the minister doesn't understand what the difference is between 
411 dental workers on staff, on salary, in 338 dental clinics across this 
province, servicing children from five to 17, Mr. Minister.  That was the 
school-based dental plan, Mr. Minister. 
 
Now under the new privatized plan, we have 411 dental therapists out of 
work.  These people were fired, Mr. Minister.  That's what you did.  You 
gave them an opportunity to work, quote, "in the private sector", as we've 
heard the members opposite say. 
 
When you fired these people, took them off salary, and gave them an 
opportunity to work in the private sector, you privatized that plan.  And 
to suggest that it's not privatization, Mr. Minister, is not to face up to 
reality because it clearly is your form of privatization -- 338 
school-based dental clinics across this province as opposed to some 35 or 
25 or 38.  I'm not sure what the number is today because they keep opening 
and closing dental clinics in rural Saskatchewan.  That's a huge 
difference.  That's the difference, Mr. Minister.  That's the difference.  
Fewer children being serviced, Mr. Minister, that's the difference.  That's 
what happened as a result of the privatization of your dental plan, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Now with respect to the prescription drug plan, I suppose you'll ask how 



 

 

that's been privatized as well.  Well, Mr. Minister, you've off-loaded 
responsibility on the prescription drug plan on to the sick and the 
elderly. They are paying a larger portion of their cost.  That's 
privatization, Mr. Minister, when you make people pay a larger portion of 
their costs. Well you'll say, we're still paying 80 per cent of the costs.  
It's not privatization. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, you can say what you want.  The sick people of this 
province and the elderly people of this province who are having to pay that 
20 per cent up-front cost, and families with three or four asthmatics who 
are having to pay huge drug costs, are telling you that the prescription 
drug plan has been privatized to the extent of that 20 per cent, Mr. 
Minister.  Yes, I understand there was the dispensing fee before but 
there's no question that a larger portion is being paid today by many, many 
people. 
 
The physical physiotherapist is another matter of concern to us, Mr. 
Minister, because as I understand you have been encouraging 
physiotherapists to set up clinics.  Now we don't have any problem with 
private sector physiotherapist clinics.  But when the correspondence goes 
to physiotherapists who are working in hospitals and it's perceived by 
people in hospitals that their physiotherapists are being attracted into 
the private sector and out of the salaried positions, we become very 
concerned that this minister wishes to privatize our salaried 
physiotherapists and put them in the private sector, when what our 
hospitals need are more physiotherapists on salary. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, another area that I want to bring to your attention is 
out-of-province treatments.  We have the distinct impression on this side 
of the House that more and more of these services are not being covered, 
out-of-province services.  And I raise the case of one individual who 
needed laser treatment to treat port wine stain, and that this is not being 
covered by the province of Saskatchewan; and another woman who needed 
cancer treatment in North Dakota and her treatment wasn't being covered by 
the province of Saskatchewan; and then there was a woman who required 
treatment for her diabetes while visiting in Alberta, and she made the 
mistake of paying for her treatment and now can't seem to get repayment.  
And, Mr. Minister, it appears to us that more and more of these 
out-of-province services are not being covered. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Minister, I would like to ask you whether or not you 
have a list of physicians' services excluded under your interprovincial 
agreements.  Can you provide us with a list of services that are not 
covered -- the list that you have today and, as well, the list that you had 
five years ago. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- The member made a reference to a couple of specific 
cases and I will just address one of them in a minute or two.  But just to 
put the record straight here, Saskatchewan Health pays for out-of-province 
or out-of-country approved procedures that are done; and approved means 
sent by physicians here, or by the Cancer Foundation, for example.  And we 
pay in full for those that are out of the country.  For those that are out 
of the province and in Canada, we have reciprocal arrangements which have 



 

 

just come into place in the last couple of years, really, across Canada. 
 
The one specific case that you mention was one that was brought to our 
attention by your colleague who sits directly behind you there, on a case 
of a person in . . . It doesn't matter where the young person was from, but 
in any case it was a citizen here who had a specific case that had to be 
dealt with in Alberta.  We paid the full Alberta rate.  We're the same as 
what the Alberta government would pay and that's what the nature of the 
reciprocal agreements are.  So if a procedure's done in Alberta, the 
physician there is paid by the Alberta government on the rates that would 
happen had the citizen been an Alberta citizen, and then we reimburse on 
that basis.  And that's how it's done across the country.  All of the 
provinces but Quebec are into that system. 
 
In another case, you were saying that you have the impression, you and your 
colleagues have the impression that there's been a reduction in this kind 
of coverage.  And the fact is, for example, in drug coverage, it was 
expanded in January of '88 to give the same coverage out of province as in 
the province.  So I mean that was an expansion of service, and then, of 
course, with the . . . and it's about at that time that the reciprocal 
arrangements were made with the various provinces in Canada and that's been 
done. 
 
At one time provinces would pay according to the rates of the home province 
and in some provinces some of these rates were higher or they varied across 
the country and it was a bit of a shemozzle for citizens, especially in 
this more mobile society we live in where people move around a lot more.  
So your impression about less coverage is in error, really.  And, in fact, 
there's, in some slight degree, even more coverage. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Minister, do you have a list of the services that are 
excluded under the interprovincial agreements?  Do you have a list today 
and one or did I hear you say that it has only come into being of recent?  
Like I'd like to compare the list from a few years back -- say, five years 
to today. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Yes, we have a list and that list came into effect on 
April 1, 1988.  So there's not anything to compare it to from prior 
because, as I say, that came into effect when the reciprocal arrangements 
between provinces came into effect.  And what the list comprises is it's a 
list that is there and it was part of the negotiations for the reciprocal 
arrangements across Canada.  And that list is for procedures that in some 
provinces are not covered and some provinces they are, and so on.  So there 
was an agreement certain procedures would not be under this reciprocal 
arrangement, and they're there.  But yes, we have a list and I'd be quite 
willing to provide it to the member. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Minister, I'd like to get a copy of your list and as 
well, I'm wondering, does this mean that those services that are excluded, 
can the Saskatchewan resident obtain coverage from the Department of Health 
for those services -- you know, Saskatchewan coverage?  Or does this mean 
that the Saskatchewan resident simply doesn't get reimbursed for those 
services, period? 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Let me just give you an example.  If I understood your 
question it was, if a citizen of Saskatchewan received the service in, 
let's say, Vancouver, and it was something that is covered in Saskatchewan 
and not covered in B.C.  Is that the gist of what you're asking?  And if 
that was the case, that person could come back, because they are a resident 
of Saskatchewan, and get that coverage, and have that paid for. 
 
Now the cases that I talked about earlier were things like what's known as 
cosmetic surgery, or altering of appearance, or whatever that it's 
officially called.  Something like that that isn't covered in either place, 
according to the reciprocal arrangements, we have a list of those things 
and they're not covered in Vancouver, and they're not covered here in 
Saskatchewan either. 
 
Now I just want to just address the one specific case because I think you 
probably have it there.  The case of the young person that had to go to 
Calgary for a specific kind of dye and so on, and a procedure to change a 
very large birthmark on her face and whatever. 
 
Now that case was back and forth, and I'm not sure what the circumstance 
was with the physician and the billing, but what was covered there after 
some significant letter writing back and forth.  I shouldn't say 
significant because it wasn't that many letters, but there were two or 
three letters that went back and forth. 
 
What was covered there was the procedure, and we paid the Alberta 
government according to the rate that the Alberta government paid their 
physician over there.  But what was not covered was the product that was 
used.  The dye that was used was not covered, and that is not covered in 
Alberta, nor is it covered here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Minister, are you going to be sending that list over 
right now? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Yes, I'll sent it over to you right now.  I'll ask the 
page to . . . Do we have another copy of it?  Just a minute, I'll ask the 
page to make a copy and then give it to you.  How would that be?  We might 
need it for . . . 
 
(2030) 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Excuse me, Mr. Minister, are you indicating that these 
services are not covered in Saskatchewan, things such as routine, periodic 
health examinations, such as therapeutic abortions, such as genetic 
screening and other genetic investigation.  Are these services not covered 
in Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Okay.  The list that I provided you with and the 
procedures that are there are issues that have been excluded from the 
common agreement that exists across the country.  In the negotiations there 
was common agreement on almost everything being covered in a reciprocal 
way.  In other words, Alberta would just pay their physician for a 



 

 

procedure done on a Saskatchewan resident -- okay? -- except for these that 
are listed here. 
 
That's in the reciprocal system.  So if someone received a procedure that's 
listed here and they wouldn't get it paid for through the reciprocal 
arrangement, just a direct payment by the government in the province where 
the procedure took place, they would then have to go through the process 
the way it once was, where you'd have to bring your bill back to 
Saskatchewan and then have it paid here.  And that's what would take place. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Now tell me what sort of 
discretion do you have with respect to paying these particular bills.  For 
example, if someone needed cosmetic surgery for altering their appearance, 
or, for example, if someone needed a therapeutic abortion for health 
reasons, what sort of procedure would one have to follow in order to be 
covered, and are there any barriers that the department sets up or do they 
pay these automatically upon submission of the bill? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Okay, for an example, surgery for alteration of 
appearance, cosmetic surgery, which is not covered here, if the procedure 
had been done in Regina, it wouldn't be covered.  And so if it's done in 
Winnipeg, you can't bring a bill back because we treat it as though it had 
been done here.  And it's the case with all of these things -- if it's 
covered here as though the procedure had been done in Regina or Saskatoon 
or somewhere within our borders, then they can bring the bill back and it 
would be paid. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  As I take it then, if someone gets 
a periodic health examination out of the province, when they submit the 
bill it will be automatically paid by the department, according to your 
remarks.  I just wanted to clear up some of the . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- That's true. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- That's true, okay.  And the same applies, I take it, with 
respect to genetic screening and other genetic investigation.  That's 
covered in the province, is it? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- There's just a discussion here with the professionals 
whether or not . . . and I try to recall whether or not that's on the fee 
schedule.  They believe that it is.  But as I said, if that procedure that 
you outline, the genetic screening, is on our fee schedule here, in other 
words, if it's on our coverage list, yes, it will be paid, the same as I 
outlined in my earlier answer. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister.  I wanted to clarify how this 
particular list worked. 
 
Now the other thing that has been raised with me is the . . . as a result 
of the chronic understaffing in hospitals, we have run across incidences 
where families have used private nursing care, Mr. Minister -- private 
nursing care.  Now is this service being covered, Mr. Minister? 
 



 

 

When we have a situation where -- and I wrote to you about a particular 
situation which was quite shocking -- where it was impossible for the 
regular staff to look after the patient, and the family had to undertake 
private nursing care.  They have found it virtually impossible to get 
coverage for this private nursing care, and of course take the position 
that they pay taxes and, you know, medicare should be taking the 
responsibility for this.  But it was a question of understaffing in the 
hospitals that resulted in the lack of staff to look after the mother. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, what sort of recourse does a family like this have in a 
situation like that?  Can you tell us what recourse they would have, 
please? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Well the situation with the kind of example that you 
raise is that private nursing care within the hospital is covered fully in 
a case where it's ordered by the physician, which is the case for all of 
the services.  So it's not a decision that a family can take.  If a family 
comes in and says I think mom should have private services besides the 
services that are provided in the institution and, you know, over and 
above, and if that service has not been ordered by the physician because 
it's needed for medical reasons, it wouldn't be covered.  And that's how 
it's been for a long time and that's how it's done now. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Minister, I want to note as well that the federal 
government, the federal PC government has cut back on funding for health 
care.  I want to make that point because it is a point that should be made 
in these estimates. 
 
However, I want to know what you are doing, Mr. Minister, to stick up for 
the people of Saskatchewan and to pressure your friends in Ottawa to stop 
their cut-backs with respect to health care funding.  Mr. Minister, can you 
tell us what you have done and what you are planning to do in that regard? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Well the established program's financing -- and I know 
that's a significant debate that's going to go on here with the . . . well 
I think it maybe has.  I may not have been listening just as carefully as I 
should have one day, when there was a debate between your Finance critic 
and our Minister of Finance, about the reduction in established program 
financing as it relates to the funding for health care and post-secondary 
education.  Now I normally listen very carefully to all of those debates 
the member from Regina Centre engages in, but let me just say in a serious 
note, the Finance ministers of Canada, all of them provincially . . . I 
think it's fair to say all of them have been expressing this loudly to the 
federal government. 
 
And the Health ministers of Canada -- and we had a communique pé to this 
effect -- the Health ministers of Canada, all of us, have expressed this in 
no uncertain terms to Mr. Beatty, the federal minister, at our last meeting 
at the conference centre in Ottawa.  We have been concerned about it.  We 
remain concerned about the diminishing level of federal funding at the same 
time as the pressures that we are feeling . . . because of the pressure of 
the things that I talked about earlier tonight as it relates to the 
technology and the costs of, well, salaries and everything else in the 



 

 

health care system that are going up. 
 
And we're concerned.  There's no question about it.  We've expressed that 
in no uncertain terms to the Minister of National Health and Welfare.  And 
I did . . . a year ago I expressed it on behalf of all the Health ministers 
as chairman of Health ministers of Canada. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Well, Mr. Minister, it certainly is not going unnoticed by 
the people of Saskatchewan because I've heard about it in a number of 
localities.  And I urge you to take a strong stand with your federal 
counterparts to tell them that these cut-backs are hurting the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And what I want to talk a bit about now is the poverty statistics in the 
province.  And I want to talk about poverty because the minister knows, the 
minister talked in his opening remarks about moving into the wellness model 
and the health promotion model and the health prevention model.  And the 
minister talked about that.  He talked about changing the emphasis with 
respect to health care, or words to that effect.  Now with respect to the 
issue of poverty, the statistics clearly show that people on low income and 
poor people are more likely to have serious, disabling illnesses and live 
shorter lives.  Now I don't have my fingers on those statistics right now, 
but the minister will know that they're contained in Mr. Epp's document on 
achieving health for all.  Very telling statistics. 
 
Now in Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister, we have a very shocking rate of poverty 
in this province, and we have many, many children who are living under 
Canada statistics poverty line and who are lining up at food banks.  In 
1982 the per cent of Saskatchewan children in poverty was at the national 
average, Mr. Minister.  In every year since 1982, Saskatchewan has been 
above the national average, and by 1988, Saskatchewan had the highest 
proportion of children in poverty amongst all the provinces, Mr. Minister. 
 
Let me just give you some of the statistics that we find so shocking, that 
the people of Saskatchewan find shocking.  In 1982 Saskatchewan had no food 
banks, and now there are food banks in all major Saskatchewan cities.  The 
Saskatoon food bank, in 1988, fed 76,164 people.  The Regina food bank, in 
1988, fed 59,705 people.  The P.A. food bank, in 1988, fed 12,242 people.  
More than 5,000 breakfasts and snacks are fed to children each month in 
Regina, Mr. Minister.  Over 47 per cent of the people dependent on food 
banks are children, Mr. Minister.  "Hunger comes from people not having 
enough money to buy nutritious food", Mr. Minister. 
 
And that's a quote from the Mayor's report -- The Mayor's Board of Inquiry, 
page 12. 
 
(2045) 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Are you just going to stand there and read? 
 
Ms. Simard: -- And the member from Weyburn is shouting from his seat as 
usual, Mr. Chair.  I think I would ask him to remain silent.  He can get 
into this debate a little later. 



 

 

 
Since 1982, the number of families living in poverty in Saskatchewan has 
increased faster than anywhere else in the country.  I want to raise this 
in particular.  Minimum wage earners, Mr. Minister, most of whom are women, 
have a maximum gross annual income of 9,360.  And the Canadian poverty line 
is 11,432 for a single person and 20,132 for a family of three.  And yet 
there are many single parent families, headed mostly by women, Mr. 
Minister, who are doing precisely that -- working on minimum wage. 
 
And the statistics go on.  About 20 per cent of the population of 
Saskatchewan, or 180,000 live in poverty.  That's page 20, Mr. Minister, of 
The Mayor's Board of Inquiry.  The highest rate of poverty is among female, 
single parent families -- 56 per cent of them live in poverty, Mr. 
Minister.  And 70 per cent of the children living in female single parent 
families are poor. 
 
And according to the most recent statistics put out by the National Council 
of Welfare, 64,560 Saskatchewan children are growing up in poverty.  "Women 
over the age of sixty-five are twice as likely to be poor as elderly men, 
and women generally comprise about 60% of all poor adults." 
 
And the situation in northern Saskatchewan, which my friend from Cumberland 
will be going into in more detail in a few minutes, Mr. Minister, is even 
more deplorable.  And I tell you, Mr. Minister, the situation with respect 
to poverty in this province is shocking.  The demand for food banks has 
grown 165 per cent since 1985 in Saskatoon, 70 per cent in Regina since 
1985, 78 per cent in Prince Albert since 1985.  And, Mr. Minister, you have 
700-plus dollars for Chuck Childers but only $740,000 for children living 
in poverty, to solve the hunger problem -- something like three cents per 
child, Mr. Minister. 
 
Now I think that says something about the misplaced priorities of your 
government, Mr. Minister.  And as the Minister of Health it is incumbent on 
you to be lobbying to solve this crisis with respect to poverty and hunger 
in this province, Mr. Minister.  That is part of your role as Minister of 
Health if you truly believe in health promotion and the wellness model of 
health, Mr. Minister.  Because as you said, it's not health care.  Those 
were your opening remarks, Mr. Minister: we have to talk about health, not 
health care.  And if you truly believe that, Mr. Minister, it is incumbent 
on you to take responsibility as Health minister to solve the crisis with 
respect to poverty and hunger that we are facing in this province and that 
has been growing and growing since 1982 by leaps and bounds in a shocking 
fashion, something we've never seen before to such an extent in this 
province, Mr. Minister. 
 
So I would like to know . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well he says, 
it's an exaggeration.  I suppose he's going to quibble with the National 
Council of Welfare statistics of 64,000 children-plus being hungry in this 
province, Mr. Minister, living, growing up in poverty. 
 
Mr. Minister, what steps have you taken to ensure that the poverty in this 
province will be alleviated and that children will have nutritious food and 
live in an environment with adequate housing, proper sewer and water, and 



 

 

the proper amenities so that they can grow up to be healthy individuals, 
physically and mentally. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- There are a couple of points that I would like to make 
in this area.  Mr. Chairman, in my earlier remarks today when I talked 
about the direction that the Department of Health has been attempting to go 
to and the new directions in terms of emphasis on health, and spoke about 
the determinants of good health, including poverty and poor housing and 
water supply, all those kinds of things -- we're very serious about that. 
 
But when I said to the member, and as my colleague has said often to her 
colleague across there, we don't serve our citizens well by using numbers 
which aren't appropriate.  And I tell the members that the number 64,000 
children is not an appropriate number to use in the context of 
Saskatchewan.  And here's why. The StatsCanada or the National Council of 
Welfare, I believe, is where the member was quoting from, and they use 
numbers which are based on the net incomes of individuals.  And the net 
income of Saskatchewan farmers, people all across the rural parts of this 
province, people that I represent, people from the area that you're from in 
your early stages of your life, those numbers include children in homes on 
farm after farm after farm in Saskatchewan who by that statistical point 
that you raise, the net income of their family . . . And you very easily 
bridge from there and you say, because they fit the statistical base set 
out by the welfare committee or the National Council of Welfare, because 
they fit that statistical base then it's automatic that they're hungry and 
that those children are not being fed properly and that is absolutely not 
the case.  That's absolutely not the case and that's why the number 64,000 
is not appropriate. 
 
Now, let me clarify this.  Let's just . . . there is no question that there 
are children and that there are people in some of our cities and in some of 
our locations, and it isn't just applied to the cities and so on but it 
doesn't do this debate any good for those of us who would purport to 
responsibly deal with our citizens, whether they be city or rural, to say 
that there are 64,000 because I dispute that number.  Okay.  So be it.  We 
dispute the number.  The fact is there are some children who are hungry. 
 
The fact is the reason that we put -- we, being the government -- put into 
place the family foundation, why the consultations that are going on by the 
Minister of the Family . . . and members across -- I've heard some comments 
about I think recognizing some of the work that's going on and criticizing 
some of the work that's going on or criticizing the minister various times 
and whatever. 
 
But there's no question that that minister's doing an excellent job of 
going out to see what's happening in those areas and to deal with the 
issues in a direct way without just standing back and saying, there are 
64,000 and all of the rest of it.  Let's get to the centre and the core of 
the problem and try to deal with it.  That's what been done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member asked what I have done as Minister of Health in 



 

 

this area.  I say to the hon. member, it is because of the information 
coming forward in the Department of Health and it's because of 
representations by the Minister of Social Services and others that we have 
come up with this structure within the government to just try to deal with 
just those issues and to try to zero in on what's happening, specifically 
to the Department of Health. 
 
Our people in the Department of Health and our public health branch work 
directly with those in poverty or at risk.  The public health nurses have a 
teen-parent support program and these programs have been in place for a 
number of years.  And they deal with just those people who are most at risk 
from poverty and all of the implications of poverty and all of the things 
which follow up from poverty.  Our nutritionists work with groups such as 
Social Services' clients, Justice clients, single parents who wish to 
enhance their economical food selection skills. 
 
And more importantly -- not more importantly than that, but very 
importantly as you well know -- the public health units of the two large 
cities are administered by those cities through grants which come directly 
from the Department of Health to the cities.  And in recent years we have 
increased those grants to the cities for just such reasons.  Because in the 
inner core of these two large cities some of the issues that the member is 
raising and some of the people that the member is referring to are living 
in the centres of these cities and the public nurses, the public health 
nutritionists, and others are . . . well are having difficult times, and 
there's no question that they are. 
 
So we've increased our grants to public health in the two cities for just 
that reason after discussions with both of those cities.  And we have it on 
a formula now where that increase carries on into the future.  I can 
confidently say that those two cities are pleased with the way in which 
this has gone through the Department of Health; and because the Department 
of Health has recognized just the kinds of issues that, not only did I talk 
about earlier, but the kind of issues that you're speaking of and that we 
all recognize have something to do with the health of our people. 
 
And the other point in health care, of course, is that our people, 
regardless of their level in income, have access and equal access to the 
health care system that is provided in this system. 
 
Our social assistance rates in Saskatchewan increased at the rate of $10 a 
child, effective June 1 of this year, just this week; $10 shelter allowance 
-- I'm not able to read the writing here so well -- $10 utilities 
allowance.  The social assistance plan rates for families are amongst the 
highest in this country, in this province, and the Saskatchewan cost of 
living is amongst the lowest in this country.  So you take those two in 
comparison: our rates are amongst the highest and our cost of living is 
close to the lowest in the country. 
 
Minimum wage went up in the province, going to $5 on July 1, 1990.  We've 
had 28,000 job placements, training opportunities, all of the kinds of 
things that some of my colleagues in other portfolios have been talking 
about; all of which point to the kinds of things that we are attempting to 



 

 

do, in some difficult economic times, to deal with this issue of poverty, 
and especially poverty among children in families who are finding it 
difficult. 
 
And the other thing, Mr. Speaker, we've had 11,000 jobs created since 1984 
for social assistance clients, directed at social assistance clients, 
people who were once on social assistance and are now working.  And there's 
been a big increase as well for the budget as it relates to student loans.  
So all of those things which relate to people in some need, we've been 
attempting to address them in some difficult times. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Minister, with respect to the National Council of 
Welfare statistics, I think it's important to note for the record that all 
previous governments have been judged on the same standard and with respect 
to the same measure.  And in 1982 the per cent of Saskatchewan children in 
poverty was at the national average according to that standard.  And since 
then, since 1982, according to that standard, Saskatchewan has been above 
the national average for the percentage of children living in poverty.  And 
by 1988 Saskatchewan had the highest proportion of children in poverty 
amongst all provinces, Mr. Minister.  And I think that's important to note. 
 
The other point, your point with respect to minimum wage.  In the 
seven-year period between 1982 and 1989, Saskatchewan had the smallest 
increase in the minimum wage in Canada.  So the fact that you may be 
raising the minimum wage today certainly hasn't helped the people that 
lived so far below the poverty line for the last eight years, has it, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
And the maximum basic social assistance allowance provided to a family of 
three, one adult and two children, is only 62 per cent of the poverty line, 
Mr. Minister, in Saskatchewan.  In the case of a single person it is only 
43 per cent of the poverty line, Mr. Minister.  And we can go on and on and 
on with exactly this sort of statistic, Mr. Minister, which clearly shows 
that we have a problem in Saskatchewan, and that this government has not 
taken any serious steps to deal with it. 
 
What we've heard from the minister today is that once again they are 
analysing and looking at the situation, and studying it to death instead of 
taking concrete action.  I note that it didn't take them all that long to 
decide that Chuck Childers was worth some $740,000, but it is taking them 
for ever to decide what they're going to do with hungry children in this 
province. 
 
(2100) 
 
And the Minister of Health, the man who is responsible for the health of 
these children, is defending this government's policies, and I find that 
shocking, Mr. Chair. 
 
Now with respect to public health nurses, you talked about public health 
nurses out there working.  Well from 1983 to 1988 the public health nurse 
staff complement fell from 171.5 to 148.2, Mr. Minister.  You actually 
decreased the number of public health nurses out there, according to a 



 

 

document dated August 1988 from the Saskatchewan . . . prepared by regional 
nursing supervisors.  And you proceeded to twin health care regions which 
put more burden on public health nurses and made them less accessible to 
the public.  They were unable to perform many of the duties they wanted to 
perform which was to keep in touch with people and to deal with individuals 
in the province and help them with health promotion and disease prevention. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, and it goes on -- the northern food transportation 
subsidy and so forth.  But I'm going to leave . . . devote some time now to 
the member from Cumberland who will want to question you on northern  
 DSaskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Just, for the member, just a couple of comments and 
just one last comment.  I wanted to make this again about the issue of the 
statistics of the National Council of Welfare.  I don't say that other 
governments and over the time haven't been judged by this statistic or the 
StatsCanada statistic. 
 
The point I was making was, and it's an important one to make because while 
it may be the statistic that's been used for a long time, it doesn't mean 
that it's an appropriate statistic to say that because there are families 
who have fallen below that line, that rural families are not feeding their 
children, which is what is suggested when you say 64,000 children based on 
those numbers, and that's what the number that keeps coming across here.  
And you don't contribute to the service of our people by saying that rural 
children living on farms in Saskatchewan whose parents, through difficulty 
in agriculture, have fallen below the net income level that the National 
Council of Welfare calls the poverty line, are not feeding their children.  
Because it is not fair to say that and it is not the fact. 
 
That the . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . now the member over here says 
I'm rationalizing.  The member can say I'm rationalizing.  I acknowledge 
that there's a problem in the inner cities; frankly, there is.  And the 
member should say -- and if we're going to have a reasoned debate on this 
-- talk about the inner cities, then; don't say 64,000 because it's a nice 
number for your NDP rhetoric.  Don't say 64,000 for your NDP rhetoric when 
it's saying to rural people, you're not feeding your kids; because it's not 
true. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order, order.  The member from Cumberland has the floor. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- I would like to start out by reiterating some of the points 
that were raised by the previous speaker, the member from Lakeview, and I 
wish right off the bat that the minister would get excited in trying to 
resolve the issues rather than trying to defend the shocking record of this 
government.  I think he should devote more of his energies in trying to 
resolve the issues relating to health in this province, rather than to get 
excited about the guilt feelings that he has about the lack of action in 
many areas of this province, including the terrible poverty that exists for 
many children in this province. 
 



 

 

Those facts have been brought out by people from across Canada, and those 
records are there clearly, as comparative records from province to 
province, and they were not created from this side of the House.  We just 
are repeating statistical evidence that is brought out by regular agencies 
who keep statistics from across Canada. 
 
I guess I would like to start out, Mr. Minister, in regards to the North.  
I would like to ask you, Mr. Minister, from the last time we were in the 
House, I asked you for statistical evidence about the situation in the 
North.  I asked you what the situation was like, for example, with TB and 
also with accidents and with pneumonia, heart diseases, and so on.  So I 
would like to, first of all, ask you what the situation is like now in 
1990.  Has there been an improvement of the situation from your statistical 
evidence in the past year, and if so, where is your evidence? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Now the hon. member . . . I believe last year following 
these estimates we -- and I think you made reference to that -- we sent you 
a report of the vital statistics as it relates directly to northern 
Saskatchewan, done by the northern medical services branch.  And we've 
asked them to update that for this year and we don't have it yet.  But I 
will undertake to be sure that you have an update of that as it relates to 
the year that's elapsed since then. 
 
But I just say to the hon. member as a . . . I just use this as a . . . 
Have you got a copy of this green book called Health Status of the 
Saskatchewan Population?  We'll undertake to send you one of these.  It 
does not specifically relate to northern Saskatchewan but there are some 
numbers in here that will be of interest.  There are numbers there that are 
broken down according to Saskatchewan registered Indians, a number of whom 
were living there but there are, you know, many residents in northern 
Saskatchewan who don't fall in that category, and I recognize that as well. 
 
One of the problems we have in identifying, for example, infant mortality 
as it relates directly to what you will call the North, is because many of 
the people from the North will come to locations that are not in that 
geographic area to have their babies, whether that be Nipawin or Meadow 
Lake or P.A. or Saskatoon, many of those cases.  And so the infant 
mortality rates are not specified by place of residence.  They're not coded 
in that way, I'm told. 
 
But I'll give you a statistic in terms of the registered Indian population, 
for example, and the whole population in terms of infant mortality for 
1,000 live births.  It's a diminishing number of deaths each year out of 
1,000.  In the registered Indian population, in 1988 it was at 15.4 per 
1,000. The year before it was 16.7; '86, 17.2; '85, 18; '84, 19.  You know 
it goes back for a period of years.  Compared, 1982 was 21.5.  So there is 
. . . and that's always a measure that is used and it's a widely used 
measure for, you know, sort of the . . . you measure the health status of a 
wider population. 
 
I'll undertake to send the member one of these books because it's a very 
well done report.  And it's a part of . . . it's done as a result of a . . 
. by the health status research unit at the University of Saskatchewan, 



 

 

Department of Community Health and Epidemiology.  And it was done as one of 
the elements of our "everyone wins" program where we knew that it was 
necessary to measure the starting point of the health status of our people 
wherever they live so that we could have the basis on which to set goals 
for the population in terms of improving the health of our population all 
across the province.  But I'll send one of these books.  We don't have an 
extra one but I'll undertake to send one over to you. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Okay, I'll await your information then from the general 
records that you do have.  I will then deal with some of the stats that I 
do have already from northern Saskatchewan.  I sort of found it a little 
bit amazing that you didn't have all of those at hand in the sense that, 
you know, we would raise the question, you know offhand, and that you 
should have that record. 
 
We knew that the records are kept under, for example, census division 18, 
and that you should be able to cross-reference that through Sask. hospital.  
And that those types of records should be more readily available to you 
because there is a method as to how the medical services in northern 
Saskatchewan is always able to access the records. 
 
So I would like to quote for you some statistical information.  You will 
find in the Health and Welfare Canada the health of the registered Indian 
population in Canada, which was done in April of '89, from the medical 
services branch.  So that's available in regards to statistics for the 
Indian population. 
 
(2115) 
 
There was also a 1987 vital statistics one for the registered Indian 
population of Saskatchewan.  And I might add that I was looking at an 
article specifically related to the topic that I want to move into.  Before 
I get there I might add that in order for the government to move into 
planning, into the '90s, that material that I've been raising questions on, 
should be easily available and readily updated -- you know even on a half 
yearly, or even a monthly basis -- because when you're doing planning I 
think it's extremely important to be able to have that evidence on hand 
because there are short-term trends and more longer-term trends. 
 
I'd like to talk now on a more longer-term trend in regards to an important 
area such as tuberculosis.  What I have found in regards to the 
tuberculosis statistics is that it's as absolutely shocking in this day and 
age that we would have tuberculosis at the rate that we do have it in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So I'll provide you with some information in regards to TB (tuberculosis), 
since you don't have the records at hand in front of you.  What I've found 
in regards to the tuberculosis population -- and this is from the Health 
Reports, Volume 1, Number 1, and it's Tuberculosis in Canada, 1987, by L. 
Gaudette.  And so that the following stats are in reference to his article.  
It says that in 1977 there were 472 cases of tuberculosis for the Indian 
population.  In 1987 it was 372.  What that shows, Mr. Minister, is that 
what we have in 1987 is 79 per cent of what we had in 1977, 10 years 



 

 

earlier. 
 
For the rest of Canadians, the percentage figure is 42 per cent.  In other 
words, other Canadians have improved by quite a margin during those years 
as compared to the Indian population.  And when you look at it in just 
straight forward percentage figures from these general numbers that I have 
given, the percentage improvement, of course, was 21 per cent for 
aboriginal people and 58 per cent for the rest of the Canadian population. 
 
When I looked at that statistic and I started looking at what the 
population was in Canada, and I wanted to see how it referred to 
Saskatchewan, I looked at the stats in Saskatchewan and I found that 
according to the health of the registered Indian population in 
Saskatchewan, they said that the TB rate was 13 to 25 times higher than the 
rest of the population.  These are shocking statistics. 
 
And I will go on further in regards to the general population as a whole.  
And these are . . . I'll quote you comparative figures.  I'll compare the 
Canadian population as a whole along with Newfoundland, Manitoba, and 
Saskatchewan, and these are the 1977 stats per hundred thousand. 
 
It was, for Canada as a whole, it was 13.7; in Newfoundland it was 16.0; in 
Manitoba it was 16.8; and in Saskatchewan in 1977, it was 15.5.  When I 
look at 1982, there was an improvement in every place right across Canada.  
Canada had improved from 13.7 to 10.0 by 1982; Newfoundland had improved 
from 16 to 12.6; Manitoba had improved from 16.8 to 14.9; and Saskatchewan 
had also improved from 1977 to 1982, from 15.5 to 11.2. 
 
Now I want to compare the 1987 records, ever since the PC government had 
come in.  Five years after the PC government had come in, the records in 
Canada as a whole had improved again to 7.8.  And for Newfoundland, it had 
improved from 1982 to 1987, 12.6 to 6.0.  So there was quite a bit of an 
improvement in Newfoundland.  Then we checked out Manitoba and there was an 
improvement again of 14.9 to 11.7. 
 
But when I look at the Saskatchewan statistics, it is quite shocking 
because everywhere else in Canada there has been an improvement.  The only 
place in Canada where everything has gone down in regards to TB cases is 
Saskatchewan.  And the fact is it has gone up from 11.2 to 15.4.  That is 
absolutely a shameful record. 
 
Here we have, from time to time, the Saskatchewan government saying they're 
leaders in Saskatchewan.  And certainly enough, when we look at the 
statistical evidence, we were leaders at one time.  And now we're way at 
the bottom of the list.  We are even worse than Newfoundland.  We are even 
worse than all the other provinces right across Canada. 
 
The TB rates have sky-rocketed, and one of the reasons that a lot of people 
have stated time and time again is because the poverty situations have gone 
up, that the sewer and water situations have not improved.  We had made 
great improvements in housing in regards to sewer and water in northern 
Saskatchewan.  And yet we have made very little since then. 
 



 

 

I would state that in the same way that many other health researchers have 
stated before that this shocking statistic is really the cause, and the 
cause is the lack of action by the PC government, not only in the health 
area, but also in regards to social and economic development in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So I would like to ask as my first question to the minister: in regards to 
the shocking statistics that I have quoted, not only to the Indian-Metis 
population as a whole, although to a large degree a larger per cent of the 
population on TB cases were in reference right directly in northern 
Saskatchewan.  Because when I look at the record of 157 cases, 66 were in 
the North. 
 
For example, Saskatoon had 30; Regina, 17; and P.A., 15; 66 were in 
northern Saskatchewan, which has a population of approximately 30,000, the 
rest of them -- 970,000.   We are close to about 40 per cent of the total 
in northern Saskatchewan -- northern Saskatchewan, which has a population 
of only 30,000.  The rest of the province has a population of 970,000. 
 
Here we have a situation in northern Saskatchewan with 30,000 population 
having close to half of the cases in regards to TB.  So I would like to ask 
the minister what has he done in the past year to deal with this, to deal 
with this terrible situation in regards to TB, to tuberculosis?  What has 
he done?  What have you done, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- The case as it relates to tuberculosis -- and just to 
put this into the context, the member is outlining a very difficult 
circumstance and a bad circumstance in northern Saskatchewan as it relates 
to tuberculosis.  I acknowledge that openly. 
 
The situation with tuberculosis over some time, and I don't want to dwell 
on the history of it, but just to go into . . . we once had the 
anti-tuberculosis league that did just laudable work in this province back 
a number of years ago when the various sanatoria were in Saskatchewan, and 
there was a time when . . . and not very long ago when they spoke quite 
openly about, and they believed they had this disease eradicated or very 
close to that. 
 
And the anti-tuberculosis league became the Saskatchewan Lung Association, 
and they were much smaller, you know, in terms of the amount of money that 
they spent and the work that they did out in the communities was a smaller 
organization than they once had been when tuberculosis was more prevalent 
in the province. 
 
I'm not sure just when, I think it's about two or three years ago, three 
years ago now probably.  I'm not sure, but I remember it's since I became 
the Minister of Health.  The Saskatchewan Lung Association wanted us to . . 
. and we've been into long discussions with them about the incidence of TB 
in northern Saskatchewan, and they by this time had become a centralized 
sort of model based in the two major cities. 
 



 

 

We wanted them to get into, and they agreed with us, that there was a need 
for more of a community-based model of dealing with this disease, of 
identifying the disease, and of being sure that people who have been 
diagnosed took their medicine on a regular basis, and did the kinds of drug 
therapy that's important for recovery. 
 
And so we did take that over and we have increased the funding for the 
tuberculosis units significantly, and in this last year -- the member asks 
the question: well what have you done in the last year? 
 
Let me just put this into context again.  In the last year of the lung 
association, their annual budget was $620,000.  That was in '86-87 -- 
$620,000.  Last year under the department's auspices and moving from that 
centralized model that I described to you, a more community-based model 
into primarily the North, the budget was 837,550.  This year's blue book in 
the budget we are now considering . . . it is up to 910,850 and we have 
just recently, in fact just this last week, redirected another 210,000 on 
top of the 910,850.  And that's a redirection within the department to . . 
. because of the circumstance that the member outlined and the circumstance 
that I acknowledged openly is a serious problem. 
 
One of the things that has been happening as our people have come into that 
community-based model and have gone into the communities to identify the 
incidence of tuberculosis, it's a case of as they go more and more in 
looking for this disease, they find more; they find a higher incidence.  
And it's a case that we recognize.  And the northern health unit has been 
adamant about that they need more resources, and we've been giving them 
those extra resources based on that need. 
 
So we are putting extra resources into it.  I could give the hon. member 
some more recent statistics, and it just relates to the issues . . . or it 
relates to the incidents.  There have been 40 new cases in the north since 
the January 1, 1990 and I'll give them to you by community:  Black Lake, 
12; Cumberland, 12; Deschambault, 7; Fond-du-Lac, 2; La Loche, 5; La Ronge, 
1; Pelican Narrows, 1; Sandy Bay, 1; Stanley Mission, 1; Wollaston Lake, 8. 
 
(2130) 
 
I don't want to just point out which communities, necessarily, except just 
to show that it's across the area, and it's as you've been saying as well.  
We're making an attempt to put more resources, more people on the ground, 
so to speak, to be sure that there is follow-up.  And one of the things I'm 
told by the professionals is that it's very important once diagnosis is 
confirmed, it's very important that the drug therapy that's prescribed is 
followed.  And that's important to have people on the ground there to make 
sure that that happens. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- You said you were providing money.  How much money did you 
increase then for the health branch in northern Saskatchewan to deal 
specifically with the situation of TB? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- The moneys that I referred to, while this money that's 
specifically related to tuberculosis is being spent in the North for the 



 

 

reasons that you've outlined and that I've outlined in return to you, while 
it's being spent in the North, it is not budgeted through the northern 
health services branch.  It's budgeted through the lab and disease control 
services branch. And the amounts are . . . Oh, I gave them to you a minute 
ago here.  This year is 910,850 -- that's the blue book number -- plus an 
additional 210,000 that's been redirected internally in addition to that.  
And that was just done last week, as a matter of fact.  So what is that -- 
$1,120,850. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- I'd like to quote some other stats in regards to the north 
so that the public there understands the severity of the problem.  In many 
situations, people simply don't know.  I mean, we've heard Dr. Murray say 
northern Saskatchewan was third-world medicine and when the health care 
task force report came up to the north and did the recommendations.  So I'd 
like to just review a few more. 
 
We know that the suicide rate is about three to four times the provincial 
average.  I've stated that many times again that, you know, for every 1 per 
cent rise in unemployment, there's a 4 per cent rise in suicide rate, that 
indeed, some of the solution has to be in the area of socio-economic 
development. 
 
And the other aspect that a lot of people have raised was the issue of 
counselling.  Now a lot of the people in northern Saskatchewan, of course, 
speak Dene and Cree as their language and they have their own cultural 
practices, of course, in regards to their local medicine and also the 
regular medicine that we get.  So I'd like to know from the minister: 
seeing the suicide rates have gone up in northern Saskatchewan and looking 
at the causes of deaths.  When you look at the mortality rate, for example, 
on the Indian population of Saskatchewan, of course . . . the mortality 
rates per thousand in regards to accidents, which is the highest cause, is 
69, 69.4.  But when you get down to suicides, it's at 30, which is just 
about at the same level as pneumonia and influenza.  So it is extremely 
high. 
 
What are you doing in regards to the health system and making improvements 
in the area of counselling which takes into consideration the cultural 
background of the people in northern Saskatchewan?  What type of plans have 
you got?  And I know the cultural aspect was not specifically mentioned in 
a task force report, but I want to know from you as a minister whether or 
not you have any plans in regards to deal with these issues of the high 
suicide rates in northern Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Some statistics as it relates to suicide rates.  The 
suicide rates in the province of Saskatchewan appear to be similar to the 
rates in this country, across Canada as a whole.  In 1988 there were 145 
suicides in Saskatchewan.  Now that's slightly higher than the figure of 
132 in 1987.  In '87 that 132 was the lowest number that had been recorded 
since '76.  But the 145 in 1988 was lower than the numbers for both 1981 
and 1982 which were 171 in each of those years.  I mean, we have fewer 
suicides province-wide than what there has been the case in some other 
years.  But obviously those are still high numbers; they're high numbers in 
the country. 



 

 

 
And I think that what you're relating to in the context of . . . I think 
you're quoting from, if I remember right . . . I'm not sure just which 
booklet you're quoting from, but it was one, I think, related to registered 
Indian population.  Is that . . . yes, and I acknowledge that those are 
higher and especially in the one age group, the younger people in the 
registered Indian population.  And we know that that's a . . . I mean, 
that's a problem that's there, especially in northern Canada, all across 
the country. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- I guess we can . . . When I looked at the other stats in 
addition, for Indian people in the province, you know, back in 1986, I saw 
that the . . . according to that, the diabetes rates were anywhere from two 
to 10 times higher. 
 
But also there was the socio-economic record.  I related to you the 
socio-economic record for northern Saskatchewan and it's fairly dismal.  We 
had done a lot of new house building up to 1981-82, and we remember the 
housing crisis at the federal level at that time.  So a lot of the 
unemployment rates rose during the summer and the ability to access UIC was 
just not there because they couldn't work the number of weeks when the 
housing crisis hit.  So a lot of it was related to that aspect, you know, 
which was a bit of the economic situation in Canada and the federal policy 
of the day not to build as many homes, you know, right throughout Canada, 
and more particularly in northern areas.  So I would like to also relate 
that. 
 
In regards to running water, in regards to having, you know, good water, we 
recognize that . . . When I looked at the statistics, there was . . . 
running water on the reserves were 36 per cent.  And it tells you quite a 
bit about the situation -- only 36 per cent of the homes had running water. 
 
And when we looked at the incomes, they were half of what the general 
population was able to get.  Fifty per cent of what the ordinary person 
gets in the province is what Indian people get.  So that the economic base 
and the resources required to be able to have a healthy life-style simply 
is not there. 
 
So when I'm talking about health here, I'm not looking at it only from, you 
know, the improvement of facilities in health and also the improvement of 
health practice, but the improvement of the socio-economic conditions of 
Indian and Metis people throughout this province. 
 
But also, the conditions of people in northern Saskatchewan.  We well know 
that we take out about a billion dollars a year from northern Saskatchewan.  
You know, a couple of years ago we got, you know, just from uranium mining 
alone, production of $700 million.  In the past couple of years, it has 
gone down a bit and it's around $800 million in the past couple of years. 
 
So what we're looking at is that while we cut back for the big 
corporations, we provided a 1 per cent royalty tax holiday for the big 
corporations, which amounted to about $15 million in the past three years.  
It's very difficult for people in northern Saskatchewan to see that amount 



 

 

of money going to the big corporations and for them not being provided with 
the jobs. 
 
Historically, you are the minister of the North.  We used to have hiring 
rates in the mines of 45 to 55 per cent.  Then it dropped way down to 
approximately 15 per cent.  And you were, yourself, the minister of 
northern Saskatchewan.  We've got it back up to about 26 per cent now, but 
still the law states we're supposed to be up to 50, 60 per cent.  So as a 
minister, as a former minister in charge of northern development, you 
should have probably paid more attention to the employment rates of 
northern Saskatchewan rather than simply turning over royalty tax holidays 
to the big corporations. 
 
I might add that we create 400 miles of road for Weyerhaeuser, you know, 
the American corporation, and we spent $8 million last year for 
Weyerhaeuser in regards to building roads at interchanges.  But in regards 
to creating employment for people in northern Saskatchewan, it simply was 
not there.  So I'd like to make that point, that we expect people to follow 
the law in northern Saskatchewan.  We created a law so that we could employ 
people in the North and we simply don't follow that.  So I'd like to make 
that as a point in regards to the socio-economic aspect of it. 
 
I guess I'd like to turn over to the issue of the health care task force.  
And I'd like to make a point.  I raised this with you before in question 
period, so I'd like to raise that with you again.  The health care task 
force had a lot of good recommendations in it.  There was fairly good 
substance in it, and I'd like to say that the food transportation subsidy 
was one good recommendation. And I'd like to quote that aspect from the 
health care task force report.  It says that, "Given its unique needs and 
geography . . ." 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Wrong page. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- I'm on the wrong page.  This was on the special ambulance 
services for northern Saskatchewan.  But the point here, Mr. Minister, is 
this: in regards to the food transportation subsidy, a lot of people have 
been asking for it ever since your government came in and took it away from 
them.  It helped people have fresh food and vegetables which looks at a 
more balanced nutrition as a basis of preventative health. 
 
Yet, Mr. Minister, in this day and age this government still provides 
subsidies for whisky, for beer, for wine.  You still provide subsidy for 
booze in northern Saskatchewan.  I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, why don't you 
take away the subsidy from liquor and transfer it over to food subsidy. 
 
(2145) 
 
This way you can say you did not take any special money from anywhere.  All 
you would be doing is transferring help from the subsidy you provide for 
liquor and helping the people out in northern Saskatchewan get a better 
balanced and nutritious meal for their children.  Would you be prepared to 
do that, Mr. Minister? 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Well first of all, as it relates to the food subsidy, 
and I pointed out to the member it's recommendation 6.51.  And one of the 
things that it says very clearly there is that: 
 

 Policies should clearly identify the foods to be subsidized and should 
exclude foods and related products with little or no nutritional value. 

 
I don't sense that you're arguing with that recommendation, but that's a 
far different sort of thing than what was once the food, the northern food 
subsidy that you and a couple of your colleagues will hearken back to from 
time to time, and the way in which that food subsidy was operated. 
 
As it relates to this concept that you're talking about in terms of whether 
or not the government subsidizes liquor in the North.  The fact is the 
government does not subsidize liquor in the North.  And you know that the 
price of any liquor product is . . . I don't know what percentage is taxed.  
Many people tell me it's a lot, but I know that as a treasury board member 
that it's a significant portion of whatever is spent in that area -- is 
taxation which comes directly in here.  So there's no subsidy by the 
government on that -- just to make that point.  Although I don't need to 
dwell on that. 
 
I would say to the hon. member that in terms of some of your other comments 
about the socio-economic circumstance of people in northern Canada and 
people, specifically to this case in northern Saskatchewan -- the need for 
water systems, the kinds of things that are going on and that have gone on 
over a number of years, water systems in. 
 
And I know that you were quoting, once again, from the -- what do we call 
it -- a brochure that dealt with registered Indians, and it talked about 
the number of people on reserve that had access to sewer and water systems, 
and what we would call very basic services as it relates to the public 
health and to the individual health of those who live in . . . wherever we 
might live in Canada.  So I agree with you on that sense. 
 
And that's why I can think of communities in the North that in very recent 
times have received water services.  I think of Cole Bay and Jans Bay -- I 
know they're not in your constituency -- but they're north of where I live 
and in the member from Athabasca's constituency.  I am aware of the 
community of Patuanak has an application for a water system, which the 
village of Patuanak . . . and I'm informed that it will be the case very 
soon. 
 
So those are the kinds of things that we are doing and we are continuing to 
do just out of the very recognition of the kinds of things you are talking 
about, the need for water and sewer programs.  As Minister of Health, I 
will always support those kinds of programs across northern Saskatchewan 
and areas where the socio-economic level is not as high because it is very 
important to the individual health of the residents.  I know that, and 
that's why I at the cabinet table will support those kind of 
recommendations.  And I'll support them whether I'm the Minister of Health 
or not, but in the particular circumstance of the here and now, I am the 
Minister of Health and I do support those programs. 



 

 

 
Mr. Goulet: -- One other basic question, Mr. Minister, and that relates to 
the fact that in the North the recommendation over in the Future Directions 
was for elected boards all the way down South, and appointed boards in the 
North.  So I'm wondering what your position there is.  You've had a better 
chance now to think about that.  So I'd like to know what you're position 
on that is. 
 
The other one I'd like to know is the wording was very different from the 
North to the South, and when I look at the wording in the North . . . For 
example, on 1.6 for the South it says, "Division councils must have the 
authority and responsibility for all aspects of health care . . ." 
 
Now it says . . . It's on page 214.  It says they "must."  The wording 
there is very emphatic that that will happen.  But when it comes down to 
the North, and you go to page 262, on 6.3 it says, "The northern division 
councils should have the authority and responsibility for all aspects of 
health service . . ." 
 
It says "should."  Of course in the English language, must is a more 
emphatic suggestion, and should is fairly wishy-washy from a lot of 
people's viewpoint.  That means, well maybe I should; maybe I shouldn't. 
 
I'm asking the minister whether or not there was a mistake in regards to 
the language used, or whether or not he figures that the North should be 
only should, and the South should be must.  Is this part of the same old 
colonial mentality we've seen in the past eight years, or is the minister 
going to make a more important statement and say, yes, the North must have 
control; the North must be able to elect their people; the North must have 
the say in health delivery in northern Saskatchewan.  Could I have the 
minister's comment on that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- First of all, I think as it relates to the issue of the 
wording, "must" as it relates to the southern divisions -- and remember 
here that we're speaking of the Murray commission report -- as I said to 
your colleague, the Health critic, there is significant debate going on not 
only in the North, but in all of Saskatchewan, both urban and rural, as it 
relates to what form might these elected boards take -- how large, what 
areas, all of that sort of thing.  But I remember, and I think the member 
has heard as well, the executive director or the vice-chairman of the 
report, Mr. Podiluk, made it very clear that that was not an intention.  It 
was not done intentionally and I think he clarified that and I'll clarify 
it here on the record. 
 
My understanding is that they meant to have the word "must" in both cases.  
And you know, I think you will have heard that and I think it's important 
that it goes in the record here.  That's my understanding of it from, Mr. 
Podiluk. 
 
So that's clear and that clarifies what the commission's saying.  That 
doesn't necessarily say that, you know, after the debate that needs to go 



 

 

on with northern people and northern elected people now that the format is 
exactly as they outline. 
 
Now as it relates to the difference between elected boards in the south and 
-- what did they say -- appointed boards in the north, my belief, and I 
said to the member before when it was first raised, that my understanding 
was that the elected councils in the north, when they were making 
presentations to the commission, had suggested appointed rather than 
elected.  Now that's not to say that that's necessarily should be the 
gospel just because someone suggested it because there are many . . . many 
submissions have been made to the commission and the commission chose to 
either adopt or to recommend some of the things that they heard from other 
people.  But I believe that that was the case. 
 
Now you asked me for my own opinion.  My own opinion, frankly, is that 
there should be no difference in that as well.  There should be . . . if 
it's elected, let's say some form of regionalization took place which 
encompassed elected boards in the various parts of Saskatchewan, whether 
they be here in the city of Regina or in Meadow Lake where I'm from or in 
Cumberland where you're from, that they should be, the board should be put 
into place on the same basis.  That would be my view and I believe it's 
your view as well.  We can agree on that one. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, in 
wrapping up this session tonight, I want to take issue with some of the 
comments that you have made with respect to poverty in this province and 
the role of the government in creating poverty in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I want to start out, Mr. Minister, by pointing out to you that the 
figure of 64,560 children living in poverty in Saskatchewan is not, as you 
claim, an overestimate of the situation, Mr. Minister.  In fact I would 
argue, Mr. Minister, that contrary to what you say, it is an underestimate 
of the real crisis in this province, because as you well know the National 
Council of Welfare does not include statistics for Indian people living on 
reserves.  And we have a higher proportion of our population living on 
Indian reserves in this province than anywhere else in Canada, Mr. Minister 
-- some roughly 39,000 people.  So they and their children, Mr. Minister, 
are left out of those figures.  I suggest to you, therefore, that the 
poverty rate is even higher than the National Council of Welfare suggests. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, let me say, moreover, that you say that the problem of 
hunger is only an inner-city problem in Saskatoon and in Regina.  Well, Mr. 
Minister, if that's the case, I wonder if you can explain to me why it is 
that in Prince Albert, for instance, in 1986, in March of 1986, 817 people 
used the food bank; why in March of 1988 in Prince Albert l,243 people used 
the food bank; why in March of 1990 in Prince Albert, Mr. Minister, 1,631 
people had to rely on the food bank. 
 
That should be an indication to you, Mr. Minister, that this is not just a 
problem in Saskatoon and Regina, it's a problem in many other urban centres 
throughout Saskatchewan, and it's getting worse, Mr. Minister.  And it's a 
problem in rural centres as well.  All you have to do, Mr. Minister, is 
look at the situation in Melfort where 50 families a week are using the 



 

 

food bank; in Lashburn where 100 people a month are using the food bank; in 
Carlyle where a food bank opened three months ago.  So don't try to tell 
this Assembly that it's just a problem in the big cities because that is 
not the case, Mr. Minister.  That is not the case at all. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, as you know, none of these food banks existed, as my 
colleague from Hillsdale said, when we were in government.  Every food bank 
in Saskatchewan has formed since the PC government was elected in 1982, and 
I would suggest, directly as a result of the policies that you have 
implemented. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you claim that social assistance rates are the highest 
in the country, here in Saskatchewan.  And you know, Mr. Minister, you know 
full well that that's an inaccuracy on a number of accounts.  You will know 
for instance, Mr. Minister, that the rate for single people in this 
province is the sixth lowest in Canada at 43 per cent of the poverty line, 
Mr. Minister.  That's a disgrace. 
 
Mr. Minister, you will know full well that our rates for families are far 
from being the highest.  And one of the reasons for that, Mr. Minister, is 
that this is the only government in Canada that deducts family allowances 
off the social assistance cheque before it's paid.  And that costs every 
family on social assistance in this province $33 a month per child, Mr. 
Minister.  Makes a big difference in the rates.  You didn't consider that 
when you mentioned the comparisons, Mr. Minister. 
 
And you know, Mr. Minister, that the rate increase that your government has 
announced in the last week is nothing in comparison with the eight-year 
freeze that we've faced.  Finally you've got around to raising the rates by 
$10 a child, Mr. Minister -- a 3 per cent increase in the rates after an 
eight-year freeze, Mr. Minister, during which time inflation had gone up by 
in excess of 40 per cent.  Now, Mr. Minister, I therefore want to put on 
the record a counter to the comments you've made, and I want to close by 
asking you two specific questions. 
 
One is with respect to social assistance rates as they relate to an 
adequate diet in northern Saskatchewan.  Mr. Minister, you will be aware of 
the fact that there is a gross discrepancy between the cost of food in the 
North and the social assistance rates paid to families in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And if you take for instance, Mr. Minister, the cost of a basket of food 
for a month for a family of four in Deschambault Lake, because of the very 
high food prices in that community, Mr. Speaker, the Prince Albert District 
Chiefs have documented -- and these figures are now about a year old -- but 
they've documented that in 1989 the cost of a basket of food for a family 
of four in that community was $775.20.  Yet the total amount that that 
family was eligible for in terms of food, clothing, personal costs, and 
household items, if they were on social assistance in that community, Mr. 
Speaker, was $680 a month. 
 
(2200) 
 



 

 

In other words, Mr. Minister, if this family had spent every penny that 
they had received just on food, Mr. Minister, they would not have had 
enough to live on just in terms of covering their food costs, assuming 
there was nothing spent on clothing or household allowances, Mr. Speaker -- 
a $95.20 shortfall.  And my question to you, sir, is: what are you going to 
do as Minister of Health to ensure that this family receives enough money 
to be able to afford an adequate diet plus have money for clothing and 
household costs?  What are you going to do to correct this shortfall, Mr. 
Minister?  Because this, Mr. Minister, this is the cause of the kind of 
cases, as my colleague from Cumberland was mentioning, this is the cause of 
things like tuberculosis in northern Saskatchewan.  This is the policy that 
your government has imposed on northern people.  Now you explain to the 
House: what are you going to do to correct that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Before I get into the specifics of his question, the 
member rose and said that he was going to take issue with the points that I 
have made as it relates to the statistics in the National Council of 
Welfare.  And I mean we'll go back and forth on this number and that's fair 
comment here. 
 
And what I had said before, and what I still stand by is that when you use 
that 64,000 number and you include -- you, and all of your colleagues -- 
and you include rural people who's net income based on Statistics Canada, 
net income is, because of the difficulties in agriculture, are down below 
what Statistics Canada would call the poverty line, or what the National 
Council of Welfare called the poverty line, you're saying that rural 
children are not being fed by those folks, and that's not true . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . No, but that's what you used by citing that 
number.  When you cite that number based on the premise of that net income, 
that's what you're doing.  And that's what I say that that's not 
legitimate.  And that's why I get upset when I hear it, because it is not 
legitimate. 
 
So rather than taking issue, in your clarification what you said is . . . 
and I acknowledge that the National Council of Welfare does not include 
treaty Indian people or Indian people on reserves -- does not include 
those.  And you say well.  But what you really acknowledge then now is that 
we're not talking of rural people, and it's important to say that. 
 
It's important to tell people who do we mean here.  We're not talking of 
rural people, and you're saying rural people are out now.  And that's the 
clarification that I'm taking from it.  And that treaty Indian people are 
in, in terms of . . . You know, and I just say that to the member.  So 
that's a clarification and it's a point that needs to be . . . so that 
we're all on the same wave length when we talk about this issue which is a 
severe one for us. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, it's obvious that our time is gone.  We'll be back to 
this or back to other issues with the Health critic later.  So I move that 
the committee rise and report progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
 



 

 

The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:04 p.m. 
 


