





























































Hansard: April 20, 1990


 

 

April 20/90 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I give notice that on 
Tuesday next I will move a motion which reads: 
 

 This Assembly recognizes and regrets the failure on the part of the 
provincial and federal government to provide a $500 million agricultural 
deficiency payment to halt the tremendous human tragedy caused by the 
crisis of farm foreclosures. 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Muller: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure today to 
introduce to you, and through you to the Assembly, three guests in your 
gallery.  And they're here and I met with them this morning between 8 and 9 
o'clock, a number of us did. 
 
They're here on . . . it's a new association -- the Provincial Association 
of Resort Communities of Saskatchewan -- and I'd like to introduce them to 
you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Bob Carter from the rural municipality of Lakeland 
which is in some of the most beautiful country north of Prince Albert; also 
Dorothy Hovdebo from Candle Lake, another resident of some of the most 
beautiful country just north of Prince Albert; and, of course, there's 
Karen Keuler from Regina. 
 
I'd like all members to welcome them here and I hope they enjoy their visit 
and I hope they learn something from question period. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Mr. Speaker, I would join with my colleague, the member 
from Shell-Torch, to welcome visitors, particularly visitors from the 
resort village association, particularly the visitors from Candle Lake and 
from the Lakeland area.  Residents from my constituency have a lot of 
contact with people and lot of them take the opportunity to visit that 
area, and we're very pleased that representatives from area north of Prince 
Albert have come to the legislature, and we welcome them on behalf of 
everybody from this side of the House. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you.  Mr. Speaker, it's a pleasure to introduce to 
you and to members of the Assembly this morning a group of Wolf Cubs 
sitting in your gallery, Mr. Speaker.  I'm doing this this morning on 



 

 

behalf of the Minister of Justice, the member from Qu'Appelle, and I wish 
to say to them that your MLA apologizes for not being here this morning.  
He's out of the province and so I'm filling in for him. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they are called the McLean Cub Pack.  There are nine in 
number, and their chaperons are Glenda Ashdown, Doug Spencer, Myrna Ashdown 
and Weddell Gillert.  And I'll be meeting with them, Mr. Speaker, at 11 
o'clock for drinks and pictures and questions. 
 
And I ask all members of the Assembly to join with me in welcoming this 
group to the legislature today, and wishing them a good day in Regina and a 
safe journey home.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Contract of President of Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the Premier and the 
minister responsible for the potash corporation, I have a question for the 
Minister of Finance. 
 
My question, Mr. Minister, deals with a very unfair and incredible contract 
you have signed with the president of the potash corporation, Chuck 
Childers.  I have here a copy of the full contract signed last July between 
PCS (Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, Inc.) and Mr. Childers that 
provides Mr. Childers with a salary and bonus of more than $700 a year for 
the next . . . $700,000 a year for the next five years. 
 
Mr. Minister, that's a commitment of more than $3.5 million in salaries and 
bonuses for Mr. Childers.  More than that, Mr. Minister, this incredible 
contract is also a no-cut contract.  If Mr. Childers dies, is fired, or is 
incapacitated for any reason, he or his estate will still receive the full 
five year pay-out. 
 
How is this, Mr. Minister, justified in these tough economic times, a $3.5 
million, no-cut contract for Mr. Chuck Childers?  How do you justify that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Speaker, this morning I see in the Saskatoon 
Star-Phoenix that Statistics Canada has calculated that unless something is 
done different in Saskatchewan, unless there is a western economic boom, 
unless we do business in Saskatchewan instead of politics and rhetoric, 
that the population of Saskatchewan will go under 1 million by June of 
1991, and according to Statistics Canada, our population will stay under 1 
million until the year 2010.  Clearly, Mr. Speaker, we're going to have to 
do something different in this province now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- I am pleased, Mr. Speaker, that the members opposite 



 

 

agree we're going to do something different.  I just wish they would have 
some policy that would be different.  Our policy is this: we have to bring 
in business; we have to bring in small business and we have to have big 
business.  In order to do big business, you have to have big-time managers, 
and in order to have big-time managers you have to pay them world salaries.  
And the small-mindedness of the NDP will mean this province will amount to 
nothing for years and years unless we do business with the world under 
world conditions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well, Mr. Minister and Mr. Speaker, I can assure you 
that things will be different in the very near future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Now getting back to the business at hand, Mr. 
Minister, I have here the contract of Mr. Chuck Childers and it is indeed 
truly a no-cut contract.  Mr. Childers cannot be dismissed for general 
incompetence, in the agreement.  If he is, the corporation, ultimately the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan who still own most of the corporation, will have 
to pay out the remainder of $3.5 million contract. 
 
Now the only grounds for dismissal are very narrowly defined as illegal 
acts which bring Mr. Childers material gain, have to be illegal acts, for 
example, theft or fraud.  How can you justify this kind of a no-cut 
contract at a time when the people of the province are being asked to cut 
back and sacrifice and kids are going hungry.  How do you justify that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Speaker, is there no end to the small-mindedness 
of the NDP.  The NDP say, let's change the government and all will be well 
in Saskatchewan.  This province will not be saved by any changes of 
government.  This province will be saved by a certain fact of world 
economics that we have no choice but to follow through with, and that is 
this:  the people of Saskatchewan will only prosper if they compete and 
participate in a world-wide economy, and that world-wide economy is a free 
market economy based on business, big and small.  That is the only hope for 
the . . . Mr. Speaker, the NDP are yelling so loud I can't even hear 
myself. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Speaker, now that we have quiet, I can explain 
this logically.  Changing government in Saskatchewan will change nothing 
unless we as a people in Saskatchewan decide to participate in the world 
economy, and the members opposite have no new ideas on how we can 
participate in the world economy.  Their examples would be Jack Messer and 
David Dombowsky going out and getting another potash mine built in Manitoba 
and getting paid big money to do that.  And they have accomplished nothing. 
 
Now on the other hand they criticize a man who ran a corporation in this 
province last year that made a profit of $100 million last year.  Why would 
anybody consider firing this man for making a profit of $100 million, 



 

 

unless of course, Mr. Speaker, you didn't philosophically believe in 
profit?  And if there is no profit, there's only poverty. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, there's one thing 
no one will accuse you people of, is being small-minded when it comes to 
the salary of Chuck Childers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Minister, this contract, this no-cut contract goes 
on to stipulate that if Mr. Childers should die tomorrow, his estate would 
be paid out in full for the duration of the contract, or $3.5 million.  Or 
if he were incapacitated or hospitalized tomorrow, he would still be paid 
in full. 
 
I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, who in the world made this contract up?  
Was it you as the minister, or was it the minister in charge at the time, 
the member from Qu'Appelle-Lumsden, or was it a wish list of Mr. Childers 
when he came here to run the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Speaker, members opposite don't understand that in 
a free market world you have to compete.  You have to also compete with 
salaries and that the competitors are paying much more per year for their 
management.  Mr. Childers was drawn away by competition from IMC 
(International Minerals and Chemical Corporation (Canada) Ltd.) to work for 
PCS to turn that company around and make a profit. 
 
That company is a private company.  The shareholders get to vote.  The 
shareholders can change the management if they wish.  Mr. Speaker, my son 
got a letter the other day. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Hon. members will have their opportunity to 
ask their questions or make their remarks at appropriate times.  It is the 
minister's opportunity now, and he has been asked to give an answer and 
he's doing that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, my son got a letter the 
other day because he is a bond holder and a voting member of that company 
and he's 11 years old.  He bought his limit.  He got a letter.  He wanted 
to know what it was.  I explained to him that he got to vote.  Even my son 
and thousands of other people in Saskatchewan can vote on the board of 
directors and they can decide.  They can directly decide how that company 
will be run.  So my son and thousands of other people in Saskatchewan, if 
they're not happy with how that company is run, can vote and change the 
management. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Before the hon. member rises for his question, I would just 
like to once more bring to your attention that I have been listening for 
the past few days really to question period, and it's generally a good 



 

 

question period. But unfortunately we're getting into a situation where 
we're moving more towards debate than to good, succinct question and 
answers. 
 
Questions have been getting a little long.  Answers have been getting a 
little long, and therefore we're having debate and it creates its own 
problem.  So I would like to ask the members of both sides to try to 
shorten their role in question period. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  In the minister's version of a 
free market economy, there are a small handful of winners and many, many 
losers, and Mr. Childers is most definitely a winner.  The contract that 
we're talking about, Minister, that you seem to refuse to discuss, also 
stipulates that if Childers is terminated for any reason, including for 
just cause -- for any reason -- the company will pay his relocation 
expenses and let him participate in what's called the corporation's home 
purchase plan.  So if you fire the man, even for cause, you're going to pay 
his expenses to move to another community and help him with a house 
purchase. 
 
Can you tell this Assembly, Minister, what the corporation's home purchase 
plan is, and why a man who is making the kind of money that Chuck Childers 
is making needs the help of Saskatchewan farmers and small-business people 
and workers to pay for a new home? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Speaker, what we have to consider here is the 
alternatives to the suggestions of the NDP.  And what are their 
alternatives?  Their alternative is: put us in power and our old policies 
will create miracles in Saskatchewan. 
 
Well if they have any new policies, I challenge them to bring them forward.  
But their old policies are not working anywhere else; their old policies 
don't work in the U.S.S.R.  The manager of the communist potash company is 
not paid that kind of money, and it doesn't work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, the minister simply refuses to discuss the 
terms of this contract, and I'm not the least bit surprised. 
 
What I would like to know is if you can tell us whether this kind of a 
sweetheart, virtual no-cut contract was also made available to other top 
PCS officials, other top PCS officials like Bill Doyle or John Gugulyn?  Is 
this kind of sweetheart contract in effect as far as they're concerned? 
 
And what about other Crown corporation heads such as George Hill of 
SaskPower, or Oscar Hanson of SaskEnergy, or the deputy minister to the 
Premier, Stan Sojonky?  Are these kind of sweetheart deals in effect as far 
as they're concerned?  Which of your friends in high places get this kind 
of deal, Mr. Minister?  And will you table those agreements in this House 
so we can have a look at how you're safeguarding the public purse? 



 

 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Speaker, it's disgusting to see the negative 
attitude . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- It's disgusting to see the negative attitude . . . Mr. 
Speaker, it's disgusting to see the negative attitude of the members 
opposite. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Speaker, thank you for bringing the members 
opposite to order so that I can explain in our democratic forum that it is 
disgusting to have the negative attitude of the NDP attack all of the 
senior management in Saskatchewan.  Next they'll be on Gunnar Pedersen and 
next they'll be on Milt Fair of the wheat pool.  Who are they going to 
attack next? 
 
They attack everybody that is successful in this province.  And for 
generations successful people have left because of their negative attitude.  
How are we going to build this province with that kind of an attitude?  
Who, with any brains or ability, is going to stay here with people like 
that constantly harassing them?  It is disgusting. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- A new question to the minister, Mr. Speaker.  It's not the 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, it is not the senior managers 
of the public service that we're attacking.  It's the incompetence and 
banality of the people across the floor that we're attacking. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- This contract, if you ever take the time to read it, is an 
appalling document.  It doesn't appear to be a case where the company and 
the employees sit down and negotiate what's in the best interests of each, 
but seems to be a case where Mr. Childers draws up a wish list and your Mr. 
Schoenhals, presumably with the full compliance of the minister, signs the 
wish list. 
 
Yesterday in this House there were hundreds of angry school teachers who 
were telling your government that its spending priorities are all wrong.  
Will you stand in your place today and explain to teachers why it is that 
our schools have to fire teachers while Chuck Childers can get a sweetheart 
deal like this out of you people?  Will you explain that? 
 



 

 

Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Speaker, the members opposite insult -- insult -- 
you, the Speaker, and this House by saying they're not attacking civil 
servants.  I just heard that member attack the deputy minister to the 
Premier.  I heard him attack him by name.  I heard him attack an individual 
who's a chief civil servant, who was an employee of the city of Saskatoon, 
who worked for Federated Co-op.  I heard him personally attack that man and 
then he says, we're not attacking civil servants. 
 
That is the continuation of their negative attitude.  I don't see how 
negativism is ever going to build Saskatchewan.  It is more disgusting. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Hiring of Consulting Groups 
 
Ms. Simard: -- My question is to the Minister of Health, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 
Minister, last week my colleague from Regina Centre asked about the $1 
million that was spent by your department, the Department of Education, and 
the Premier's office on image making through the Corporate Strategy Group 
and Decima Research.  We found out that the money in the Department of 
Education was probably spent for selling Saskatchewan people on core 
curriculum, but we did not find out on what sales job the money was spent 
in your department, Mr. Minister. 
 
Could you tell us what it was used for and also what other projects your 
department has paid Decima or Nancy McLean to take on since that time? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Well first of all, you know, the member will use her 
term of image making and all of that which is, I suppose, it's their right, 
but it is not the fact, what they're doing. 
 
What we have, Mr. Speaker, within the Department of Health and the use of 
Corporate Strategy Group, it was to develop the strategy as it relates to 
the new health card that was introduced across this province, and also for 
the Everyone Wins program, which is a program which has been widely 
regarded across the province, but not only across this province, which is 
now being looked and which has been widely regarded by Health departments 
across Canada. 
 
Our Everyone Wins program, our health prevention program, is without 
question, without question the best of its kind in this country, and the 
Corporate Strategy Group was very involved with our department in 
development of Everyone Wins and in the development of the health card 
technology. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- New question, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, I have here a 
study by the Corporate Strategy Group prepared for you last January and 



 

 

presumably paid for in the '89-90 fiscal year.  It concerns your attempts 
to sell to the people of Saskatchewan through the mass distribution of this 
material, Mr. Minister, your changes to the drug plan and your plastic 
health card.  And it's costed out at $288,000. 
 
Can the minister explain his department's decision to spend $288,000 on 
that sort of self-serving advertising to try and convince the people of 
Saskatchewan that you know what you're doing, rather than spending the 
money to do the right thing? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, another example of a very negative 
attitude.  The member uses the term "self-serving," and she says that it's 
self-serving as it relates to the government, the Department of Health.  
I'm not sure who she says it's self-serving for.  I would say to you, Mr. 
Speaker, to the public of Saskatchewan that the mailing that she refers to 
which . . . one mailing across all of the province costs in the 
neighbourhood of $200,000.  There's no question that that's the cost of it, 
and that's a lot of money. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the only people that have been served very well, and if 
you want to use the term self-serving, are every citizen of this province 
as it relates to the individual life-style changes, the attitudes towards 
individual responsibility for their own health which is the very essence of 
what Everyone Wins, the Everyone Wins program is about.  That's a well 
regarded program, as I said earlier, all through this province.  It's a 
well regarded program throughout this country.  People of this province are 
very well served by the Everyone Wins program.  And, Mr. Speaker, judging 
by the responses that came from the very mailing that the member refers to, 
in the thousands, in the tens of thousands, responses back asking for more 
information and more responses.  Mr. Speaker, that's a very successful 
program and Corporate Strategy Group had a good deal to do with it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Minister, let me just quote to you from the Executive 
Summary of this corporate strategy document which deals with promoting your 
changes, your decimation of the drug plan, and the plastic health card.  
This strategy with respect to advertising will allow the government to, and 
I quote: "position itself as open, consultative, and interested." 
 
Position itself, Mr. Minister, not be open, consultative, and interested.  
But to look as if you are open, consultative, and interested.  Instead of 
trying to look like you were doing your job, you could have spent that 
money, Mr. Minister, actually doing your job. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Minister, how many more spaces in the early childhood 
intervention program would that $288,000 have paid for? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, notice in 1990, Mr. Speaker, notice that 
in 1990 we have a member of the NDP, supposedly their leading spokesman in 
the health care world, stands here and says . . . stands here in this House 
in front of all of the people of Saskatchewan and says . . . and equates 
the terms change and decimate.  If there's change suggested, that's a 
decimation to her and to the NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the drug plan changes, while they were difficult changes to 
make because they were change and because those people didn't like them and 
they went on and on and on for ever, Mr. Speaker, not many people in 
Saskatchewan today would suggest that there should be any change back to 
the system that was there before, which frankly was an unhealthy 
circumstance for individual citizens in this province. 
 
The drug plan changes have been successful, despite all of their rhetoric, 
number one.  And, Mr. Speaker, the health card, the technological advance 
of the health card introduced in this province and which is now being 
marketed by a Saskatchewan company, Co-operators Data Services of Regina, 
around the world, is a successful change, not a decimation of the health 
system as would be portrayed by that member. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- New question, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, your changes to 
the drug plan were cruel and caused all sorts of hardship on the people in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- And, Mr. Minister, I'm still writing you letters about your 
changes to the prescription drug plan.  The entire purpose of this study, 
Mr. Speaker, is to try and polish up the government's image, not address 
problems.  In fact, the study says its purpose is, and I quote: 
 

 . . . to take a first step in aligning the government's/department's 
actions on health care with the public interest. 

 
Now we have a government, Mr. Speaker, that's so out of touch that it's got 
to get a hold of Nancy McLean to try and tell them ways to get on side with 
the public. 
 
Mr. Minister, I'm sure the final report on the responses has been tabulated 
by your Toronto consultant, a Dave Tkachuk.  Will you today lay on the 
Table the results of this expensive, politically motivated PR campaign? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- The members of the NDP opposition can portray 
everything that goes on in a very large department like Health, or in fact 
everything that goes on in government, in a political term if they like.  
That's what they do; that's what they always do.  Everything is politically 
motivated, according to the NDP members, Mr. Speaker. 



 

 

 
Mr. Speaker, I say to the member opposite who stands in her place today and 
talks about the . . . it's almost the rhetoric of 1987.  If you close your 
eyes and think about it, nothing's changed from 1987 when she was talking 
about the drug plan changes at that time or 1988. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I challenge those members over there, today, to stand in their 
place and say that they would return the drug plan to its former condition; 
that they would return the drug plan to the situation that it was in 
before; before the advent of the health card; before the advent of that 
card which has been so very useful and so very good at ferreting out abuse 
in the prescription drug system -- all of those things. 
 
I challenge them to stand and say that change was not good -- which they do 
say -- but stand in their place and say that they would return the drug 
plan to its former state.  They will not do it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  The hon. member from Regina Centre hollers loudly 
from his seat with frustration.  Well let me just bring to the attention of 
the hon. members once more what I said earlier. 
 
Questions are getting too long and introducing large materials, many topics 
into their preambles.  That will provoke similar answers, and here's the 
problem.  We don't need members hollering from their desks that the answer 
is too long or they don't like it.  Just stick to the rules and everything 
will be fine. 
 

Cancellation of Home Improvement Program 
 
Ms. Smart: -- Mr. Speaker, I had a question for the minister responsible 
for the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation, but I'll direct it to the 
Minister of Finance. 
 
Mr. Minister, when your government cancelled the home improvement grant 
program, you gave Saskatchewan people an unreasonable deadline.  On March 5 
you told them that they had until April 30 to complete work that was 
already approved if they wanted to get it paid for.  Since the grants were 
already approved, Mr. Minister, and presumably budgeted for, why did you 
need this artificially short deadline? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, in winding down the home program, 
consideration was given to a number of scenarios that might present 
themselves.  They were all reviewed.  There's probably no easy or perfect 
way to wind-down programs, but consideration was given to the pros and cons 
and short periods of time and long periods of time.  The other day, I 
think, the 45 to 60 days was chosen. I'm not suggesting for a minute that 
everyone is going to be happy with it. 
 
But I just remind you again, Mr. Speaker, that we didn't expect that any of 



 

 

these cuts would be easy ones or that there wouldn't be some pain.  But the 
thrust in the budget, once I again I reiterate for the hon. member, is yes, 
we know these are difficult and they're not going to be perfect 
winding-downs, but the thrust in this budget, Mr. Speaker, was to cut 
expenditures and not raise taxes.  And we stand by that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Earth Day Anniversary 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, this morning I 
would like to make a statement respecting Earth Day and I have a copy here 
for the opposition's perusal.  And I'd like to at this time send it over to 
them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Sunday, April 22, 1990 is Earth Day.  I believe, Mr. 
Speaker, that this is a historic occasion as it represents the 20th 
anniversary of Earth Day.  On that first Earth Day 20 years ago, a small 
number of far-sighted  
 DSaskatchewan individuals joined together to demonstrate their concern 
about the deteriorating quality of our water and air and about the 
detrimental effect that increasing levels of pollution were having on our 
environment. 
 
Since that time, a generation has grown up, and with them we have also come 
to learn and accept the fact that the planet upon which we live can no 
longer be exploited irresponsibly.  Mr. Speaker, I'm sure that all members 
of this Assembly will agree that it is our responsibility to take a 
leadership role to aggressively pursue the protection of our environment, 
to ensure that the public will at all times be informed about the quality 
of their environment and the impacts of specific environmental problems; to 
promote public input and public consultation in environmental decision 
making; to promote individual and community participation in the protection 
of the environment and to ensure that the cost of environmental protection 
from pollution will be born primarily by the polluter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Earth Day's 20th anniversary provides us with a special 
opportunity to reflect upon the way we relate to each other and to the 
environment; to recognize that as a society we can no longer treat the 
environment as a free economic good; to recognize that it does not make 
economic sense to abuse the environment; to recognize that wealth 
generation and the protection of the environment are not mutually exclusive 
objects; to recognize that we must put into practice the concept of 
sustainable development here in Saskatchewan and finally to recognize that 
as individuals we can take action to protect the environment and that such 
action really does make a difference. 
 
I am sure all members of this Assembly will join with me today to make the 
commitment to get involved in Earth Day activities; to make the commitment 
to take responsible, individual actions to protect the environment; to make 
the commitment to increase environmental awareness amongst our families, 



 

 

amongst our friends and our neighbours, and finally, Mr. Speaker, to make 
the commitment to do our part as the elected representatives of the people 
of Saskatchewan to take responsible actions to protect and enhance the 
environment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to join the minister in 
congratulating those who have brought the concept of an earth day to 
Saskatchewan.  I want to join with the minister and all members and 
certainly all citizens of Saskatchewan in joining with the activities that 
are planned for Earth Day this weekend.  It is a good opportunity for us 
all, I think, to recognize again how beautiful and how precious and how 
fragile is this prairie environment of which we are a part. 
 
It's an opportunity for us all in our individual ways to look at our own 
life-styles and how we as individuals may be part of protecting and 
enhancing the environment.  And it is obviously an opportunity for we who 
are involved in public life in this province to be considering the broader 
issues of protection and enhancement of the environment.  Now, Mr. Speaker, 
I'm pleased to see that the minister would stand in the House today and 
recognize Earth Day. 
 
What we have seen, Mr. Speaker, in the last few months is what I would 
describe as the "greening" of the Tory party.  And while that's a welcome 
development, Mr. Speaker, one needs, I guess, to question some of the 
motivations here.  It seems that the blue Tory party is growing greener as 
we come closer to the election. And while that's a welcome development, one 
wonders about the motivations. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, one has to question the commitments of this particular 
group of men and women in government to the enhancement and protection of 
the Saskatchewan environment.  Mr. Speaker, we have seen this government 
work trade-offs between licences for dam projects and natural parks, 
national parks.  We've seen this government in the courts, Mr. Minister, 
brought to the courts because of its irresponsibility in maintaining 
environmental laws and protection. 
 
But more currently, Mr. Speaker, we see this government refusing to do an 
environmental impact study on a major industrial development in our 
province not 20 miles from my own community, the development being put up 
by Cargill Grain.  No environmental impact study; no environmental impact 
study for Millar Western; no seeming concern about the clear-cutting that's 
going on with Weyerhaeuser; no real concern about the kind of spills that 
we've seen in the North.  Mr. Minister, one begins to question . . . and no 
real commitment, Mr. Speaker, I might add, to a recycling program; lots of 
rhetoric, but very little commitment to really see that program established 
in our province. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, while we on this side of the House, and I think all 
Saskatchewan people, welcome the kind of announcement we've heard from the 
minister today, and the kind of rhetorical support, at least this side of 
the House, members of this caucus and the people of Saskatchewan want to 



 

 

see some more real commitment to the Saskatchewan environment.  I thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 13 -- An Act to Provide Access by the Public to Government 
Information 

 
Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I wish to 
move first reading of a Bill, to provide Access by the Public to Government 
Information. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next 
sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Rural Development 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 43 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Minister, I heard you last night in the course of your estimates and 
the course of the debate imply that you were looking forward to some 
questions on land branch and I am more than happy to discuss some of those 
issues with you today. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have here in my hand an advertisement that you placed in 
The Western Producer on May 11, 1989.  I know you did that, sir, because 
your name is right here at the bottom of the ad.  It was an ad advertising 
the sale of a piece of land on the north shore of Buffalo Pound Lake.  If 
you need the land description it's SW20-20-26, west of the second. 
 
Mr. Minister, you will be familiar with this piece of land and the 
arrangements for its sale because we've corresponded on this piece of land.  
And so, Mr. Minister, I have some very specific questions about this sale 
by tender. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you confirm for the House that this piece of land had 
been leased by a farmer from the Marquis district for some years prior to 
1989; that in fact his lease was not renewed in 1989, and that then you, 
sir, decided to sell this piece of land through this ad that appeared in 



 

 

The Western Producer. 
 
I ask, Mr. Minister, if it's true that that land was leased to an 
individual for some seven or eight years before last year?  I ask you, sir, 
if that individual was informed that his lease was not renewed; that this 
piece of land would be sold? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Just so I have it clear, there was no lease on it at the 
time.  There had been no lease the previous year at least in the department 
. . . haven't got that information with me but we could find out for you 
how long since there had been a lease. 
 
Previous to that they believe it was only on a permit basis, not on a lease 
basis, and so therefore it hadn't been leased at least, or hadn't been 
permitted at least the year previous to that, and previous to that or a 
year or two before that, had been under a permit year over year lease basis 
only. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Minister, when was the decision made that this piece of 
land would be put up for sale?  When did you make that decision? 
 
(1045) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Probably some time previous to that advertisement.  
Probably a month or two previous to that.  I'm not sure, but probably in 
early '89. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Minister, why was the decision made to put this piece 
of land up for sale? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Mr. Chairman, we had identified that as a piece that 
could be commercial property and bring a higher tax base to the area and to 
the municipality.  We also had other pieces of property, I believe two 
others at the time, listed for sale -- one in North Battleford, and it 
escapes me where the other one was that was listed for sale -- because we 
didn't believe they had much or any agriculture value but had some 
commercial values to it which would allow some development of the area and 
create some jobs. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- So, Mr. Minister, then it was the decision of yourself that 
this particular piece of land on the north shore of Buffalo Lake would be 
better used for commercial purposes and therefore you decided to sell. 
 
Mr. Minister, did you not feel it at least incumbent upon yourself to 
acquaint the person whether he had a lease or a permit or whatever it was?  
Obviously an individual had paid rent for that piece of land for some 
years.  Did you not feel it incumbent on yourself, first of all, to contact 
that individual to say that the land was going up for sale? 
 
Now, sir, you indicate that you were selling the land because you thought 
it should be used for commercial purposes.  And I take it from that, you 
mean that it should be used for lake shore developments, cottage 
developments, or some other commercial purpose.  Well I gathered that, sir, 



 

 

from the ad that you ran in The Western Producer because you entitled the 
ad, "Sale by tender, non-agricultural Crown land."  That's how you entitled 
the ad in The Western Producer.  And then as you read the ad, sir, it 
reads: 
 

 All lands listed for tender are currently approved for use under 
provincial and municipal land use regulations solely for the purposes of 
agriculture. 

 
Sir, did you acquaint the RM 190, the RM of Bethune that in fact you were 
putting this land up for sale for commercial purposes before contacting the 
RM? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- First of all, I'm not sure if the RM was contacted prior 
to the advertisement for sale, but the reason it was advertised the way it 
was is the RM has final say on the land use. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Well, Mr. Minister, why would your run an ad that says, 
"Sale by tender, non-agricultural Crown land," when in the body of the ad 
it says it's for the purposes of agriculture solely, when the RM of 
Bethune, to my knowledge, had no indication from your department the land 
was going up for sale, and particularly that it was going up for sale for 
commercial purposes. 
 
Why would you run an ad that says, "sale by tender, non-agricultural Crown 
land"? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Because the land was listed under lands branch as 
agricultural land, and because it was deemed to be of very low agricultural 
value, if any, then we left it to the RM to decide whether they deemed it 
to have agricultural use, and if they did, then they could refuse to allow 
the sale as a commercial property. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Minister, people put bids in on this land in good faith 
that it was actually for sale for non-agricultural Crown land.  You're 
telling me this morning that it's the practice of your department to go 
around offering pieces of land for sale for commercial purposes, but not to 
acquaint the local RM that that's what you're doing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Well just so it's clear, any land that's zoned and any 
RM where they have community planning by-laws if you'd be aware of it, the 
RM has final say how it would be zoned.  So therefore they have final say 
over the use of that land.  We are just an owner and in this case a seller 
of lands and we put that out believing it had some opportunities to be 
commercial value.  We didn't know if anybody else believed that to be true: 
we believed that to be true. 
 
So we put that out and therefore it was listed that way.  Now we did run 
into some other complications.  The shore line, we didn't have the right 
title to it, the shore line defined by water corporation was different.  We 
went through a whole series of problems with that piece of property over 
the last while in regards to identifying even what was the shore line out 
there and surveys and other things that would have to be done. 



 

 

 
Mr. Calvert: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you may . . . please excuse my 
scepticism but I think the problem that had happened here is that it didn't 
go to the party.  It didn't go where it was intended to.  Mr. Minister, you 
put up a piece of land for sale that's zoned solely for agricultural 
purposes.  You advertise it as non-agricultural Crown land.  You do not 
inform the individual farmer who obviously has a vested interest in this 
piece of land having leased it for many years. 
 
Let's move along then, Mr. Minister.  I understand, correct me if I'm 
wrong, when this tender was out last year, two bids were received.  One 
from the individual who in fact had leased that land for some time, and 
another from a group called North Shore Developments.  Now, Mr. Minister, I 
also understand that the individual who had the vested interest in that 
piece of land placed a bid that was exactly 180 per cent, sir, of the 
asking sale price, the asking price, which you advertise as $8,400.  I 
understand that bid was put in at $15,000.  I understand that the tenders 
were opened from the two bidders on June 4.  I understand his was the high 
bid of the two.  Are those facts true, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Just so we have it clear.  First of all, I believe the 
member is somewhat misleading the people here, or the public, in saying 
that the person who had it previously or had it that time was not notified.  
I want to make it absolutely clear.  Nobody, nobody, had had even a permit 
on that for at least a year previous to that and maybe longer. 
 
Now he did go back and say, had an invested interest.  Well a lot of people 
have invested interests in a lot of things, number one. 
 
Number two is that when we advertised that for sale, we advertised it as 
non-agriculture land so that everybody in the province who may be 
interested in that, looking at a commercial development, could bid on it.  
If we advertised it only as agriculture land, then under the regulations 
that exist in this legislature, under this legislative system, nobody else 
could bid other than a farmer.  So because we looked at it as possible 
commercial land, we advertised it as non-agriculture land. 
 
Now when the bids came in, and whatever date they were -- and I can't 
confirm the date; lots of stuff comes and goes, but I assume you're correct 
-- therefore when the bids come in we went to look for titles, search for 
titles.  The title that we had, we done two things wrong.  One, we had the 
wrong acres on it, because shown on the piece of property, we advertised 
incorrect acres because the shore line, what we had defined as the shore 
line previously, was not correct according to Sask Water.  There was some 
problems with it. 
 
And second, that we didn't really have title to that piece of property the 
way it worked out.  We couldn't achieve title because of this shore line 
need so we couldn't sell it if we wanted to.  So we were forced then to not 
to sell it to anybody. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Minister, I find this amazing that your department 
would put up a piece of land, advertise its sale.  After the tenders are 



 

 

all received and open, then you begin to find out, oh, we can't put this 
piece of land up for sale because of problems. 
 
Mr. Minister, when did you do the survey on this piece of land?  When was 
the survey done? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Well when you say you wonder why we advertised it for 
sale, we have a lot of land even under time leases and they want to pick up 
time sales, but this previous government had the same thing. 
 
We find now that many of those titles, we have to have them resurveyed 
again, because they are, for one reason or another, they don't even, they 
just don't match the properties that are out there.  In fact we found one 
title out in the east side of the province that actually angled through 
another piece of property and that was the way it had to be surveyed out. 
 
Any time you're doing land that doesn't have . . . has been surveyed a long 
time ago, we run into a lot of problems, particularly the water has . . . 
the water, the high water level has receded.  A lot of those things has 
created us a lot of problems and we just advertised it believing we had the 
right to go ahead with the survey for title.  I believe we were doing it 
after it was advertised, as we normally do it, as we normally do it and as 
it normally would be done in the past, but at this time it just didn't work 
out because of the . . . because the water-table is higher than we thought, 
the property we advertised was not the right size -- a whole series of 
things that says we couldn't sell it because of those problems. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Minister, I asked when then . . . I mean now the piece 
has been readvertised again, retendered, and it's been sold in very recent 
days.  Mr. Minister, when did you have the survey done upon which you now 
base the new tender? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- We did the survey some time in '89, and I don't have the 
exact date, but during '89.  After the tender went out we found out we 
didn't have the right amount of lands listed.  In fact when the title 
survey was completed, they went from 24 acres approximately, with a piece 
across the lake even that we didn't even know was part of the little chunk 
of land, back to I believe about 11 acres, 4.6 hectares of land.  So it 
reduced more than half in size because of the shore line that was not 
defined properly and that piece across the lake that we didn't even know 
existed as that part of the title. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Well, Mr. Minister, perhaps I can inform you of the 
activities that you are responsible for. 
 
Mr. Minister, you've said to the House this morning that there was 
something wrong with the survey.  And when the tenders were opened -- they 
were opened on June 4 -- someone who bid 180 per cent of the value was 
turned down on that land because there's something wrong with the survey. 
 
I asked you this morning when a survey was done.  You say it was done some 
time in 1989.  Well I want to tell you, sir . . . and then, Mr. Minister, 
in some of my questioning through letters, you say to me, when I ask why 



 

 

this individual was not granted the sale, you say to me in your letter, 
"Upon attempting to raise title, several problems arose, including the need 
to do a survey." 
 
That was dated July 18, 1989.  You're telling me on July 18, 1989 that you 
need to do a survey on this piece of land and that's why the tender was 
pulled.  Well how is it, Mr. Minister, then in the most recent ad for this 
same piece of land, it is indicated right in your own ad, signed by 
yourself, sir, "acreage is based on survey plan dated May 24, 1989" -- on 
the survey plan dated May 24, 1989, two weeks before the tenders and the 
first tender were even opened. 
 
Could you explain that to the committee, sir? 
 
(1100) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Mr. Chairman, that's exactly what I told him.  When we 
advertised it for sale we went out and had a survey done, which you have to 
do, when it was brought to our attention of some of the problems.  And I 
don't know what the date of plan of survey was, but whatever date it was, 
if it was after we put up the tender or announced the tender of the land, 
certainly that's appropriate.  Because then when we got it back and it told 
us that this is a different piece of property altogether to what you had 
advertised, you sure couldn't sell that piece of property in all fairness 
to anybody.  And you would have to then readvertise.  You have no choice 
because you've changed the size of the piece of the property. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Well, Mr. Minister, why then are you writing a letter to me 
on July 18 of last year telling me that, oh well, now we need to do a 
survey, when just a moment ago you tell me that you did the survey in May?  
Why are you writing to me in July telling me that oh, well, we need to do a 
survey and that's why we pulled this tender; that's why we didn't award 
this piece of land to the highest bidder, to someone who has a long-term 
interest in that piece of land? 
 
I tell you, Mr. Minister, there is something very peculiar, to say the 
least, about this whole deal.  When the other -- and I remind you, Mr. 
Minister, that the person who has had the lease on this piece of property 
for many years intended to use it again for agricultural purposes, as he 
has -- the other group, I take it from their title, intended to use this 
piece of property for commercial purposes.  They were entitled North Shore 
Developments, I believe. 
 
What happened here is that it didn't go to North Shore Developments because 
they didn't bid enough.  My speculation is, sir, that that's why the tender 
was pulled. 
 
Mr. Minister, may I ask this question about the events of last year?  When 
the ads were run for this piece of land, why was this ad not run in the 
Moose Jaw Times Herald? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- I was just making sure that I had the correct answer.  
It was advertised, I understand . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Try 



 

 

and listen for a second.  I was saying that . . . I was just making sure 
how we do it.  We went through the normal process of advertising which is 
The Western Producer, the weekly papers in the area; that's in regards to 
the area where the properties may be involved in that area.  My 
understanding was it wasn't in the Moose Jaw Herald, but I believe there 
was a request for this time to put it into the Moose Jaw Herald.  And I 
asked him if it was in there; I'm not sure if it was. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Why wasn't it in the first time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Somebody over there said, why wasn't it in the first 
time?  I think I explained that.  Because the normal process is to put it 
in The Western Producer, in the weekly papers, because that's basically the 
area it goes into.  This time somebody requested it to be put into the 
Moose Jaw Herald paper, which I believe it was done for the first time.  
Normally we don't put it into daily papers.  It's not a normal procedure. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Minister, by your own admission this morning you took 
the position that this land was better suited for commercial purposes than 
agricultural purposes.  Buffalo Lake has some obvious connections -- the 
land at Buffalo Lake has some obvious connections to the people in the city 
of Moose Jaw, particularly if it's going to be used for lake lot 
developments or commercial purposes. 
 
Then you say, well, we decided we're not going to advertise it in the daily 
Moose Jaw paper.  Well, Mr. Minister, you will be aware that there is a 
weekly paper in the city of Moose Jaw called Moose Jaw This Week.  Did you 
advertise it in Moose Jaw This Week? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Just so you understand, Mr. Chairman, we still don't 
advertise in daily papers without a special request because it's only one 
day old and then it's gone.  You'd have to advertise it a lot of times; 
there'd be seven times in a week or something.  So therefore we do it in 
the weekly paper which, as you know, is read and kept around for the whole 
week or two.  And we do it in The Western Producer, and I think it's a 
Saskatchewan-wide read paper that it's in that. 
 
If we have a request for some area to put it into a daily paper, we do 
that, otherwise it is not the normal process; we haven't used it.  Now if 
it wants to be changed, it can be done. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Minister, we have a weekly paper in the city of Moose 
Jaw called Moose Jaw This Week.  It is distributed to every household in 
the city of Moose Jaw and to a wide geographic area surrounding the city of 
Moose Jaw. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you had wanted to get the widest possible advertisement 
for this particular piece of land which holds specific interest to the 
people of Moose Jaw, why did you not advertise it then in, I would argue, 
both the daily and the weekly paper in the city of Moose Jaw? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Well first of all, the daily paper, I explained.  I 
won't do that a fifth time for the member. 



 

 

 
The weekly paper, I didn't even know there was a weekly paper in Moose Jaw, 
particularly right in the Moose Jaw . . . and I suppose it would be fair to 
say the same as he, as the member from Moose Jaw South wouldn't know 
there's a weekly paper in Hudson Bay either.  So it's probably a fair 
criticism, but I didn't know there was one . . . (inaudible interjection) . 
. . Do you want to get in it?  Why don't you get up and ask some questions 
then? 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I think you had better have a 
discussion with Dome Advertising or whoever it is that places all your 
advertising, if you don't know, sir, as the person responsible for 
advertising Crown lands in this province, that there is a weekly paper with 
wide circulation in the city of Moose Jaw.  And, Mr. Minister, you need to 
apologize to that particular newspaper. 
 
Mr. Minister, this morning, by your own admission, you said you decided 
that this land was better suited for commercial purposes and that's why 
you're selling it.  Now, Mr. Minister, in the Moose Jaw Times-Herald -- I 
guess at the special request of members from this side of the House, and 
perhaps others -- on March 10 of this year the same piece of land was 
retendered with a new survey of 11.4 acres, Mr. Minister.  You said in this 
House this morning that this land was destined for commercial purposes 
because that's why you're selling it.  Let me now quote to you, Mr. 
Minister, the ad that you ran in the Moose Jaw Times-Herald on March 10, 
1990: 
 

 Tenders will only be accepted from individuals able to declare they are or 
intend to be actively farming, and the land which they own, rent, or lease 
in their own name or proportionately as a part of partnership or company 
does not exceed a municipal assessment of $60,000. 

 
Now a few minutes ago you told us that you're selling this land because it 
should be in for commercial purposes.  Now you retender it and say that 
only those, only those who are in active farming need submit a bid.  Now 
can you explain that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- The member's correct.  It was advertised as agricultural 
land on the second sale because the RM had some concerns that we were 
preceding their rights to decide whether it should be commercial properties 
or not.  So we advertised it as agricultural land, us believing it had 
commercial values, advertised it that way so that the RM then could make 
the decision whether they want developments in the area or not, and it 
would be back at the local authority to make all those decisions. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Minister, the tenders have been opened. Again, the 
individual who had the long-term interest in this piece of land put in a 
tender.  Again he has received a letter from you, sir, your department, 
saying that he is not the successful bidder.  Will you tell the House, this 
morning, who in fact is the successful bidder on this piece of land? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- First of all, we never do give out the names of either 
the bidders or the successful bidder.  We do notify those who didn't have 



 

 

the highest bid.  We also notify those who were the successful bidders. And 
on transfer of titles of land, then we will release the name of the person 
that got that property.  But until transfer of land takes place, we're 
never sure; we haven't got our money, we haven't transferred the land, so 
it is not in anybody's name except the Crown. So it still belongs to the 
Crown until such time as the land title transfer is completed. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Minister, will you tell me how long it will take for 
the land title transfer to be completed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- My understanding is the normal procedure is anywhere 
from three to six weeks. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Minister, when were these tenders open, and can you 
tell me, was there present at the opening of the tenders any of those who 
had a tender in, to observe the opening?  Or was there present at the 
opening of the tenders an independent lawyer, and if so, who was that?  
And, Mr. Minister, is it the role of that independent observer, if one was 
there, to see that the tender was given to the highest bidder?  And would 
it be possible, sir, for myself or any of those who have a direct interest 
in this process to contact that independent lawyer and receive from him the 
information about the tenders? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- First of all, no, it's not a public process as per se 
but what we do . . . The tenders comes to the lands branch.  They're then 
held, the tenders are held, not opened.  A lawyer is then brought in and is 
present and the lawyer opens and records all the tenders.  Now the lawyer 
is bound, I think, by the legal system to keep the records there, and 
that's why we bring a lawyer in.  So there is no changing of anything.  
It's all done in proper form.  But no, it's not done as a public tender, 
but I'd be very pleased . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Why not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- It is a public tender, not a public opening.  I would be 
very pleased as soon as the title has been transferred to transmit to you 
the amount of tender that was received for the properties. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Minister, I'm not sure that this kind of process . . . 
We're talking here about public lands owned by the Crown, held by the Crown 
on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, public lands.  You are selling 
these public lands, receiving moneys for the public purse.  How is it then 
therefore that the tendering process isn't a public tendering . . . a 
public opening, sir?  And the deals all done now.  Letters have gone out to 
say, you're not successful in your bid.  How is it, Mr. Minister, that you 
will not today tell the people of Saskatchewan who purchased this piece of 
land and how much they paid for it? 
 
(1115) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Well I hope I don't have to draw the picture too many 
times for you but I said very clearly . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Just keep quiet for a moment and I'll give you the answer.  I said very 



 

 

clearly that until the title is transferred to the person who has purchased 
the land, therefore it remains in the name of the Crown, and we do not 
release the name of the proposed purchaser of the property or the amount 
that he purchased.  At that time, if the land titles office is available, 
we don't mind disclosing it from the Department of Rural Development.  Now 
those who weren't successful and in receiving the bid are notified that 
they were unsuccessful.  So that process goes through. 
 
The third part I want to make absolutely clear.  A couple of members over 
there are lawyers.  They know that when a lawyer is brought in he's bound 
by both his profession and by his ethics that it must be done properly and 
it must be done fairly.  So those things are there in place to cover that 
off. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you.  Mr. Minister, I hadn't intended to enter 
into these discussions, but I've listened with growing indignation at your 
behaviour over the last day and a half. 
 
Mr. Minister, your tendering system is nothing but a fertile bed for 
corruption.  That's all it is.  Mr. Minister, nobody, but nobody but you 
people handle a tendering process in this fashion.  Everybody else has 
tenders.  The people who bid tenders are allowed to see them.  The names 
are disclosed.  If, by some reason or other, the person can't complete the 
transaction, you retender it.  That's the way everyone does it but you 
people. 
 
But you people, for the sourest and the crassest of political reasons -- 
because you want to favour your friends -- have a private tendering system.  
Mr. Minister, it's precisely this kind of shenanigans and chicanery which 
got you into trouble with STC (Saskatchewan Transportation Company). 
 
If you had a public tendering system that was honest, you wouldn't have a 
tenth of the problems you have.  The reason, Mr. Minister, why you have 
this kind of a tendering system is because this government is rotten to the 
core. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- First of all, I want to make it absolutely clear that 
all the tender processes that are tendered on all lands -- and we have a 
lot of land; I believe there was 400 parcels up in one tender bid.  Some 
are bid in blocks and some were bid individually.  The people over in the 
department, after the tenders are all open and recorded, looked through 
them all in a lot of cases, to be sure that somebody didn't bid one, two, 
and three, and priorities have bid. All those kinds of things have to be 
done.  The same person -- and I won't name the person; he's a very good 
public servant -- was doing the lands branch . . . all the sales of the 
lands branch land under the former administration and under this 
administration. He does a good job; I believe he's a very honest person.  I 
have to trust somebody. I believe I trust that person; they trusted him, 
number one. 
 
Number two is that when the tenders are open we have a lawyer present to 



 

 

record all the tenders that come in.  So therefore the highest tender is 
recorded and kept by the lawyer to be sure that it's all in place. So we do 
that. 
 
Therefore everything, I think it's fair to say, Mr. Chairman, everything is 
done according to the most fairest way that we can do it.  Now we could 
bring everybody in, and I would say that in those bids, when we have those 
400 pieces of land, if you were to bring them all into here, you would 
probably have in the neighbourhood of 8 or 900 people trying to sit in one 
room to look at the opening of the tenders. You would have to have that 
many people in that room.  Some of them bid on two or three different 
pieces of land. You wouldn't know who was what; you wouldn't know which 
person.  It would be totally impossible. 
 
So that has been a process put there so we have somebody to record it to 
make sure that the highest tender, the highest bid goes to the highest 
tender.  So therefore, Mr. Chairman . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Well it's always nice to accuse somebody of being dishonest. It's always 
easy to do when you sit on the other side and say, well the government is. 
 
Everybody isn't always like the people that ask the questions either.  
There's a tendency amongst civil servants, amongst most people in this 
province to be honest.  And that is very, very important to recognize, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Minister, if you had an open tendering system as 
this province once had, nobody would accuse you of being dishonest because 
we would know whether or not justice was being done.  The reason, Mr. 
Minister, why you have so many problems with corruption is because you have 
this tendering system that is not open to public scrutiny. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- And until you open up your tendering system to public 
scrutiny, you're going to go on having problems like you do with STC.  Mr. 
Minister, your tendering system is an open invitation to corruption. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Well first of all, to be absolutely clear, I don't 
believe the former government had a tender process to sell any lands back 
at all.  They didn't have that kind of . . . they had a lease sale back so 
therefore they had no tender system at all.  Number . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order, order, please.  Order.  The procedure, I think, has 
been in the committee to ask a question and for the rest of the members on 
both sides of the House to allow the minister to consult with his officials 
and then have the question answered.  And if we can continue in that vein, 
I think we'll probably get through the whole thing a whole lot faster. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I think I've explained the process 
and I've given to it as it honestly is.  That's the way it has been done.  
I said a moment ago they didn't have a process for land sales because they 



 

 

didn't have tender sales of land.  They were purchasers of land, they had 
the land bank, and I don't know how they went about purchasing land, but I 
know in my area where I come from, they competed with me trying to buy land 
from the same farmer that I was trying to buy it from so they had a 
different version.  I grant you that we're selling land back, and I would 
agree that it probably can be done better.  But to the best of my knowledge 
it is done honestly, fairly, and up front. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Minister, prior to '82 all tendering in the 
government of Saskatchewan was open to public scrutiny.  Mr. Minister, the 
former member from Regina Elphinstone, Mr. Blakeney, led a government which 
for 11 years was never once tainted with anything that sounded like 
corruption or patronage, Mr. Minister.  And one of the reasons for that, 
Mr. Minister, was because we had an open tendering system that in all 
respects public could they look at.  If you had an open tendering system, 
Mr. Minister, you wouldn't have the problems which you have.  Mr. Minister, 
your tendering system is a big part of the problem which you're having with 
this government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I'm not going to go into a long 
rebuttal because I don't think that's the proper forum for it.  I will say 
this, that we have probably sold somewhere at the neighbourhood of 5,000 
pieces of land or more, and we have very, very, very little problems with 
any of it.  And it's been open to the public for everybody to purchase it. 
 
I can think in my area where I come from, that some of the land that was 
purchased was certainly purchased by other than Tories.  In fact most of 
the land in my area, I would say it would be fair to say that. 
 
So I don't believe that's the way it should be.  I don't think politics 
should enter in it.  It's the highest bidder.  The farmer needs it.  The 
young farmer needs it.  That's the way it has to be for now and in the 
future. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- But surely, Mr. Minister, you understand that the 
problem with your system is there's no assurance that the highest bidder in 
fact gets it.  That's the very problem, Mr. Minister.  That's the very 
problem. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have been a member of the Saskatchewan bar for some 15, 16 
years.  I can tell you that having a lawyer on retainer in the room is no 
guarantee of anything at all, no guarantee of anything at all, Mr. 
Minister.  There's only one effective guarantee, Mr. Minister, that justice 
has been done, and that is to let the public see what you're doing.  If you 
do that, you won't have any problems.  If you don't do that, Mr. Minister, 
you've all kinds of problems, just like you have right now. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question is: what earthly objection could you have to an 
open, public tendering system, except that it wouldn't allow your friends 
to feed at the trough in the way they're doing right now? 
 



 

 

Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Just to satisfy the member.  We have no objections to 
going to an open, public tendering system if that will be better for the 
public out there.  We have no problems with that because it goes to the 
highest bidder.  That's who it goes to.  So we don't have no problem with 
that at all. 
 
I just want to make mention that if anybody's lived out in rural 
Saskatchewan and bid on a piece of property, whether it be government land 
or whether it be private land -- and certainly the member from Regina 
Centre there knows this to be true -- that within two hours almost after 
the tender's closed, you know what everybody bid on it because either 
they're all in the coffee shop, so therefore I don't think there's any 
secret about what anybody bid for land in any area. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Then I want to go back for just a moment to the events of 
the tender last year.  On June 4 the tenders were open. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- June '89? 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- June '89.  The individual, who had the interest in the 
land, had requested to be present at the opening of those tenders and was 
turned down.  The line being that there would be an independent lawyer 
present to open the tenders. 
 
That night, sir, a representative of the North Shore Developments, who had 
the other bid in, phoned the individual to say that he had got the tender.  
Now tell me, Mr. Minister, how that group knew that the tenders had been 
opened and that the farmer had in fact had the highest tender? 
 
You said a moment ago that you would support open . . . public opening of 
tenders.  Well then why don't we just start today.  Why don't you just tell 
the House who got the tender on this piece of land at Buffalo Pound Lake 
and for how much? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, first of all I want to say that I 
mentioned a moment ago that in rural Saskatchewan, any place, you know 
within an hour or two after close what everybody bid on it.  I would assume 
-- and I don't know, I asked the department, nobody knows how anybody would 
know other than the two bidders that were bidding on it.  And if they knew 
they were both bidding on it I would assume if somebody said I bid "X" 
dollars and you bid "XY" dollars, you're higher than me, you got the 
tender.  I would assume that would be the case. 
 
From the department or from my office I can tell you we would have no way 
of knowing how they would know about it at all.  So therefore -- well you 
can laugh if you want.  So therefore if they knew amongst themselves what 
each one bid on it I would assume they would know who was the high bidder 
in that case. 
 



 

 

Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Minister, in this particular case the individual who 
had the vested interest in that piece of property, having had the use of it 
through lease for many years, had no idea that anyone else had bid, or who 
they were. 
 
Mr Minister, I want to simply review what has happened around this 
particular piece of land.  An individual farmer from Marquis, Saskatchewan 
has had investment and involvement in this land for some years.  Your 
department, sir, decides not to renew the lease.  Then you, sir, decide 
that this land is going to be put up for sale as commercial property -- not 
agriculture property, commercial property. 
 
You, sir, then decide that the advertisement on this piece of commercial 
property, non-agricultural land as you advertised it, was going to be 
restricted to The Western Producer, and I think two weekly newspapers, 
studiously avoiding a newspaper that would reach the man who has a vested 
interest in it, studiously avoiding the newspapers that would reach the 
citizens and people of Moose Jaw who would have interest. 
 
Only by the purest of coincidences did the individual who had the vested 
interest in this land find out that it was for sale, only through a phone 
call from a neighbour.  This individual then puts in a bid, a tender, for 
$15,000 -- 180 per cent of the value that you advertised the land at.  One 
other bid is received from something called North Shore Developments. 
 
Mr. Minister, when the bids are open, obviously the $15,000 bid is the high 
of the two.  What happens then?  Is the land sold to the high bidder?  No, 
sir.  Then two weeks later you pull the tender on the excuse that we need 
to do a survey; telling me that in July, when in fact in May the survey had 
been done, sir, by the admission of your own ad. 
 
Now this year the piece of land is advertised again.  The individual with 
the vested interest in the land puts in a bid.  The bid's been opened, not 
in a public process, and he is not successful.  Someone else is successful 
and you, sir, refuse to tell this House. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, again, please excuse my scepticism but there is 
something wrong here.  There is something wrong with this particular piece 
of land and the sale of this particular piece of land, but what's more 
important, there's something wrong with the process of tendering in your 
government, sir.  It is wide open to abuse.  And if the abuse isn't 
happening, there's going to be speculation about that kind of abuse. 
 
Mr. Minister, you've committed today that you would change to public 
opening of tenders.  Mr. Minister, I'm giving you an opportunity right now, 
right now, to start that process.  Will you tell this House right now who 
has been the successful bidder on this piece of land at Buffalo Pound Lake? 
 
(1130) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Well first of all, let me make it clear what I said.  I 
said I would allow opening as a public tender.  And that would only allow 
those who bid on it to be there -- nobody else.  I don't think you can have 



 

 

that kind of a public forum; I don't think you should have.  The only ones 
with an interest in would be there. 
 
Any other tender opening that I've been at as a reeve of the RM, just those 
contractors that bid on whatever -- the gravel or whatever it might be -- 
would be in attendance.  Anybody else would not be in attendance at the 
opening of it. 
 
So therefore what I said was, and I want to make clear what I was meaning 
at least, that those who bid on it could come to the opening of the tender 
on that parcel of land.  And that way it would be a public tender when it 
was open so they would know that they were high, low, or otherwise. 
 
In regards to who got the pieces of property, I have no problem telling the 
people who got the property what the price was that got the property, and I 
have no problem telling those who didn't get it what the price was.  But I 
don't think it's my position, or should be, to stand in the legislature and 
tell the world what everybody bid on a piece of property.  Now I don't 
believe that to be true because I believe that that would not be the right 
way to go.  That's not the way those people, whoever bid on it, would want 
their names in this legislature. 
 
And I got a series of tenders down here; I could read names off for hours.  
But I don't believe I would want to do that.  I think that's not right nor 
should it be done that way.  They bid believing it was bid as confidential 
bids.  They've been done that way.  But I said to you, and I will do it 
that way, if that's the wish of this Assembly, to have the bids opened in 
public with those who would bid on it be in attendance, so therefore they 
would know if they're high, low, or in between. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Minister, just two more questions then.  Again I go 
back to the events of the tender of last year when on June 4 those tenders 
were opened; on the evening of June 4, the successful bidder, the highest 
bidder, was contacted by the other bidder to say that he had received the 
bid. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you can raise your hands like that and say, I don't know 
how this happens.  Well there is only one way it can happen; that that 
information came from your office, sir.  And this wants to be explained.  I 
will give you another opportunity to do that. 
 
My second question and last question, Mr. Minister, is this: if today you 
are committing to the public opening where the bidders may be present, this 
deal is done.  Will you commit today, sir, either yourself or one of your 
officials will be in personal contact with the unsuccessful bidders this 
time around, to tell them who got the piece of property and how much it was 
sold for? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I can tell the member I won't be in 
personal contact because I don't know who the bidders were, nor do I intend 
to deal with that process.  They will be notified by letter, as I said 
earlier. And I want to make it absolutely clear.  I think you alluded to 
the point that my office was probably the way that that person found out 



 

 

whether they were high or low bidder.  And if you did, that is totally 
incorrect and I don't believe that kind of statement should be made in this 
Assembly, and I take offence to that because my office does not and will 
not do that kind of stuff. 
 
So I tell you, the openings will be in public to those who bid on it.  The 
ones who weren't successful in this piece of property will be notified and 
will be notified of the high price -- the price, the high bid -- and also 
the ones who got it will be notified that they got it and they know what 
they bid on it. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, you will recall last evening we 
were talking about a gravel pit in the Rural Municipality of Meadow Lake, a 
gravel pit that I noted as pit number 73K66 and it was located in the south 
half of 14-61-21 W3.  Mr. Minister, you admitted that you're the minister 
responsible for rural municipalities and you protect their best interests.  
And I pointed out to you that there's a very strange procedure that 
happened with this particular gravel pit. 
 
Mr. Minister, the thing that you acknowledged last night also was that when 
the Department of Highways releases a gravel pit, the rural municipality in 
which the gravel pit is located always has the first right of refusal  If 
they want the gravel pit they can have it.  In this case the Rural 
Municipality of Meadow Lake wanted the gravel pit, and yet your government 
saw fit to award the gravel pit to a private individual. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I'm wondering if you could tell us today in this House 
whether you've gathered a little more information since last night, and the 
first question I would want to ask you is whether or not you were aware of 
this situation within the department of rural affairs. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd like leave to introduce a visitor. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Many of my constituents take 
an avid interest in the proceedings of the Legislative Assembly, and many 
of them are able to watch it at home over the cable television.  But today 
we have one of those citizens with us, Betty Lewis from my constituency.  
I'd like members to recognize her and bid her welcome.  Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: -- I'd like to ask leave to introduce some guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman and colleagues in the Legislative 
Assembly.  It gives me pleasure to introduce to you, and through you, Mr. 



 

 

Chairman, four visitors seated in the opposition gallery.  They include my 
cousin Harold, his wife Lorraine, Darla and Bryce Trew, all from Carrot 
River.  We've had the pleasure of sharing our household with them last 
night and visiting, having a nice visit. 
 
A little story about Bryce: he happened to catch me on the TV news the one 
day I was on and he looked at that and he says, that guy lives with Jay -- 
Jay being my number two son who spent some time with the Carrot River 
Trews.  But I'd like to ask all members to join me in giving the Carrot 
River Trews a welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Rural Development 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 43 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- I've got an information sheet that I'm going to send 
across to the member here in a few minutes.  First I want to outline again 
one more time to the member what the process is.  First I'll say, before 
that, only that through the process what we do is protect the RMs, or my 
job is to make sure the RMs are protected through the process. 
 
I wouldn't personally know about many, many things that go on within the 
department.  The total department is almost 400 people, and between 
everything that goes on, between whether it's lands branch or extension 
services, which do a great deal of work out there in the province, or 
whether it's RMs and roads and bridges, I honestly wouldn't know, nor could 
I know. 
 
But there is a process in place, and when it's drawn to my attention 
there's a problem, then I find out why and work through the process.  I'll 
read the process off. 
 
In this case the Department of Highways certainly has the right of first 
refusal on all gravel in this area.  Energy and Mines is to contact RM to 
determine if they require gravel prior to leasing to private contractor.  
Rural Development's involvement is in two areas: one, issue of a surface 
lease if property in question is Crown land, and two, approval of 
subdivisions where title severance is part of the process.  Now that's what 
we're responsible as a department. 
 
Now here is sort of the sequence of events, and I'm going to send it over 
to you so you'll have it to look at it.  And I had the department put it 
together in regards to this parcel of land you're talking about, and that's 
the west half of LSD-6 on the 14-61-21, west of the third. 
 
Department of Highways had quarrying lease on parcels which they determined 
were no longer required and surrendered their interest in the quarrying 



 

 

lease.  Department of Energy and Mines subsequently issued quarrying lease 
to a Mr. Wagman on subject parcels. 
 
Three, titles in the Crown were in the name of the Department of Highways 
who were unable to issue surface leases, requiring the title be transferred 
to lands branch for administration. 
 
Four, in order for title to be raised, subdivision approval under The 
Planning and Development Act, 1983 was required. 
 
Five, application for subdivisions was made by Saskatchewan Rural 
Development March 5, 1990.  The rural municipality reviewed the proposal 
and recommended approval of the transaction of the title on April 11, 1990. 
 
Six, the RM approval, subject to the agreement which provides 200,000 cubic 
yards of gravel to be supplied at no cost to the RM. 
 
Seven, we have no record of any request from the RM suggesting we should 
not transfer title, nor have they been asked to intervene in the process by 
the RM. 
 
Eight, we have no record of order in council documents relating to this 
property. 
 
And nine, subdivision approval by the department April 19, 1990.  Surface 
lease will be issued as soon as title has been properly raised and 
documentation can be completed. 
 
And I'll send this over to you just so you'll have it for to review it in 
case you missed some I said. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Minister, I'm sure that that is the current state of 
affairs.  I just would not question you on that, but there's more than what 
you've told us. 
 
The proper procedure within government was not followed and I'm surprised 
that officials in your department would not bring that to your attention if 
they were aware that the proper process was not being followed in terms of 
turning over this gravel pit that the Department of Highways no longer 
required.  I still maintain that Highways wanted it.  They were told to 
release the pit, and against their best advice, did release the gravel pit.  
And that gravel pit should have gone to the Rural Municipality of Meadow 
Lake. 
 
In fact, there was a notice sent of this but it was sent to the wrong rural 
municipality.  It was sent to the Rural Municipality of Beaver River.  Now, 
Mr. Minister, after the rural municipality approached their own local 
member of the Legislative Assembly, they found out that the rural 
municipality was not going to sit back and allow that gravel to be taken 
away from them.  That's why they ended up getting 200,000 cubic yards of 
gravel, Mr. Minister. 
 
What has happened in this situation was that when the rural municipality 



 

 

finally applied to the Department of Energy and Mines for a quarry lease, 
Energy and Mines told them they would not give them the lease because they 
already had five gravel pits in the Rural Municipality of Meadow Lake. 
 
But what they are not aware of at the Department of Energy and Mines is 
that three of the pits were completely empty, one was almost totally 
depleted, so they only had a quarry lease on one good gravel pit.  And in a 
rural municipality the size of the RM of Meadow Lake, you certainly require 
more than one gravel pit, just because of the geographic size of the rural 
municipality, Mr. Minister. 
 
So they would not give the quarry lease because I think there was 
interference from other members -- I'm not saying you, but other members of 
your government.  And that's how the rural municipality, when they said no, 
we're not going to let this gravel go because we need it and the proper 
procedure is that we should have it, finally someone comes up with the 
idea, well, we'll give you 200,000 cubic yards to leave this go. 
 
But my question is: why wouldn't you, Mr. Minister, intervene?  I'm sure 
the department must have been aware of the situation, your department.  If 
they weren't, somebody should have been.  And I can't expect them to bring 
every little issue of a bridge or a gravel pit to your attention, because I 
know you're a busy individual.  But it should have been brought to your 
attention, Mr. Minister, because it was so unusual for the Department of 
Highways to release the gravel pit and turn it over to a private individual 
without first offering it to the rural municipality in which the pit is 
located. 
 
And this process just did not happen with this particular gravel pit in the 
Rural Municipality of Meadow Lake.  So I'm asking, Mr. Minister, was your 
department aware of it?  Did they bring it to your attention, and did you 
condone the turning over of a gravel pit from the Department of Highways to 
a private individual without first offering it to the Rural Municipality of 
Meadow Lake? 
 
(1145) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Mr. Chairman, I was unaware of this and certainly up to 
a little while ago that it was brought to my attention.  I was at the SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) convention and the RM of 
Meadow Lake was there.  In fact I was even standing there talking to a 
couple of the councillors from there and they didn't raise it at that time 
with me.  I spent the entire time at the SARM convention. 
 
I want to just say again that when it was raised by the RM -- and the 
member's right, it was raised by the RM according to this -- the 
application, just so you understand it and make sure we understand, that 
the application for subdivision made by Saskatchewan Rural Development, and 
that's our department, March 5, 1990, the Rural Municipality of Meadow Lake 
reviewed the proposal and recommended approval of the transfer of title on 
April 11, 1990. 
 
Now it was left to them to say yes or no; they had that option.  And I 



 

 

don't know, Mr. Chairman, if they wanted it more than that, if they weren't 
satisfied with what was going on.  I'm sure -- I know those people very 
well -- they would have said no.  They would have said no.  So I say the 
process that we have went through, we followed it right exactly as we're 
supposed to do, as the department's supposed to do, and myself as a 
minister. 
 
I want to say one other statement.  Around this province, we have many, 
many RMs, both looking for gravel and in some RMs, have excessive gravel.  
Some just have the right amount.  We have a regravel program that we 
brought in about four years ago which we spent $7 million a year to help 
RMs haul the gravel to put on their roads.  We assist them in that.  We're 
on a 50-50 basis. 
 
I can only say that I don't how many RMs have come to me over the last five 
years and said, can you help us find gravel or can we share this gravel 
with the other RM.  This gravel pit's over there in the highways and we 
could need a part of it.  Can we go into the Crown land and the forestry 
and get gravel.  Can we go into the other RM and sign an agreement.  I 
don't know how many times I went through that.  I can tell you, Mr. 
Chairman, it's been many, many, many times. And every time we have sat and 
worked with every RM, and that's exactly what we did here. And we let the 
RM, the RM of Meadow Lake make the final decision, not the Department of 
Rural Development. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Well, Mr. Minister, a number of things that you brought up 
-- the rural municipality were held to ransom for the RM of Meadow Lake 
because they weren't given the opportunity in the first place.  And I would 
admit to you that yes, they are happy having 200,000 cubic yards of gravel 
that they didn't have before, but there's a million cubic yards of gravel 
in that particular gravel pit.  That's the estimated amount of gravel in 
the pit. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, when they were at the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities' meeting here, that's correct, they did not meet with you 
because they wanted to meet with their own member of the Legislative 
Assembly, who is currently the Minister of Health, a cabinet colleague of 
yours.  And I believe that they likely did meet with him or one of his 
representatives before they left the association's meeting. 
 
So that's why they didn't come to you.  They came to their own member of 
the Legislative Assembly and asked for his assistance with this inequity 
that was being foisted upon them.  Because if the Rural Municipality of 
Meadow Lake had not fought for that 200,000 cubic yards of gravel, they 
wouldn't have got a bloody stone. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you may have satisfied the process . . . the legislative 
or regulatory requirement within your department, but you did not satisfy 
your responsibility to looking out for the best interests of rural 
municipalities. 
 
I ask you again, was your department aware that the proper process, not 
only in your department, but by the time it got to your department and left 



 

 

your department, was your department aware that proper process was not 
being followed in regard to this gravel pit? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Just to make it clear, Mr. Chairman, the process was 
followed.  It was followed by the department.  And I read it off and I sent 
him a copy of the chronological order of events that went on.  And it has 
been followed the way it should be followed.  And it's been followed, to 
the best of my knowledge, to the satisfaction of the RM of Meadow Lake -- 
to the best of my knowledge. 
 
Because they have approved.  They approved the subdivision, and they had 
the right to say no.  And as you know, under community planning by-laws 
that they can say no and it is final.  So they had lots of opportunity and 
they could have come to me.  If they wanted, they could have phoned me; 
they could have come to the department.  None of us have representation 
other than the process that we went through. 
 
So it has been up front; to the best of my knowledge it has been fair, and 
to the best of my knowledge the RM of Meadow Lake was satisfied with the 
process and with the gravel that they have received. 
 
Now I can go back again and I could go back to a few years ago when I was 
reeve when we were trying to get gravel from them, the former 
administration and some of the comments that was made to our municipality 
in regards to even trying to go through this kind of a process, and that 
process wasn't available to us.  I think the words were almost root, hog, 
or die.  And so that's about the size of it. 
 
But this here, we've got a process; we go through it; we follow it for 
every RM and every case we go through the process the way it should be.  
It's set out; they know the process; the department follows it, and that's 
the way it should be. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- This is not a history class, Mr. Minister, this is current 
affairs, and you are dead wrong in terms of the process being followed, 
absolutely wrong. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- The Rural Municipality of Meadow Lake was held to ransom 
and of course they're happy with 200,000 yards of gravel because they stood 
to get nothing if they hadn't complained very loudly -- stood to get 
nothing. 
 
Mr. Minister, why would you stand aside and allow a gravel pit that was 
much needed by a rural municipality to go a private individual?  What could 
be the motivation for your government to allow the gravel pit to go a 
private individual, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Well we can go over this a lot of time, Mr. Chairman, 
but first of all, to the best of my knowledge the RM was satisfied; second 
of all, RMs have local autonomy.  They make their own decision, and it will 
always be that way as long as I am minister here.  They have the right . . 



 

 

. there's a process that they could have said no to.  And if they said no, 
the subdivision would not have been approved and they know it and I know it 
and you know it. 
 
Therefore they had the right to say no.  They had the right to come and 
make an appeal on that.  If they didn't like that, they could have done 
many different ways, and we would have worked with them if there was a 
problem.  But to the best of my knowledge, first of all, they were 
satisfied with whatever the agreement was struck, and I understand it's 
200,000 cubic yards; and second, they approved the planning and subdivision 
of that property which says to me, Mr. Chairman, that it was reasonable; 
that they were satisfied with it, and they had no problems with it because 
it fit with what they wanted to do in their RM. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Do you know, Mr. Minister, the first official contact that 
the Rural Municipality of Meadow Lake got from your government?  It wasn't 
that Highways was releasing the pit.  The first official contact that the 
rural municipality got was from Energy and Mines, asking them to waive 
their right of first refusal.  Are you aware of that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- No, I would have no reason to be aware of that. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Well I would think that if you represent the best interest 
of rural municipalities, you should be aware of that.  Because there must 
be a process; you're the minister responsible.  When Highways releases a 
gravel pit, what is the formal procedure to let the rural municipality know 
that that pit is available? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Mr. Chairman, the RM deals through . . . with the 
process.  They're very capable, intelligent people.  The only time they 
would come to us is when I laid out the two situations.  They did come to 
us at that time.  They were contacted at that time.  They approved it.  I 
don't know what other process you can go to protect the RM. 
 
There's 299 RMs out there, and I deal with many of them -- many of them 
over a period of a year.  For either come in to see me at meetings, come 
out to their meetings, look at their roads, look at their bridges, look at 
their irrigation projects -- all of those kinds of things I do with them.  
The gravel, the pits . . . I don't know how many times I've been through 
the RM, different RMs. 
 
But unless they draw it to our attention they are having a problem, I 
wouldn't know.  I wouldn't know it they're buying a piece of land from a 
private person or from anybody else unless there was a reason to come to 
the department for subdivision or that kind of stuff.  And then it goes to 
them back for final approval. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Minister, watch my lips:  you're the minister of rural 
municipalities, in charge of rural municipalities.  I ask you, as the 
minister responsible, what is the formal procedure when Highways releases a 
gravel pit to let the rural municipality know that that pit is available?  
What is the procedure? 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- I read the procedure, Mr. Chairman.  I could read just 
the abbreviated part of it again: 
 

 Rural Development involvement is in two areas:  One, issue of surface 
lease if property in question is Crown land; and two, approval of 
subdivisions where title severance is part of the process. 

 
That's where Rural Development fits in.  That's where we come in. And the 
only other time we'd be aware of any of this is if there is a problem.  And 
the RM, I'm sure, would contact us if there is a problem, because they know 
my door has always been open to every RM in this province. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Minister, your door was open.  The door of the member 
of the Legislative Assembly for Meadow Lake, his door was closed I suppose, 
because that's who they came and saw to try to get this situation 
rectified.  They relied on their local member of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Instead of getting a million yards of gravel, they get 200,000 yards of 
gravel.  You don't have to read to me what your involvement here is again.  
I understand that.  But surely are you not aware of the procedure when 
Highways releases a gravel pit?  What is the formal mechanism by which the 
rural municipality is notified that that pit is available to them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the RMs deal with it as local 
government, and they are a local elected government to deal with the 
different departments on their own.  The only time, as I read -- and I 
could read it one more time, but he says he understands it so I won't -- 
that's the only time we get into the process. 
 
The other time that I would become involved in it would be when they phoned 
me or called me or called the department saying we have a problem.  And if 
they don't do that, we would have to assume that the process that is there, 
that they're satisfied with it, and whatever is going on, that they're 
making a local decision, not Big Brother making decision. They're making a 
local decision on their own to their own best benefits.  And I can't 
emphasize that enough. 
 
If they're building a nursing home, they don't come and see us.  If they're 
building a new store in town, they don't come and see us if they're getting 
help.  If they're building an industry, they don't come to the Department 
of Rural Development.  I mean, there's a lot of things they don't, because 
those people are very capable people to deal with the different departments 
on their own.  The time they come to us is when they're having a problem 
that might relate to the department. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Minister, is there a formal mechanism?  How does a 
rural municipality become aware that a gravel pit is available?  That's a 
very simple and straightforward question.  How does the rural municipality 
become aware that a gravel pit is available to them?  Please answer the 
question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Well, three or four ways.  One, I suppose, if they find 
a pit and know it's there.  Second, any time . . . 



 

 

 
An Hon. Member: -- Well aren't we smart. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Well that's the truth.  The second part is if somebody, 
if Department of Highways or Energy and Mines or a piece of gravel comes 
up, they always contact the local RM, which I understand from the member 
over there that Energy and Mines did contact the local RM to make them 
aware of it. 
 
So that is the process that's in place and that's when the RM would become 
aware of that piece of property being made available, or is going to be 
made available for use, other than for the Department of Highways. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Well I'll tell you the procedure in this case, Mr. 
Minister.  The RM became aware of it through coffee-row conversation, that 
the government was giving this gravel pit to a private individual.  And 
Energy and Mines did not contact them to make them aware the pit was 
available; Energy and Mines contacted them to ask them to sign a waiver of 
their right of first refusal. 
 
Now that is not proper procedure, Mr. Minister.  You'd even have to admit 
that.  Mr. Minister, do you admit that the rural municipality, if they want 
a gravel pit, they have every right to that full gravel pit, not one-fifth 
of it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- I guess it's fair to say that where RMs need the gravel, 
and they have defined that need, that certainly they should have access to 
that gravel. 
 
In many RMs, and I can't speak for Meadow Lake because I don't know about 
the RM in Meadow Lake . . . And you raise they got five pits and you said 
two of them are out or low on gravel.  I don't know if that to be true or 
not to be true; I have no way of knowing. 
 
But I can say this: that many RMs . . . And I was a reeve in an RM for a 
long time and I know how it works.  I've seen land that we had, that was 
Crown land that we thought we had access to at that time, the Department of 
Highways come in and said, you no longer have it; we've just taken it.  And 
that's all -- the first notification we got -- that was done. 
 
In the RM of Meadow Lake, I can go back through the process again.  But 
like I said, the Department of Energy and Mines contacted the RM of Meadow 
Lake, and when they contacted us, we said, the right of first refusal.  
Well how else would they contact them saying, here's the piece of gravel 
that we're going to sell or let somebody else use? 
 
If you sign off the right of first refusal, we know you have no need for 
it.  Now that makes them aware of it.  That's a decision then to be made by 
the RM.  If they have a need for it, they're not going to sign that right 
of first refusal, say, hey wait a minute, wait a minute, we got some need 
for that gravel. 
 
(1200) 



 

 

 
And I'm sure they did exactly that.  According to the letter, the 
information I got and I sent you a copy of it, it was worked out to the 
benefit -- at least what it says here to me -- benefit of both the RM and 
to those who were involved in it. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Minister, if the rural municipality at this point now 
contacts you instead of trying to deal through their local member of the 
Legislative Assembly who has obviously bungled this thing up, if they 
contact you directly, will you intercede?  And if they want and need that 
gravel from that gravel pit, will you give them the entire gravel pit in 
reverse to the decision that's already been made? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Well, first of all I don't have the authority.  The 
Energy and Mines have issued the quarrying lease on it.  Second, it's went 
through the process.  It went through a whole, complete process as you 
realize, including the approval of the RM, including the approval of the 
RM. 
 
Now the RM, if they change their mind afterwards -- I've made deals or 
decisions and afterwards wished that it was made a little bit differently 
-- they may or may not decide to do that.  I don't know.  But I don't have 
the authority to cancel the quarrying lease.  I don't have that authority.  
That's why you go through the process.  You come to them asking for the 
right of first refusal; they say, no, we want this or don't want this.  
They go for the subdivision.  They can say yes or no. 
 
When that's all finished my belief is a deal is a deal.  It's done.  And I 
think most RMs and most farmers in this province would agree that once you 
come to a final deal on it, that's the end of it, it's done. 
 
Now the RM, as I said, has not even contacted me to this date in regards to 
that nor to the department to this date.  They went through the process.  
My understanding is that it's been worked out to their satisfaction, and 
that was my concern, to make sure it's worked out to their satisfaction.  
And if they approve the subdivision, I would have to assume that it was 
worked out to their satisfaction. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- It was likely worked out to their current satisfaction 
because they were hijacked by your government and they were in danger of 
losing the entire pit, Mr. Minister.  That's what happened. 
 
Mr. Minister, you said you have no authority to intervene and reverse the 
decision that's already been made, if the RM requests it.  You said that 
you look out for the best interests of rural municipalities.  You do not 
look out for the best interests of rural municipalities.  This is just one 
more crooked deal of your government, Mr. Minister -- no other explanation 
of that. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you tell me who the lawyer was who communicated on behalf 
of the individual who finally got the gravel pit? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- I believe -- and I've asked the department; I had no 



 

 

idea -- but he says they believe the lawyer out of Meadow Lake called . . . 
and the last name being Cariou.  They don't remember the first name. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Minister, could you also tell us who the business 
manager was for the individual who finally ended up getting the gravel pit? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- I don't know why we'd . . . I don't know, and they don't 
know the business manager's name, nor would I know.  We could probably find 
out who the business manager is but I don't have a clue who he is. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Well I think I likely know but I'm not going to draw his 
name through the legislature here . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- You wanted me to. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Yes, I wanted you to tell us who the business manager was 
for the individual who finally got the pit.  Because what's happening here, 
what appears to be happening, Mr. Minister, is that your government tried 
to take away a gravel pit from the Department of Highways.  They refused to 
give it to the rural municipality until the rural municipality had them 
dead to rights and knew they had to give access to that gravel. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, it seems to me that your government wanted that gravel 
pit to go to some private individuals so that those private individuals 
could in fact sell gravel from that pit in a sweetheart deal with a 
construction venture in the Meadow Lake area. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, that's not standing up for rural municipalities in 
Saskatchewan.  That's standing up for the continuation of the pork-barrel 
that your government has brought to new heights in any government anywhere 
in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Minister, the question I have for you is this: if it 
can be demonstrated by the rural municipality that there was interference 
by your government and that there was pressure put on them by your 
government, and that at this point in time they want the entire gravel pit, 
will you intervene and make sure that justice is done and the Rural 
Municipality of Meadow Lake has the gravel pit? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Just to be clear, the process I understand . . . we went 
through the entire process.  Energy and Mines issues the quarrying lease, 
the RM has went through . . . They may want to back up on what they've 
done.  I don't know.  They've never contacted me in regards to it.  I don't 
know if the agreement's been signed but it is the process of being signed.  
I don't know how you would back up on an agreement that's been agreed to by 
the RM, by Energy and Mines, by the participant that's in question, by 
whoever else may be involved in it.  I don't know how you'd back up on an 
agreement that has been signed and put together by all these people 
involved, including the RM.  If they had a concern, I'm sure they would 



 

 

have come to me earlier, and they would have come to me and made it out 
that they wanted more of that, or less of it, whatever the case is. 
 
They made their own decision.  I would think it's fair to say . . . and I 
can't make a decision for them.  They have made the decision, not me, and 
that's the way it should be. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Minister, they signed because of undue influence by 
your government.  Your government pressured the rural municipality into the 
deal they finally accepted.  And so, yes, the Rural Municipality of Meadow 
Lake is happy to have 200,000 cubic yards of gravel.  But, Mr. Minister, 
they have the right to the gravel pit in total.  That is standard practice 
of this government for years, Mr. Minister.  Because of the manipulation 
and the pressure placed by your government, the gravel pit did not go to 
them. 
 
I'm asking you very simply: if there was undue influence placed on the 
rural municipality to accept the deal and they would say to you what the 
trail of that undue influence was and that yesterday they want the gravel 
pit in total, will you intervene and represent the rural municipality's 
best interests like you're supposed to, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Well we can keep talking about this as long as they 
want, and certainly they've got that opportunity, but I want to say this.  
Number one is, the RM is an elected body of people by the residents of the 
RM of Meadow Lake.  I do not believe now or in the future that anybody can 
put pressure on an RM to make a decision they don't want to make.  I don't 
buy that. 
 
And I'll tell you one thing that's absolutely for sure.  This department 
does not put pressure on anybody to make a decision an RM council does not 
want to make.  We have worked with them over the years totally, and many 
times we've had to spend a lot of hours working out a situation. 
 
I heard the member say, crooked deal.  You know, that's just flagrant abuse 
of a system here that I believe this Legislative Assembly does not believe 
in nor should stand for.  And if he's insinuating that the Department of 
Rural Development is crooked and talking about the residents or about 
myself, then I take offence to that and I say to that member, he better 
word his . . . Now I'll put this a little different. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Yes, you better. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- That's right, I will too.  That he says things that are 
not both relevant to this here Legislative Assembly, and I say to him that 
as long as I've dealt in my life and in all the businesses I've been in, 
the one thing that I do not believe in is those who deal in the illegal 
systems of doing things.  And I tell you this department has never once and 
will never once put pressure on an RM to do a deal that they do not want to 
do.  And I can tell you that it hasn't gone on in the past and will never 
go on in the future as long as I'm minister. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- The only thing you're guilty of, Mr. Minister, is standing 



 

 

by while others manipulated the rural municipalities.  That's what your 
guilt it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- And I suppose you wouldn't say, Mr. Minister, that there's 
a crooked deal with STC, but you  
 Dmaintained that too, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order, order.  The debate seems to be moving to lower 
level.  I think that members should . . . Order, order.  The member from 
Humboldt is interfering with the Chair and I'd ask him not to; and same 
with the member from Regina Elphinstone.  I would ask members to not use 
unparliamentary language in this legislature. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- On a point of order, can you tell me what language was 
unparliamentary? 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- The use of the word crooked going back and forth across 
the floor, I don't think is parliamentary language, and in the context that 
it was used, and that is a judgement of the Chair. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- That's ridiculous.  Show us that. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order, order.  Is the member from Regina Elphinstone 
challenging the Chair? 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I'm asking you, would you show us. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order.  If the member wants to challenge the Chair, he can 
certainly rise at any time and challenge the Chair. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Minister, this gravel pit, moving from Highways, should 
have gone to the rural municipality -- finally ended up in private 
individual hands.  When the government found out they were in trouble on 
it, they offered an olive branch to the rural municipality of 200,000 yards 
of gravel. 
 
I'm asking you, in this trail of manipulation and coercion and 
interference, if the rural municipality comes to you and asks you to 
intervene on their behalf as the main minister . . . They did ask the MLA 
from Meadow Lake to intervene but he hasn't helped them, Mr. Minister.  In 
fact, he's harmed them by giving away four-fifths of the gravel pit to a 
private individual, when the RM needs the gravel; they can use the gravel. 
 
If they can show you the trail of events -- you don't have to take my word 
for it -- if they can show you the trail of events and the manipulation 
that happened to get this gravel pit from the Department of Highways into a 
private individual's hands, will you intervene on their behalf, Mr. 
Minister?  Yes or no? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- I've said three times, four or five or 10 times, Mr. 
Chairman, the process was followed.  It was followed out the way the 



 

 

department's supposed to do it, and that's the way it sits. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- My last question is, what have you got to hide?  What have 
you got to hide that you won't represent rural municipalities in 
Saskatchewan on an issue like this where they've been manipulated and 
cheated and tricked and finally offered an olive branch of one-fifth of a 
gravel pit.  They should have every right to the full access. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Mr. Chairman, no RM has ever been cheated, tricked, or 
anything else in this province by this department as long as I've been 
minister.  And I can say this, as a reeve for many, many years and been at 
many, many, many SARM conventions, I can tell you something.  The quality 
of those councillors and the qualities of those reeves and the quality of 
those administrators are such that nobody would either cheat them, trick 
them, or pressure them, because the quality of them is much above some that 
I've seen otherwise. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Minister, we're not making accusations.  Mr. Minister, 
we're not making accusations.  Basically the bottom line here is if the 
rural municipality . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order, order. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Did I say something unparliamentary, sir? 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Is the member challenging the Chair, I ask?  I've called 
for order and when the Chair calls for order the member is to sit down.  I 
would like to ask the member from Rosthern to rise and apologize to the 
House for unparliamentary language. 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- I apologize, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Basically the bottom line, Mr. Minister, is if the RM comes 
to you and shows you that there was political interference, because that's 
basically what it was.  It wasn't the officials of the departments; it was 
the politicians of your government that interfered in what should have been 
a very smooth-flowing process for the RM to get the gravel pit.  If they 
come to you and can show you that there was political interference, will 
you do your job and intervene on behalf of the rural municipality to 
rectify this situation? 
 
It does your government no good to continue on the path you're continuing 
on.  People see it for what it is.  People see political interference, and 
I would think you, of all ministers, would intervene because you're the one 
who has responsibility for rural municipalities in the province. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, my final question to you.  If the rural municipality 
comes to you and points out the political interference that happened in the 
transfer of the gravel pit to a private individual, will you in fact 
intervene and see that justice is done in this situation for the Rural 
Municipality of Meadow Lake? 
 
(1215) 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm just hard pressed to believe that 
anybody would believe, that anybody in this province would believe that a 
reeve and six members of council and an administrator who is a very 
qualified person, in any way is not capable of running their own affairs. 
 
And they have made a decision.  The council has made a decision and I will 
abide by the council's decision that they have made here in regards to that 
pit. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I think, Mr. 
Chairman, it's pretty clear that the minister of rural affairs has had 
enough of detailed questions.  Yesterday he was complaining that he didn't 
have any detailed questions in his estimates, so my colleagues attempted to 
point out some details of some issues in this province which I would want 
to say the minister, I think, handled very poorly. 
 
In respect of gravel and in respect of tendering of land and this 
government's tendering process, I would say that the people of Saskatchewan 
have had very clear indication of what makes this government tick. 
 
They've got a very clear indication of why this government is in the 
political problems that it is, and why this province is in such economic 
straits as it is. And it was really clearly shown by the minister of rural 
affairs in the last hour, in this House especially. 
 
Mr. Minister, you talked, and I've listened very closely to the rural 
affairs estimates, and my colleague from Quill Lakes was asking you about 
the benefits of your department to the people of rural Saskatchewan, to the 
rural communities and the rural municipalities.  And he was asking many 
questions about the effects of your administration on rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And I tell you, I stood in here and I heard, you're putting pressure on in 
terms of the federal government and federal issues. I've heard that you 
consult a lot. I've heard that your government makes representations and 
I've heard that you don't want to be confrontational because you don't want 
to dry up the good will of the federal government. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, I want to ask you some questions in respect to the 
rural post office closures in Saskatchewan and what's happened under your 
administration, and what your federal cousins in Ottawa have done to rural 
communities in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, rural Saskatchewan stands to lose many good, high paying 
jobs.  The base and the hub of many of those communities is not only their 
grocery store and their garage, but it's their post office.  And while 
you've been embarking upon all this pressure and consultation and 
submissions, we've lost in Saskatchewan some 52 rural post offices, by my 
figures, which means a lot of hardship on those communities and which 
means, in all probability, those rural towns will be dying a lot quicker 
than they would have, had it not been for the post office closure. 
 
Now I ask you, Mr. Minister, if you're comfortable with what your federal 



 

 

cousins have been doing.  I ask you if you agree with the privatization of 
rural post offices, or if that is no longer one of your agenda items since 
you got beat up severely on your attempt to privatize SaskEnergy. 
 
Now I ask you, Mr. Minister, if you're comfortable with your record and 
with the results of your consultation and your representation to your 
federal cousins in Ottawa.  And I ask you if your lack of ability, frankly 
speaking, sir, of this government to stop that rural post office closure, 
if you're comfortable with what's been happening in the last while. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Mr. Chairman, rural post offices are important to the 
people of Saskatchewan.  They've been a process of . . . they've been an 
area that we have used over the years as a province. 
 
I can go back into the '50s, when our local post offices, where I lived out 
in the country, three of them all closed.  I go back into the early '70s, 
when my small towns, like the towns of Clemenceau, Veillardville, Erwood, 
Smoking Tent, Barrows -- I could go on -- all lost their post offices, all 
lost them back in the '70s.  All the post offices went.  And I could get 
the dates for them all.  They've all gone; they've all gone from there. 
 
And now in the '80s we face another problem, Mr. Chairman.  A lot of our 
small towns become . . . there's not even a store left in them in some 
cases.  And I don't know how you . . . nobody goes there any more.  And 
that becomes a problem.  Nobody goes to the town if you don't have a store 
in it.  In a lot of cases the elevators, the pool elevator's leaving.  
Many, many of these towns now don't even have a school in them. 
 
So the use of the post office in some areas is not being used any more.  So 
if it's not being used, you would expect those, as it did in the past, to 
gradually they will disappear. 
 
But there's many towns and many villages, I believe, needs to maintain a 
good post office in their communities -- a strong post office.  And I can 
think of . . . I could name the same towns that I believe need to maintain 
that post office.  So they're there. 
 
So I can say to the members of the Assembly that two post offices that I 
thought that needed some more clarification, that the people of the 
community weren't happy with, that I intervened with the minister 
responsible for Canada Post is Silton and Dubuc.  Dubuc, eh?  Dubuc, okay.  
Okay, I said it wrong. 
 
I wrote a letter to the minister on both of those and he has now postponed 
the closure of them and is reviewing with the communities and with the 
people in the area in regards to what needs to be done. 
 
So where I have been asked to intervene, I have done that.  Where there has 
. . . in some cases I don't even get asked to intervene because there's 
just nothing left in those small communities, as there was when the former 
administration was here on our side of the House, because there's nothing 
left to really keep a post office there. 
 



 

 

And the other thing we all realize, that we travel so much further now.  We 
just do.  It's just a fact of life and you can't change that.  So those two 
things along, those things along with the times and what went on in the 
past -- not just today, but what went on in the past -- certainly make some 
changes in there. 
 
And as we go through, you'll see that there'll be strong post offices, good 
post offices left in many, many communities.  And some of the ones where 
there's no town left, you wouldn't expect there to be a post office. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I can take you through a list of 50 
that are to be closed, and I can tell you that they're not, sir, all dried 
up and withered-away towns. 
 
You know, what you've just done, sir, is you've stood up, Mr. Minister, and 
you've talked about rationalizing of the post office service which is one 
of the little key words that go with privatization.  What you're saying is, 
forget the service, you've got to look at it in terms of dollars and cents.  
And I would want to say that the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg should 
be listening very closely because there are some post offices in his riding 
that the people are lobbying very strong and very hard to ensure stay open. 
 
And I want to tell you, Mr. Minister, you can go to Lafleche, Saskatchewan 
and tell those people that you intend to fight to keep their post office 
open, but when your federal cousin, Mr. Wilson, the member of parliament 
for that area stands up a minute later and indicates that he favours the 
privatization and the eventual closure of the Lafleche post office, I want 
to say to you, Mr. Minister, you don't have any credibility. 
 
And I want to say that this minister can make excuses and he can talk about 
fighting for the community of Silton and Dubuc -- Dubuc, a name he can't 
even pronounce --- which gives me a clear indication of just how interested 
he is in the rural post offices.  I tell you, Mr. Member and Mr. Minister, 
that you've got little credibility. 
 
I'd like to know, Mr. Minister, how many post offices you expect to see 
closed within the next year in Saskatchewan, in the year 1990 or '91?  And 
I want to know -- I would like a list of those, sir, and I would like a 
list of how many of those you plan to intervene.  I'd like a list to tell 
me which of those communities you feel are viable and which you want to see 
go by the wayside. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Well, I don't have the list with me, that's for sure.  I 
want to say three things.  One, back under Tommy Douglas, if he called that 
privatization when they were closing the post office out there, I would 
doubt it very much. 
 
Under the former premier of this province, Allan Blakeney, who I believe 
was a statesman, who had many, many post offices close under his 
jurisdiction when he was premier of this province -- many of them.  I can 
think of one that was sort of transferred at Scout Lake.  I was out there; 
I was out at Scout Lake, and it was done in about 1973 or '74.  It was 
transferred to the co-op store there at Scout Lake.  And I talked to the 



 

 

manager, the guy that run the co-op store there, and he said if it wasn't 
for the post office being here -- and it was done many years ago, he said, 
I think '73 or '74 -- he said, we wouldn't even have nothing here at all in 
Scout Lake. 
 
So I guess what I'm saying is that I don't believe that closing the post 
office in '50 was privatization.  I don't think closing them in '70 was 
privatization. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Well, get out, it is called privatization. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Oh, it was! All right.  Well the member from Quill Lakes 
said that they were privatizing them back in the '70s.  I don't know if 
they were or they weren't.  That isn't what I was . . . 
 
What I want to say is that we've met with Canada Post and they have assured 
us that there would be no closures of post offices, first, without working 
with the community; second, without notifying us; and third, making sure 
that there was available to them the same type of service or better, in 
their communities; and that no post office would be closed in any size of 
communities at all, even to move it to where it would be a different type 
of service in their community at all if the town was of any size.  And they 
give us a list of towns.  I don't have it with us, but it was just the 
smaller towns and some of the ones that, like I said, don't even have a 
store any more. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well, Mr. Minister, what I hear is you making excuses 
for the federal government.  So I'm asking you and I ask you again: do you 
favour rural post office closures? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- No. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well, Mr. Minister, can you tell me what kind of 
correspondence you may have had with the federal minister?  Can you table 
some documentation to show that you've actively been lobbying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- I haven't got it with me, but I can certainly table it 
on Monday when I come back. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Minister, I want to share with you a letter from 
some people in the riding of Assiniboia-Gravelbourg.  There's a group 
formed there to stop the closure of their post office, and they had a 
meeting with one of your cabinet colleagues, the Associate Minister of 
Economic Development, the MLA for Redberry.  And I want to quote from part 
of this . . . or from Redberry.  And I want to quote part of this letter 
for you if I could.  It says: 
 

 Mr. Gerich indicated that Canada Post is in contact with the provincial 
government for consultation before any closure or conversion. 

 
The letter goes on to say: 
 

 Canada Post had to present four or five authentic reasons for closure and 



 

 

assurance that the closure would present no hardships for the community. 
 

That's a quote from the Associate Minister of Economic Development. 
 
So Canada Post has to present four or five authentic reasons for closure to 
the community.  And she goes on to say: 
 

 That indicates to me that you gave approval for Dubuc's closure.  What 
were the authentic reasons and when does hardship occur? 

 
Can you give me those four or five reasons, Mr. Minister? 
 
(1230) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, Dubuc is not closed; it's still 
open. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Minister, your colleague, the Associate Minister of 
Economic Development indicated that Canada Post . . . the process is that 
Canada Post gets in contact with the provincial government, gives them four 
or five reasons to rationalize the closing.  Can you tell me what those 
four or five reasons are?  We've lost 50-some post offices.  If this is the 
process, can you tell me what those -- you must have gone through this 
before -- can you tell me what those reasons are? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- I'm not aware of the four or five listed reasons.  We 
did meet with Canada Post.  I meet with them about once a year.  I meet 
with them to discuss the areas of concern that might be raised in regard to 
post office closure, delivery of mails, how it would affect rural 
Saskatchewan.  So we meet with them about once a year to discuss those 
kinds of things, but I'm unaware of the list of 1, 2, 3, 4 things that they 
would say to us that'd be a reason for closing, other than the ones that I 
mentioned earlier. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you've had ample time to find out 
what those four or five reasons are.  This letter was sent to you early 
this year, and your colleague, the associate minister of economic 
development, indicated in his letter, or indicated that you would be 
getting back to this person prior to February 26.  Can you tell me if 
you've got that correspondence or if you've talked with that minister?  And 
can you tell me if you've responded to this letter? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- I don't know, Mr. Chairman, I don't know if I've 
responded to the letter or not, or what the response was, if it was.  I 
probably have somewheres in the neighbourhood of about a hundred letters a 
day that I answer and I respond to, and I just wouldn't . . . I'd have to 
go back in the files and take a look at the files.  That's the only way I 
would know. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you've got 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 
9, 10 officials with you today.  Surely one of those officials would be 
able to go through . . . or if you each, if you gave each one of these guys 
10 letters a day, they'd be able to brief you as to those hundred letters. 



 

 

 
I'm asking you again, do you recall the letter?  And could you bring . . . 
could you tell me if they've briefed you as to what the consultation 
process is before the closures go on.  Surely one of those, one of your 
officials can help you with that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Mr. Chairman, I have a lot of correspondence with a lot 
of different ministers, federal ministers, provincial ministers, public, 
all the way from RMs to people who have crop insurance claims and all the 
things that come to my office, which I do sign and do read and do send 
back.  But I can't mentally remember all the letters that go out.  I'd have 
to go back to the files, as I said earlier. 
 
And if there was one come with four points on it, as he said, I honestly 
can't remember.  And he asked me, have I answered?  And I would have to go 
back and check my files because, in all fairness, I probably since that 
time have sent back over maybe 1,000 or 2,000 letters that I've responded 
to. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I want to ask you, in terms of 
consultation, did the federal department consult with you prior to the 
closing of Aylesbury? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- No, they didn't. That was probably the first time that 
we had . . .  After that, we had requested some meetings to try and see 
that we would be aware of and the public be aware of what their plans were. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Minister, did they consult with you prior to the 
closure of Briercrest? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- I'm not aware that Briercrest is closed or if it's been 
converted.  Either one, I wouldn't know.  Nobody's made any representation 
to me, and I wouldn't know particularly on that issue. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Minister, did they consult with you prior to the 
closure of Candiac? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- I wouldn't know if Candiac is closed. I wouldn't know 
unless a community came to us and said there is a problem with what they're 
doing. 
 
When you say closed, do you mean converted or do you mean closed?  Now 
there's two different things.  In some communities where the postmistress 
or master is retiring, they've been moving them into the private stores or 
into the co-op stores, and they've been run there.  In fact one place, I 
believe, they even run out of the credit union. 
 
And those communities in a lot of cases are pleased with that; in some 
cases they're not.  Usually if they're not, I hear about it.  If they're 
pleased with it, I don't usually hear about it because that's a community 
decision. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I know there are two issues.  



 

 

There's total closure, and I know that there's the privatization which will 
event in closure.  And you know that as well as I know that -- 
privatization will result in the loss of service. 
 
I want to ask, Mr. Minister, what have you in writing in terms of a lobby 
to the federal government to indicate to the people of this province that 
you in fact do oppose rural post office closure and privatization?  What 
have you got in writing, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Just to be clear on it, I told them I would table the 
correspondence on Monday when I come in of some of the letters I have 
written to Harvie Andre, the minister responsible for Canada Post, some of 
the representations that we made otherwise. 
 
I want to just say only in regards to such things as he said the 
privatization, as he used the word, the post office going to somebody in 
the private sector and the co-op or the credit union, it's just 
deterioration of services and the loss of it. 
 
In my view, Mr. Chairman, in many of those cases they'll have extended 
services.  It will keep that small store in that town as it does in Scout 
Lake.   It's kept it there for many, many years, done back in the '70s, 
certainly under not this administration.  It's better than losing . . . as 
the guy said at Scout Lake, we would have just lost it altogether.  Much 
better to have it here in this store there for another 20 years that 
probably wouldn't have been there. 
 
I think that the credit unions and the co-ops and those who run the private 
business will give good service.  They're good people; they're honest 
people.  And if you have a choice between whether you want an extended 
service in your community or you want . . . in a lot of cases they only had 
part-time postal services in a lot of those communities.  You know, that's 
a decision that the community has to make.  And if these communities that 
he's named has made that decision that's in their best interest, I don't 
believe I should be one to complain about it. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Minister, let's get one thing straight.  These 
people in these communities don't have the option because Post Canada comes 
in already having made the decision as to what's going to happen with those 
post offices, as was the case in Aylesbury.  And those communities have 
nothing to do about it. 
 
And I tell you, Mr. Minister, what Post Canada is doing is picking off 
these communities one by one.  And with the rural hardships faced by your . 
. . that are mostly in a great part caused by your government, they've got 
their minds on keeping their farms afloat and keeping their businesses 
afloat.  And in a lot of cases those small communities, because of the 
number of people you've chased off of the land, don't have the numbers to 
lobby and don't have the time to lobby. 
 
And what I say to you, Mr. Minister, if you're sincere about keeping postal 
service in rural Saskatchewan, what you should be doing as a representative 
of this provincial government, you should be lobbying your federal 



 

 

counterparts long and hard, saying, we oppose privatization of rural post 
offices, we oppose the closure of rural post offices, and we oppose the 
loss of service to rural Saskatchewan.  That's what you should be doing as 
the minister of rural affairs. 
 
But it's clear where you are.  You talk about not making waves with your 
federal counterparts when we're talking about stabilization programs for 
agriculture.  You talk about not being too confrontational.  Well, Mr. 
Minister, while you are trying to avoid a confrontational mode, these post 
offices are closing and these services are disappearing. 
 
Now I mean, the good will that you're trying to build with your federal 
counterparts in Ottawa isn't doing the job.  It's not doing the job in 
terms of developing a long-term agricultural strategy.  It's not doing the 
job in terms of gaining the kind of equalization payments that we should be 
having here in Saskatchewan.  It's not doing the job in terms of federal 
procurement of government expenditures in this province.  And I tell you, 
Mr. Minister, frankly, it's not doing the job for the people of this 
province.  And I want to say, Mr. Minister, that's why people in this 
province are very sceptical of you. 
 
I draw you one parallel, and I want to take you to the provincial riding of 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg.  The newly elected member, the Associate Minister 
of Health, I believe he is, tells the people in their communities that he 
opposes the closure of rural post offices.  Yes, indeed, he does.  His 
federal cousin, the MP, comes out and says, well you know, we have to do 
something.  We have to make Post Canada accountable, and we have to have 
this corporation that was developed to deliver a service to all of the 
people of this country, we have to have that in a profit-making mode.  And 
I mean, we need that $96 million of profit because we can put that into 
other places. 
 
And I tell you, Mr. Minister, what they have done is they've made a profit 
-- Post Canada has.  But a lot of people in Saskatchewan, 50 communities in 
Saskatchewan, have lost the service that is a right to theirs as citizens 
of this country. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Minister, I don't think you've been doing your job 
with respect to the lobby in terms of speaking with your federal 
counterparts and insisting that the federal government stop the closure of 
Saskatchewan's post offices. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, why I say you're not doing your job is for one very good 
reason, because if you look at the number of post offices that Manitoba has 
lost, and if you look at the number of post offices that Alberta has lost, 
and you compare that to the number Saskatchewan has lost, you've got a 
pretty dismal record in terms of the lobby. 
 
Are you aware of how Saskatchewan stands in terms of the number of post 
offices we've lost and the other provinces have lost? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- As you have, I have had probably the same list and it 
says here that in Saskatchewan there was 66 post offices under review, 39 



 

 

had been converted of the total, and the rest were under review.  They have 
a list here of the post offices that have been closed over the last years, 
and the list is on the side of the sheet here.  You probably have the same 
list that I have, such things as Springwater, Weldon, Esk, Forgan, Forget. 
There's a whole list of them. 
 
I have the same list as you have.  I understand in Alberta, by this list -- 
and I don't know when this date was; it was issued 6/10/89, so that would 
be in June '89 -- that Alberta had 31 under review and they had converted 
37.  So Alberta, that's where they sit as well. 
 
(1245) 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Minister, you may not be aware and the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg may not be aware, but last night the Palmer post 
office was closed, and that's another one we can add to our list. 
 
My understanding is that the Cadillac post office is to be converted to an 
RPO (rural post office) in the next week, is what I'm led to believe.  And 
I want to say, Mr. Minister, there was a meeting out there last week and 
three people had applied for that RPO, but when they came to understand 
what the effects would be on their community, the three people who had 
applied removed their applications. 
 
Mr. Minister, I don't think there's any doubt where you are in terms of 
privatization or where this government is in terms of privatization.  I 
don't think that there's any doubt that you will quietly stand by while 
your federal cousins destroy the post office system in Saskatchewan.  I 
don't think there's any doubt of that. 
 
And these small communities, their postal service is being destroyed one by 
one as you stand on your hands telling us that your work-load is too heavy 
and your department can't handle a hundred letters a day.  And I think 
that's pretty clear that you can't handle a hundred letters a day. 
 
And I'm not blaming your officials, sir.  I think the officials do the 
work.  I think it's the minister in charge of the corporation who can't 
handle the information flow that comes to him. 
 
I think, Mr. Minister, you've got a problem when it comes to transfer of 
gravel pits and how it affects RMs when that gravel pit is privatized.  I 
think, sir, you've got a problem when it comes to the kind of tendering and 
the tendering process that your government uses.  And I think, Mr. 
Minister, what you are is one of your cabinet, many of them with the same 
problem that you have -- that you're just simply not fit to govern. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Minister, that there are communities that are 
starting to lobby and starting to organize in order to protect their 
communities, because they know you haven't been doing your job here in 
Regina. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: -- And I want to say, Mr. Minister, that these groups are 
going to be asking for your assistance in protecting their post offices.  
They're going to be asking for assistance to protect their communities, and 
to protect rural Saskatchewan.  And I want to say, Mr. Minister, that they 
know the hypocrisy of this government.  They know that the federal 
government has made the decision to close them down.  And they know that 
you're putting up a little road show and pretending to care, all the while 
letting these communities be picked off, one by one. 
 
But I say to you, Mr. Minister, that they're looking for a government that 
will be able to lobby our federal government; that will be able to come 
home with the goods.  And they're looking for a provincial government that 
cares about rural Saskatchewan and that cares about working people, which 
clearly your inaction indicates you don't. 
 
So I say, Mr. Minister, the people see through you.  They see through your 
colleagues and they understand what your government is about.  And I ask 
you, Mr. Minister, would you support action in this House -- would you 
support a motion in this House -- condemning the federal government for 
destroying our rural postal system?  I ask you if you would support that 
kind of a motion that would tell the federal government that we're not 
satisfied with the kind of action they're taking with respect to post 
Canada, and that we condemn them for the privatization and for the closure 
of post offices in Saskatchewan.  Would you do that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, he always used the word condemn.  It 
seems to me I've heard that about a hundred times in the last couple or 
three days.  They never once used the word . . . they don't use the word, 
do we request, or do we ask for, or do we work with, or those kinds of 
situations . . . or how do we make . . . how to work with the communities, 
to work with the federal government, or to lobby the federal government to 
make things better.  They said no, we must condemn. 
 
Well I never got very much in my life by saying negative things about 
people.  I always found out that if you're going to be successful and 
you're going to do things in a reasonable way, at least your chance of 
success is much better. 
 
So I say that certainly if you want to put a motion in this House that says 
that we will work with the people of Saskatchewan and the people of this 
Legislative Assembly to maintain our postal service in this province and to 
maintain it in a proper and right way and to maintain the systems that out 
there where needed, certainly, I'll support that any day. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Mister, you are really standing tall, fighting for rural 
Saskatchewan.  Are you ever working hard.  I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, 
are you aware of the policy of the federal government which clearly 
indicated that their course of action was the privatization of the postal 
system across Canada?  And in view of the privatization -- many are here in 
Saskatchewan -- how can you possibly stand up and be opposed to a principle 
that your government spent its entire session promoting last time until the 
people of Saskatchewan got rid of you, or stopped you.  It goes further 
than just the closures, and you're trying to relate it just to the 



 

 

communities that are closing down.  It's more insidious than that, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Are you aware that Canada Post are going into communities of the size of 
Watson and Wynyard and other communities and are saying to them, we want to 
give you not only your post office but we want to set up a complementary 
additional service so that your postal services will be improved. 
 
Have you heard of those situations?  And do you know what the game is 
there?  They want some private business man to take a supplementary postal 
system, cut back on the volume in the postal system -- and doing the same 
in Watrous, my colleague says -- and therefore can come forward and say, 
well look, you got the private operation. The volume here does not in fact 
warrant the continuation of a postal system under the jurisdiction of the 
Crown corporation, Canada Post.  That's exactly the process that's going 
on.  And, Mr. Minister, they were in towns like Watson. 
 
And you know what the chamber of commerce has done?  The chamber of 
commerce in Watson rallied the business community and asked them that none 
of them accept the privatization, the private facility in conjunction with 
the postal system, because they know exactly where the federal government 
is headed.  This is privatization in its most blatant form. 
 
And you stand here and say, well the community has only the post office, I 
guess it has to close; I'm fighting hard but you know we got to co-operate.  
Mr. Minister, your government has one course of action and that's 
privatization.  Canada Post, by your federal counterparts, is on a course 
of privatization.  Let it not be denied, and the people of Saskatchewan 
know it.  And no amount of your words here that you're fighting will ever 
convince the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Minister, you've been out to a community of Dubuc.  I 
want to say that that community rallied to the extent that no community 
should have to be required to put in.  They set up a committee of citizens 
to keep their postal system.  They even sent a representative all the way 
to Ottawa to get that changed. 
 
And where was the minister of rural affairs?  Have you ever heard a 
statement, Mr. Chairman, a public statement by this man standing up and 
saying, I condemn the privatization and the withdrawal of postal services 
from community after community across this province?  He's been silent.  
That's what he is. 
 
I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, are you aware that in fact the postal 
system, Canada Post, is not only closing out postal systems against the 
will of the people of this province, just like they're instituting GST 
(goods and services tax) and you're about as powerful in fighting against 
the privatization of the postal system as you are fighting the GST.  That's 
where you're at. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister: are you aware of this insidious method of 
privatization that is being invoked by the federal government?  That not 
only are they going out and closing it -- hospitals -- where mail . . . the 



 

 

postal clerk or post office -- What do you call them? -- post office 
master, master, mistress, yes, post mistress. 
 
But not only are they, Mr. Minister, closing in smaller communities . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Just keep your chatter to yourself because 
you don't make any sense, the member from Rosthern.  I mean you.  I went 
through with the problem that you have and we could relate it again across 
national television or Saskatchewan television if you want. 
 
What is happening, Mr. Minister, is that exactly the same way as in 
Saskatchewan when your government tried to privatize SaskPower against the 
will of the people, you have now the federal government here invoking on 
exactly the same program and that is the privatization of the postal system 
across Saskatchewan against the will of the people. 
 
Mr. Minister, you've been found out, you and your government.  You aren't 
fighting for the welfare of the people.  The people of Saskatchewan had to 
stop you from privatization.  How can they possibly believe that now you 
are going to stand up to your big brothers who have the same philosophy and 
say, well we're going to fight for rural Saskatchewan and the retention of 
postal services.  Credibility, Mr. Minister.  They want honesty.  They 
don't want this here hypocrisy that is being lipped to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
You indicated, and as my colleague indicated, that you in fact are 
consulted by the federal government in respect to the closures.  That's 
what you have indicated.  You have indicated that reasons have to be given 
for closing.  The question that is clear, that there's many 10's and 20's 
and 30's and 40's and 50's -- post offices closed across rural 
Saskatchewan.  And you have stood by and been about as effective as . . . I 
don't know.  There is a word to describe it, Mr. Minister. 
 
But the big problem that you have is that you believe, exactly like the 
Tories in Ottawa, that privatization is the way to go, regardless of 
whether the public want it or not.  You have demonstrated it; you've gone 
overboard with your privatization; you're hooked on it.  And it's such a 
hypocrisy for you to stand up and say, well I will certainly if I'm called 
on, take a stand. 
 
But the people of Saskatchewan want honesty from you, Mr. Minister.  How 
can you on the one hand support massively privatization on the one hand by 
your own government, and on the other hand oppose, or pretend to oppose, 
privatization by the federal government. 
 
This is what they're doing, Mr. Minister.  They are putting community after 
community under the pressure of privatization, whether that postal service 
is required or whether it is not.  All I say to you, Mr. Minister, you have 
again failed, failed miserably to represent rural Saskatchewan and the 
needs of the people of rural Saskatchewan, people in Dubuc, as I have 
indicated to you. 
 
I'll tell you, don't laugh; you think it's a laughing matter.  Why don't 
you go out to Dubuc and see what they say to you, Mr. Minister.  Ask them 



 

 

whether they think you've fought the fight for them.  Why don't you go out 
and ask them?  I'll tell you, Mr. Minister, what you are doing here is the 
level of hypocrisy in its highest form. 
 
You believe in privatization.  You tried to privatize SaskPower and the 
people of Saskatchewan rejected that, and you had to back off.  The 
privatization of Canada Post is done by your cousins in Ottawa with the 
full and total support of the Tory Party here in Saskatchewan.  Let the 
mask and the deception come off. 
 
That's where it stands, Mr. Minister, and you're part and parcel of the 
erosion of rural Saskatchewan, rather than defending rural Saskatchewan as 
you should be, which is your duty to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: -- Before the House adjourns, I would at this time inform the 
House that not very long ago the report of the Provincial Auditor has been 
delivered to me.  A letter accompanying it which reads as follows: 
 

 Dear sir: In accordance with Section 14(a) of The Provincial Auditor Act, 
I present herewith my report to the Legislative Assembly for the year 
ended March 31, 1989. 

 
 In accordance with section 14(b) of the same Act, I request that you table 

this, my report for the 1989 fiscal year.  Yours truly, G.F. Wendel, 
A/Provincial Auditor. 

 
I now table the report. 
 
It being past 1 o'clock, the House stands adjourned until Monday at 2.  I 
trust you have a pleasant weekend. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 1:02 p.m. 
 


