





























































Hansard: June 04, 1990


 

 

June 4/90 
EVENING SITTING 

 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 
Bill No. 28 -- An Act respecting Investments by Saskatchewan Residents in 
Support of Community Diversification and Environmental Protection 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Would the minister introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman.  I want to introduce 
to the Assembly Mr. Graham Parsons, the associate deputy minister of 
Economic Diversification and Trade, and Mr. Bryan Hebb, the director of 
investment.  These are the only two officials I have with me this evening.  
We are ready to proceed. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- That's very encouraging, Mr. Chairman, as I begin my 
remarks to the minister.  I spoke to this matter briefly on second reading 
and I had observed that the idea of a community development mechanism was 
an old idea.  And I think the minister agrees with that in the sense that 
it has been around the literature of regional and economic development for 
decades now.  It's certainly an idea that the preceding government, the 
Blakeney government, had considered in relation to the development problems 
that existed and still exist in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
And I had pointed out to the minister the other day that, in fact, there 
are community development corporations in existence in northern 
Saskatchewan -- I should amend that and say there were.  I'm not aware of 
whether they still exist or not, but at the time of the board of inquiry 
into the proposed uranium mine at Key Lake, there were such corporations.  
And I think of Pinehouse, for example, as a community where there was an 
active corporation. 
 
They had also been in existence in the Northwest Territories, in the 
Arctic, in the Yukon.  And it's been quite a well researched idea with 
quite a lot of literature, and an idea with quite a bit of potential, given 
certain local conditions that would permit the idea to take root and to be 
properly organized and properly run. 
 
The question that faced all of us at that time was: to what extent and in 
what manner could governments -- both at the provincial and the federal 
level -- support the activities or proposed activities of community 
development corporations?  And a number of instruments were considered as 
potential instruments for doing that.  And probably the answer, at least in 
the 1960s and the 1970s, was that some combinations of instruments would be 
necessary in order for government to assist these community development 
corporations to get off the ground and to generate economic activity in the 



 

 

community for the benefit of the people who live there. 
 
And I well recall, and I believe the minister is aware, that grant 
programs, the various kinds, were considered, as well as loans and loan 
guarantees and indeed equity participation by governments in economic 
development initiatives that may be undertaken by the community development 
corporation. 
 
Now I think the fact is that these community development corporations, for 
the most part, were ideas on paper and ideas that existed in the minds of 
researchers and the minds of various consultants who were trying to fulfil 
contracts to come up with ideas about community development and didn't see 
the light of day quite as often as one might have wished. 
 
To my knowledge, the idea that the government has incorporated in this 
Bill, of guaranteed bonds, was not prominent in the literature of the time.  
I have been wondering why that is so, and I think the answer is that the 
communities where economic development was an issue in the 1960s and 1970s 
were communities where there was no wealth, Minister, where there was 
simply no pool of untapped capital that could be drawn out of the savings 
accounts and out of the mattresses, so to speak, and be put to work in the 
community.  And so they had to consider other means of getting these 
corporations up and running and funding them to the point where they could, 
in fact, undertake some activities. 
 
Now in Saskatchewan, we see really the shocking, almost shocking -- I think 
shocking is the right word -- spectacle of some of our finest, oldest 
communities, small towns, some towns not so small, small cities, that are 
really up against it as far as economic activity and local employment is 
concerned, and they're trying very, very hard to generate something. 
 
I can see that this Bill is in some small part a response by the government 
to try and assist the communities to get something going, to develop some 
industry, to develop some employment creation within their communities.  I 
think that's a first, at least the first in a long time, Minister, that 
some of these well established and wealthy communities are, in fact, facing 
economic adversity to the point where something like this is necessary.  To 
my knowledge, my experience, which extends through the '60s, '70s, and 
early '80s in regional development questions, programs such as community 
development corporations in some of the established communities in 
Saskatchewan was an unheard-of idea, an unheard-of idea.  There were, of 
course, economic development programs in existence in Saskatchewan, as 
elsewhere, where grants of various kinds were available to local industries 
to get them started or assist them in expansions, but the idea of community 
development corporations of the sort that's contemplated by this Bill had 
just never crossed anybody's mind.  The need in the late 1980s, indeed in 
1990, is clearly there but was not there in anything like the current 
situation in the 1970s. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, the minister and I are planning to have a fairly 
constructive discussion about the principles of this Bill, and we hope that 
we're able to continue that in spite of the catcalls from the peanut 
gallery there. 



 

 

 
This idea, Minister, would have, in the 1960s and 1970s, been considered a 
very conservative and limited response to the problems that would be 
encountered by a community development corporation.  If you took this idea 
of community bonds to a community like Pinehouse in northern Saskatchewan, 
where you would be prepared to guarantee bonds sold within the community, 
you would not have brought them a useful instrument; they couldn't take 
advantage of it; whereas now I see plainly what you're trying to do is to 
pull out some of the savings in the rural communities and use them to 
generate economic activity in those communities.  And in principle, 
Minister, we are not opposed to that idea.  It's not what we would have 
done, I think, but it is not a bad idea, and we're certainly prepared to 
permit passage of the Bill and give the idea a chance although, as I say, 
in the context of the whole sweep of the notion of community development, 
it is quite a conservative and limited response even for your government.  
But it is not the big deal that you, Minister, and the Premier, tried to 
make out as you announced it the other day.  It's not a bad idea but it's 
certainly not the kind of big deal that you were trumpeting across 
Saskatchewan some 10 days ago. 
 
The other problem, Minister, is that -- and I'll be coming back to this as 
we consider the Bill tonight -- the indication we have is that there isn't 
much trust out there that your government will deliver this program 
properly.  There is concern out there that this program will be used 
politically, for political purposes; that it may be more freely available, 
more available in target ridings of the Conservative Party than it is in 
other ridings; and that indeed considerations like that will bend the 
administration of this Act.  And that's a concern that is expressed very 
often to members of my caucus as we have been talking to our constituents.  
And it's a concern engendered by other situations that have been the 
subject of a lot of discussion and questions and comments in this House, 
and it's a situation that is of concern as you try to launch this program, 
and I hope that you will be aware of that and will try to ensure that this 
program is administered in a sound and appropriate manner. 
 
The other thing that I mentioned about this Bill when I spoke to it in 
second reading -- rather abbreviated comments at the time -- was that, for 
reasons that I don't fully understand, it centralizes too much control in 
the provincial government.  Now I know the problem with that -- I saw your 
press statements on that and I've heard you on it -- that you're committing 
public funds here and so you have to have some kind of mechanism to ensure 
that that is done properly. 
 
The literature, Minister, the extensive literature on the idea of community 
development through community owned and controlled corporations has always 
stressed the importance of control at the community level.  Now that was a 
rather easier idea, I know, when you're talking about a corporation to 
which money is loaned or to which grants are made or to which loans are 
guaranteed.  And you're making the motion of throwing money, and I 
understand what you're saying when you do that.  But you will agree that, 
I'm sure, that the whole concept of community development corporations 
envisioned that the money would have to come from somewhere by way of a 
loan or a grant or both. 



 

 

 
(1915) 
 
But that having been done, the whole idea of community-owned corporations 
set up for the purpose of community economic development went hand in hand 
with the idea of the community being in control of their local situation 
and of hunting out their economic development opportunities and deciding 
how to set them up and how to fund them and how to run them and how they 
would be accounted for and those related matters.  And I draw to your 
attention the obvious fact that your Bill envisages a great deal of 
control, indeed the final say in respect of whether a community development 
bond will be issued at all, and secondly and rather surprisingly, how the 
money raised locally into community development bonds will be expended. 
 
I'm distinguishing here between the project-specific bonds and the 
investment pool bonds.  And one would have thought that it wouldn't be 
necessary for you, Minister, and your government, to have the kind of 
control over how that money is in fact expended that you have taken for 
yourself in the Bill.  And there are, I believe, if I read the Bill 
correctly, two distinct ideas here.  First of all, will this community 
development bond be approved, number one, and number two, how will the 
money in these investment pools in fact be spent? 
 
And as I read the Bill, Minister, you have expressed, as I said the other 
day, you have expressed a lack of confidence in these communities to be 
able to make a lot of the decisions about economic development that we 
would expect those communities to properly have.  It's their community, 
it's their money, it's their future, it's their people who are going to be 
employed there.  And I would think it would be their decision as to what 
kind of business they're going to get in and how they're going to raise 
their money and what kind of interest, if any, they're going to pay and all 
those related matters. 
 
And my first question to you, Minister, is: on what basis do you justify 
the degree of control that the government has laid down in these Bills over 
those two matters that I've raised -- the issue of the bonds and the 
spending of the money from the investment pools? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Thank you.  I'll try to address briefly some of the 
concerns you've had. 
 
I'm pleased that we are in agreement that we have to look for different 
vehicles in which communities can address investment in their own projects 
and their own communities.  And I'm sure that the member opposite will 
agree that we cannot expect foreign people to come in and build our own 
economy, and that is something that they have been opposed to all of my 
lifetime.  I've heard the members of the NDP say we should not have foreign 
ownership and foreign control.  So we have to find a means for our local 
people to build something that is locally owned and controlled. 
 
Now it has worked to a limited extent in the co-operative system, but not 
to the extent that we have diversified Saskatchewan.  If you go back to the 
member indicating that in the past we haven't had to develop a rural 



 

 

southern Saskatchewan, I think he is in error there.  What we had was, when 
the NDP were government, we had something you'd call POW -- potash, oil, 
and wheat. And the prices of those were high, and when the price of those 
commodities are high, then people forget about economic diversification.  
And when the price falls, then we all suffer as a province and then people 
get serious about economic diversification. 
 
And so while the member says that we didn't have to diversify, I disagree.  
We should have diversified when we had the cash to do it, and the problem 
we have is that we didn't, and now we have to try to do it when we are 
short of cash.  But I agree with you.  There are savings out there that can 
be put to use. 
 
The idea of community bonds has been in the literature, as you say, for 
quite some time.  There's a big difference here though, and what we're 
doing here is that we're taking it out of the literature and we're putting 
it into practice.  And I don't really care who had the idea first.  I give 
this commitment, that it's going to work this time because it's going to be 
done somewhat differently than the idealism that is written in the 
literature over the last 20 years or so. 
 
They'll do it from a pragmatic way.  And what you have here is a real 
question of a balance between the role of government and leaving some local 
incentive.  And if you just throw cash on it and the government closes its 
eyes and doesn't look to see what's happening to this cash, the people at 
the community will take the cash and they won't have their own money at 
stake and they won't invest and they won't pay attention to what has to be 
done. 
 
This is not a process of throwing cash into local communities and saying, 
okay, there now you go, here's the cash, you go ahead and build something.  
When it's the people's own money, guaranteed by the province, they are 
guaranteed their capital, but they're guaranteed only a return if they make 
it themselves.  There is no absolute guarantee on a return. 
 
Therefore there is a balance here, and it's surprising to hear the 
opposition criticize that there is too much government control.  Maybe it's 
enlightening to hear the opposition speak in that terminology -- too much 
government control.  Maybe it's a sign of the future and some policy 
changes within the NDP that they are not in favour of so much government 
control. 
 
So I take that criticism to heart.  If you really mean there is too much 
government control, then I will try to explain why there is some government 
control.  And it's very simple.  We are not making gifts to the 
communities; we are making guarantees on their principal.  This is a 
guarantee, not a gift.  But guarantee requires some government control as 
to what kind of things the money is going into.  It has to meet the 
criteria of the Act and has to meet the test of commercial viability before 
the taxpayers should risk their guarantee on it. 
 
So we have to have a balance between some government control and local 
control.  And we've tried to achieve that in this Bill. 



 

 

 
Your question that you concluded with is . . . Maybe you can remind me here 
because it was a rather long question . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Why is there control at both the issue of the bond and at the time of 
investment.  That's your question?  All right. 
 
Let's look at this process.  First of all there has to be a review before a 
community bond corporation goes out and gathers money from the public, for 
several reasons.  You have to be certain that they are complying with the 
rules and regulations of the Act.  And you can't simply just set community 
bond corporations loose and let them raise money and then it turns out that 
some of it isn't qualified.  And they have to be following the Act.  So 
it's a preliminary screening.  I don't think it will be very onerous but it 
will be a preliminary screening. 
 
You'll find in the regulations that will be available soon that there will 
be a standard form of prospectus and a standard form of share certificate 
which will have printed right on it that this share is guaranteed in 
principal for face value by the Government of Saskatchewan.  So you will 
have standards there that have to be met by the community bond 
corporations. 
 
With respect to the actual investment, the test is commercial viability, 
and different people have different ideas of what is commercial viability.  
What we are looking at here is a twofold standard: number one, that after 
the term of the bond is expired that the investment will have a means of 
repaying at least the principal; and secondly, that it has a reasonable 
expectation of return for the community shareholders. 
 
We believe they should not be investing in matters in the community that do 
not project a return of some sort; and they have to satisfy themselves what 
that return would be, and then sell the community bonds on the basis of the 
projected return.  There has to be some government review; there is in the 
private sector and there is in this quasi-private, quasi-government sector 
here. 
 
So that's the explanation.  We will try not to have too much government 
control but we feel we have to have a little. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- It's on that last point that I want to test your thinking 
a bit further, Minister.  But before I get to that, I don't know where in 
the world you would get the impression -- you who pride yourself in the 
fact that you were once a member of this party -- where you would get the 
impression that we would want the kind of control that you have retained 
for yourself in these circumstances. 
 
On the contrary, it has long been an established policy within this party 
-- and you must recall that, Minister, if you were as active as you are 
always claiming that you were -- that we want as much local control and as 
much local community involvement as we possibly can.  And our record, 
dating all the way back to the 1940s and the development of the larger 
school units and all of those long-time institutions of Saskatchewan, are 
testimony to the fact of our belief in community involvement. 



 

 

 
An Hon. Member: -- Big brother all the way. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- My friend across the way says, big brother all the way.  
And all I can say is that my friend is believing his own rhetoric, but that 
his rhetoric is not borne out by the facts, not at all.  And the minister 
who, as I say, prides himself in the fact that once having been a member of 
this party, must be aware of that. 
 
Now, Minister, I can understand that you would want to satisfy yourself 
that a community bond issue is being set up properly and that it is in 
accordance with the Act and that it meets the requirements of the Act and 
the requirements of the regulations, whatever they're going to be.  I can 
understand that because that just makes sense.  And they're going to go out 
and they're going to raise money from the members of the community to be 
put into this investment fund on the basis of the way in which they're set 
up and the purposes for which they're set up. 
 
But that having been done, Minister, and the community development 
corporation having gotten off the ground, as it were, raised the money 
locally, got it all together; and hired their consultants to talk to them 
about what might be a viable economic activity; and their own local board 
of directors having sat down with those consultants and having worked it 
out and said okay, we're prepared to go with this, we're prepared to put 
our community money into this thing; why in the world wouldn't you be 
prepared to accept that? 
 
What is it about a handful of appointments -- up to eight appointments to 
this review board -- what is it about those eight people that enables them 
to pass upon each and every expenditure of each and every development 
corporation all across this province?  Why is that decision better made in 
Regina than it is locally?  And even if this review committee is supported 
by a large bureaucracy or any kind of a bureaucracy, what is there about 
those bureaucrats that enables them to see more clearly than the people at 
the local level and the consultants who they hire and in whom they have 
confidence?  Why is that degree of control a necessary part of this plan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Well the member opposite is mistaken in saying that I 
pride myself in having been a member of the NDP.  Let's say that I 
confessed to having been a member of the NDP.  And in 1976 I quit that 
particular party, having before Deng Xiaoping and Gorbachev and the 
revolution of eastern Europe in 1989, come to the conclusion that socialism 
would not work.  So I do confess to having been a member of your party and 
I pride myself in having seen the light and left before the rest of the 
world did the same. 
 
So I consider myself to that extent to be a revolutionary.  But the members 
opposite question whether I ever was a member.  I have my card.  I keep 
everything; I'm a pack-rat.  I can prove I was a member.  In due course I 
will table the card . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . One has to have 
proof, you know, so . . . 
 
The question here is with respect to accepting consultants' reports.  The 



 

 

bottom line is this.  You cannot delegate government to consultants.  
Because there's a guarantee by the Department of Finance, we are of the 
view that there must be a final decision made by government to invoke the 
guarantee.  We don't intend to interfere to any great extent, but there has 
to be, with respect to the guarantee, a government decision, decision made 
by a competent committee. 
 
And the bottom line is, and I think you would criticize us for that, if we 
delegated government to consultants.  Governments are elected to make 
decisions, not to delegate to consultants how to govern.  So that is the 
bottom line.  We don't intend to interfere but we have to make those 
decisions to protect the taxpayer. 
 
(1930) 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- I want to comment on your answer, Minister.  It's not a 
question of delegating the responsibility or the power to consultants.  
It's a question of whether these community development corporations, with 
their boards of directors headed as they will be by municipal reeves or 
mayors or their appointees, made up of members of the community, whether 
those people who are in a very significant way democratically appointed or 
elected representatives of their community; whether they can make the 
decision or whether that decision has to be approved by a group of eight 
people appointed by yourself or by your government sitting in Regina, 
second guessing or passing judgement on all of the little decisions made by 
community development corporations in the various communities. 
 
It's not a question of delegating this decision to consultants, it's a 
question of these boards making those decisions on the basis of advice for 
consultants as, Minister, you will be making your decision on the basis of 
advice given to you by professional people, either people on your staff or 
people retained by you from the private sector.  So it's a question of 
whose advice is the best.  And what is it about your advice that makes it 
better than the advice that's received at the local level? 
 
I'm inclined to be sympathetic for you wanting to make sure that the bond 
issue is in order, that the corporation is set up for purposes which are 
consistent with the Act.  I can see that, but I cannot see that your 
advisors are any better able to help you make a decision than the advisors 
of the community development corporation are able to advise them properly 
on making a decision about whether they will invest their money in a 
particular project. 
 
We've been through that and you can comment on it when you get up, 
Minister, but I want to leave you with that thought and the thought that 
you really have . . . your powers under this Bill are such that you really 
have these development corporations by the throat in the sense that they 
can't decide anything about how to spend their money without your say-so, 
indeed that the power of spending that money is in a real sense yours. 
 
I want to turn to the composition of this review committee.  And I think 
you will agree that that review committee is carrying the large share of 
the responsibility here, being entitled to review all projects up to $2 



 

 

million, all expenditures up to $2 million.  The composition of that 
committee is, a chairperson which is going to be appointed by you; another 
member which will be appointed by the Minister of Finance; two people from 
outside government who are going to be appointed by the cabinet; and up to 
four other members who are going to be appointed by the cabinet -- and when 
I say cabinet I mean the Lieutenant Governor in Council -- which makes a 
review committee of up to eight people, all of whom are appointed by you. 
 
Now I wonder about that, Minister, why on that committee you do not draw 
from the community development community.  And there is a large, 
significant community development community in Saskatchewan.  You will know 
who I mean -- community development committee members from all manner of 
cities and towns in Saskatchewan and indeed permanent civic employees whose 
job it is to deal with community development matters.  How come these 
people weren't brought in to sit on your review committee and assist you in 
making decisions that are not just focused in Regina but rather 
representative of the entire province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Well there's another consideration that you have to 
have with respect to the reason for a review committee, that there should 
be some degree of protection for the local investors who are guaranteed on 
the principal but have no guarantee on the return.  So the committee will 
review it to see that there is at least a reasonable chance of return on 
their investment.  And the test of commercial viability has to be there. 
 
Now the question is at the local level, you know, why should they be 
subject to this kind of supervision?  Well without the guarantee they don't 
have to have any government supervision.  They can raise money at the 
community level in the ordinary way that's been available to them for 40 or 
50 or 60 years, and then there is no supervision and there is no guarantee.  
But to get a guarantee you have to have a review because the ultimate 
responsibility stops right here.  Right here on the government side, the 
ultimate responsibility for the guarantees and the taxpayers' interest 
stops right here. 
 
So we have to have a balance.  And you cannot go headlong into community 
development without taking into account the consequences.  The communities 
are interested in development but the province has to protect the treasury 
province-wide. 
 
With respect to your suggestion that the community development community be 
involved in the review process, they would have several problems.  On any 
given occasion some of them may end up in a conflict of interest where they 
are paid by a community and also sit on a review committee.  So what do you 
do, have them exclude themselves?  It's complicated. 
 
We could appoint someone from that area and we are seeking input and 
nominations.  And if you have a potential community development officer, 
for the most part I don't think they'd want to be on the review committee.  
This is going to take a fair amount of work.  I've insisted that when this 
committee is appointed it meet weekly if necessary to expedite the 
decisions. 
 



 

 

There may be times where they have to call for more information or request 
changes, so they're going to have to meet often.  I've indicated they have 
to meet weekly if necessary. And I don't think any of the publicly paid for 
community development offices around Saskatchewan should be using their 
local taxpayers' time or be distracted from their job of finding community 
developments and economic activity for their area. 
 
So I don't think it's that workable although I've instructed my staff to 
call upon the Saskatchewan chamber of commerce for nominees, to call upon 
the Canadian Federation of Independent Business for nominees.  I'm prepared 
to have other groups propose nominees for the review committee, so the door 
is not closed there.  And we will consider those people.  But we really 
need people who may have been in business, understand business, may be 
retired and out of business so they won't have conflicts.  We don't want 
anybody working on their own schemes while they're approving other schemes.  
That's a problem.  We want it as clean as possible. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Well, Minister, we are not going to agree tonight that you 
need this kind of control over the spending of the moneys in these funds 
that are generated by the sale of bonds at the community level.  I think 
it's obvious we're not going to agree so maybe we'll just stop talking 
about it. 
 
But let's then turn to the review committee.  And I appreciate that you 
have asked for suggestions of names from the chamber and from the Canadian 
Federation of Independent Business.  You have no interest, Minister, I 
suggest -- if it's different, you should tell me -- but you have no 
interest in controlling the work of this committee.  Let me suggest that to 
you, and you can respond to it when you get up.  You have no interest in 
controlling it. 
 
And so I see no reason why you could not accept, and agree in this Bill to 
accept, the nominees of a number of interest groups, two of which you've 
mentioned.  We could add to that the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities and SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association), 
the urban municipalities.  I think the rural development corporations have 
an organization that would permit them to put forward a nominee, or at 
least even if there is no organization like that they could be asked to 
collaborate on putting forward a nominee. 
 
And the other one that occurred to me is the organization of resort 
communities or resort villages who have an interest in this kind of 
development, I would think.  And, Minister, because you have no interest in 
controlling this committee you ought to be able to accept in this Bill the 
formal requirement to name to this committee the nominees of groups like I 
have mentioned. 
 
Now I've just scratched these out and I'm not making a fully considered 
presentation to you, but I've suggested a number, and there are probably 
others that could be asked to name nominees to this review board . . . or 
the review committee.  And the whole purpose of it, Minister, is to make 
clear to the public that you're not trying to control these expenditures. 
 



 

 

It hearkens back to the point I made earlier, that there is a fear that you 
will try to use this mechanism to political advantage.  I've no idea 
whether you are or not, but there are a lot of public out there who think 
you are, and they think they have some reason for saying that.  And if you 
accepted a mechanism like this and established a review committee made up 
of people who, while you appoint them you don't really decide who they are, 
would go a long way towards allaying that fear. 
 
So my question, Minister, is whether you would agree to a friendly 
amendment to section 13 which would accomplish the suggestion that I've 
just made. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Well, Mr. Deputy Chairman, we've discussed the need 
for some government supervision because of the guarantee and because of the 
local investment factor.  And we will add to our list of people invited to 
nominate people of the review committee, those that you have suggested. 
 
However, we will not agree to have government by interest groups.  That is 
not something that is part of our democratic process.  We will consult 
interested groups, but we cannot delegate government to interest groups, 
because in the end we are responsible to the taxpayers as a whole, not to 
interest groups. 
 
But your idea of using this kind of an organization for crass political 
purposes is something I hadn't thought of.  Now it's probably 
understandable that the opposition would come up with this kind of a 
suggestion.  And it's an insult to my record of fair treatment of the 
constituents in my constituency in particular and the people whom I have 
dealt with over the years as a minister in various portfolios. 
 
I can tell you this, that in rural Saskatchewan we control all the 
constituencies but two, and those two are under consideration just as all 
the others.  Northern Saskatchewan have already indicated to the people of 
northern Saskatchewan on the TV satellite hook-up that we will look at 
special ways of including them, and I have not discounted taxpayers' equity 
in their projects if they are commercially viable.  I've said that publicly 
to a thousand people on the uplink that we had last Friday. 
 
So with respect to Regina, Saskatoon, Prince Albert, and Moose Jaw, they 
were concerned that this would be a rural program and that is not the case.  
Regina, Saskatoon, Prince Albert, Moose Jaw are just as qualified to 
organize rural development corporations as anywhere else in Saskatchewan.  
And the crucial test will be commercial viability and the desire of the 
local citizens in the larger cities to invest in projects in their city. 
 
So there is no exclusion of any part of the province.  And I do acknowledge 
that capital is harder to raise in northern Saskatchewan, and we will do 
what is possible to assist them in projects.  What we need them to do in 
northern Saskatchewan is to come up with ideas that are commercially viable 
and fit into the criteria of this particular Act. 
 
So I think you should cease and desist.  I stand on my record for fair 
treatment, and I'm not just saying that the record is enough.  You just 



 

 

watch how fair and broadly based this economic policy will be spread all 
over Saskatchewan, and then we will see if anyone dares to stand up and say 
that they are not being treated fairly. 
 
I will say this. Yes, there will be some people to which the community 
project will either not qualify under the regulations or to some that will 
not qualify under the commercial viability test, and those will be 
disaffected.  It's like when you tender and 10 people tender -- only one 
person gets the contract; nine people are unhappy.  You cannot please 
everyone, but there will be fairness if not total satisfaction. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Minister, if you were able to do just any fraction of what 
you've just said you will do in terms of fairness and equity, then you 
would be a first in the government opposite.  You would be a first.  You 
have no more chance of selling the line that you've given to me to the 
people of Saskatchewan than you have of being able to fly out of this 
Chamber. 
 
The people believe, and with all kinds of justification, that this 
government has been a patronage ridden government from the very beginning 
and that it does favours for its friends; that if you're a friend of the 
government you can get all kinds of things.  You can get a job, you can get 
a grant, you can get a special kind of treatment, you can have a chance to 
profit from this, that, or the other thing. 
 
(1945) 
 
And the stories are legion.  The examples are legion.  We've raised a few 
of them in this House and there are dozens of times that . . . stories 
lurking all through the communities.  So you have no chance of selling that 
line.  No chance at all. 
 
And we'll be interested in watching how you're going to set this up in such 
a way as to try and ensure that this program is in fact fairly 
administered.  And key to that will be the appointments that you make to 
your review committee, and I suspect that you'll be announcing that in the 
near future.  And we'll see how fair your community development bond 
program is going to be in the first instance by the personnel on that 
committee. 
 
I want to ask you with respect to the Bill, how much money the government 
plans to dedicate to this program in, say, each of the next three years.  I 
note in the Bill that the review committee shall not approve the issue and 
distribution of community bonds beyond the amount that is prescribed in the 
regulations.  Now we don't know what that is, and I hope you're in a 
position to tell us what it's going to be for the first, second, and third 
years. 
 
And also in the Bill it is clear, both in section 16(1) and 16(2), that the 
review committee is held in check and reined in sharply on this question by 
the regulation that will say the amount that the government is prepared to 
guarantee.  So can I know what those figures are for each of the first 
three years of this program? 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Chairman, we thought we would start with a $20 
million cap this year.  It hasn't been fixed, but this is a figure that 
I've used publicly.  And I've indicated that if that is too low, we were 
prepared to raise it.  And I don't know if you were present in question 
period when I indicated that if there was an uptake of qualified 
investment, we were prepared to go up to 300 million if that's what it 
takes. 
 
We're prepared to start modestly with 20 million.  We already have coming 
into the bonds office, proposals that are up to the $20 million range 
already when you add the total.  Now that doesn't mean that all of them 
would get through the review committee, but before we even pass the Bill we 
have $20 million in proposals already. 
 
So it's quite likely that we would have to raise that sum.  But we didn't 
want to start with a gigantic sum.  We'll start with a modest sum and if 
there's an uptake -- and you said earlier you had doubts about the degree 
of uptake there would be -- if there was an uptake that exceeds 20 million 
this year we would increase the guarantee accordingly.  We're not going to 
hold the people back for a lack of guarantee commitment. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- I don't recall having said that there wouldn't be uptake 
on it.  I did say that it is too little too late considering the enormity 
of the problem that has developed in Saskatchewan and that you have allowed 
to develop in Saskatchewan. 
 
Did I understand you correctly to say that you were prepared to go up to 
$300 million per year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- I said we'd be prepared -- I don't know about per year 
-- but certainly we're prepared to go up to $300 million if that's what the 
uptake is. 
 
The top end would be what the treasury could afford in guarantees.  And the 
commercial viability will be the test. And as long as there's commercial 
viability we will not stop.  We will guarantee to the very last cent that 
we can afford to guarantee so as not to slow down economic development. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Now on the question on commercial viability, I have some 
sense of how the community development corporations are going to be 
assessing their viability.  I believe they're going to be working with 
consultants in order to do that. 
 
How do you plan to review those, Minister?  Let me just leave the question 
there.  By what process do you plan to review these proposals that come in 
and bear the approval or at least the consent of or the . . . I'll say 
approval of a private consultant.  How does the department plan to deal 
with these? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the size of the project would 
determine the expertise of the consultants.  So that if it were a very 
small project the review committee would be given guide-lines either in the 



 

 

regulations or in policy that the larger the project the more they should 
question the expertise of the consultant that prepared the report, because 
to a large extent they're going to rely on the consultant's report. 
 
And so therefore, if you have very large projects we would expect that you 
would have the very largest and most experienced consultants on those large 
projects.  And as the projects are smaller you could allow less experienced 
consultants.  I would expect that most of them would be certified 
accountants, either chartered accountants or certified management 
accountants.  Most of them doing the reports would have to have that kind 
of expertise. 
 
We are discussing a proposal with the College of Commerce with respect to 
the very small community development projects, to set up as a pilot project 
a form of commercial aid similar to what we have with respect to legal aid.  
And the College of Commerce, with their interim program and their 
professors supervising, would prepare business plans for the very small 
communities with the very small projects.  We have not set a limit.  We're 
looking at projects under $100,000 total capital investment or under 
150,000, in that range. 
 
So we are negotiating with the College of Commerce and are making good 
progress.  A suggestion of theirs that there be input for their interim 
students, much like we have articling students out in the legal profession, 
so that would tie in Saskatchewan young people with their very future in 
Saskatchewan.  And with respect to what they learn on the smaller project, 
they may be then be able to apply that, after they graduate, to the larger 
projects which they may end up managing five years or three years down the 
road. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Minister, as you answered the question a thought went 
through my mind and I don't recall having read it in the Bill.  Is it 
recognized by the legislation that these corporations will have a lot of 
up-front expenditures?  The legal expenditure and the accounting 
expenditure is obvious.  But also obvious is the need for the services of 
consultants as we've just mentioned.  It may be that you can develop a 
program where some of that is available at little or no cost, but for a 
project of any size there's going to be a considerable cost to assess its 
viability through the use of economic development consultants of one sort 
or another. 
 
And is it recognized that these community development corporations will be 
able to spend funds that they have raised in order to get to the stage 
where they have projects ready to go and ready for approval by you?  Do you 
recognize their right to do that?  Or is that something where they also 
need approvals from you or the department or the review committee or 
somebody like that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- I think I gave you part of the answer when I started 
explaining to you the proposal for commercial aid, and that would be for 
the smaller projects.  And there are some already that have been brought to 
my attention that are in the $100,000 range for the total project, and you 
know, two or three employees and $100,000 of capital investment. 



 

 

 
But with respect to the larger projects, let me explain.  What you would 
have here is you would have two corporations.  One would be a community 
bond corporation that would raise capital and reinvest it in a project or 
several projects.  And what you have there is a new legal entity that is 
basically this Bill, which gives the rules for a new legal entity which is 
a community bond investment corporation.  This corporation would reinvest 
that money into a project corporation. 
 
And so what you would have is a situation where, for example, if you were 
to have something that were to manufacture glasses, if a drinking glass 
manufacturer came to the community and said, we have the expertise but we 
need some capital for a new kind of drinking glass which we think will 
sell, then there are various ways that the community bond corporation could 
raise the cost of doing the economic studies. 
 
First of all, there is a provision -- that will be in the regulations if 
it's not in the Bill; I don't believe it's in the Bill but it will be in 
the regulations -- that will say that the community bond corporations are 
not to pay operating expenses out of capital, which means that they cannot 
dip into the capital of the bond money and dip into the government's 
principal guarantee so that after five years they have used up for 
operating expenses their capital and come to the government and say, here, 
we're out of money; pay the guarantee. 
 
In order to avoid the community bond corporations doing anything like that, 
or anybody getting any ideas that that is possible, we will prohibit the 
expenditure of expenses, the operating capital, out of capital, so out of 
income.  So when they gather in the bond money, they're required to put it 
in a chartered bank or credit union.  The interest they can use for their 
expenses.  The income that comes in from the investment in the project 
company can be used, first of all, to pay expenses; and secondly, then has 
to be paid out to the bondholders as income.  What we would encourage them 
to do, because it is merely an investment corporation, is to limit their 
overhead and their expenditure.  And I would think that not everyone in the 
community has to be paid to attend directors' meetings.  I would think that 
some people could sit on the board as volunteers, and maybe if they have to 
have their mileage paid to a meeting that's another matter, but the 
expenses should be minimal. 
 
We're not creating here a cash cow for the local citizens to act as 
directors and dip money out of it.  So this is not a livelihood for anyone; 
this is a community service to serve as a director, much the same way as 
people have served on boards, recreation boards, and things throughout 
Saskatchewan for many years. 
 
Where then would they get the money?  Well the first source we would 
encourage them to look at is the entrepreneur who may own a majority or 
minority interest in the project corporation that manufactures the new 
drinking glass.  Say if this is your idea and you want investment from this 
community, you will have to pay for the feasibility study, which would have 
to be paid in any event, because if you went for bank financing or any 
other financing, they would have to pay that anyway. 



 

 

 
If this were a community bond corporation where the corporation is going to 
own primarily most of the business project, the glass manufacturing 
company, then they would have to raise it in other ways.  Maybe they would 
go to the participating municipalities in that jurisdiction and say, will 
you pay the cost of doing the economic feasibility study after which, if 
it's viable, we will apply to be registered as a community bond corporation 
and take that study with us. 
 
It is also open for them to do fund raising in the community to raise that 
money.  It's open for service clubs to put up the 5 or $10,000 that the 
community may need.  So what we're saying is that they will have to raise 
it in the community to pay the costs of starting up the corporation. 
 
Now we anticipate that you should not need a lawyer to register and 
incorporate community bond corporations. 
 
And we were going to design the regulations so that we will have more or 
less an invest-by-numbers corporation, where they fill in the standard-type 
forms, follow the standard rules, register with our department, and they 
will have their community bond corporation. 
 
We anticipate that they will have an annual statement, and we require it; 
that the expense on that should not be extremely complicated.  And I don't 
doubt that as far as an annual statement, in a community venture -- and I 
know in my community -- the accountants will be very reasonable in 
assisting this.  And you and I are lawyers and you know we've all helped 
out.  I recall our firm incorporating things as a community service with 
respect to community organizations like Lions Clubs and things like that. 
 
So we anticipate that there will be some community effort.  As a matter of 
fact, I recall incorporating some commercial ventures as a charitable 
donation for which I've never been paid, and I'm sure you know all about 
that as well.  So we all do from time to time some community work, whether 
we looked at it that way to start with or not. 
 
(2000) 
 
These are the options available to the community to raise the money to get 
started.  And we do not feel that the government should grant actual cash 
for them to do feasibility studies and for them to do the final consultancy 
for study or the business plan. 
 
And so we've drawn the line.  We've made it fair for everybody; we're not 
going to pay for anybody.  Now that doesn't mean that in northern 
Saskatchewan they couldn't piggyback on other programs.  And this is an 
interesting concept, in that municipalities, like everyone else, are 
entitled to invest up to $50,000.  So in northern Saskatchewan the 
municipality receives extra money from the government because of their 
limited tax base.  They could plough some of that back into a community 
bond corporation. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Minister, I thank you for that answer.  I want to go back 



 

 

for a moment to the question of the administration of the program in a fair 
and appropriate way that is not political.  And you spoke with some emotion 
about that and reminded us of your record and asked us to accept your 
assurance that it would be done properly. 
 
I want to follow that up with this suggestion, Minister, so that we can all 
leave here with some assurance that that will, in fact, happen -- let me 
put it that way -- some assurance that will, in fact, happen.  Can I ask 
you, Minister, to undertake to me, to us, to keep us informed, to keep me 
informed about applications that are made to you and referred by you to the 
review committee and the nature of that application and from whom it comes 
and the disposition of that application by the review committee. 
 
This is information that we're entitled to in the long run anyway, but if 
we had it at the time, if we had it in a timely way, we would be in a 
position to know that you are in fact able to deliver on your assurance.  I 
know that one mustn't jump to any conclusions about any small number of 
statistics about that, but overall we'd be able to get an impression in the 
long run that either you were or you were not administering this program in 
an appropriate way. 
 
I wonder if you could give us, give me your assurance that you are prepared 
to provide me, and through me the official opposition, with that 
information, Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Firstly, in answer to your question, there will be a 
public registry at my department that will be open to the public with 
respect to all community bond corporations registered in Saskatchewan.  We 
plan to also have that information available on the consumer and corporate 
affairs computer system with respect to corporations.  So the community 
bond corporation would show up on the computer.  If you searched the 
corporation it would say, community bond corporation; for details see 
registry at Economic Diversification and Trade. 
 
So that part will be public completely.  I will also attempt to -- and I 
can't absolutely guarantee you this because I may miss one or two -- but I 
will attempt to make public to all Saskatchewan citizens all of the 
applications received for community bond corporations and all of the 
approvals given.  And those that have not been approved will either have 
been rejected or will still be under consideration for further information, 
further compliance. 
 
So that by the time I am finished giving you all the information publicly, 
you will probably complain that I'm giving too much.  So you have my 
assurance that I am not going to hide this program -- it's not really a 
program but an economic policy -- that the success of this will be told.  I 
don't anticipate using any government advertising money but it will be made 
public and the public media can carry it if they wish. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Well that's a very interesting answer, Minister, and I 
want to give one of my own.  And that is that I will never complain that 
you are giving me too much information about the administration of this or 
any other program. 



 

 

 
I want to deal with another matter -- and again I referred to this in my 
second reading remarks -- and that is the really extraordinary amount of 
information or requirements with respect to this program that aren't 
written in the Act.  And this is a complaint that we on this side of House 
have had of your government for some considerable time. 
 
I think that your government achieved some kind of record in the 
agriculture finance Bill that it passed in this House in the last session 
where we had a Bill about very important aspects of agricultural finance 
which contained almost nothing.  You could read the Bill and not have any 
idea what government policy was, or what policy had been approved by this 
House.  What this House in fact ended up approving was a Bill that gave all 
the power to the cabinet to make the law. 
 
In this Bill we see very much the same thing, Minister -- not as bad as the 
agriculture Bill, I'll admit that, because the agriculture Bill was in a 
class by itself, but in this one I suggest that you have just left away too 
much to regulation.  For example, there is something said about the ground 
rules for eligibility in section 3(3), but in the same section you reserve 
unto yourself the power to change the ground rules for eligibility whenever 
you like just by passing a regulation or amending a regulation. 
 
And you have in section 9 the power to prohibit a community bond 
corporation from doing practically anything, any other thing.  Language 
like that, Minister, has no business in the laws of this province.  We went 
through this again and again. 
 
I remember the party that is now the government sitting in opposition and 
criticizing at great length and with great heat the government headed by 
Allan Blakeney for introducing legislation into this House which provided 
for regulation 
_making power which doesn't even compare to this -- very, very minor 
compared to this.  And it was a major, major public issue. 
 
One of the things I expected out of this government when it took power was 
that it wouldn't do this sort of thing, but here we are with all kinds of 
very important aspects of this policy to be left to a regulation, including 
a question that I've just asked you about, and that was the maximum amount 
that could be approved in any year, or the maximum amount of any bond that 
would be approved.  But I also notice in section 19, the content of the 
offering memorandum will be governed by regulations.  Now there is 
something, the content of the offering memorandum that could be easily 
dealt with in statute. 
 
You have only to look at The Business Corporations Act to see an exhaustive 
list of what has to be included in a prospectus, which is what an offering 
memorandum really is.  But if you look at section 19 of your Bill, these 
community development bonds are going to have offering memoranda that 
contain the information prescribed in the regulations.  Now what kind of a 
Bill is that to bring before us? 
 
It is well within the skill of your advisors and your department and of 



 

 

other people within government to prescribe in the Bill, plainly for 
everybody to see, what has to be included in an offering memorandum.  And 
that's just an example. When we get over to section 24, we find that you 
can pass regulations as to how a community bond corporation may hold its 
money. 
 
Well why isn't that set out in the Bill?  Why aren't we allowed the 
opportunity to debate that important question of policy in this House?  Why 
is that something that has to be passed later?  And you know, Minister, you 
know perfectly well that it is a difficult proposition under the rules of 
this House to debate the content of a regulation, to debate the 
appropriateness of regulations; whereas if you bring it before this House 
in the form of a Bill and you set out those details in the Bill, that gives 
the opposition an opportunity to make comments on it, to criticize it, to 
make suggestions which you may find valuable and which may in fact improve 
the program, and that's part of our role.  And by bringing it in in this 
way, you deny us the opportunity to play the role that we are supposed to 
play in our democracy. 
 
Finally, I refer you to section 32, which is your regulation-making 
section.  And I won't take the time of the House to go through those many, 
many sections as to the regulation power which you've reserved unto 
yourself, except to make my general point that far too much is left to 
regulation and far too little is contained in the Bill.  Some of these 
regulation-making powers contain huge amounts of policy that this House 
ought to have the opportunity to debate. 
 
In short, Minister, this is shoddy drafting.  This is shoddy policy 
development.  And it is incumbent upon you, as it is incumbent upon all 
ministers, to bring your policy ideas to this House in the form of 
legislation, where the policy itself is reflected in the legislation rather 
than reserved to the cabinet to be laid down at some later date. 
 
So what I would like you to do, Minister, is to just review some of these 
sections and see whether you can't bring amendments to this House which 
will lay out what your policy is going to be -- lay out what the 
requirements are going to be. 
 
You've indicated, I think, in your remarks earlier, that these regulations 
will be along fairly soon.  Well if they are, they must be almost ready to 
go.  And if they're almost ready to go, then they could be put in this Bill 
as substantial requirements of the legislation rather than the content of 
regulations to be passed at a later date.  Will you do that, Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Speaker, members opposite know that this Bill is 
in a complex area.  We tried to condense it down to something 
understandable.  It still is 26 pages. 
 
So you're in a complex area.  It incorporates parts of The Business 
Corporations Act; it incorporates large parts of The Business Corporations 
Act so that the general rules there would apply except as amended by this 
particular Bill.  The member opposite is a lawyer, as I am, and knows that 
these are complex legal matters; that the Bill and some of the sections 



 

 

he's referred to give us the power to expand the eligibility.  And he knows 
that if we pass absolutely every detail of the policy, regulations, and Act 
in one large thick Act, that there is no flexibility to adjust to the 
injustices that could happen.  And you'd have to wait many months to come 
back to the legislature to allow some community in, because there was a 
strict, absolute prohibition somewhere in the Bill with respect to their 
idea. 
 
It gets complex with respect to environmental bonds; it gets complex with 
respect to commercial water projects; it gets complex with respect to 
destination tourism; and you have to have a chance to amend things if there 
is some fine tuning necessary.  And the member opposite started this 
evening's discussion of the Bill by saying that this kind of concept was 
only written up in the literature and had never seriously been tried, to 
his knowledge, anywhere.  And I agree; it hasn't been tried, at least in 
Canada.  I'm not so sure of anywhere in North America. I don't know of 
anywhere in the world that something exactly like this has been tried.  And 
therefore it is not going to be perfect or flawless. 
 
There will have to be some fine tuning, and the regulation power gives us 
the power to do some fine tuning as we are working through this Bill.  And 
I know the opposition, while they may wish Saskatchewan to succeed, does 
not have any other policy for how you build Saskatchewan. And if they 
genuinely want Saskatchewan to succeed, then we have to try this experiment 
as others have been tried in the past.  With respect, this is an economic 
policy experiment that has to be fine tuned and the key is the 
implementation.  Here is a document that is legalistic, maybe somewhat 
academic in that it has never been implemented before.  The responsibility 
falls upon myself as minister to implement this, to take it from 20 years 
of academic thought to practice in Saskatchewan where we are in desperate 
need of more and more diversification to catch up from what we haven't had 
in the past. 
 
(2015) 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- I recognize as well as anyone that legislation in some 
respects needs to be flexible, and we all do.  But there's so much 
flexibility here, Minister, that you could just go around as many corners 
as you want to without straining the fabric of the Bill.  I mean, it 
practically is a power to rewrite the Bill if you so wish. 
 
Now I spent many years, and you'll know this, Minister, in the public 
service in Ottawa and in the public service in Saskatchewan, here as a 
deputy minister. And the standing instructions, both from the federal 
government in Ottawa and the provincial government in Saskatchewan, was 
that regulation-making powers were to be kept as narrow as possible -- as 
narrow as possible.  And many times, Minister, I had the experience of 
having my drafting turned back to me to redo the regulation-making section 
and to translate those regulation-making powers into substantial provisions 
in the Bill.  And in large part it was to ensure that democracy could work, 
so that the opposition could see just what your policy was. 
 
You mentioned environmental bonds and I'll mention that as a good example.  



 

 

Part IV of your Bill deals with environmental bonds.  Nobody knows what an 
environmental bond is.  You look in section (2)(b) and you see that they're 
projects that "are designed to better manage environmental resources or 
improve the quality of the environment;" and that's all it says.  That's 
all it says, except that it does say that those environmental bonds have to 
"meet the criteria prescribed for environmental bonds in the regulations." 
 
Now you're coming into this House asking us to approve this.  You're asking 
this House to approve this idea of an environmental bond.  And you tease us 
with those two lines that I mentioned earlier, and then you say you're 
going to reserve to yourself the right to lay down the criteria for those 
bonds in regulations which you've told me you intend to have ready in the 
near future and to table in the near future. 
 
Now, Minister, that's just not good enough.  We're entitled in this House 
to see those criteria and we're entitled to be able to debate them here and 
to criticize them . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Nothing is ever good enough. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- . . . and to fulfil our role as an opposition. 
 
The minister says it's never good enough.  That's right; it's not good 
enough.  This is shoddy, shoddy legislative practice and you ought to quit 
it.  And you ought to quit. 
 
Now I made that remark before, I make it again, and I sincerely invite you 
to take the draft regulations which I believe you have with respect to 
these environmental bonds and to introduce them into this legislature as an 
amendment to this Bill so that we can have an opportunity to properly 
debate them. 
 
Now, Minister, on that basis we're prepared to proceed with a clause by 
clause consideration of the Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Chairman, I think we should go to clause by clause 
consideration because if the member has specific questions, I will answer 
them and I will answer them as to what the proposed regulation would be. 
 
There has to be a degree of flexibility.  Environmental bonds have never 
ever been considered by anyone and never been put into practice.  And we 
need the flexibility there to adjust to what is necessary in a 
fast-changing area.  And I will agree that this area is not as specific as 
other parts of the Bill, nor is the specific area of the environmental 
concerns and what can be done about them, what is commercially viable with 
respect to enhancement projects for the environment. 
 
So we need a degree of flexibility there, and I acknowledge that there 
could be a little more information, but we need, especially in the 
environment, an opportunity to fine tune and adjust the changing 
conditions, changing studies.  There's scientific data that goes this way 
and then that way and we have to be able to adjust to the environmental 
concerns, and therefore we need a broadly-based environmental bond so that 



 

 

we can bring in environment enhancement projects that are commercially 
viable. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I don't want to be too long at 
this, Mr. Chairman, but I do have some concern regarding the Bill.  In 
regards to the community bond issue, there's no secret that the minister 
and I have had some meetings in regards to the community bond and at the 
time of the announcement.  And basically I'd like to just pursue some of 
that because it is definitely in the interests of the people in the city of 
Lloydminster. 
 
As you well know, Mr. Minister, the city of Lloydminster is neither all 
Saskatchewan or all Alberta.  In fact, the city of Lloydminster, if you 
understand the situation there, does have its own charter.  And I'd ask the 
member from Prince Albert to maybe pay attention.  But the city of 
Lloydminster, I guess, as some people may indicate, is kind of a unique 
situation.  It is the only border city in Canada which takes in two 
provinces.  And through that charter there are many difficulties. 
 
I guess probably in light of that charter the minister would understand 
that through education and health and many other social programs . . . And 
education, health, pretty well all pillars of government, are handled on a 
very, very different sort of way because it definitely is not an easy 
situation to represent a community that has to be under two 
administrations. 
 
My first question to you, Mr. Minister, would be this: would, in the case 
scenario, if a bonding corporation wished to form in Lloydminster, 
Saskatchewan and being under the Lloydminster charter, if this Saskatchewan 
corporation had the opportunity of accepting, would the Saskatchewan 
corporation have the opportunity of accepting some Lloydminster, Alberta 
residents within that corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- The question is very complex.  First of all, I'm not 
totally familiar with the Lloydminster charter and I will have to study it 
further.  And you in no uncertain terms invited me to come to Lloydminster 
and study the unique situation further and also study the charter 
situation.  Let me answer the question as best I can. 
 
Section 21 of the Bill would say that an individual is eligible purchaser 
if they are Saskatchewan resident.  So that, as an individual, that would 
limit it to Saskatchewan residents.  However, if you go to section (l) of 
the definition of municipalities, it says, "and includes any municipality 
administered by the Minister of Urban Affairs." 
 
I don't know what the jurisdiction of the Minister of Urban Affairs is with 
respect to the Alberta side, and we would have to study the details of the 
charter if that crosses borders from Saskatchewan to Alberta and vice 
versa.  Those details will have to be studied.  Let me say further, though, 
that other eligible purchasers are thus, and that is under section 21 of 
the Bill, "a corporation that has its head office in Saskatchewan," which 
means that if the head office of a corporation were in Lloydminster, 
Saskatchewan, there could be shareholders in that corporation resident 



 

 

outside of Saskatchewan.  But the head office must be in Saskatchewan. 
 
So it is possible that residents on the Alberta side, through the use of an 
investment corporation or a specific corporation, could invest up to 
$50,000 out of a Saskatchewan head office corporation, even though not all 
of the residents were on the Saskatchewan side.  This is a grey area that 
is technically complicated. 
 
The criteria, though, is that you must be a Saskatchewan head office 
corporation in order to be guaranteed up to the $50,000 like other 
corporations.  So you have to pay your Saskatchewan corporate income tax, 
have your head office, and do the majority of your business in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So if we can study the charter further, we will look at ways, but as far as 
individual residents of Alberta, they could invest in the project 
corporation. For example, use the example I used earlier of a company 
manufacturing a drinking glass.  That company could be owned by Alberta 
residents and have investment from the Saskatchewan side through the 
community bond corporation.  Their place of manufacture would have to be on 
the Saskatchewan side, but the company could be owned by Alberta residents 
resident on the Alberta side with an investment from Saskatchewan residents 
through their community bond corporation. 
 
So there's not a total ban, but we cannot go so far as to guarantee the 
principal investment of Alberta residents because then it gets complicated 
as to how far do we go.  Do we go to the city limits or do we go to the 
community limits or do we go as far as Vegreville?  It gets very 
complicated.  Somewhere there has to be a border.  Unfortunately in 
Lloydminster it goes right through the centre of the city and that makes it 
complicated. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I can understand that some people find 
it fairly difficult to administer in the city of Lloydminster, and no doubt 
it does at time to time give the members, both of us, the member from 
Alberta and the member, as I am, for Cutknife-Lloydminster, some fairly 
great difficulty in deciphering. 
 
But I do appreciate the fact that you will be checking the charter.  And I 
know that through the charter there has been some very direct reminders 
that the border does not end where the line is drawn as far as the map is 
concerned, but the city itself has always been regarded -- especially under 
the part where we'll finally have two administrations that are governed by 
two Tory governments -- and finally for the city of Lloydminster, they've 
been able to get along over the past eight years. And I would hate to see a 
resurgence of the fact that administrations can no longer co-operate and 
get along.  And I appreciate some of the remarks you've made here tonight. 
 
I guess a lot of those other questions will be asked.  As you have 
indicated, I have invited you into the city of Lloydminster, and I'm sure 
that the public, as well as the mayor of Lloyd, will be very interested in 
some of the remarks that you may have indeed regarding the community bond 
issue and as others. 



 

 

 
My other question to you then is, and it'll be a final question because, as 
I said, it will be difficult to really get into it in a great stage here: 
but if there are those examples that you have given where it could be an 
Albertan company but the majority of the manufacturing and everything else 
would be on the Saskatchewan side, I would think that there may not be any 
great difficulty to that. 
 
And I realize that it's pretty hard for us to, I guess, back any or 
guarantee any kinds of dollars to an Albertan resident, but I think 
probably in some essence here, even if I as a member that represents 
Lloydminster, that I could possibly get you to and have your assurance that 
you will study that charter in great detail. 
 
And with that understanding, I think, as you come away from that charter, 
you'll understand that the charter does not basically travel outside the 
city limits of Lloydminster, so you don't having to worry too much about 
Vegreville or Vermilion or other parts.  But the city of Lloydminster, I 
would indeed like you to consider when you're setting your regulations in 
regards to Bill 28. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(2030) 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Let me just say that I would encourage the Government 
of Alberta to implement a community bonds program like this.  I think it 
would do wonders in rural Alberta.  And specifically if they could put in a 
community bonds corporation Act, as long as they were guaranteeing the 
residents on the Alberta side, joint ventures would be very, very possible.  
And we would come back and amend the legislation, if necessary, to make 
joint ventures possible and community bonds in the total community in the 
Alberta-Saskatchewan side.  But we would have to have the Alberta 
government at least experimenting with community bonds in Lloydminster, 
Alberta, which I think is something that they should seriously consider. 
 
The other thing that I want to make quite clear: that the project company, 
not the community bond company, could be headquartered in Saskatchewan and 
owned by Alberta residents with its plant on the Saskatchewan side, and it 
could be owned and controlled by Alberta residents.  And the community bond 
corporation on the Saskatchewan side would have to decide what percentage 
of ownership it would want to take in that company.  The project company is 
not limited just to Saskatchewan shareholders, so there is some room here.  
We'll have to see what the details are. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 5 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, this section 
allows you to go to court to do some pretty heavy things as far as these 



 

 

community bond corporations are concerned.  And one of the things that you 
can do is apply to the court to liquidate and dissolve the community bond 
corporation.  I'd like you to tell the House in what circumstances you'd 
exercise a power like that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Chairman, the answer to the question is that this 
is yes, a powerful tool in the hands of a minister, and power cannot be 
abused.  I understand the power in this, and because I personally 
supervised the drafting of this Bill, I understand all of the reasons why 
these clauses are in this Bill.  As I said earlier, this is a new legal 
entity.  And with respect to this new legal entity, it is in the hands of 
the government to protect the minority shareholders where necessary.  This 
section gives the government, the minister, the power to make community 
bond corporations function in the interests of the community.  It gives us 
the power to prevent the misuse of funds used for improper purposes.  It 
helps us protect minority shareholders.  It prevents the company from doing 
things that are financially contrary to the Act, unqualified investments.  
It prevents the company, if it should fail to make financial disclosure as 
required under the Act, so that its bondholders have information.  It gives 
the minister some clout to enforce this without having community 
bondholders, who may be minority shareholders with small interest, try to 
take their own corporation to court. 
 
So the minister has the power to make them comply, and this is in the 
interest of protecting the little guy.  And that's why we need that kind of 
powerful power, whereas The Business Corporations Act doesn't give the 
little guy that kind of protection.  And co-operatives, they usually don't 
need it; and non-profit organizations get a little squabbling once in a 
while.  But in this kind of legal entity gives us the power to protect the 
little guy, and we intend not to abuse that power. 
 
Clause 5 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 6 to 16 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 17 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, clause 17 is the 
clause that says that the Minister of Finance may guarantee these bonds.  
Now we've been through earlier in this committee the review committee and 
its mandate and the necessity for the review committee, and I questioned 
the necessity of that committee and I questioned its composition.  But this 
section adds another layer of administration to this concept that I frankly 
don't understand.  If it's necessary to have a review committee, as you 
have said, and if it's necessary that it have the kind of power that it 
has, and if it is necessary that it be staffed in the way that it is, then 
how is it that at the end of all of that process, at the end of all of that 
process, the Minister of Finance still appears to have a discretion not to 
issue the guarantee?  What kind of program is this when one of your 
compatriot cabinet ministers have the right to throw a spoke in your wheel 
and say that, I won't guarantee this? 
 
And what I'm referring to, of course, is that the legislation doesn't 



 

 

require the minister to guarantee. It says he "may guarantee."  And you and 
I know that that means he may not guarantee either, it's up to him.  Why 
would we leave him with that discretion? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, originally I had drafted it to say 
"shall," but the Minister of Finance is a tough guy and he said, no, if I 
got to guarantee this, I want to have some absolute say.  The Minister of 
Finance is not so certain that maybe the Minister of Economic 
Diversification and Trade doesn't get wrapped up in all this economic 
development and appoint a committee of review that's too lenient and that 
the public purse is not protected.  So this tough guy, the Minister of 
Finance, insists that he may guarantee them.  And he says that he will not 
abuse his power of the purse unnecessarily and that subject to him having 
money in the purse to guarantee this, he will generally go along with what 
we've proposed. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- What I think we've seen develop tonight, Minister, is that 
you don't trust the community development corporations with respect to its 
proposal, so you retain the right to approve or disapprove.  And then we 
have the Minister of Finance coming along saying he doesn't quite trust you 
either, so he retains the right to approve or not approve.  Do you think I 
have it right? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Chairman, I believe the Minister of Finance trusts 
the Minister of Economic Diversification and Trade.  It's just that the 
Minister of Finance is a little short of cash and so he gets stubborn about 
these kind of things.  And if I were Minister of Finance, I think I would 
take his position as well. 
 
In the front benches here, we will work out these details of how much we 
can guarantee.  The Minister of Finance indicates that the ultimate 
jurisdiction over the finances of Saskatchewan has to be in the hands of 
the Minister of Finance, not in the hands of the Minister of Economic 
Diversification and Trade who is maybe a bit more of a risk taker than the 
Minister of Finance. 
 
Clause 17 agreed to. 
 
Clause 18 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- One short question there.  As I read section 18(1), the 
government isn't responsible in its guarantee until the maturity date of 
the community bond.  What happens, Minister, if this is a project bond and 
the project goes down the tubes and it's bankrupt and there is no 
possibility of it being revived?  Are you really going to make the 
bondholders wait for the full term of the maturity of the bond, which may 
be up to 10 years, before they're entitled to claim their guarantee on 
their principal, probably without interest? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, if you look further on to 
subsection (4) you will see that (4)(a) where the owner of a community bond 
dies, the Government of Saskatchewan shall pay on its guarantee as soon as 
practical, so we wouldn't hold up the administration of estates; (b) in the 



 

 

case of a project bond where there's a receivership order, bankruptcy, 
etc., or any other conditions prescribed in the regulations. 
 
So that we expect that there will be some failures in the project 
corporations.  We are realistic.  What we want to do is keep them down to a 
minimum and have many more winners than losers.  So in order to reduce the 
amount that has to be paid out, we insist on all the criteria we've talked 
about earlier, a review committee, to reduce the chances of having losers 
as compared to winners with respect to local development. 
 
So there, that section and the regulation power give us the power to pay 
out sooner if there were a failure, so that the citizens wouldn't have to 
drive past their local factory and say, that sure makes me angry; I have to 
wait three more years to get my principal guarantee.  So there is that 
flexibility in the regulations, and hopefully we don't have  
 Dto use it. 
 
But I'm realistic.  I know that there will be the occasional failure, and 
we expect that.  We've taken that into account.  The government here is 
sharing the risk on the principal, and the local investors are sharing the 
risk with respect to their return. 
 
Clause 18 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 19 to 24 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 25 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, clause 25 deals with the 
matter of environmental bonds, and I was critical of you a few moments ago 
for including so little information in the Bill and leaving yourself such a 
wide power to make regulations setting out the criteria for environmental 
bonds. 
 
Now I believe that you indicated earlier that you have a fairly good idea 
of what those criteria are.  And could you enlighten the House as to the 
contents of the regulations that you propose to pass under section 25. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- An environmental bond is basically a community 
development bond with some added features. And let me list them for you. 
 
And it wouldn't have to be as much of a community base.  It could be a 
provincial, or a city-wide, or an area base that people who are concerned 
about a particular problem in the environment could form a community bond 
corporation and find a head office somewhere in Saskatchewan where the 
local municipality would authorize the formation of a community bond 
corporation that would be an environmental bond corporation. 
 
Secondly, it must be a project that enhances the environment, not that it 
just complies with the environmental rules of the province, but it enhances 
the environment. 
 
If that is the case and it's so designated by the Department of the 



 

 

Environment then the question that it should be commercially viable but it 
allows in an environmental bond a broader base.  So whereas community bonds 
would be in processing, manufacturing, destination tourism, commercial 
water projects, the base is broadened to anything that enhances the 
environment and is commercially viable to the extent that there is 
provision made for the repayment of the principal after the 5 or 10 years, 
or maybe some people are prepared to forego a return for the social and 
environmental benefits of that kind of a project or a bond. 
 
(2045) 
 
In addition, an environmental project would be considered by the 
environmental protection fund for government equity in the project 
depending on the value to the enhancement of the environment. 
 
And lastly, we would consider some degree of return, a varying rate 
depending on the project which would be a principal guarantee and possibly 
a return guarantee of a certain sum depending on the social value of the 
project and the environmental value of the project.  This really is kind of 
a super community bond directed at environmental enhancement. 
 
Clause 25 agreed to. 
 
Clause 26 to 35 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- I'd like to thank the minister and his officials. 
 

Bill No. 2 -- An Act respecting Family and Community Services 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- I'd ask the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman.  On my right, the president of the 
Family Foundation, Dan Perrins; immediately behind him, Shelley Hoover, 
policy analyst; and administrative co-ordinator, Linda S. Martin, behind 
me. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I wish to join the 
minister in welcoming his officials this evening.  I would like to just 
make a few comments if I could and then I have some questions that I'm sure 
that the minister will be able to answer.  And as I've made fairly 
extensive comments last day, I will be fairly short here.  But I would like 
to make a few comments. 
 
I indicated the other day that I hoped that the ministry of the Family, 
which I see as having a lot of potential . . . I have to see it that way; 
I've been the critic of the Family and youth for the last couple of years, 
and I credit the Leader of the Opposition with recognizing the importance 
of assessing the impact of government policies on families and communities.  
So I see the potential of the Family ministry.  And my fear is, from what 



 

 

I've seen to date though, it may be a bit of a PR (public relations) 
exercise and I sincerely hope that that isn't the case. 
 
I indicated last time that I do see the Minister of the Family as a very 
sincere minister, and I see him working very hard.  I am supportive to the 
thrust of the mandate; we on this side are supportive to the thrust of the 
mandate.  I have some specific questions, but we are supportive to the 
mandate.  In fact I would suggest that the Minister of Health and Social 
Services and Education particularly, should in fact be following this 
mandate already, as of course should the Minister of Labour and Employment. 
 
I would like to say that Saskatchewan does have a proud history of 
co-operation and of supporting families.  The families have been a place of 
security for many years in this province.  We valued our families; we 
valued our young people.  In fact the family in Saskatchewan is the 
backbone of the fabric of our society. 
 
So we have a very proud record in the province and if I could, I would say 
that our party, successive CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation), NDP 
governments indeed have a good record in working with families over the 
years, over many, many years, to build the Saskatchewan pride, to build a 
strong sense of community that we see in Saskatchewan today. 
 
So at the outset I want to say that we very much support the notion of 
supporting families.  We endorse that.  We endorse the notion of community 
building, and we in fact have had a proud record in working with 
Saskatchewan people, as governments, to do that. 
 
The other thing I talked about the other day was, well, a mandate is one 
thing.  A mandate is a series of words that are important because that 
gives some direction in terms of the objectives you're trying to pursue.  
But I must say that there also has to be a will to carry out that mandate.  
And I would say that the record of this government, while I won't go into 
the detail that I did last time, but the record of this government in 
supporting, or lack thereof, families and communities is something that is 
a major concern to almost all of Saskatchewan. 
 
We know that our economy is performing very, very poorly.  We know that 
we've got a very, very poor record of job creation, the only province that 
in fact last year had a net decrease in the employment . . . in the labour 
force.  We know that we have about 36, 38,000 people unemployed.  We know 
that Saskatchewan small-business families in 1987 to '89 had record levels 
of bankruptcies, and we know that 1990 the bankruptcy rate is up some 22 
per cent over this time last year. 
 
We're talking about family businesses here to a large degree, small family 
businesses.  Of course we know the situation in agriculture.  We've spent 
lots of time this session talking about the lack of long-term policies in 
agriculture, and given the eight years that this government has been in 
power and the five years that the federal government has been in power, we 
really have not come to grips with land transfers from generation to 
generation.  With the debt on the farm, we're losing some 1,000 families 
off the farm every single year.  And we really are kind of sad on this side 



 

 

of the House that the government has chosen on three occasions not to join 
us to express our concerns about the high interest rate policy of the 
federal government. 
 
We're very concerned about the ever increasing rate and number of young 
people who are forced to leave the province, and young families.  We're 
concerned about the fact that there's a very high level of taxation on 
families in Saskatchewan, the debt load.  We know that today in question 
period, we're aware that we've now had two credit rating reductions, drops, 
in the last week or so.  And that we find out that we have some $4 billion 
due in interest over the next -- not in interest, but in payments -- over 
the next year.  And that's placing a tremendous burden on Saskatchewan 
families. 
 
We know of course as I talked about last day, the situation in the 
education field, whether it's K to 12 or the technical system or the 
universities, where those systems are in a crisis.  And we know that the 
special education moneys have been severely cut back by this government, 
and I'm referring specifically to a call I got today regarding cut-backs to 
the hearing impaired.  There's a major concern about that. 
 
We know that since this Family minister came to power, and I don't blame 
him necessarily, but we've gone from having the second highest rate of 
family poverty to now having the highest rate of family poverty in all of 
Canada.  We certainly are concerned about health care underfunding to 
seniors whether it's home care or the prescription drug program.  And so we 
are concerned about cuts to important services that affect families. 
 
No, if we're really concerned about supporting families then we would 
provide sufficient funding for transition houses.  We would provide 
sufficient funding to support native farm stress and sufficient funding for 
rural communities.  We had a budget cut in Rural Development in the last 
budget.  So on that level, where the specific impact of the policies of 
this government have affected families, I'm very concerned about that. 
 
There is another level that I'm also concerned as to how they impact on 
families, and that's been the, I suppose the lack of honesty with this 
government in terms of its promises, the election promises, whether that's 
in regards to taxes or health care or privatization.  The government said 
it wouldn't privatize and then tried to do just that. 
 
And we're concerned about the lack of accountability. Again that affects 
families, the fact that the provincial auditor said that the government is 
breaking its own laws and not being accountable. 
 
We're concerned about the fact that the mismanagement and waste of hundreds 
of millions of dollars by the government has a tremendous impact on 
families in that it takes away money that could be supportive to programs 
that families need, plus it puts our young people into a high future debt 
situation. 
 
The sell-off of our assets again will affect our ability to recover and to 
provide supports and services and jobs and opportunities for our young 



 

 

people, not to mention that those took many, many years to build up. 
 
So the sense of mismanagement on the one hand, and sort of the integrity 
question on the other as we blame families as we have a confrontationist 
approach by this government, is something that I think is a concern to 
many, many families in the province and to many communities. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, the point I'm trying to make is that most of the 
indicators that affect the health and the viability and the functioning of 
Saskatchewan families and communities, most of the indicators are, in fact, 
going the wrong way.  And I have some hope that through your family 
ministry that you will help to turn that situation around, that you will be 
able to convince the Premier and the Minister of Finance and some of the 
other colleagues in the front benches to in fact make the indicators go in 
a more positive direction. 
 
So I would like to say that I support your mandate; we support your 
mandate.  I support your ministry, I support the notion of building 
communities and supporting families, and I wish you well in your 
endeavours.  One of the concerns I do have is that I didn't really see a 
plan in the throne speech, and I'm not going to get into that, but I really 
didn't see a plan in the throne speech to deal with the indicators here 
that I'm suggesting are going in the wrong direction. 
 
In the budget -- and I assume that this is because of some input by you and 
I'll give you credit for that -- there was some acknowledgement of waste 
and mismanagement; there was some acknowledgement of the issue of poverty.  
And I would thank you if you convinced your ministers that in fact that 
situation does exist because that's plain to the vast majority of 
Saskatchewan people.  And I assume that you had some input into the budget 
to make that acknowledgement because that was a first that we've heard your 
government acknowledge that. 
 
However, I was concerned in the budget that there were cuts to youth 
unemployment programs, that ordinary families . . . In fact, the impact of 
the budget has been to put more debt on families; to in fact, despite what 
the Minister of Finance said, has been to increase the debt load on 
families, the taxation increases.  I'm concerned about rural development 
cuts, and the university and just general educational underfunding. 
 
(2100) 
 
I guess I'm also concerned, and I'll ask you some questions about this 
later in estimates, about the $740,000 that was designated to combat 
poverty.  I guess it was designated to combat poverty.  We've had some 
conflicting messages about what that $740,000 is about or is for, and I 
will be asking you some questions regarding that. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, $740,000, which equals about the yearly salary and 
benefits of Chuck Childers, is simply not enough to feed and deal with some 
64,000 children who are officially living below the poverty line in 
Saskatchewan.  Now I know you're shaking your head as if that isn't true.  
I'm talking about official StatsCanada poverty figures, and so if those 



 

 

aren't correct I would ask you to correct StatsCanada on that. 
 
But there's money for Chuck Childers, there's money for Cargill, there's 
money for WESTBRIDGE, there's money for Weyerhaeuser and Guy Montpetit and 
the whole GigaText fiasco. 
 
So I would suggest that some families are doing very well, and I know that 
you will want to continue to advocate with your colleagues to get more 
money for employment programs, more money for education and health care, 
and more money for poor people, and money to subsidize food to the North, 
which used to be the case in Saskatchewan but isn't any more. 
 
Mr. Minister, as I say, I'm not blaming you for the record, the last eight 
years of this government, as it has placed incredible stress on families.  
In fact, I'm putting my hope in you that you will be able to help deal with 
the situation. 
 
I will conclude by saying that I hope that you will suggest to the minister 
from Melville, the Minister of Labour and Employment, that Saskatchewan 
people with Saskatchewan families are not 25 years behind the rest of the 
world.  But in fact we have been pioneers and we have led the world in many 
ways -- in health care and education and economic development.  So I hope 
that, through your influence, you will convince him that we in Saskatchewan 
are not a quarter of a decade behind the rest of the world. 
 
I hope you will use your mandate to support families in a meaningful way.  
I hope you will use your mandate and your influence to make sure that 
average Saskatchewan citizens are treated to fair taxation, that 
small-business people will get some support from your government.  All 
they're asking for is the same kind of benefits that Cargill has and the 
big players.  And I know that you will be pursuing fairer policies for 
small-business people with your colleagues. 
 
I know that you will be just as concerned as Saskatchewan young people and 
families are about the 17 per cent unemployment rate for young people, and 
the fact that our number of people in the labour force is shrinking.  I 
know that will be a concern of yours because that has a direct impact on 
families and communities as they migrate to other provinces. 
 
I know that you support good health care.  I've heard you say that and I 
believe that you do.  I know that you support good education.  You have 
three or four of your daughters in university.  And I know that you would 
want to see all young people in Saskatchewan get that opportunity to go to 
university to get an education which will help them to adapt to the 
changing world, and to not only adapt but to help influence the direction 
in which those changes occur so that they occur for the better in terms of 
supporting our families and our communities. 
 
I know, Mr. Minister, as Minister of the Family, when money is so badly 
needed, that you will hold your ministers accountable to make sure that 
waste and mismanagement is dealt with and that there will be better 
financial accounting to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 



 

 

Mr. Minister, I would suggest that if you put people first as a Minister of 
the Family, that if you put people first and I believe you will, and if you 
influence your colleagues to restore fairness in Saskatchewan, fairness to 
ordinary families, and that you help provide security and opportunities, 
and in essence you help provide -- contrary to what the Red Cross study 
says -- that if you help to provide hope for young people in Saskatchewan 
families, then you will have made a great contribution.  And I will applaud 
you for that contribution, Mr. Minister, as I do for your outreach workers 
in North Battleford.  I commend you for responding with the community of 
North Battleford to that need. 
 
Now I know that you will be asking yourself the question, why are there 
street gangs in North Battleford anyway?  Does it relate -- you'll be 
looking with your officials -- does it relate to lack of employment?  Does 
it relate to poverty?  Are there street gangs because of lack of recreation 
and social opportunities in North Battleford?  I know that you'll be 
looking at those questions. 
 
And I give you credit for providing, with the community of North 
Battleford, for providing emergency support to that community, and view 
that as an important emergency solution, and that you will be addressing 
the long-term root causes with the community, of the fact that street gangs 
could evolve. 
 
I also have given you credit for sponsoring the family forums, and I do so 
again this evening.  I give you credit for your community consultations.  
And as I say, if you impact on your government to make sure that there are 
opportunities for employment and education for young people, so our seniors 
can live in dignity and not in poverty, and that there can be a sense of 
hope provided to our families, that I will applaud you for that. 
 
Mr. Minister, I would like to turn to the Bill for a minute if I could.  I 
guess one of the things that I'm not aware of from the Bill is what powers 
-- I understand the mandate -- I'm not aware of what powers you actually 
will have as Minister of the Family under this Bill, what powers you will 
have with your colleagues in cabinet, whether it'll be the powers only of 
persuasion or whether you have some money at your disposal apart from the 
740,000 in the budget, or where you will access your money to carry out the 
support to families that you refer to in a number of the sections. 
 
I have four or five questions that I would like to ask you but I guess that 
would be the first one.  Mr. Minister, would you like me to give you these 
one at a time?  One at a time? 
 
Okay, I'd be interested in the powers that you have in your new duties as 
family ministry in terms of the resources that you're going to need to 
support families and communities. 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- Well much of what you said tonight was just a repeat of 
what you said the other night in your opening remarks, and I kind of had 
the feeling that I was responsible for just about everything since the 
Second World War.  And I don't mean to be flippant about it because I get 
credit for nothing and criticism for virtually everything this government's 



 

 

done since 1982. 
 
Now you mentioned young people leaving this province.  I grew up in this 
province, been my entire life in this province.  Every one of my friends 
back in the 1950s left this province because there were no jobs for them.  
Virtually every one of my friends left this province.  They went to 
Alberta, they went to British Columbia, they went to Ontario, they went to 
United States.  Virtually every one of my friends that I grew up with left 
this province because educated as they were, they left unless they became 
doctors or lawyers or teachers. 
 
And at the same time . . . I guess the question is, we had a million people 
in this province in 1932 -- a million people in 1932.  Well today we've got 
a million people, 1932.  In 1932 this province was larger than Alberta.  
But how come Alberta's twice as large as us now?  Because all the people of 
Saskatchewan went to Alberta.  Alberta, you might recall, has been 
virtually a Tory government for ever.  Social Credit before that, which is 
virtually Tory.  And why have the people of this province gone?  Let's just 
take the last 15 years, for instance.  Let's start in 1970-1971. 
 
During the times when oil prices were high and mineral prices were high in 
all those provinces, what did Alberta do with their money during that time?  
They diversified and created an infrastructure within their province to 
create a variety of types of jobs.  Not a few types of jobs, but a variety 
of types of jobs.  They expanded, they diversified in Alberta back in the 
1970s.  And virtually a lot of the young people in this province left 
during that time. 
 
And what did we do with our money in Saskatchewan in the 1970s?  Well I 
don't want to get into that litany of criticism that we hear here very 
often about the government in 1970 spending their money on potash plants 
that we already own.  Why didn't you diversify?  Why didn't the NDP 
government diversify, create the infrastructure that Alberta and British 
Columbia did during those years when mineral prices and prices were high 
for all the products that were available in this province.  We had a lot of 
money in those days.  Where did it all go?  It certainly didn't go into 
creating jobs for young people in Saskatchewan.  So you want to know why 
young people leave this province today as they did back in 1950?  Because 
the jobs are in Alberta; the jobs are in British Columbia.  Because those 
governments had the foresight to see that the only way you can keep people 
in a province is to provide them with good jobs.  All right? 
 
Now having said that, let's talk about increases in health.  I mean I don't 
have to tell you that a substantial increase in health costs, or health 
spending by this government since 1982 -- it's virtually doubled. 
 
And education, increases in education -- and you know something about 
education -- have increased as well, substantially since 1982.  There have 
been a large expansion, particularly in this last budget in terms of 
regional colleges.  Why expand into regional colleges?  Why do we want to 
spend money in rural Saskatchewan for rural Saskatchewan regional colleges?  
Because the people in rural Saskatchewan want to have access to education 
just as well as the people in the cities do. 



 

 

 
You know, if you live in Swift Current and you have to go to university in 
Regina or university in Saskatoon, the biggest expense you have is not the 
cost of getting into the university, but the day-to-day cost, the living 
cost, living in Saskatoon or living in Regina or Calgary or wherever they 
want to go to university.  If we can offer first and second university 
classes in Swift Current, in Melfort, in Yorkton, and a variety of other 
areas in the province, the young people living in those cities and those 
towns can go from their home to go to school.  If they live 15 or 20 miles 
or 30 miles out of town they can drive to those schools during the day; 
they can live at home.  It also gives them the opportunity to hold 
part-time jobs in the community in which they live, so their expenses are 
cut substantially. 
 
The reason you expand in rural Saskatchewan, the regional colleges, is 
because you allow thousands more young people the opportunity to get a 
university degree.  You can't continue to fill the universities in Regina 
and Saskatoon.  Why should we, when we can provide an education out in 
rural Saskatchewan?  They deserve good education just as well as they do in 
Regina, or living in Saskatoon.  It's all very well for those of you who 
grew up in Saskatoon, 15 minutes from the university, and say, you're not 
spending enough money on the university in Saskatoon. 
 
What about the people who live 2 or 300 miles away, like in Swift Current 
or in some other place?  They can go to school there.  There's a tremendous 
advantage in that.  That's where the money for colleges and university 
should be going.  It should be going into the regional colleges.  The 
University of Regina and the university of Saskatoon have been doing very 
well, thank you. 
 
Now you talked about youth unemployment, and you said youth employment for 
the summer.  And you said that there had been a substantial cut in youth 
employment for summer students.  The fact of the matter is there's exactly 
the same number as last year.  I don't know how many times I have to tell 
you that.  I must have said it 15 times in this House. 
 
What we did was took $500,000 from Public Service Commission and put it 
into an environmental youth core.  It's the same amount of money.  That 
$500,000 or half a million dollars has gone into a youth corps for 
environmental projects in Saskatchewan.  The money is exactly the same for 
summer student employment.  Now try to remember that, will you? 
 
You talk about 64,000 hungry children in this province.  There are not 
64,000 hungry children in this province.  There may be 64,000 children 
living in homes below the low income cut-off, but that doesn't mean they're 
all hungry.  What you're suggesting is that the people of this province, 
the poorer people, if I may phrase it that way, are not feeding their 
children.  Not only is it an insult to the people, not only is it wrong, 
but it's an insult to the people of this province who live low income. 
 
Don't think for one minute that the people of this province who are living 
on lower incomes are not feeding their children.  So stop using that 64,000 
hungry children number; it just doesn't work.  It's an insult to the people 



 

 

out there and nobody believes it. 
 
(2115) 
 
Now let's just get to the seniors.  Home care. He talked about home care -- 
$30,405,200 is budgeted for home care in the 1990-1991 budget.  That's a 
128.6 per cent increase since 1981-1982 -- 126 per cent increase since 1982 
in home care.  And I think that the Directions on Health Care that recently 
came down, that report, indicated that seniors want more home care.  And if 
that's what they want and that's what they indicate to this government, I 
wouldn't be a bit surprised if that's the way it goes, because home care is 
working very well. 
 
Now let's talk about the Saskatchewan income plan which is of course, as 
you know, a program that tops up seniors' income.  The current maximum 
benefits of $80 per month to a single senior represents a 220 per cent 
increase over benefit levels of 1983-1984.  The current maximum benefits of 
$135 per month to a senior couple represents a 200 per cent increase over 
maximum benefits in 1983-1984.  And as was indicated in the budget, we're 
going to increase it even further. 
 
Now you indicated that since I came on board as a cabinet minister in 
October that I've done virtually nothing.  The member from Prince Albert 
said that I was nothing but a dupe for this government.  He felt sorry for 
me because I'm nothing but a dupe for this government. 
 
Let me point out to you the things that have happened since October 3, 
1989.  First of all the Saskatoon family support centres, now I'm not 
responsible for all these.  I did however have input into them because 
these are programs that have been introduced by this government since 
October 3, 1989 and I feel that I was part of that process. 
 
Saskatoon family support centre, established in June 1989 to establish 
programs to help strengthen families and prevent family breakdown.  
Services include: parenting education; outreach to victims of family 
violence; drop-in support services; teen-young parent program; child care 
to parents involved in family support centre services. 
 
School-based family centres in five urban schools -- two in Regina and 
three in Saskatoon. 
 
This is a situation in which a social worker, or a home economist -- 
whichever the school wishes to hire -- works directly with the benefit . . 
. with the parents, or the family I should say, of a student who has been 
identified by the teacher as having a problem.  This is the famous Haultain 
project that started in Regina -- in Haultain school in Regina -- has now 
expanded to other schools in the province. 
 
Now increasing minimum wage from $4.50 an hour to 4.75, January 1, to $5 an 
hour effective July 1. 
 
Forums about families; 57 forums about families have been held in 
communities across the province involving more than 14,000 -- actually it's 



 

 

closer to 15,000 -- participants. 
 
Seven hundred and forty thousand dollars for addressing the problem of 
child hunger.  The province will provide a long-term strategy of family 
support, education, and parental involvement, as well as short-term 
co-ordinating feeding. 
 
The province will be responsive to the regional, community, and educational 
needs which communities themselves have identified.  Now we've been around 
this province since early in . . . late in October actually, I suppose, 
early November probably, on a series of consultations.  And we have now the 
result -- the North Battleford two street workers was a response to that. 
 
We are now waiting.  I had a letter in my office from the mayor of Regina 
indicating that they are studying their program and very shortly will get 
back to us.  We've been waiting for that, from Mayor Archer in Regina, for 
their response to that.  We know that part of the problem exists in the 
community schools, and there's an area that we'd like to look at a little 
more seriously. 
 
We are waiting for other communities to come forward with their responses 
to that.  Saskatoon has asked for support for the child hunger and 
education program.  I think they're going to get what they're asking for; 
we haven't completed the arrangements with them yet. 
 
Prince Albert is asking for two street workers, as North Battleford did, 
because in Prince Albert they told me that the people of Prince Albert will 
feed the children of Prince Albert.  They say, we need two street workers 
in Prince Albert.  There are a variety of street . . . a variety of feeding 
programs going on in Prince Albert right now which are very effective.  
They're going to try to expand that, and I think we'll be able to help 
them.  But they want two street workers in Prince Albert, and I think 
probably they're going to get them. 
 
Now let's talk about child counsellors in transition houses, an area that I 
think is particularly important.  And I work very closely with the Minister 
of Social Services on here, on this particular issue, and I compliment him 
for responding so quickly to the issue. 
 
Child counsellors are approved for three transition houses; they work with 
youngsters who are a product of a home with a spousal abuse situation.  
Interval House in Saskatoon, YWCA, the Isobel Johnson Shelter here in 
Regina, and the Regina Transition House now have child counsellors working 
directly with the children.  Prior to this there were no counsellors 
working . . . well there was one in the transition house in Regina but that 
was short-term project.  But now there are three child-care workers -- 
counsellors -- working with children who come from abused homes. 
 
The social assistance plan which was announced recently by the Minister of 
Social Services -- $10 per month per child increase effective June 1, 1990 
-- so that's already in effect, an increase of approximately $3 million a 
year, and $10 per month increase for shelter and utilities.  It's a total 
in the SAP (Saskatchewan assistance plan) increases of $4 million.  That 



 

 

was announced just a few weeks ago. 
 
The SIP (Saskatchewan income plan) increase provides additional funds to 
seniors who have little or no income other than old age security, that is 
OAS (old age security) -- I spoke about this a few minutes ago, and the 
guaranteed income supplement paid by the federal government -- an increase 
of $1.3 million has been approved.  One point three million dollars has 
been approved.  That's over and above last year.  The administration of the 
increase is currently under examination. 
 
And finally, automatic enforcement of maintenance orders: since March of 
1986 this program has recovered more than $14.5 million on behalf of 
claimants, relieving them of the burden and the expense of enforcing court 
orders for maintenance.  In other words, claimants -- a wife or a husband 
-- who are suppose to be receiving money from their spouse, have been 
ordered by the court to pay it, are not receiving it; they have recovered 
$14.5 million. 
 
So quite frankly not only does this department have potential, but I think 
we're doing the job. 
 
Now the question you asked was: what powers does the minister have under 
this Act, okay?  The family foundation . . . Your criticism has been that 
the family foundation is a powerless department created only for public 
relations purposes or political purposes. 
 
Here's the response: the family foundation is needed to provide a program 
of policy focussed for issues affecting the family -- a program and policy 
focussed for issues affecting the family.  The foundation is designed to 
serve all Saskatchewan families, not just the vulnerable families.  Ten per 
cent of the population in this province receives over $400 million a year 
from Social Services.  What about the other 90 per cent?  We're interested 
in those as well.  The Act would provide the minister with the power to: 
consult, co-ordinate, and develop community services, conduct research, 
communicate with rural and urban families and with a wide range of 
organizations affecting families -- and we've been doing that, we've met 
with hundred of groups around this province, out in their communities as 
well as in my office --  provide policy leadership on family issues 
including the power to develop policies and programs to improve family 
relations, monitor all aspects of government for their impact on families 
and recommend changes, recommend ways of improving family living skills, 
evaluate the impact of government economic and social policies on families. 
 
Forums about families is an example of the family foundation assisting 
community groups and organizations identifying community needs and conduct 
workshops that focus on issues critical to the family.  These are workshops 
that they, themself, design because they identify the problems in their 
community.  They organize the community workshops or the family forums.  We 
supply a little bit of money to them for it, but they do most of the work 
because that's the way they want. 
 
Taking the lead role on the hunger issue is an example of the family 
foundation working across government departments to meet the needs of 



 

 

province's hungry children. 
 
And, finally, will the minister have the capability of providing funding.  
I think that was also part of your first question.  The Family and 
Community Services Act does not provide the minister with funding 
capability.  The minister has the ability to provide funding through The 
Government Organization Act. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Minister, perhaps I gave you too much credit when I was 
talking about the potential of your office for some of the initiatives that 
I thought were good short-term solutions.  And I guess in the face, Mr. 
Minister, in the face of record numbers of young people leaving and young 
families leaving, and you've been in power for eight years, for you to go 
back to when you were a child and all your friends were leaving under an 
NDP government, that is not an answer. 
 
You now, Mr. Minister, are charged with the responsibility of turning this 
situation around.  And if you're just going to be a cheer-leader for 
policies which have contributed to some 62,000 people leaving over the last 
five years, some 40 or 50 per cent of those people being young, if you're 
not going to take a serious look at that as an issue and try and address 
that as the Minister of the Family, then I don't think young people, any 
young people that are watching or any family members or any seniors who are 
concerned about their grandchildren, they're not going to have too much 
hope that you're going to make a difference. 
 
So if you're just going to defend high out-migration numbers, a high debt 
load, a thousand families going off the farm a year, young people not being 
able to get into education, the fact that we have 64,000 children living 
below the poverty line which I'm glad tonight you acknowledge for the first 
time -- now you didn't say what you were going to do about it, but you at 
least acknowledged it for the first time, and that's a start -- if you're 
not going to seriously address those problems, then you're missing the 
point on one of the major areas in your mandate, and that, Mr. Minister, is 
where you say that . . . and I might add it's at the very end, it's at the 
very end of the Bill where you talk about monitoring government programs 
and services and initiatives relating to the family to determine their 
impact on the family. 
 
You've got that almost last in your mandate, and you've got very last 
section 3(d)(iv): 
 

 evaluate the impact of government economic and social policies on 
Saskatchewan families. 

 
Now if you're not starting there by first of all evaluating the impact of 
all of these indicators that are going the wrong way, if you're not 
starting there in your analysis of what's happening to Saskatchewan 
families and communities, then there's some credibility to me saying that 
maybe this is just a public relations exercise. 
 
Surely, surely in the face of the major problems facing families in the 
province you would start with analysing government policies and their 



 

 

impact on families.  That doesn't even warrant a section of its own in this 
Bill.  And it would seem to me that that's a starting point, Mr. Minister, 
given the fact that there's a 17 per cent unemployment rate for young 
people.  What on earth is your advice to the Minister of Labour and 
Employment to deal with youth unemployment? 
 
So I'm concerned about why on earth you would tack that onto the end as if 
it's an afterthought.  What I view, and I think quite frankly many people 
in the province view as to one of the major things that you should be doing 
is analysing the impact of many of the economic and financial policies of 
your government, which is failing Saskatchewan people, that you should be 
analysing those.  If you correct those problems, then a lot of other 
problems will take care of themselves. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, I'd like to ask you if in that $740,000 that was 
designated in the budget, these two street workers from North Battleford, 
is that money taken from that 740,000 to fund those two street workers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- Well which question do you want me to answer first -- 
the one on the Act or the one on the $740,000 having to deal with North 
Battleford?  You asked two questions.  Which one do you want first? 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Address both of them.  I guess I want to know why when I 
view and I think many people of Saskatchewan view that the Family minister 
should assess the impact of government programs on families, when many 
people view that as your role, and I assume make suggestions that would 
improve the situation for families and communities, why is it sort of 
tacked on as an afterthought? 
 
(2130) 
 
And then secondly, the question about the $740,000.  Is the money for the 
two street workers in North Battleford taken from that 740,000? 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- Well the answer to your first question is under . . . 
if you look in section 3, subsection (2)(a), and 3, subsection (2)(b), 
which is provide the ability to consult, co-ordinate, and develop community 
services and conduct research, which is what we did when we went around and 
consulted, like North Battleford where they said they needed street workers 
and not money to feed the hungry kids because Senator Sparrow was doing 
that in North Battleford. 
 
The answer to your second question is yes. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- So yes, that $740,000 is, in fact, not going towards 
feeding hungry children, some 22,000 hungry children that used the food 
banks in Saskatchewan in 1989.  It's not even 740,000, Mr. Minister.  How 
much of that money is going towards feeding hungry children?  That in 
itself at 740 was only 3 cents a day for a hungry child.  And so you're not 
even going to spend 740. 
 
While you're up I'd like you to . . . I'd hate to ask you two questions 
again, but maybe you can answer the second question because it relates to 



 

 

the 740,000.  You said last week that that $740,000 is not cost shared 
under the Canada assistance plan. 
 
Now I assume that money is coming from Social Services.  I would like to 
clarify tonight: is that 740 cost shared or is it not cost shared? 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- Well the first question about the hungry children is 
that's what that $4 million was for.  That's what the staff increase was 
for -- directed to hungry children. 
 
Seven hundred and forty thousand dollars, or rather the money then went to 
the youngsters in North Battleford . . . Street kids are hungry as well.  
And not only hungry; they're directionless as well.  Prince Albert said for 
their hungry children that are walking the streets, they want street 
workers to work with these kids, so we responded in that direction.  The 
$740,000 that's earmarked for hunger is not cost shared. 
 
I should clarify that because the portion in North Battleford could 
possibly be -- could possibly be -- cost shared. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Minister, I find it hard to believe.  I find it hard to 
believe that you don't know, under the Canada assistance plan, whether or 
not this money is cost shared with the federal government or it isn't cost 
shared.  Either it is or it isn't. 
 
I happen to have been in a position in the past where I know whether 
programs are not or they are.  We know those things.  So I want to know . . 
. a clear answer . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well I suspect that 
the minister doesn't know. 
 
I want to know whether that $740,000 is cost shared or not.  If some of it 
isn't cost shared, then I would like you to provide me, not necessarily 
tonight, but I'd like you to provide me with an explanation tonight and 
some more detail in the next day or two, because you have given different 
messages about this $740,000. 
 
And just while I'm on my feet, I would like to say that I'm not just 
talking about hungry children who happen to be on social assistance.  I 
already gave you credit for raising those rates $10 a month per child.  
That still makes them very, very low, but I already gave you credit for 
that.  There are many, many children living below the poverty line where 
their parents are not on assistance.  Some 70 per cent of working, 
full-time working single parent moms live in poverty; their children live 
in poverty. 
 
Now I want to know whether or not that is cost shared, and I'd like a 
straight answer on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- Well currently Canada assistance plan will provide cost 
sharing for direct feeding programs only where the recipients are shown to 
be eligible for social assistance or a needs test is applied.  For a local 
group feeding children in a school or community centre, needs testing would 
both destroy the spirit of community service and create administrative 



 

 

complications that would undermine the program.  Cost sharing arrangements 
through the Canada assistance plan inhibit the development of innovative 
community solutions to the hunger problem, and we feel that the community 
involvement, the partnership within the community and the government, is 
absolutely critical to the success of these programs.  We've had good 
success in that respect. 
 
Direct feeding programs are sharable only when they are delivered by an 
eligible agency -- schools do not qualify -- establish a charge which 
reflects the full cost of the meal, administer a test of need consistent 
with the Saskatchewan assistance plan regulations, to families whose 
children are fed through the program.  Families who do not meet the 
requirements of the needs test must pay the fee that has been established.  
Co-ordination of existing feeding programs will likely not be sharable 
because the feeding programs themselves do not meet CAP (Canada assistance 
plan) eligibility requirements. 
 
For street worker programs to be sharable, they must be delivered by a 
CAP-listable, non-profit, social service agency.  The major focus cannot be 
upon education or recreation.  They must emphasize the provision of 
counselling and/or information and referral services.  They must employ at 
least one staff person. 
 
And if you're not satisfied with that answer, I would invite you to meet 
with my officials and members of the Social Services department just so 
you'll understand it better if you're not happy with that answer. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Well I'm not happy that you didn't know that, Mr. Minister.  
But, Mr. Minister, I'd like to take a look at section (2)(b) regarding 
conducting research on the most effective methods of providing community 
services.  And my question there, Mr. Minister, is that I wouldn't disagree 
with that, but my question to you is: does this have anything to do with 
the possibility of privatizing any social services? 
 
Now you will be aware of the recent poll that was done that asked the 
public the question about privatizing social services, and there was a very 
strong desire not to privatize social services.  My concern with regard to 
that section is that if that's your agenda -- and I think the public is 
quite sceptical about your agenda on privatization -- you could do it under 
that section.  Do you have any plans to privatize under this section any 
parts of Social Services? 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- The research that we've been doing really has been 
centred around finding out the best way to deliver the programs that are 
being delivered and/or improve on those programs with the research that we 
gather, not only in this province, but also across Canada and maybe even in 
the United States, wherever programs are being delivered.  That's really 
the purpose of the research. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, on (2)(c) we talk 
about establishing and maintaining effective communication with families, 
and you mention their cultural groups.  And I know that you will be well 
aware of the terrible situation that our aboriginal people live in, the 



 

 

terrible situation with regard to poverty and unemployment -- some 75, 80 
per cent unemployment in the north, 90 to 95 with regard to young people, 
the high rates of disease in the North, the suicide rates and so on.  And 
I'm wondering, in establishing this Bill and in looking at how you would 
operationalize this particular section, have you had any discussions with 
native organizations or do you plan to do that in the future regarding 
native families and aboriginal families, as you refer to, in terms of your 
concern about various cultural groups? 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- Well I personally have met with a number of native 
organizations or individuals, and I know that my officials have also met 
with a number of native organizations and individuals.  And this is a 
problem of great concern to everyone, or should be of great concern to 
everyone.  And I agree with you on that.  Quite frankly, I would appreciate 
any good ideas that you might have as to how we could help resolve the 
problem that natives have in this province. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I do have some ideas and in fact 
I have a file of suggestions based on some reports that we have done that I 
will be happy to give to you.  And if there is anything useful there, then 
feel free to use it. 
 
Mr. Minister, I guess in closing I would just say that . . . Again, as I 
said at the outset, I think this is a positive mandate.  I worry a little 
bit that you may not have the kind of influence that you're going to need 
to successfully carry out your mandate.  I worry a little bit that you 
maybe are acting a bit too much like a cheer-leader, and I hope that you 
will give serious consideration to critically -- I say that in a positive 
way -- to critically analysing the impact of government economic financial 
and social policies on Saskatchewan families and that you will influence 
your colleagues to provide constructive solutions and alternatives and 
suggestions. 
 
And I will be asking you when we look at estimates in a few minutes what 
some of those concrete suggestions are that you are giving to your 
colleagues who are charged with providing more opportunities to young 
people and families in regard to employment and education, and so on. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I would suggest to you that if you take seriously the 
provision where you will monitor your programs and that you approach your 
job in the way I think you will, with some compassion and some sensitivity, 
and that you commit yourself to the principle of fairness to all 
Saskatchewan families, not just the Hills and the Childers and the other 
families, but to all . . . 
 
(2145) 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Come off it. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- No, seriously.  I'm serious.  You've got $3.5 million for 
Chuck Childers, and you're telling me to get off it.  The fact of the 
matter is, the disparity between the few families who have a lot and the 
many families who live in poverty is a major concern to Saskatchewan 



 

 

families, so don't dismiss it.  It's a major concern to Saskatchewan 
families.  If you're going to take the attitude that your government is 
treating all families in Saskatchewan fairly and with justice and fairness 
and compassion, then you are going to fail as a Family minister.  What we 
don't need is another cheer-leader over there, Mr. Minister, we need 
somebody who is going to . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- We need somebody over there who is going to make a 
difference, who is going to make a difference to average, ordinary 
Saskatchewan families.  We're putting our hope in you because you've got 
the mandate that would suggest that you can have that kind of impact. 
 
But if you're going to defend the fact that 62,000 people left in the last 
five years and that we've got a 17 per cent unemployment rate of young 
people and we've got poverty in the North and on and on and on, then not 
much is going to be accomplished. 
 
Therefore my question was: is this just a public relations exercise?  And I 
think unless you demonstrate that you understand the very real problems 
facing Saskatchewan families, the hardships facing Saskatchewan families, 
then you are not going to make a difference as the Minister of the Family. 
 
So I plead with you: we don't need another cheer-leader, we need somebody 
who will offer and forward constructive ideas to the front benches to deal 
with the very real problems facing all Saskatchewan families and young 
people so that there can be opportunities provided in Saskatchewan so 
people don't have to leave and there can be a sense of security in our 
communities and Saskatchewan and so that most of all, Mr. Minister, that 
families of the province -- young people, seniors, others -- can have a 
sense of hope. 
 
The Red Cross study said that the Saskatchewan pride is almost broke.  They 
talk about that being a very proud pride.  They talk about all the issues 
that I've talked about tonight, and in a very gentle way they lay a fair 
amount of the responsibility on your doorstep.  So I urge you to take your 
job seriously and then you have a chance to make a difference to the people 
of Saskatchewan and the average family of Saskatchewan.  Thank you very 
much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- I've met with literally hundreds of people, hundreds 
and hundreds of people in this province since October.  I've met with 
seniors, I've met with families, I've met with teenagers, in the 
Legislative Building and all over this province.  I will continue to listen 
to what they say.  I will continue to hear what they're telling me.  I will 
continue to take that message to the cabinet table, and I will continue to 
make a difference in the cabinet room on behalf of the people of this 
province. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Minister, with respect, I would say that it doesn't 



 

 

matter how many people you've met with; it doesn't matter what your mandate 
is. Unless when you meet with people you hear them, unless you take their 
advice, and unless we start seeing some changes, some concrete changes, 
then you as Family minister are not going to give much hope to Saskatchewan 
families and Saskatchewan young people. 
 
Need I remind you that since you've become minister, we've gone from having 
the second highest rate of family poverty in all of Canada -- I know you 
don't like to hear this -- we've gone from the second highest rate of 
family poverty to now having the highest rate of family poverty.  That's 
since you've become Minister of the Family. 
 
Mr. Minister, since you have become Minister of the Family we've got two 
additional food banks that have opened, one in Melfort and one in Carlyle.  
Now surely that is a disgrace in the bread-basket of the world.  I know the 
member from Wilkie says that we can't afford to feed our hungry children, 
that the province just can't afford to do that.  On this side of the House 
we say you can't afford not to, Mr. Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- You say you can't afford to fund the health care system 
properly.  On this side of the House we say you can't afford not to have a 
healthy population. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Minister, your government has cut some $7.5 million 
from student employment programs since 1986-87.  You're the Family 
minister.  You know that young people have a 17 per cent unemployment rate.  
You know that tuition fees have gone back up.  You know that it's harder to 
get into university because you've cut back on student loan programs and 
bursary programs.  And you allowed the Minister of Finance to cut another 
$1 million from youth employment.  And you talk in some devious way about 
putting money into the environment -- $500,000 into the environment -- but 
you can't say, because we've asked you, how many jobs that's going to 
create. 
 
So don't tell me that you're going around the province and you've listened 
to 15,000 people, because what I'm hearing around the province is that 
you're not listening.  You're not even listening now.  You don't have to 
give me your attention, Mr. Minister, but you have to give your attention 
to the people in the province. 
 
I've got some more questions for you when we get into estimates in a few 
minutes, Mr. Minister, and I hope to get some clear answers from you, 
because I think, Mr. Minister, what you've done in this legislature is you 
have demonstrated tonight again, as you have in previous days, that you 
don't understand the real issue facing Saskatchewan families, that you're 
not even accepting the fact that we've had the poorest job creation record 
in all of Canada -- in fact, the only province whose labour force dropped 
-- that that's a serious problem.  Fourteen thousand fewer people in the 
labour force in December of 1989 than in December of 1988. 



 

 

 
Now it's your government; you're the Minister of the Family.  We're talking 
about the loss of jobs for bread winners of families.  And I expect that 
your charge was giving advice to the Minister of Labour and Employment.  
He's going to need your advice, and your very stern advice, because this is 
a guy -- the member from Melville -- who's made a habit, who spent three 
and a half years beating up on poor people. 
 
Now I know you don't like to hear that, but you have got a major challenge 
on your hands, Mr. Minister, to convince your front-benchers that families 
are hurting in the province and that something's got to be done to provide 
real solutions. 
 
And until you acknowledge some of these problems, until you acknowledge 
that these indicators are going in the wrong way, the ones we talked about 
tonight, and I don't think the public of Saskatchewan, that the families of 
Saskatchewan are going to be too reassured that you're going to have 
constructive solutions to provide and that you're going to be able to carry 
out this mandate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 
Bill No. 28 -- An Act respecting Investments by Saskatchewan Residents in 
Support of Community Diversification and Environmental Protection 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- I move that this Bill be now read the third time and 
passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 2 -- An Act respecting Family and Community Services 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now read the 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10 p.m. 
 


