





























































Hansard: May 09, 1990


 

 

May 9/90 
 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, allow me to introduce to 
you, and through you to the members of this Assembly, a group of grade 12 
students from Wawota High, and also their principal, Mr. Harold Laich.  
This group of students and Mr. Laich has brought his students in on a 
number of occasions, not only to visit the Assembly, but as well to visit 
the provincial court. 
 
I trust the students find their visit today to be informative and 
educational.  I'd like to ask the members to join me in welcoming the 
students this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce to you, and 
through you to all members of the Legislative Assembly, another group of 
students from Weyburn Junior High School in Weyburn, from the grade 8 
class, numbering some 63 in number in the east gallery, Mr. Speaker.  
Accompanying them today is their teachers, Janice Bernard and Sid Trepoff, 
as well as bus drivers Vance Peterson and Gary McKenzie. 
 
This is the second contingent from Weyburn in the last two days, Mr. 
Speaker. And as I mentioned yesterday and I repeat again today, that the 
junior high and the teachers and the students there have a long-standing 
practice of coming to the legislature during their school year, and I 
commend the students, the parents, the board, and as well the teachers for 
making this part of their school year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I hope they find the proceedings interesting.  I know they've had a tour of 
the legislature.  And my colleague, the MLA for Regina Wascana, will be 
meeting with them after question period for refreshments and pictures and 
to answer their questions, since I cannot attend to that.  And I would just 
ask all members of the legislature to join with me in welcoming these 
students here from Weyburn, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure this 
afternoon to introduce to you, and through you to other members of the 
Assembly, two guests from the province of Quebec, Jacques Beland and Anne 
Campeau, who are representatives from the Canadian youth education 
excellence program.  They're seated in your gallery. 
 
The youth education excellence program, Mr. Speaker, is a national forum 
promoting the personal, social, and cultural development of Canada's youth.  



 

 

And the reason that these two individuals are in Regina is that each year 
the highlight of the program is to have a week whereby students from all 
across Canada, from the 10 provinces, come together to select the Canadian 
educator of the year.  And the plan is that next spring here in Regina, 
this very special event will take place.  And Jacques and Anne are here 
today making arrangements, meeting with the city of Regina and with other 
members of the educational family to make the preliminary plans in hosting 
this very special event next year. 
 
And I would ask all members of the House to join with you and with me in 
welcoming these two guests with us this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, today 
I rise on behalf of the member for Melville who is out of the province 
today and has asked me to introduce to you, Mr. Speaker, and to all members 
of the legislature, a group of students from Mr. Schmidt's constituency.  
This group of students is seated in the west gallery.  We have 55 students, 
Mr. Speaker, in grades 3 to 7, from the Qu'Appelle Indian Residential 
School in Lebret. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this group is accompanied by Jim Hartman, Tracey Shewchuk, 
Angie Smith, and as well they have their very capable bus driver, Lawrence 
Pinay.  Mr. Speaker, these students are here visiting the legislature 
today.  I do, on behalf of the member for Melville, want to welcome them 
here.  I hope you have a wonderful visit here today on a nice spring day, 
in the legislature.  I will, on behalf of the member for Melville, be 
meeting with you after question period on the steps of the legislature for 
a few pictures and perhaps a short discussion later. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join these fine young people 
from the Qu'Appelle Indian Residential School in Lebret. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As the Minister for Public 
Service Commission, it is again my pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to introduce to 
you and to you other members of the House, some of our professional civil 
servants who are continuing on the tour process that we started some months 
ago. 
 
This tour process, Mr. Speaker, includes members from various departments.  
The departments today are Public Service Commission, the Department of 
Health, Consumer and Commercial Affairs, Economic Diversification and 
Trade, and Department of Urban Affairs, Mr. Speaker, as well as Sandra 
Gardner from the Legislative Library and Nathalie Bellerose, Legislative 
Guide Services.  And the process, Mr. Speaker, is really designed to give 
our professional civil servants an opportunity to see how some of the other 
areas of government work outside of their particular offices. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, would all the members, including the member from . . . all 
members in this House please welcome all our civil servants here today. 



 

 

 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Aid for Farmers 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  My question today, Mr. 
Speaker, in the absence of the Minister of Agriculture, the Premier, is to 
the Associate Minister of Agriculture.  Mr. Speaker, farmers in the 
province of Saskatchewan are becoming increasingly confused and I would say 
angered by the statements and the actions, or perhaps more correctly 
stated, the inaction of the Tory governments in Regina and Ottawa when it 
comes to farm policy and farm aid. 
 
And today we have yet more reason for the confusion.  In the Star-Phoenix, 
Mr. Mazankowski of the federal PC government says he's now offering some 
form of loan program to the provincial government in order to get the $500 
million.  And in the same story Mr. Mazankowski talks about yet an 
alternative approach where the $500 million, which was promised by the 
Premier and the government opposite as cash on the dash, is now going to be 
used for some form of an export enhancement program. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, to the Associate Minister of Agriculture is this: 
why is it that your government has permitted this kind of confusion, this 
kind of proliferation of possible farm aid programs, all the while the 
farmers of the province of Saskatchewan so desperately needing the $500 
million cash which you promised on or about March 19, 1990?  How in the 
world does the political timetable of Tories in Regina and Ottawa swamp the 
day-to-day needs of farmers who needed that $500 million, not today but two 
months ago? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to point out to you 
and to members opposite that there has been a discussion on an ongoing 
basis with various organizations throughout the province in dealing with 
exactly what this government should be doing.  Those organizations include 
the farmers' union; they include stock growers; they include the Sask Wheat 
Pool; they include United Grain Growers; they include western Canada grain 
growers.  A whole host of these have been discussing with us exactly how we 
should be handling our relationship with the federal government. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have had an opportunity to read a number of letters 
that we have received from various organization exactly expressing the same 
concern that the Premier has to the federal government.  And I have a 
letter received yesterday from the SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) where they said that the 299 municipalities were endorsing 
entirely the focus that the Premier was putting onto the discussion he was 
having with Mr. Mazankowski. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have a new question to the 
Associate Minister of Agriculture who said in his response to my last 
question that the government was involved in an ongoing series of 
discussions, which is all well and good. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I remind you, sir, and the Associate Minister of 
Agriculture that on March 19, 1990, right here in this legislature, in the 
Speech from the Throne -- and I've a copy of it in front of me -- the exact 
words of you, sir, and your government and your Premier were: 
 

 My government has received a commitment from the Government of Canada that 
financial assistance will be provided to farmers for spring seeding. 

 
Note those words, Mr. Speaker -- a commitment from Ottawa for spring 
seeding.  Now that's clear, and that's precise. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to the Associate Minister of Agriculture is this: 
did you have that commitment when you wrote that Speech from the Throne on 
March 19, 1990, yes or no?  Give us a simple answer to that. And if you did 
have it, what was it?  And if you had it, why was it derailed?  What caused 
it to be derailed?  And if you didn't have it, were you just fooling with 
the emotions and the financial plight of the farmers of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, this government has never fooled with the 
plights of the farmers of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, SARM, Sask Pork Producers, Saskatchewan 
livestock feeders, National Farmers Union, UGG (United Grain Growers 
Limited), western Canadian wheat growers, canola growers, the crop 
insurance board, the stock growers -- SARM made this observation to the 
Premier on May 8:  "I wish to take this opportunity to commend you on the 
stand you and your fellow western premiers have taken on the matter 
relating to agriculture financing". 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the Associate 
Minister of Agriculture.  He referred to the letter from SARM under date I 
believe of May 8, which was chronologically a couple of days after the 
Premier's television address to the province on May 5, but came before the 
March 19, 1990 commitment. 
 
You say the commitment here is clearly stated from the Government of Canada 
for financial assistance.  Now my question to the minister is this, Mr. 
Speaker:  what was that commitment?  Was it $500 million cash on the dash?  
Was it $250 million plus a provincial of Saskatchewan borrowing from 
Ottawa?  Was it $250 million cash only from Ottawa?  Was it a 50-50 cost 
share?  Or was it an export enhancement program? 
 



 

 

Which one of those was the commitment that you were referring to on March 
19, 1990?  We want the specific answers, because I tell you, Mr. Minister, 
if you don't tell us, then we're going to conclude that the government 
never did have a commitment and you were playing politics with the farmers 
of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, yesterday the city of Regina, through a 
resolution through their council, indicated to us that the Premier was 
taking the right and accurate steps in his relationship to the federal 
government. 
 
I have a letter from Mr. Cholod who's the alderman from the city of Regina, 
who is the president of SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association), indicating that the 500 communities which comprise the 
Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association want to encourage the Premier 
in his stand against Ottawa and Mr. Mazankowski.  As a matter of fact, 
right at this moment, Mr. Speaker, the Premier is meeting with Mr. 
Mazankowski and will be having supper later this evening with the Prime 
Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Associate Minister of 
Agriculture.  I'm pleased, I suppose, that the Premier is in Ottawa meeting 
with Mr. Mazankowski and Mr. Mulroney, although I suspect that the farmers 
of Saskatchewan don't have much cause for hope given previous many meetings 
between the Premier and the Prime Minister to no result. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, relates to this, to the Associate Minister of 
Agriculture.  I want to know what that commitment was that you promised the 
farmers on March 19, 1990.  I want to know, did you have that commitment or 
did you not have that commitment?  I want to know how it is that you can 
explain to this House and to the farmers of this province that we've now 
got at least five various possible options for the $500 million, none of 
which yet of course is translated to money to the farmers of the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to the Associate Minister of Agriculture is simply 
this.  I think you blew it, and instead of phoney excuses and more 
meetings, meetings, meetings, and more inaction and more talk, when are the 
farmers of the province of Saskatchewan going to get a definitive statement 
from you that they're going to get this $500 million cash as they were 
promised?  When are you going to give it to them? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, the Premier is meeting with the Minister 
of Agriculture in Ottawa today.  He's meeting with the Prime Minister 
today.  And he will outline exactly, as he has outlined in this House, all 
of the concerns in relation to agriculture that we have said in a 
resolution on a number of occasions already from this House that have had 



 

 

unanimous consent from this House to deliver to the Prime Minister and to 
the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
We have stood behind the agriculture in this province all of the time we 
have been in power, and I can recall, Mr. Speaker, because I was a producer 
at that time when they were government and I am a producer today, when this 
government is in place.  And I understand and I know it very well that the 
things that we do in agriculture in the province of Saskatchewan far exceed 
what they ever did. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have a new question to the 
Associate Minister of Agriculture, and it's going to be very short, very 
simple but very important.  My question to the Minister of Agriculture is 
simple but important, sir, and it's this.  On March 19 -- and I read these 
words to you -- you said, your government said the following: 
 

 My government has received a commitment from the government of Canada that 
financial assistance will be provided to farmers for spring seeding. 

 
End of quote, full stop, period.  Will you tell me and tell this House and 
tell the farmers of Saskatchewan precisely what was that commitment?  Tell 
us in simple, honest, straightforward terms, what was that commitment?  Do 
you have one? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- We on the government side of this House, Mr. Speaker, 
are committed to serve the people of Saskatchewan and the farmers in 
Saskatchewan, and we will continue to do that, Mr. Speaker.  One of the 
fundamental things that those people over there have found out when they 
were dealing with the Trudeau government, in the years that they dealt in 
government and dealing with the kinds of things that they did, they never 
got anywhere. 
 
In the last five years, Mr. Speaker, we have put together $6.6 billion in 
funding from the federal government.  And who did it?  The Premier of 
Saskatchewan, the member from Estevan. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, was matched one to eight on our part in dealing with 
the kinds of programs that we could deliver to the people of Saskatchewan.  
We have fundamentally stood behind our farmers in this province, and we 
will continue to do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Associate Minister of 
Agriculture.  Mr. Minister, I asked you to stop evading the question.  I 
asked you to stop reminiscing about past periods . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . You can talk about it if you want. 
 
I am asking you to give us a clear-cut answer to the farmers of the 



 

 

province of Saskatchewan today in 1990.  My question to you, sir, is:  
specifically, tell me what commitment you had from Ottawa for financial 
assistance for spring seeding that you put in your Speech from the Throne 
on March 19.  Tell us.  The farmers deserve to know, and if you don't give 
us an answer, then I say the only conclusion that can be made is that you 
didn't have one and you were fooling with their feelings and with their 
rightful economic position.  What is it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- The president of the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association said this: 
 

 We will be encouraged by the strong message (he's talking about the 
Premier, Mr. Speaker) . . . be encouraged by the strong message you have 
sent to the Government of Canada about their responsibility to respond to 
the farm income crisis and other severe financial problems that we have in 
Saskatchewan. 

 
That, Mr. Speaker, is the message that we are giving to the Prime Minister 
today; we're giving to the Minister of Agriculture today.  In no uncertain 
terms, we are delivering that message as firmly and succinctly as we can. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Federal Funding for Seniors 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my question 
is to the Minister of the Family, and I hope that he can be more effective 
in answering the questions than the previous minister was, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Minister, my New Democratic colleagues in Ottawa yesterday exposed your 
Conservative government's attempt, your secret attempt to once again attack 
the stability and the future of our senior citizens.  New Horizons grants 
for Saskatchewan, which were used by hundreds of seniors' groups in this 
province, are to be cut by some 35 per cent this year, Mr. Minister. 
 
Can the minister tell this House when he first heard of this situation and 
what steps he has taken to get the federal government to reverse this 
decision. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- Mr. Speaker, I spoke today with officials in my office 
concerning the alleged . . . concerning the alleged information from Ottawa 
about New Horizons.  The discussion has been, from Ottawa, New Horizons has 
alleged there may be a possibility of some holding back of some of the 
money to the senior citizens' grants for New Horizons projects. 
 
Well we would be very concerned, Mr. Speaker, about any cuts from anywhere 
that would affect the senior citizens in this province.  However, if the 
changes are involving with some accountability as to how this money is 
spent, Mr. Speaker, then I think it's worth while looking at. 



 

 

 
However, Mr. Speaker, our officials in the Department of Seniors' 
Secretariat have been in touch with Ottawa.  There's been a conference call 
going on virtually all day long on this, Mr. Speaker.  And I would hope 
that perhaps even later today we may have an answer to this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while I'm on my feet, I'd like to speak about another project 
that was related to seniors as well . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Speaker, new question to the minister.  Mr. Minister, 
your job is not to defend the rationale for Ottawa setting aside this 
money.  Your job is to stand up for the interests of Saskatchewan senior 
citizens. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Minister, this is just one more of the same from your 
federal cousins in Ottawa.  They have launched a course of total 
abandonment of Saskatchewan and of our senior citizens and of the west.  
Saskatchewan seniors are outraged, as we heard on the radio this morning, 
at this most recent cut-back from Ottawa.  And you sit placidly by, doing 
nothing about it, Mr. Minister.  My question is: if it's your job to fight 
for seniors and cut-backs like this, if it's not your job to do that, what 
is your job? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity this morning 
to speak to in the neighbourhood of a hundred senior citizens in North 
Battleford about the very thing we're talking about here today, as well as 
all the other seniors' projects and seniors' initiatives that this 
government has brought forward since 1982. 
 
And the seniors of Saskatchewan -- this was the action committee of 
Saskatchewan, seniors' action committee I was meeting with, Mr. Speaker -- 
said that the seniors of today in Saskatchewan are better off now than 
they've ever been, Mr. Speaker, because of the support that this 
government's giving them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- Mr. Speaker, let me get back to the original question.  
My department is concerned about the possibility of a hold-back of New 
Horizons funds from Ottawa.  But that's the case, Mr. Speaker, we would 
certainly strongly talk to Ottawa about that.  And as I say, our officials 
are speaking to them today about that very thing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  New question.  Mr. 
Minister, your PC federal government tried a few years back to de-index 



 

 

pensions.  Seniors across Canada, joined by the New Democratic Party, 
fought that one to the ground, Mr. Minister, and seniors will never forget 
that.  You people sat on the sidelines and did nothing. 
 
In it's 1989 budget the federal government brought in a tax-back scheme for 
pensions which was a unique tax burden to seniors, Mr. Minister.  Again 
seniors were outraged.  We on this side of the House decried it and you as 
minister did absolutely nothing at that time when you could have done 
something about it. 
 
Now my question is to you: how long are you going to stick up for the 
interests of Brian Mulroney rather than the interests of senior citizens in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- Mr. Speaker, I will continue to stick up for the 
interests of the senior citizens of this province.  I will continue to 
consult with them as I do on almost a daily basis, Mr. Speaker, and look 
after the interests of the senior citizens of this province as this 
government has done so well since 1982. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Tendering Process for WESTBRIDGE 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Yesterday notice was taken of 
five questions that were asked by the opposition with regard to WESTBRIDGE. 
 
Mr. Speaker, first of all the question was the tendering policy.  The 
tendering policy has been consistent since this government took office in 
1982.  And, Mr. Speaker, unlike under the NDP, SaskCOMP, Mr. Speaker, was 
changed into a corporation that had to compete for government contracts, 
Mr. Speaker -- a rather dramatic change from the past practice of the New 
Democratic Party.  And WESTBRIDGE continues that practice of tendering for 
contracts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the next question dealt with the matter of the acquisition by 
WESTBRIDGE of the assets of the Mercury Group, that the NDP say were 
acquired for roughly twice the valuation of the firm, Mr. Speaker.  Let me 
indicate that the statement made by the hon. member is totally false, and 
that documents were tabled in this House, Mr. Speaker, on June 22, 1989 -- 
and I say this to the press because I will have a response to them -- 
tabled, Mr. Speaker, in a volume that thick with all the valuations; public 
documents, Mr. Speaker, sent to the hon. member from Regina yesterday, Mr. 
Speaker, who asked questions yesterday.  Included in that, Mr. Speaker, 
were the valuations and the valuations done by the independent evaluator, 
Richardson Greenshields, setting out, Mr. Speaker, what the valuations were 
and the valuations as set out by the independent evaluation or the amount 
for which the . . . were the amounts that were in fact paid. 
 
So true value was paid for, not double as alleged by the NDP -- a false 
statement, Mr. Speaker. 



 

 

 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, they then made -- and this is the third question 
dealing with a valuation for Leasecorp Western -- and they went on to say, 
Mr. Speaker, that the assets were 59,000 and that the government or the 
people paid several million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again, in public documents tabled in this Assembly nearly one 
year ago, the valuations were specifically laid out and given to the 
opposition and to the public and to the press, Mr. Speaker.  And those 
valuations made it clear that what was paid by WESTBRIDGE was the true 
valuation, Mr. Speaker.  Now, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. 
 
There may have been 3, 4, 5, or even 10 questions, however, I cannot give 
an inordinate amount of time to ministers to answer questions that they 
have taken notice of.  I have given you quite a lot of time, quite frankly, 
and I'm going to give you just a little bit more time, but I'm not going to 
be able to allow you to go on at any length in answering your questions.  
I'll give you just a little more time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I want to make sure that the 
opposition and the public has the truth, Mr. Speaker.  The information on 
the merger requested yesterday again is in public documents and again in 
the prospectus. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP were comparing the prospectus amount of tangible 
assets opposed to the intangible assets, which are valued independently, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  It seems that the hon. member is going to go on at 
great length.  I must go to the next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  The hon. member . . . order.  The hon. member has 
engaged in the use of unparliamentary language and I ask him now to 
withdraw the remark and to apologize. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Mr. Speaker, I withdraw the remark and apologize; I 
should have said deliberately misled. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Now the hon. member who's been a member for 
. . . order, who's been a member here for a long time, knows that he is, 
quite frankly, playing with the rules.  I ask him once more to withdraw and 
apologize and sit down without any further comment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Mr. Speaker, I again withdraw and apologize, and indicate 
to the Leader-Post that I want an . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 



 

 

 
The Speaker: -- I'm going to ask the Minister of Justice . . . order.  I'm 
going to ask the Minister of Justice for the final time, for the final time 
to rise in his place, to withdraw and apologize unequivocally. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I apologize, Mr. Speaker, I thought I had apologized 
unequivocally.  I then made my remarks to the Leader-Post and their sloppy 
coverage, Mr. Speaker, and I want an apology.  I do apologize . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Now the Minister of Justice well knows 
 Dthe rule of this House.  And I'm just going to once more draw to his 
attention that if he does not comply with the request of the Speaker, which 
is now plainly that he rise and apologize and withdraw his statement, I 
will be forced to name him. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I have apologized unequivocally three times and I do it 
again, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to address a question to the 
Minister responsible for WESTBRIDGE Computer Corporation, the Minister of 
Justice, and I want to say in my preamble that it's interesting how the 
minister grandstands and tries to cut off question period and cover up the 
very issue here of evaluations of corporations that were purchased by 
WESTBRIDGE. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister is this.  The 
appraisals that were done by the corporation and submitted to the exchange, 
the Toronto Stock Exchange, are here and were tabled.  And they indicate 
very clearly that the valuation of these companies amounted to $104,000.  
You paid, the WESTBRIDGE Corporation paid $20.5 million for those assets -- 
200 times the valuation quoted here in the appraisal, in the report that 
was done, the prospectus by WESTBRIDGE to the Toronto exchange. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Minister, come clean, quit grandstanding and quit trying 
to cover up the facts in the Assembly and tell us why.  Explain why you 
paid 20.5 million for assets worth and valued at $104,000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Again, and I'm going to quote from the prospectus, Mr. 
Speaker.  I'm going to quote from the same prospectus that this hon. 
member, with the collusion of some of the press yesterday, had these public 
documents.  In fact the province received, at page 28, $51 million not 
$104,000 as stated by the NDP -- $51 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 



 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, the valuations that they're talking about are 
certain stated assets not the intangible assets; that is also made 
reference to in the prospectus, Mr. Speaker, in the valuations tabled.  And 
in fact, Mr. Speaker, there are strong evidence in the valuations, Mr. 
Speaker, that in fact they were even valued higher.  We got a better deal, 
Mr. Speaker, than what the NDP said. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not $104,000 as the NDP said, but 51 . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motions for Interim Supply 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order.  I would ask the Minister of Finance to introduce 
his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  To my left is Art 
Wakabayashi, the deputy minister of Finance; behind him, Keith Laxdal, 
associate deputy minister of Finance; to his right, John Wright, associate 
deputy minister of Finance, and to my right, Bill Jones, assistant deputy 
minister of Finance.  Be it: 
 

 Resolved that a sum not exceeding $761,792,600 be granted to Her Majesty 
on account for the 12 months ending March 31, 1991. 

 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, I have a few questions directed to the 
Minister of Finance on a matter of urgent public importance, questions 
which I might say, Mr. Chairman, I'm sure you'll agree with me were not 
adequately answered in question period either today by the Associate 
Minister of Agriculture or in previous question periods by the various 
ministers of Agriculture that this government has installed in office. 
 
And by way of backgrounder, Mr. Chairman, I want to paint the picture to 
the ministers opposite and the members of the committee, the situation with 
respect to the $500 million cash promised for farmers in Saskatchewan made 
jointly and severally by the provincial government here in Regina and by 
the federal government in Ottawa, as it relates to the recent statements 
made by the federal Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, this matter all arose actually some time in late 
November 1989, when Mr. Garf Stevenson of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool took 
the leadership on behalf of the farm community and argued that there needed 
to be $500 million cash injection into the farming community, given the 
economic plight of the farm community.  Some some several weeks after that 



 

 

a variety of political people, including the Premier, including myself, 
including the Liberal leader, including farm organizations, joined with Mr. 
Stevenson in calling for the $500 million. 
 
The next step chronologically, as I understand it, Mr. Chairman -- I'm sure 
the minister will correct me if I'm in error -- the next major 
chronological development is a television address on March 5, 1990 by the 
Premier and the Minister of Agriculture on this urgent matter of 
expenditure and farm aid policy, both on a federal and provincial basis. 
 
I'm going to take the time of the House, Mr. Chairman, to read to you a 
somewhat lengthy excerpt of the Premier's television address, but I think 
it's important to cast into context the point that I want to make.  I've 
read it many times, and unfortunately it doesn't get any better with the 
reading; it still remains the same. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, here's the part that I want to particularly refer to the 
Minister of Finance.  The Premier said, amongst other things on March 5, 
the following, quote.  This is the Premier speaking: 
 

 I told the Deputy Prime Minister Saskatchewan people need half a billion 
dollars right now to get ready for spring seeding, and another $400 
million just to compete with unfair subsidies of foreign governments.  I 
also told Mr. Mazankowski Canada needs a $1 billion contingency fund to 
keep us from become casualties in subsidies wars. 

 
He says . . . Mr. Devine says . . . Sorry.  The Premier says: 
 

 Thousands of farmers have to have cash for spring seeding.  There is no 
disputing this fact.  We agreed to jointly fight the subsidy wars at the 
international negotiating table and I can assure you Saskatchewan's farm 
community will have direct input in those efforts.  We simply must 
succeed. 

 
Continuing, the Premier said, quote: 
 

 And the Deputy Prime Minister confirmed that farmers affected by last 
year's regional drought will be receiving additional crop insurance 
compensation prior to seeding. 

 
And then he ends up this portion of the address by saying, quote: 
 

 I came back from Ottawa with a mutual agreement to work out the farm 
financial crisis. 

 
Now note in the March 5 address there are three or four crises identified.  
One is the grains war.  But one, undoubtedly, is the $500 million.  And the 
conclusion of the statement by the Minister of Agriculture, Premier, is on 
March 5:  "I came back from Ottawa with a mutual agreement to work out the 
farm financial crisis." 
 
The next chronological event of importance, Mr. Speaker, is two weeks 
later, the opening of this legislature, March 19, 1990, and on page 4 of 



 

 

the Speech from the Throne, which I have a copy here in front of me, Mr. 
Chairman, under the heading: "Protection for Saskatchewan farmers" the 
following paragraph is written and read in this House.  I heard it, the 
following words: 
 

 My government has received a commitment from the Government of Canada that 
financial assistance will be provided to farmers for spring seeding.  
Ottawa has also agreed to establish a mechanism to help counteract the 
international grain subsidy wars.  My ministers will press the federal 
government to fulfil these promises as soon as possible and in a way that 
ensures fairness and adequate assistance. 

 
(1445) 
 
Now you'll see why I read that, Mr. Chairman, because chronologically on 
March 5 he says, these are the issues and we agreed to sit down and talk 
about them. 
 
On March 19 the Premier reports to the House as the government's agenda for 
this current session, that on one issue he has gotten a promise.  In fact 
he uses the word "promise" and then he uses on another occasion the word 
"commitment."  And I repeat the relevant words: "My government has received 
a commitment from the Government of Canada that financial assistance will 
be provided to farmers for spring seeding." 
 
On the international wars there's a mechanism for monitoring and for 
inputting into that matter. 
 
And as we know, there were subsequent resolutions by the House which were 
endorsed unanimously with respect to the $500 million.  There were 
subsequently a number of trips by the Prime Minister and the Premier 
meeting in Ottawa, all of which led, I think, a reasonable farmer and a 
person to conclude that shortly after March 19, 1990, the commitment to 
which this government said it had, the promise which was made by this 
government, by the Prime Minister to the Premier would be realized, that 
after a few trips the commitment and promise, those being very weighty, 
important words, would be realized and would be effected. 
 
Today, on May 9, we don't have any hint of what assistance and what 
financial contribution, if any, might be coming from Regina with respect to 
that one vital issue of the $500 million cash.  Not at all, Mr. Chairman.  
Today we're considering interim supply and in the consideration of the next 
two-twelfths expenditure of money, we're going to be now considering 
whether or not any of that money has been earmarked to share on a 
provincial-federal basis the $500 million cash or whether none of it is 
earmarked or what exactly the arrangements are with respect to this 
commitment. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, in my question period remarks to the minister in charge, 
I said that the farmers were being . . . could conclude that they were 
being deceived by the government opposite.  By virtue of the fact that 
nobody, at least the minister has not given me an answer specifically, as 
to what that word commitment meant, and so in order to ensure that no hasty 



 

 

accusations which may be erroneous are made in this area, I think it's 
important for the minister to tell the House on a update, especially since 
it might have a financial implication for us of some moment, what it is 
exactly -- and I refer the Minister of Finance to March 19 -- what exactly 
was the nature of the commitment that you and your government had, exactly 
the nature of the commitment.  And you might while you explain the 
commitment to me, tell me when it was to be paid out and how it was to be 
paid out.  What was the exact nature of the commitment and the promise that 
you referred to as a result of the Premier's television address on March 5, 
and more importantly, or as importantly, the Speech from the Throne word 
where you told us, you gave us your word that these promises and 
commitments were here?  What commitment was it, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, and members of the committee, relative 
to assistance for Saskatchewan farmers and commitments from the 
Saskatchewan government, and more importantly from the federal government, 
to help Saskatchewan farmers and farm families in our rural communities, 
there is absolutely no question that our Premier has led the charge. 
 
Not only has he led the charge, Mr. Leader of the Opposition, and members 
of this caucus and members of the opposition caucus, not only has our 
Premier led the charge on behalf of Saskatchewan farmers and farm families, 
but he has carried a tremendous, heavy weight, Mr. Chairman, because he too 
has led the charge on behalf of Manitoba farmers and Alberta farmers. 
 
Indeed, Mr. Chairman, our Premier is the chief spokesperson, not only for 
Saskatchewan as it relates to agricultural issues, but indeed for all of 
western Canada, and I am proud of him because of that, Mr. Speaker.  And I 
am proud of him because, Mr. Chairman, just as in the past, he has 
delivered.  Whether it's been drought programs or livestock programs or 
crop insurance programs, he delivered for Saskatchewan farmers and western 
Canadian farmers again. 
 
He is the chief spokesperson for this province, for western Canada, and 
indeed, Mr. Speaker -- and in a way this is a sad comment on the federal 
agricultural leadership -- our Premier has indeed become as well the chief 
national spokesperson for agriculture.  When you look at the charge that he 
has led in dealing with Europe and the U.S.A. and the trade wars, he has 
been the chief spokesperson on the international stage as well to try and 
bring some sense into that international agri-food arena that defies logic, 
Mr. Chairman.  This Premier got the commitment from Ottawa when others 
could not get it. 
 
Yes, Mr. Chairman, the size of the commitment was somewhat less than we 
would have wished in terms of the spring seeding component -- $500 million.  
We wanted $500 million for Saskatchewan, not for western Canada.  But 
having said that, I'm pleased that he got the $500 million and that the 
federal government recognized that 90 per cent of that should go to the 
grains and oil-seeds sector because that's where the most hurt is.  I'm 
happy that they acknowledged that. 
 



 

 

The sum is lower than we would have wished.  It's lower than this 
legislature in a joint resolution, one that was passed by members on this 
side of the House as well as the opposition members.  And we appreciate 
their support and coming with our Premier to defend our Premier in Ottawa 
on behalf of Saskatchewan farmers, and we ask for their continued support. 
 
Our Premier has had tremendous back-up and input and guidance from all of 
the producer groups across Saskatchewan -- all of them, Mr. Chairman.  We 
have appreciated the support the NDP have given our Premier, and we hope 
they will stand behind him as we finish the negotiations. 
 
Having said all of that, Mr. Chairman, no one single program is going to 
make all the challenges that face agriculture go away.  In fact, Mr. 
Chairman, I tend to still be of the view that an inch of rain and good 
wheat prices will do more than any legislative program can ever do in this 
legislature or in any other legislature or parliament across Canada.  And 
our farmers know that. 
 
And I said in the budget speech, Mr. Speaker, I said in the budget speech 
that all our farmers want is a fair return based on quality of the product, 
not having to worry about the size of somebody else's treasury. 
 
And I said in that same speech, Mr. Chairman, on March 29 that this 
government, the Saskatchewan government, has responded in a fair and 
reasonable way.  We announced the spring seeding program to make sure the 
crop would get in the ground and to make sure that farmers would have the 
necessary cash to buy the farm inputs, and not only buy the farm inputs but 
to have that operating loan at a low rate of interest, ten and 
three-quarters per cent. 
 
I said then that night, this government has responded in a fair and 
reasonable way; the federal government must also keep its commitment.  We 
have since obtained the dollars, $500 million.  It's less than we would 
have liked.  We will not stop there, because in this legislature we asked 
for more than that.  Yes, we said, we need money to get the crop in the 
ground; we will need money to get the crop off.  And as well, the federal 
government has an obligation to take the international trade wars head on. 
 
This is not a fight between Saskatchewan and the United States.  This is 
not a fight between Saskatchewan and France or Saskatchewan and Italy.  
This is a trade war fight between the U.S. and the members of the EEC 
(European Economic Community), and Saskatchewan and Canada is getting 
caught unfairly in the middle of that cross-fire, Mr. Chairman. 
 
No one program will do it.  We are thankful that they have put the money on 
the table.  We would ask them to send the cheque as quickly as possible.  
And as the Associate Minister of Agriculture said earlier in question 
period today, our Premier is this very day meeting with the Deputy Prime 
Minister and the Prime Minister. And, Mr. Speaker, our Premier has a good 
track record.  I'm not saying today that he'll come back with the cheque in 
his pocket, but certainly the money will be forthcoming. 
 
The final point I would like to make here, Mr. Speaker, because really what 



 

 

he is questioning is our Premier's credibility.  I say to you absolutely, 
the member for Saskatoon South, I say to the member from Saskatoon South, 
he has credibility.  He has delivered for Saskatchewan farmers in the past; 
he got the commitment this time.  The money will be forthcoming.  And I say 
that's a lot more credibility than we see from the NDP opposition leader 
when it comes to farm policy.  How can you be credible as a farm leader, as 
a Leader of the Opposition when it comes to farm policy, when in the middle 
of March he sent to our Premier a letter saying, dear Mr. Premier, this is 
the NDP farm platform.  Step number two says we should have a spring 
seeding loan guarantee program. 
 
The Premier looked at that and I looked at that, and during our 
deliberations we were considering that very program.  We fully expected on 
budget night, in conjunction with all the farm groups who had had their 
input, that this would be well received by the opposition.  And what did we 
get from the opposition?  No sooner had I sat down in my seat, Mr. 
Chairman, and the critic, the NDP opposition, stood up and said, no, the 
spring seeding program is no good.  And it was almost identical to what the 
Leader of the Opposition had asked for two weeks earlier. 
 
So I say to you, Mr. Chairman, I say to the members of the NDP opposition, 
look into your souls.  Look into your souls.  I question the credibility of 
the Leader of the Opposition when it comes to farm policy.  How can you be 
credible when in the middle of March you say, bring in a spring seeding 
program, and when we bring it in, you say it is no good? 
 
I'll tell you, there is only one person that the farmers in this province 
question when it comes to credibility in farm policy.  There is only one 
person they question in this province, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to 
genuineness and sincerity and a real desire to help farmers rather than 
some kind of partisan showboating by the Roman god of Janus.  There is only 
one person that the people in this province question when it comes to farm 
policy because of that cute-by-half politics that's merely looking to 
position themselves for farm votes.  There is only one person's credibility 
in this province that is questioned when it comes to farm policy, and 
that's the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
He should look into his soul, put behind him this politics.  What the 
people of the province want and what the farmers of the province want is 
something else I addressed in this budget, Mr. Chairman. 
 
When I said at the close of this speech, March 29, I said, I almost begged, 
Mr. Chairman, what the farmers want is farm policy, not farm politics.  
Can't we put this aside?  Can't he put that aside and work with our Premier 
to get the best deal possible for Saskatchewan and western Canadian and 
indeed all Canadian farmers? 
 
There is the man who has the crisis of credibility when it comes to farm 
policy.  This caucus here, and I hope that Leader of the Opposition and 
that NDP caucus, I hope that they, along with all the farm groups of 
Saskatchewan, will stand behind our Premier.  These are difficult times, 
Mr. Chairman.  I ask you, Mr. Leader of the Opposition, put aside this 
cute-by-half partisan politics; join with our Premier; stand behind our 



 

 

Premier on behalf of all of our farmers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, I don't what the Minister of Finance got his 
shirt in a knot tail for on a simple question about what the commitment 
was, because he obviously did, and in doing so, attempted to deflect the 
question.  But I can assure him that he's not going to so easily or readily 
deflect the question. 
 
And I don't say this by way of any animosity.  But I tell you, Mr. 
Minister, we're going to be here for a very long time until we get some 
specific answers about what you, your Premier, and your government meant 
when you used the words in an official government document: commitment. 
 
And I'm going to ask that question again in a moment.  And I'm going to ask 
that question in the context of this March 19, 1990 throne from the speech 
address.  And just to focus the minister's thinking a little more clearly, 
lest he fly off the handle again, I want you to look at page 4 of the 
printed text of the Speech from the Throne under the heading "Protection 
for Saskatchewan farmers" dated March 19, 1990, and I draw your attention 
to the following sentence: 
 

 My government has received a commitment from the Government of Canada that 
financial assistance will be provided to farmers for spring seeding. 

 
I want you to tell me and the farmers now what that commitment was that you 
received from Ottawa for farmers, financial assistance for spring seeding.  
What was it on March 19, 1990? 
 
(1500) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- As I said earlier, Mr. Chairman, our Premier has led 
the way in terms of getting help from Ottawa.  The amount that Ottawa has 
laid on the table, at least to deal with the immediate cash problem, is 
half a million dollars.  It's less than we would have liked, less than our 
farmers would have liked -- a half a billion dollars, sorry, Mr. Chairman.  
That was what we . . . we were of the view, other farmers were of the view 
that was what we needed for Saskatchewan, not for all of western Canada or 
indeed all of Canada.  It's less than we would have liked. 
 
Now we would like Ottawa to put that cheque in the mail to our Saskatchewan 
farmers so we can get on with step two, an equally important step, which is 
dealing with the international agri-food trade war and the crisis that 
that's creating on the price side, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- I again am referring the minister to this question and to 
the sentence.  I would say, Mr. Chairman, and the minister should note, 
that the March 19, 1990 official government document does not say, my 
government is urging a commitment from the Government of Canada for 
financial assistance; it doesn't say, my government is asking or expects or 
hopes.  It says, my government has received a commitment -- in the past 
tense -- received a commitment.  It doesn't talk about leading the charge, 



 

 

which your Premier is not doing, never did.  It is being led by the . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well I don't care about my credibility; 
we'll let the voters decide about that.  But I tell you Mr. Stevenson of 
the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, weeks before any politician thought of this 
issue, raised it, not your Premier or not your Minister of Agriculture 
officials.  And I'll give them the credit before I will the Premier.  
Leaving that as an aside . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- That's typical of the problem, not the solution. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Well typical of the problem is you people trying to put 
your Premier on some sort of a pedestal.  He might be a good Minister of 
Agriculture or a bad Minister of Agriculture.  I have my thoughts about 
that.  But your statement is absolutely incredible.  It lacks any kind of 
credibility and that is irrelevant to the issue. 
 
I am saying to this question, Mr. Minister, the words in your Speech from 
the Throne say not that you're fighting, not that your mighty Premier is 
fighting, not that you hope, not that you anticipate, not that you expect.  
You say you have received a commitment -- in past tense, full stop, period. 
 
And you're not satisfying me when I ask the question.  You say you received 
the commitment.  I asked the question, what was that commitment?  You're 
not satisfying me by giving me a great big speech about the Premier leading 
the charge.  If you want to give it to me again, go ahead, give it to me 
again.  I am going to ask you again and again, what was the commitment that 
you and your Premier and your government received from Ottawa on this $500 
million, according to your own words? 
 
So one more time, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I ask the minister with the 
greatest of respect, tell us what was the nature of the commitment you had 
on March 19, 1990 that obligated you to put in the Speech from the Throne 
the words, "My government has received a commitment . . ."?  What was it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, our Premier got the commitment.  It is 
less than this legislature, less than he would have wished for, and less 
than the Saskatchewan farmers would have wished for, at least in so far as 
dealing with the immediate cash situation.  We haven't dealt with export 
enhancement programs and those kinds of things. 
 
Our Premier got the commitment.  It's 500 million for across Canada, 90 per 
cent to the grains and oil-seed producers at least recognizes that that's 
the area of the most hurt.  And I wish the Premier well in his further 
discussions with the Prime Minister and the Deputy Prime Minster that he's 
undertaking yet today. 
 
And all I ask the Leader of the Opposition is when the Premier is looking 
for help, why can't he bring himself to help?   Why can't he put his own 
political self-interest behind him and get to work with our Premier on 
behalf of Saskatchewan farmers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the minister asked me a question and 
I'll answer.  I can't get behind this Premier because I don't know where 
this Premier stands on this issue.  The Premier tells us on March 19, he 
has a commitment.  I get behind him on that, thinking full well there's a 
commitment.  I endorsed the motion unanimously, thinking there's a 
commitment. I support Mr. Stevenson; I support the Premier.  He says he's 
got a commitment, there's a commitment, and we think that's what the 
position of the government is.  But here it is, two months later, and we 
find out that there is not commitment.  We find out that there are 
variations of that commitment. 
 
Now the minister came close to answering my question.  He flirted around 
the edges of it, but he never of course answered it.  I want to ask the 
minister, you said in response to my question that there was a commitment 
but it wasn't quite as high as had been expected.  Are you telling me that 
on March 19 -- and note carefully the words that I use and the dates that I 
use -- are you telling me that on March 19, 1990, in the Speech from the 
Throne, the commitment that you referred to there was a commitment 
substantially less than $500 million from Ottawa and that you knew the 
same? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, members of the committee, the Premier 
got the commitment.  It's going to work out in the order of something 
around $250 million for Saskatchewan farmers, based on 90 per cent of it 
going to the grains and oil-seeds sector.  As I said earlier, it's less 
than we might have wished for, that part of the assistance that we think 
should be forthcoming from the federal government. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- So, Mr. Chairman, the minister is telling me we'll end this 
statement or question with a question mark.  Is the minister telling the 
House, and telling me, that as of March 19, 1990 the commitment that the 
Premier and the government had was a commitment of $250 million 
approximately from Ottawa, cash to the farmers?  I understand the Minister 
says it was not enough, not quite hoped for, but that that is what the 
commitment was and the reference to the word "commitment" meant on March 
19, 1990.  Am I correct in that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chairman, rather, the Premier has 
got the commitment from the federal government on behalf of Saskatchewan 
farmers and indeed other farmers across Canada.  It was less than they 
would have hoped for.  We are happy that they recognize that the grains and 
oil-seed sector had the most hurt and now we would hope that they would 
send the cheque to the Saskatchewan farmers so that they can use that to 
alleviate some of the cash flow problems that exist in that sector today, 
Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm going to ask the Minister again for 
clarification.  Is the commitment approximately $250 million from Ottawa to 
Regina as of March 19, 1990?  And if the answer is yes, because I think you 
said yes in the second to last question to me, my complementary question or 
supplementary question is, if it is $250 million, why is it that in the 
Speech from the Throne, your government, your minister, your Premier of the 
province of Saskatchewan did not alert the farmers and this House that the 



 

 

commitment which he received from Ottawa was insufficient, that it fell far 
short of the $500 million which the president of the Wheat Pool led the 
charge on, which other farm leaders led the charge on, that the Premier 
supports? 
 
Why was it that in the Speech from the Throne there was no identification 
that the $250 million fell far short of the $500 million that everybody 
expected and this government by implication promised?  Why was that not the 
case? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, members of the committee, as I've said 
before, the Premier got the commitment, he has a very good track record 
when it comes, much to the dismay of the opposition leader, when it comes 
to dealing with Canada's government on behalf of Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
He got the commitment, as I said earlier.  It was less than we would have 
liked for this part of what we think has to be a multi-part package for 
farmers across Canada.  We're happy that they at least acknowledged the 
grains and oil-seed sector has the most hurt.  Based on our calculations 
and I think Ottawa's calculation, it looks like that should mean something 
in the order of 225 to $250 million flowing into Saskatchewan farmers' 
pockets based on the discussions that have taken place on the basis of the 
commitment from the federal government to date. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman was the commitment that you refer to, Mr. 
Minister, $250 million approximately from Ottawa payable to Saskatchewan on 
the condition that Saskatchewan would match that $250 million on a dollar 
for dollar basis?  Was that the commitment on or about March 19, 1990? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, as I said earlier, the Premier got the 
commitment from Ottawa.  It turned out to be less than we would have 
expected; we're still grateful for that.  Our Premier will continue to work 
at that and other issues facing the farm sector. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, again I guess we're going to have to settle 
in on this because we're talking about credibility.  Forget about mine for 
the moment, we're talking about yours now. 
 
And I'm just telling you, Mr. Minister, you're going to have to tell us 
what that commitment on or about March 19, 1990 was.  I did not use the 
words:  "My government has received a commitment from the Government of 
Canada".  You did, your government did. 
 
I'm asking you one more time, was the commitment that you refer to on March 
19, 1990 a commitment of $250 million from Ottawa, cash, contingent upon a 
dollar-for-dollar matching program from your treasury, the Minister of 
Finance, and the provincial Government of Saskatchewan.  Yes or no? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Our Premier, Mr. Chairman, on behalf of Saskatchewan 
farmers and indeed all farmers across Canada, got the commitment from the 
federal government to help out with the cash flow problems in that sector.  
The sum is less than we would have liked.  At the same time it did 
recognize where the most hurt was and we're hopeful that the Premier will 



 

 

be successful in convincing Ottawa to get those cheques in the mail as soon 
as possible, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, I say the minister is being evasive and I'm 
going to pursue him.  I want to ask the minister . . . and I'll wait until 
he and the Associate Minister of Health finish their conversation.  It's 
okay, Mr. Chairman, I can wait if you can, sir, and the ministers can.  I 
think it would be a good idea to hold cabinet meetings in the cabinet room 
and not in the Legislative Assembly.  However, I'm thankful for any place 
where these cabinet ministers hold meetings.  It's good to know they're 
consulting with each other.  So I'll wait.  This is a . . . There are a 
number of firsts, all right, in politics in this legislature, and this is 
got to be one of the first.  But nevertheless as hard as it is for the 
minister to even give some measure of respect to the Leader of the 
Opposition, I'm going to try again. 
 
And my question to the Minister of Agriculture is this . . . Minister of 
Finance: did you have on March 19, 1990, any dollar figures from Ottawa or 
any commitments with respect to dollars from Ottawa pertaining to spring 
seeding on or about March 19 at the time of the Speech from the Throne?  If 
so, I want to know what that commitment was. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- I can only say, Mr. Chairman, again, that our Premier 
got the commitment from Ottawa to help the Saskatchewan farmer -- Canadian 
farmers as it turned out.  I think the other ministers of Agriculture from 
the adjoining provinces and their premiers appreciate the lead 
spokesmanship role our Premier has taken on this issue.  The Premier got 
the commitment. 
 
As I said earlier, it was somewhat less than we would all have wished for.  
We're grateful for it.  It's going to be targeted to the area with the 
biggest hard grains and oil-seed sector.  And now we just wish they would 
send the cheque, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, I want to ask the Minister of Agriculture, 
when did he receive, your Premier, this commitment of which you speak?  Was 
it on or before March 19, 1990 or was it after March 1990?  And if it was 
after March 1990, are you referring to the $250 million from Ottawa on a 
cost-shared basis with the provinces as the commitment which you say is 
somewhat less? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- The Premier got the commitment from Ottawa.  
Subsequent negotiations with all ministers of Agriculture involved, I 
think, led to the announcement at the ministers of Agriculture meeting that 
the Premier was at.  It led to Mr. Mazankowski then announcing that he 
would put a half a billion dollars on the table, and I said what our view 
is of that amount and how it's to be distributed earlier. 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, is the minister tell me that your 
government, Mr. Minister, you sitting around the provincial cabinet table 
writing this official government document, the Speech from the Throne, that 



 

 

you put in the words, knowing full well that they were going to be 
publicized province-wide to the farmers and the farm communities of this 
province, that you put in the words, my government has received a 
commitment from the Government of Canada.  Are you telling me that you put 
those words in on March 19, 1990 without having anything in your pocket 
except a vague, generalized statement of commitment by the Ottawa people, 
that there were no dollars attached to that?  Is that the position you've 
taken? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- As I said earlier, our Premier got the commitment, 
the dollar figure at the end of the day, I suppose in what we might 
consider round one, was less than we would have wished.  But having said 
that, at least it's targeted, at least a majority of that money, 90 per 
cent of it will be targeted at the right sector. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, when did the minister and the Premier get the 
commitment and would he table the correspondence from the federal people 
which describe that commitment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- I can only repeat, Mr. Chairman.  The Premier, on 
behalf of not only this province but other provinces, got the commitment 
from the federal government.  Having said that, we know the farmers don't 
have their cheque in the mail yet but we're hopeful that it's coming and 
coming shortly. 
 
The dollar amount that Mr. Mazankowski was prepared apparently to put on 
the table for this for farmers across Canada was a half a billion.  That 
announcement was made at the end of the ministers of Agriculture, joint 
federal-provincial meeting.  I'm not sure of the date of that, but that is, 
if my memory serves me correctly, that's when Mazankowski made the 
announcement of the amount. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the minister is being evasive, I repeat 
again, and I might add not very cleverly so.  He says the federal 
government delivered a commitment.  He does not tell me when that 
commitment was delivered.  He refuses, or at least ignores, to answer my 
request for a tabling of the letter from Mazankowski and the federal people 
describing that letter; I will come back to that point. 
 
How in the world can the minister stand in this House and say that he has a 
commitment when as of this date, Mr. Chairman, May 9, 1990, we have 
newspaper stories -- I have a copy here in front of me from the Saskatoon 
Star-Phoenix -- headline of which says, "Provinces offered farm aid deal."  
As of May 9 in this story there are two alternative "commitments" that Mr. 
Mazankowski's offering to you people here in Regina and to the farmers.  
One is $250 million cash from Ottawa but only if you borrow from Ottawa the 
remaining $250 million to make up for the grand total of 500 million. 
 
The other option is the $500 million export subsidy program if you don't 
follow this plan, where Ottawa will use the $500 million for export 
subsidy.  Now that's of May 9. 
 
How in the world can the minister opposite, and will you please explain to 



 

 

me, can you use the word commitment in the context in which you have, given 
the fact that as of this very moment as we speak, in fact as the question 
and answer period in question period revealed, your Premier is down in 
Ottawa looking at these various options and so-called "commitments"? 
 
Look it, isn't the truth of the matter that you never had any kind of a 
commitment and you still don't have a commitment and it's being negotiated 
by the provincial government.  The very thing that you're pleading with me 
to give some unanimity and support to your Premier, it's being negotiated 
right now.  There is no commitment, isn't that the truth of the matter and 
there never was one on March 19, 1990. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- No, the hon. member is incorrect, Mr. Chairman.  The 
Premier got the commitment. The dollars less than we would like.  There's 
been discussion and negotiation with the Premier, with other provinces, 
other agriculture ministers, relative to some conditions that the federal 
government placed on that money, conditions that we disagree with. 
 
All our Premier wants is what the Saskatchewan farmers want.  We laid that 
out fairly clearly here in this legislature.  I know the NDP had raised the 
resolution with our House Leader.  We were of the view it was a bit too 
narrow; we expanded that to become a bit more comprehensive on all of the 
things that we thought need to be addressed in agriculture. 
 
We were thankful for the opposition's support of that resolution and the 
unanimous support that resolution enjoyed.  I think that sends a clear 
signal and did send a clear signal to Ottawa.  We're hopeful that those 
negotiations will be concluded shortly and that the cheques will be in the 
mail, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, I come back to this to the minister.  Note 
the words very carefully, Mr. Chairman, of what the minister has said.  He 
is trying to ride two horses at least, going in opposite directions and 
maybe more -- a very difficult job but only this Minister of Finance can 
accomplish that.  I commend him for his dexterity . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well, he says he's got his cowboy hat on right, but I 
think right now, if he walked anywhere with a cowboy hat in the province of 
Saskatchewan he probably would find that the farmers of Saskatchewan 
wouldn't support that view. 
 
But let me ask the Minister of Finance this.  Let me ask the Minister of 
Finance this.  And just listen to the question for a moment, Mr. Minister.  
And I ask you because you're clever, by half, unfortunately for your 
government and for your side.  Listen carefully to what you're saying to 
me, because I'm going to be using these transcript answers very carefully, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
You said to me in the last answer that your Premier received a commitment 
but the dollars were less.  I'll stop there.  That's the effect of the 
answer. 
 
And then you went on to describe that the dollars less of the $250 million, 
the proposition that you describe, obviously that's the less part of what 



 

 

the commitment was. 
 
Clearly my conclusion is that you say you had a commitment from Ottawa for 
something more than $250 million.  You had, as I interpret your words, a 
commitment from Ottawa, thus you put it in the March 19 Speech from the 
Throne, a commitment of $500 million, or some larger amount than 250 
million in any event -- cash on the dash. 
 
That being the case, are you saying that Mr. Mazankowski and Mr. Mulroney 
broke their word and broke their commitment, broke their deal with the 
farmers of the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, as I said earlier, the Premier got a 
commitment, one that I think enjoyed the support not only of this House, 
but as well, of other prairie Agriculture ministers.  It was less than we 
would have wished.  And so in that regard I suppose one could say the 
federal government -- in fact I think it's safe to say we would say they're 
reneging on what should be their entire commitment. 
 
Because as I said right at the outset, there's no one single program that's 
going to address all the challenges that farmers face.  We saw this as part 
of a multi-part program.  We were greatly disturbed when it comes to 
reneging on what we think was a great opportunity to take the second step, 
if you like.  We were greatly disappointed when they announced, Mr. Mayer 
announced on behalf of the wheat board here a week or so ago, the lower 
initial grain prices. 
 
We think that was a golden opportunity, as our Premier has said, to really 
show . . . Canada could have shown the Europeans and the U.S. that we're 
not going to be intimidated by this war, being caught up in this 
cross-fire; that they were prepared to stand up with their treasury against 
these other treasuries that are taking part in the international agri-food 
trade war. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, this is disturbing indeed to hear that 
the federal Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Mazankowski, and the Prime 
Minister of Canada . . . Leaving politics aside for the moment, people in 
responsible offices have made commitments which were reneged upon, made 
commitments to our Premier but reneged upon. 
 
And of course we'll be very anxious to see if any Member of Parliament 
tomorrow or so soon thereafter in the House of Commons will inquire of the 
Prime Minister and Mr. Mazankowski why it was that they reneged on the $500 
million cash on the dash which you say was made to the Premier of the 
province of Saskatchewan.  Because that indeed is a very, very damning 
indictment of people in responsibility who have offered and made a 
commitment, verbally or otherwise, but have gone back on their word, which 
is basically what you've said.  And we'll be pursuing that in the next few 
days in advance. 
 
But I want to come back to another question in this regard.  Was this 
commitment which you had, to which the Prime Minister allegedly, and the 
Minister of Agriculture Canada, broke the deal, broke their words, was this 



 

 

a written commitment forwarded in writing to the Minister of Agriculture or 
to you, sir, as Minister of Finance, or to the Premier in his capacity as 
Premier?  Was it in a verbal form?  What precisely was the form of that 
commitment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well the details, written, verbal, or telex or 
facsimile or otherwise, those kinds of details would be better asked of the 
Premier and Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, again I really tell the House and you, 
sir, Mr. Chairman, we want to deal with business in a dispatchful proper 
way.  And it's not my job -- I've got other things to do outside of this 
Legislative Assembly this afternoon -- not my job to prolong the services 
here. But I tell you this is a major issue. 
 
And we are talking about credibility and I would suspect that if the 
minister opposite is going to protect the credibility of his Premier and 
his minister, the easiest way to do that would be to table the 
documentation which would support the statements which he makes in defence 
of what the provincial government has done.  There's nothing to fear, 
nothing to hide.  If Ottawa has made a commitment and has reneged on that 
commitment, a revelation of the relevant documents would only buttress the 
Premier's position, I'm sure, and probably would get us more inclined to be 
charitable to the current machinations and the current thrashing about 
which is going on all the way from Portage la Prairie to Ottawa. 
 
So I say to the Minister of Finance, in the interests of preserving the 
credibility of the Minister of Agriculture and the Premier of the province 
of Saskatchewan, and given the fact that you, sir, are a very senior 
minister in the government and given the fact, sir, that the debate about 
potential provincial funds be forced to be paid by Regina to Ottawa and 
therefore this has a very big dollar component to you, I want you to table 
those documents now which will verify the fact that Ottawa, the Prime 
Minister, and Mr. Mazankowski have gone back on their word, and the 
commitment was something, in your words, less than had been expected. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, I have tabled in this House what I've 
had to say on this, and I'll reread it and reiterate it for the hon. 
member.  On March 29 I said in this House: 
 

 Saskatchewan cannot take on the treasuries of the United States or the 
European Economic Community by itself -- we cannot go alone . . . (This 
government has) responded in . . . a fair and reasonable way . . . 

 
 . . . The federal government must also keep its commitment.  The 

Government of Canada has a responsibility to our farmers.  All members of 
this Assembly have called upon the federal government to assist farmers 
with the cost of spring seeding and to provide compensation for current 
unfair prices.  We fully expect the federal government to honour its 
commitment to Saskatchewan farmers and provide assistance. 

 
That's what I said in this House, and I stand by that, Mr. Chairman.  And 
when it comes to the question of credibility and tabling documents that he, 



 

 

who's a long-standing member of this House, would think that I might have 
between the Premier and the Minister of Agriculture and the Prime Minister 
and the Minister of Agriculture for Canada, I say to you, Mr. Chairman, 
that is a prime example of petty politics. 
 
That member has been in this House long enough to know -- and he can 
correct me if I'm wrong, I challenge him to correct me if I'm wrong in fact 
-- you've been in this House, you've been in this committee several times . 
. . and I think I've hit a nerve.  I think I've hit a nerve, Mr.  
 DChairman, I've hit a nerve amongst some of the members of the NDP caucus 
because they know I'm right.  They know that this is nothing more than 
simple, petty politics suggesting to the members of the committee that I 
would likely come to the House with a truck load of the Premier's 
correspondence that probably goes out in any given week. 
 
You know, Mr. Chairman, and I know that that is as shallow as that member's 
credibility.  When it comes to credibility, I reiterate, what kind of a 
credible spokesperson for the farm community would stand up in mid-March 
and say, we need a spring seeding program, Mr. Premier.  And I'll table 
that letter if you want.  I'll find that one.  I'll table that letter that 
says, the platform of the New Democratic Party of Saskatchewan and the 
Leader of the Opposition says as part of that platform, short term and long 
term, we should have a spring seeding program. 
 
Now if that's the case, I ask the Leader of the Opposition, why did your 
Finance critic, the hon. member for Regina Centre, why did the member for 
Regina Centre, why is he still the Finance critic if he denounced your own 
policy two weeks later?  Could you explain that lapse of credibility on 
behalf of your party as its leader?  Could you explain that lapse of 
credibility to Saskatchewan farmers? 
 
(1530) 
 
And while I'm talking about credibility, could you explain that other lapse 
of your credibility when a year and a half ago the member for 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, the now member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, 
campaigning, and a letter from you, under your signature, went to all 
constituents saying if you elect a member, the PC member for 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, all the hospitals in that riding will shut down.  
What about that lapse of credibility I ask the hon. member about?  So we 
don't need your hectoring and your lecturing about credibility. 
 
The crisis of credibility when it comes to the farm sector, and quite 
frankly many other sectors, should weigh heavily on your shoulders.  And I 
say to you, look into your soul when it comes to this issue.  Get rid of 
the petty politics -- get rid of the petty politics.  Let's get rid of, 
well what day did the letter go and what time did the letter go and did he 
send a facsimile or was it a telex?  What day and what hour was the 
telephone call made?  Let's get to some bloody issues in this House! 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, those are awfully scary words by that tough 



 

 

Minister of Finance.  Boy it's got me shaking in my boots I want to tell 
the Minister of Finance.  But I think we're going to give it another try.  
We're going to give it another try.  And I'll make, first of all, an 
observation, Mr. Chairman, about the New Democratic Party policy on 
agriculture and . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order, order.  I'd ask members to discontinue the debate 
across the floor and allow the Leader of the Opposition to put his 
question. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Although I don't mind 
hearing the Conservative back-benchers even from a seated position 
speaking; it's about the only time we hear them.  So we'd just as soon hear 
them even from the heckling position. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I want to explain for the moment, for the sixth time.  Now, 
Mr. Chairman, I'll take any heckling from a seated member but I will not 
take any heckling from a member standing at the door outside of the 
debating Chamber -- none whatsoever.  And I ask you to call him to order. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order, order.  The member that was heckling was the member 
from Wilkie who was in his seat. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm going to ask you, sir, to get the member 
from Cut Knife-Lloydminster who was standing in the doorway known to you, 
sir, and heard by you, sir, hollering at you and me, sir . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order.  Is the member challenging the Chair, saying that I 
was not looking at the member who was doing the heckling?  You're casting 
aspersions on the Chair by saying that I wasn't watching and knowing what 
was going on?  The member from Wilkie was in his seat, and he was heckling 
the member from Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, I say that the member from Lloydminster-Cut 
Knife, as is his habit, was standing in the doorway yelling at me.  I say 
that that was heard by everybody here.  I ask you to consider whether or 
not you heard it, and if you did to take the member to task for doing so.  
Everybody knows it, including him and . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order.  We are going to continue these estimates, or I 
will put the question. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- You refuse, do you, to take this member's complaint, the 
Leader of the Opposition's complaint, about that member to heart?  Is that 
what you're telling me? 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- The member is not to debate with the Chair. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, I am not debating with the Chair.  I will 
observe to the members of the House that the way the members opposite in 
decorum have conducted themselves in this committee, especially the member 
from Lloydminster-Cut Knife, is a disgrace. 
 



 

 

I don't ask you to make a comment on it.  You apparently haven't heard it. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order, order.  The Chair will be the judge of the decorum 
in the House, not members.  The Chair will make that decision. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, I wish again to return to the main issue, 
albeit the threat that the hon. member from Lloydminster-Cut Knife is again 
moving to his secret alcove for debate, with the encouragement of the 
Minister of Finance I might add, and the avid support of all of those 
people in the back, I shall now pursue once again . . . I don't mind the 
member from Wilkie from a seated position, I say, take part in the debate, 
because it's welcome to hear you at all. 
 
But I say, Mr. Chairman, I say to the Chair . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order.  I've asked the member from Wilkie to allow the 
member from Saskatoon Riversdale to put his questions to the Minister of 
Finance. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, I was in the 
process of saying the following with respect to the New Democratic Party's 
policy on spring loan seeding before I was rudely interrupted, the 
following, and I repeat this to the Minister of Finance so that he can take 
note of it. 
 
I have the document and I can mail it to him.  The document which we 
released on February 26, 1990 was very clear.  It said: first, $500 million 
cash payment; second and thereafter, a spring seeding loan guarantee; and 
third, a moratorium to July 1, 1990. 
 
We did not advocate a spring seeding loan guarantee in the absence of a 
$500 million cash pay-out.  We advocated the $500 million cash payment 
based on what the president of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool argued.  And 
what you people were telling us in the House or before the House in the 
public at large, was the objective of the $500 million.  That is the 
policy.  To move with the spring seeding plan only in the absence of the 
$500 million cash, the $500 million cash needed to absorb a lot of that red 
ink out there, of course is throwing an anchor, as has been described 
before, to a drowning farmer. 
 
That is what we criticize you about.  It's a policy of three points that 
need to be raised.  I'm not going to convince you because you're going to 
continue to use your argument.  That's neither here nor there but at least 
I get a chance to put on the record, and for those people who might be 
watching this debate on television, what the true facts are with respect to 
the document, and we remain on that. 
 
But I want to come back to the issue here with respect to . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Pardon me? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- As the World Turns I think is probably getting more 
viewers than you and I. 



 

 

 
Mr. Romanow: -- Well maybe so, maybe so.  But I'll tell you one thing, how 
many there are, there're too many for you people because every time the 
proceedings are aired you lose more support.  So it doesn't much matter how 
many there are. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- But I want to come back to the question of credibility.  
And I suspect that it will . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Capital C. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Yes, capital C.  You spell it out, Mr. Minister, in your 
usually arrogant fashion.  Continue on and we'll, as I say, we'll just 
pursue this until we get some answers. 
 
I am asking you, sir, not to come in with truck loads of documents.  I'm 
not asking that.  I don't expect you to come here with truck loads of 
documents.  I don't ask that. 
 
I just simply ask you -- you've got several officials behind you; you've 
got your political people watching this matter on television -- I ask you 
to have somebody from your office make the phone call to the Premier's 
office right now and say, look, the Minister of Finance has said that the 
Premier received a commitment on March 19, 1990.  You said a commitment.  
You made that statement.  What is that commitment?  You said it was in 
writing; you said it was from the federal government; you said it was for 
more than $250 million.  You say that the Ottawa government broke that 
commitment. 
 
I want to know what that original commitment was -- simple, pure and 
simple.  Because I tell you if Mr. Mulroney and Mr. Mazankowski had $500 
million in a commitment to this Premier -- PC or otherwise, I don't care -- 
I think it's an obligation for the people of this province, in opposition 
and in farm, to say to the Prime Minister, you've done wrong, you've broken 
your word.  We need the money; the farmers need the money. 
 
But I can't take that position based on your statements, especially your 
answers which, if I may say so again, are evasive to put it mildly.  But I 
can say those statements if I've been given some documentary proof that the 
commitment was made so that we could at least assess where the blame falls.  
Right now, sir, don't you see what's happening?  In the minds of 
fair-minded people a lot of the blame falls on your shoulders.  Maybe 
unfairly as you see it, but the way to dispel the unfairness is to be able 
to show what the documentation reveals, to tell the track record.  That's 
what I'm getting at in this questioning and I'm not succeeding. 
 
So one more time, Mr. Minister.  Tell us when this commitment was received.  
Tell us what the commitment was.  Produce a document or documents in due 
course, in the next hour, showing what that commitment was and then mount 
the argument that it was less than what you had been received and assured 
by the Prime Minister and Mr. Mazankowski, that it was considerably less, 



 

 

upon which then at least we can make some progress to determine who really 
was telling the truth with respect to this commitment.  I ask you again, 
what's so unreasonable about that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- I think we now see what the hon. member is truly 
looking for, Mr. Chairman.  And it was in the statement when he said, you 
see, Mr. Minister, fair-minded people would say that the blame is really on 
the Premier's shoulders.  You see what I say, Mr. Chairman, is, fair-minded 
people would also say that our Premier is the one who got the commitment.  
It's our Premier who has worked hard to get assistance from the federal 
government.  It's our Premier who has worked with the farm groups to get 
that commitment.  It is our Premier who has worked with farm groups to 
tailor the response of this government in a right and proper fashion. 
 
You see, Mr. Chairman, what he would really like, what he would really like 
is to be able to lay the blame on the Premier's shoulders for his own 
purely political partisan purposes.  It's got nothing to do, it's got not 
one iota, not one iota of anything to do with getting support for 
Saskatchewan farmers from Ottawa.  It's nothing more than him trying to 
politically position himself as somehow the Premier is the bad guy; he is 
the good guy.  It won't work.  The people see through it because the issue 
is just as you have said -- credibility.  Just as you have said. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- I'm trying to hold my tongue, but I must say that the 
answer of the minister is pathetic.  I could say more but I'm not going to 
because I'm still hopeful that we're going to make some progress here. 
 
Mr. Minister, and Mr. Chairman, I did not write the words: 
 

 My government has received a commitment from the Government of Canada that 
financial assistance will be provided to farmers for spring seeding. 

 
I did not do that.  You, sir, did that.  You did that.  And you, the member 
from Wilkie, you did that.  This Speech from the Throne was taken to the 
caucus and to the cabinet and you approved it.  Was not the member from . . 
. maybe he could get involved in this committee deliberation. 
 
I want to ask the minister, the member from Wilkie, did you know that this 
sentence was in the Speech from the Throne?  And if you do, did you not get 
up in caucus and ask what was the commitment? 
 
You see, Mr. Chairman, what I'm getting at.  I did not write these words.  
A farmer who sees these words interprets that there is money or a 
commitment.  In fact later on it says, a promise.  The word used is 
promises.  Now we've gotten the minister to at least admit that there is 
some money which was promised by Ottawa which was less than what the 
Premier wanted. 
 
He says, trust me, the Premier had that commitment.  I'm saying I wish I 
could trust you but I can't because of previous record.  I am saying to the 
minister, the thing that you've got to do is to show the Legislative 
Assembly what that commitment was in writing.  You have nothing to fear.  
If I am here to embarrass the Premier as you allege -- and I assure you 



 

 

that I am not here to embarrass the Premier -- if I am here to embarrass 
the Premier as you allege -- and I repeat again that it's not my objective 
-- the easy rebuttal to that embarrassment attempt would be surely some 
form of documentary proof of what you say.  Why not?  What's so difficult?  
Why would that be the impossible task to achieve as far as you and the 
officials are concerned?  I don't see it whatsoever. 
 
(1545) 
 
And I think, Mr. Minister, that you owe it, given the urgency of the issue, 
given the delay in receiving the money, given the confusion about whether 
or not any money is going to be forthcoming based on today's newspaper 
reports, you have an obligation, sir, to table it, not for my sake. 
 
If you want to enhance your Premier, I don't care.  Just give us the 
documentation showing what that commitment was so that the farmers and the 
farm organizations can judge for themselves where the log-jam is, who's at 
fault, where the difficulties are, and why that money which is badly needed 
is not forthcoming.  Again, Mr. Chairman, I ask the minister, on those 
arguments, will you not reconsider and table documentation as is 
appropriate here? 
 
 DHon. Mr. Hepworth: -- As I've said before, Mr. Chairman, the Premier 
received the commitment.  We would have liked to -- this phase if you like 
-- to have been more than 500 million.  In fact, we would've wanted 500 
million for Saskatchewan alone.  In so far as details relative to letters 
and faxes and whatever else, I'll have to refer the hon. member to the 
Premier and the Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I clearly am being stonewalled here, 
and totally unsatisfactory responses.  I want to shift therefore, given the 
adamancy of the minister, to ask: if he will not give me paper, will he 
give me a relatively concise verbal description of what that commitment was 
on or about March 19, of 1990 that I refer to in the Speech from the 
Throne. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, once again as I said, our Premier has 
led the charge on this issue through a series of meetings with farm 
leaders, other ministers of Agriculture from across western Canada.  He 
enjoyed wide-spread support on this multifaceted approach, which included 
cash for spring input costs.  That commitment was culminated by 
announcement by Mr. Mazankowski at the ministers of Agriculture meeting, if 
my memory serves me correctly, at the ministers of Agriculture meeting.  I 
think the Associate Minister of Agriculture would back me up on that. 
 
Five hundred million dollars was what he was prepared to lay on the table 
as that part of the commitment.  It's not as much as we would like.  I've 
already expressed on behalf of the Premier and Minister of Agriculture the 
disappointment that we had last week when they dropped the initial grain 
price because we thought that would be an excellent place for them to 
address the international agri-food trade war export enhancement program 
offset that we also addressed, not only that our Premiers had addressed, 
but this House addressed, but hopefully that too yet can be resolved, Mr. 



 

 

Chairman. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the minister again, I think one has to 
now conclude after an hour of questioning, really has no commitment, had no 
commitment on March 19, 1990.  The Premier had no commitment, and they 
misled the farmers of the province of Saskatchewan.  The simple answer 
would have been to tell me the details of that commitment on March 19 or, 
in the alternative, some documentation from the federal government.  I 
think we're rapidly coming to the conclusion that there is a misleading by 
the government opposite, the Premier and the Minister of Finance, on this 
question of the $500 million cash on the dash. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Is that parliamentary? 
 
 DMr. Romanow: -- The member is asking whether it's parliamentary.  I did 
not accuse the member of deliberately misleading, which is unparliamentary, 
at least I haven't made that accusation yet.  But I make the accusation 
that it was misleading.  But I do make the accusation, I think, subject to 
your answers, that it's misleading. 
 
But I want to ask the Minister of Finance again . . . I want to ask the 
Minister of Finance again in what I think is a serious set of questions -- 
the minister obviously doesn't want to treat it with the same gravity that 
I think it deserves -- but I'll ask this question from the Minister of 
Finance.  Is it the position of your government that no provincial money 
will be forthcoming to complement or match any federal special financing 
with respect to this aspect of the farm aid program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, in so far as our expectation, and we 
hope the opposition's expectation, was laid out in a resolution that 
enjoyed the unanimous support of this House, and I hope that it still does 
enjoy the unanimous support of this House, when our Premier and the 
Minister of Agriculture moved under rule 39 a very comprehensive six-part 
resolution or motion relative to help for Saskatchewan farmers, I think 
that fairly clearly laid out our position then, which was March 20, and it 
does today, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- So the answer the minister is giving me is that under no 
circumstances will the Minister of Finance pony up, if I may put it that 
way, any provincial Government of Saskatchewan, province of Saskatchewan 
money with respect to anything which might be ongoing by way of discussions 
between Mr. Mazankowski and the Premier in Ottawa, and that the Minister of 
Finance seems to be pretty dug in on that. 
 
I want to ask another question, and that is this.  Would the provincial 
government be willing to make a loan . . . effect a loan from Ottawa as 
offered by Mr. Mazankowski under today's date of May 9, 1990 in order to 
match the $250 million unconditional from Ottawa, thereby totalling the 
$500 million and thereby get this much-needed cash on the dash for the 
farmers?  Is that an option that is open to you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Our view is that we . . . and it's a view shared by 
our neighbours to the east and west of us, their ministers of Agriculture 



 

 

and their premiers, is: we're not about to blink.  Five hundred million, 
less than we would have wished for, but they've put on the table.  Our view 
is, now send the cheques out to the farmers. 
 
Our commitment, as other provinces would say as well . . . their 
commitments were in their budgets for the farmers.  It's I think a very 
reasonable commitment, given the times we live in -- substantive new 
dollars to agriculture, substantive increase in some areas relative to some 
of the ongoing programs, tax relief and spending to the farm sector, rural 
Saskatchewan, totalling over $400 million in this budget -- our cash on the 
table.  Federal government now needs to send their money to Saskatchewan 
farmers. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- So the answer is that the Minister of Finance has dug in.  
There will be no request for Ottawa to lend to the province of Saskatchewan 
$250 million so that we can resolve the impasse in that way.  That's 
another option which is removed. 
 
Will the Minister of Finance tell me whether or not in this interim supply 
that we're discussing and voting, whether or not there is any contingency 
or reserve set aside from which $250 million could be found by the province 
of Saskatchewan if it changed its mind -- I understand that you won't 
change your mind -- as negotiations might unfold. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- No, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- So the situation is the Government of Saskatchewan will not 
match the federal offer.  The Government of Saskatchewan will not borrow 
from Ottawa in order to get the $500 million.  The Government of 
Saskatchewan does not have any contingency fund for the $250 million 
provincial commitment in order to match the Ottawa, so we don't have money 
in that regard either.  The doors, Mr. Chairman, are being shut pretty 
clearly to many of the options. 
 
Let me explore a fourth option.  Is it the position of the Minister of 
Agriculture, or the Minister of Finance more particularly, that the export 
subsidy usage of the $500 million that Mr. Mazankowski threatens as of 
today's date, May 9, is it your position that is unacceptable too?  Or what 
is your position in that regard? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Our position is that we will not allow the federal 
government to shirk its international responsibilities to our Saskatchewan 
farmers.  Not only is that our position, that's the position of all of 
these who have written the Associate Minister of Agriculture and the 
Minister of Agriculture and the Premier, urging not to back down on this 
position, Mr. Chairman.  Whether, as the Associate Minister of Agriculture 
said in question period, whether it's the canola growers, the Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association, the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities, the Western Canadian Wheat Growers, the wheat pool, the 
United Grain Growers, whoever it is, they are standing behind our Premier, 
urging him on, telling Ottawa send out the money, support our farmers in 
the international agri-food trade war. 
 



 

 

That's the position of the farmers.  The farmers are behind the Premier.  
And I just ask this and this simple thing of the opposition and the 
opposition leader particularly; I ask him to get behind our Premier on 
behalf of Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, again the minister says that I get behind the 
Premier.  Pretty hard to know how to get behind the Premier, since his 
position changes so much and so often and so frequently; ranging all the 
way from a commitment which turns out to be a phantom commitment, there was 
no commitment -- how we can back that, I don't know -- now to at least four 
different options which have arisen, each one of them having arisen just 
today.  And yet we are to get behind the Premier of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
It's little wonder the farmers in the province of Saskatchewan are very 
angered with this government and the government in Ottawa.  This is not the 
first time this has happened.  There have been promises in 1988 of drought 
assistance, 10 days before the federal election, which money of course 
after the election they scrambled together to try to advance and no one 
quite knew the formula for the drought pay-outs -- the massive confusion 
that took place there.  And I suspect this is the same situation, sadly as 
far as the farmers are concerned, which we are facing here. 
 
But none the less, I notice in today's Star-Phoenix of May 9, 1990, in an 
article by Vern Greenshields and a head-line which says: "Provinces offered 
farm aid deal," a quotation from Mr. Mazankowski, and I'll put the whole 
quotation into context by reading it, and then preface the quotation, then 
give you a question. 
 

 Mazankowski said he would be flexible to the point of paying both his 
share and the province's immediately if the provinces would repay Ottawa. 

 
Now, Mr. Chairman, I'll stop from the quotation there.  Note the words of 
Mazankowski.  He is going to make that $500 million available immediately, 
cash on the dash to the farmers of the province of Saskatchewan, if the 
provinces would repay, some time down the road, Ottawa.  We know the 
farmers need the money very desperately.  They needed it two months ago, 
three months ago, and even more than that.  Here is a prospect of getting 
it immediately if the provinces would repay. 
 
Is the minister taking the position that that is simply not on and 
therefore the farmers of the province of Saskatchewan must wait whilst the 
dispute between Tories in Ottawa and Tories in Regina is resolved? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well we're taking the position, as are other western 
provinces, premiers and ministers of Agriculture, that we have put our cash 
on the table.  It is up to the federal government to respond. 
 
And why would we let the federal government off the hook?  Is that your 
view?  Is that your policy?  That certainly isn't our view.  And the hon. 
member suggests that because the Premier and other western premiers are 
taking that approach, that somehow the farmers of Saskatchewan -- to use 
his words -- are angry at the Premier.  I doubt that, Mr. Chairman.  That 



 

 

pile of letters I had here and showed you just moments ago, that doesn't 
look like a bunch of angry farmers or farm group leaders to me.  What that 
is, is a bunch of farmers and farm groups who believe in the position our 
Premier has taken and want to support him. 
 
This cuts again at that very issue we talked about -- credibility.  There 
is no credibility in that statement to say that the farmers of Saskatchewan 
are mad.  The farmers of Saskatchewan, I would suggest, would be mad at you 
if you don't stand behind the Premier and help him with these discussions 
on these several issues that need to be resolved relative to 
federal-provincial relations in agriculture in the international agri-food 
trade wars. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, did the provincial government put any 
provincial money into the drought payment of 1988 and, if so, how much?  
And, Mr. Chairman, while the minister is considering, why would the 
provincial government do that on the principle that this is a federal 
responsibility presumably, as in this instance? 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, relative to federal-provincial 
cost-sharing of programs, ad hoc and/or otherwise over the last few years, 
and these dates and numbers are rough, but I think they make the point that 
I want to make relative to cost-sharing which I think is where the hon. 
member was coming from on one specific program. 
 
What I can tell him is over the years -- and I think this would go back to 
something in the order of '84-85 -- the historical ratio has been this 
roughly:  for every $1 we have provided to Saskatchewan farmers, farm 
families, rural Saskatchewan, the federal government has provided $8.  
Obviously they're a much larger treasury.  And in real numbers it's 
something in the order of . . . we've put up $800 million and the federal 
government, through that same rough time period -- and I stand to be 
corrected on the time period -- was $6.6 billion.  And that's the point 
we're making with them on this round of negotiations.  And they ought not 
to hold Saskatchewan farmers hostage by suggesting that the ratio should be 
otherwise. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, I asked about the drought program and I guess 
I'd like those numbers.  But what I'm getting at is I'd like to know the 
rationale of the government.  If you're holding the federal government, as 
you say you are, to this $500 million straight from Ottawa and there should 
be no provincial money for this, why is it that the provincial government 
opposite agreed to cost share the -- as I understand they did -- the 
drought payment in 1988?  What made the principle capable of violation then 
but not capable of violation now, given the gravity of the crisis in rural 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well there's a couple of points I would make here, 
and I think the hon. member might be missing the key one, is that we have 
in this budget as I said, in one way or another, expenditure side or tax 
relief side, provided farms, rural Saskatchewan, with something in excess 



 

 

of $400 million as our part of our commitment to farmers in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We have put our cash on the table and it's out there for Saskatchewan 
farmers.  Our view is that the federal government should do the same thing.  
The idea that it should be 50-50 cost shared, as I said, we've rebutted 
that argument by showing quite clearly that the historical ratio has been 
1:8. 
 
Thirdly, if they're looking for new money, if that's what they think they 
need to see, there's lots of that in this budget -- $525 million 
appropriated for a spring seeding program, not to mention the other various 
programs. 
 
But the very key point and I think one that the opposition leader should be 
made aware of as well as the critic for Agriculture and other members of 
the caucus, because this is really the key component to the Premier and the 
other premiers' and farmers' arguments, is that why we need the help is 
because of the international agri-food trade wars. 
 
The North Dakota legislature and the North Dakota farmer isn't expected to 
pony up to take on the international trade war.  The Saskatchewan farmer 
shouldn't be expected to either, and that is the key fundamental impacting 
on our thinking here and, indeed the thinking of other farmers across 
western Canada.  This is an international issue, not an interprovincial 
issue, and that is why it should be and, indeed, we make the case for the 
federal government's help to Saskatchewan and other Canadian farmers. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- The argument the minister makes with respect to the 
treasuries of Canada being better equipped to support Saskatchewan and 
Canadian farmers in the international wars is a good point.  There's no 
doubt about that, that the amount of money that Ottawa has vis-a-vis 
subsidies compared to what Saskatchewan has, especially given the mess, the 
financial mess which you people have sunk the province into since 1982, 
clearly there's a strong argument for Ottawa's involvement. 
 
But how does the minister propose to explain the situation that we find 
ourselves in?  Ottawa is not coming up with the money, albeit there are 
some good reasons for it.  You're not coming up with the money, although 
you've done it in the past with drought and you've done it on other 
projects.  I don't want to get you flying high again, but I'll mention the 
word Cargill. 
 
What happens to the farmer in this circumstance?  You say that the farmer 
shouldn't carry on his or her shoulders the international grains wars.  I 
agree.  But don't you think that the farmer should similarly not carry on 
his or her shoulders the Regina-Ottawa wars, phoney or otherwise, as some 
observers have made?  Where are they left in this whole situation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Quite simply, Mr. Chairman, he asks where is the 
farmer in all of this.  I'll tell you where the farmer is in all this.  
He's four-square behind the Premier, that's where he is.  We've got a stack 
of letters this thick, and typical of those letters is one to the Premier, 



 

 

May 8: 
 

 Dear Mr. Premier: (and it's from the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities)  I wish to take this opportunity to commend you on the 
stand you and your fellow western premiers have taken on the matter of 
obtaining assistance for western grain producers.  Further, I wish to 
commend you personally on your initiative in travelling to Ottawa to 
personally present the case to the Hon. Don Mazankowski. 

 
That's where Saskatchewan farmers and farm groups stand.  That's just 
typical of the kinds of letters the Premier's had in support of his 
discussions with Ottawa, and I only wish that the hon. member would get 
behind him.  Don't capitulate.  Our Premier, other premiers, our farmers, 
and our farm groups stand behind him, and I ask you to do the same, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, that's all well and good for the SARM 
people, good for them.  But the fact of the matter is, the fact of the 
matter is that two months after you promised them that you had a commitment 
there's not a penny on-the-dash cash for the farmers.  That's the fact.  
Two months later into the crisis and there's still no money, and farmers 
are losing their farms; the crisis is getting tighter; small towns and 
villages are being hurt -- that is also the fact. 
 
And your prescription is that they should continue to suffer until the 
wrangling between PC governments in Regina and Ottawa is resolved.  That's 
what you say.  I want to know what in the world has changed in your 
relationships between you people, Conservatives in Regina and Conservatives 
in Ottawa, from 1986.  All that it took in 1986 was an urgent, baleful, 
pleaful, call at 5 o'clock in the morning and there was a billion dollars.  
Why isn't that same kind of rapport and clout available in 1990? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well the hon. member speaks about our Premier's track 
record.  Yes, he has and still does enjoy a very good track record in terms 
of getting Ottawa's attention and getting help for whatever sector.  And I 
think our society as whole, in particular the farm sector in rural 
Saskatchewan, appreciates that.  He's been the chief spokesperson again for 
western Canada.  He got the commitment, a little less on phase one than we 
would have liked, but nevertheless he got the commitment, and we're hopeful 
that those cheques will soon be out in the mail, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I don't believe the Premier has any 
commitment -- never had one on March 19 and he doesn't have one now.  He 
does not have now.  And he has no credibility and neither do you, sir, 
because if he had the commitment, you of all the people in the front bench 
would be so eager to demonstrate that, to show us in black and white, right 
here in the legislature -- you of all the ministers.  You won't do it.  You 
know why you won't do it?  Because you haven't got it, pure and simple, you 
have not got it.  You're not telling me the truth; you're not telling the 
farmers the truth; you're not telling the members of this Assembly the 
truth.  You haven't got it.  If you had it you'd table it.  Make no mistake 
about that. 
 



 

 

Mr. Chairman, we have a situation here . . . And if you've got it, I'm 
still prepared to receive it at this late stage -- it would have saved a 
lot of time in the committee if you could have tabled it earlier.  If 
you've still got it, I'd be pleased to see it.  I'd be pleased to see it 
and we'll make a reversal of our position if that's that case.  But based 
on what I have now, absolutely nothing and evasive answers, I say you have 
no commitment whatsoever. 
 
I notice in today's Star-Phoenix, the minister federally of Agriculture, 
Mr. Mazankowski, is quoted as saying the following: 
 

 I am somewhat saddened that they (the western premiers) would rather play 
politics than really help the farmers. 

 
Is the quotation he's got.  That's a quotation from your confre père, your 
political mentor, the Deputy Prime Minister, the Minister of Agriculture.  
He says that western premiers are playing politics.  How do you credibly, 
with facts, rebut that allegation from, not me, but from your colleague, 
the Minister of Agriculture Canada, in the absence of evidence that there 
was a commitment in writing from Ottawa upon which they reneged. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well I think the only one that's been playing 
politics and doing a little political two-step here has been the hon. 
member.  Certainly he has every right to ask the questions: what was the 
hour, the day, the date, the facts, all of that.  That detail he'll have to 
get from the Premier. 
 
I mean, there are some larger issues here facing the Saskatchewan farmer 
and the farm economy that go beyond that kind of picayune questioning, Mr. 
Chairman.  It surprises me, because the very article he quotes from speaks 
to the point I've been making.  This Premier led the charge.  He has the 
support of the western premiers that we have all done our part relative to 
the farm sector and now Ottawa must get their cheques out.  They're all of 
that view.  There is one voice and the Premier has been leading that 
charge.  He has been successful at getting the commitment.  It's a little 
less in dollars than we would like, and now our Premier is saying, get the 
cheques in the mail. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, again the minister has not answered the 
comment of the Minister of Agriculture Canada about the Premier's playing 
politics, was the words used by the Hon. Mr. Mazankowski. 
 
This is a serious situation, Mr. Chairman, because here we have the 
Minister of Finance and the government of the province of Saskatchewan 
alleging that Ottawa has reneged on a commitment.  They didn't use the 
words in this exchange this afternoon yet, but the effect of that is that 
Ottawa's been playing politics. 
 
On the other hand, the Minister of Agriculture Canada, Mr. Mazankowski, 
alleges that this Premier and this government and Minister of Finance, that 
they've been playing politics.  Somebody is telling the truth and somebody 
isn't telling the truth.  Or maybe both have been playing politics.  Maybe 
the conclusion that can be made is that all of this is a pillow-fight 



 

 

between a Tory in Regina and a Tory in Ottawa, letting people believe that 
somehow a Tory in Regina is different than a Tory in Ottawa. 
 
And I want to tell you, Mr. Chairman, that given the evasive answers and 
given the mutually accusatory statements made by two Conservatives, and 
given the facts and the knowledge that farmers have of the province of 
Saskatchewan, they understand that a Tory in Regina is like a Tory in 
Ottawa, because a Tory is a Tory is a Tory everywhere -- everywhere. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- A Tory in Regina, be he a premier or minister of 
Agriculture, believes in the same free market principles.  A Tory in Regina 
is like a Tory in Ottawa, quick to make promises like the commitment that 
was stated on March 19, 1990, and not able to deliver.  A Tory premier in 
Regina or a Tory premier in Ottawa are the same in announcing the spring 
seeding program and then waiting several weeks to flesh out the details of 
this.  My goodness, what kind of a way to develop an agricultural policy! 
 
A Tory government in Regina or in Ottawa is the same when it comes to free 
trade, when it comes to privatization of post offices, when it comes to the 
question of farm aid for the people of the province of Saskatchewan.  When 
it comes to this kind of an issue with respect to freight rates, with the 
crop insurance premiums, with interest-free cash advances, all of which 
those people opposite were absolutely deathly silent. In fact their silence 
was deafening.  You could hear it all over the province of Saskatchewan 
because a Tory in Regina is the same as a Tory in Ottawa, because a Tory is 
a Tory is a Tory. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- So there are only two or three options which are possible.  
Either the premiers have been playing politics and there is no commitment, 
and there is no commitment and this statement of March 19 was a patent 
untruth, and therefore Mr. Mazankowski is correct in which case the farmers 
should know that these kinds of commitments are made but not honoured. 
 
Or in the alternative, there was a commitment but Mr. Mazankowski reneged 
and Mr. Mulroney reneged, in which case the farmers should also know and 
they refuse to table the documents.  Or as a third option, there is a 
phoney pillow-fight going on over this $500 million -- a phoney 
pillow-fight designed to make the money available to the farmers when it 
suits the political timetable and agenda of the Premier and the government 
opposite, which is the third option. 
 
And so one accuses them of being political; the other one accuses of being 
political.  They go into some sort of a fight that they would have us 
believe is real.  Don't kid yourself, Mr. Chairman. Don't kid yourself.  
These people are all of the same belief.  They're all birds of the same 
flock.  They're all birds of the same feather. 
 



 

 

They fly together and they act together and they believe together.  And in 
the meantime the farmers in the province of Saskatchewan, promised since 
now early 1990, since the Premier's dramatic address on March 5 that they 
would be getting much needed cash, have again been left holding the bag -- 
again left holding the bag while Tories are involved in some sort of 
political machinations and some sort of political statements which of 
course leave them out in limbo. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- They're hemorrhaging. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- They're hemorrhaging, my colleague says.  That's the least 
that can be described about the situation.  It is in fact a critical one 
for agriculture.  And we are told that the farmers should not fight the 
European-American subsidy wars out of their treasuries.  I agree. 
 
And we're told that the farmers shouldn't be asked to subsidize the battle 
between Ottawa and Regina.  That's my position, to which they do not agree.  
They say they're going to continue this battle going on.  In the mean time, 
what happens to farmers?  In the mean time, the farmers continue on until 
Tories go through this political gamesmanship and political games playing, 
notwithstanding the resolutions that we've tabled here. 
 
I can only make the plea to the Minister of Finance.  For goodness sake, 
Mr. Minister of Finance, stop the games playing.  Stop the political 
charade.  Stop trying to distance yourself from an unpopular federal 
government.  It is incredible politically that, leaving politics aside for 
the moment, it is hurtful and harmful to the resolution of the situation. 
 
Tell the people whether or not this was a truthful statement or an 
inaccurate statement in the Speech from the Throne.  Tell us if that money 
is going to be expected and when.  But above all, let's get on with the job 
of getting that money to the farmers in the province of Saskatchewan who . 
. . even you, sir, as the chairman, know they desperately need. 
 
I say to the Minister of Finance, as I withdraw from this debate and let 
other colleagues get into it, that the performance by the minister this 
afternoon has been dismal.  And I expect more from the minister who I say 
on a personal basis has an intellect and an ability which really should 
permit him to answer effectively and more simplistically in a sense of 
honesty than he has today. 
 
And I can only conclude the minister has been caught -- caught in a squeeze 
between a situation which has amounted to basically a fundamental untruth 
in this Speech from the Throne. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order.  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Swan: -- Mr. Chairman, I just heard the Leader of the Opposition 
involving the Chair in the debate.  And I think that that is 
unparliamentary and I would ask you to bring him back to a correction. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order, order.  The point of order is well taken.  The 
Chair is not to be involved in the debate, but I would ask . . . I would 



 

 

just caution members not to do that in the future. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I accept your ruling.  I would say the 
reference I made was to the fact that I felt that even the Chair would be 
aware of the point that I was making. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Any reflection to the Chair is not to be used in debate.  
I'd ask the member to refrain from that. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, I want to close my intervention this session.  
I accept your decision.  I am going to close by saying that the Minister of 
Finance, who comes to seek more supply, grievance before supply -- this is 
what we're raising -- grievance, farm grievance, before supply. 
 
I would have thought that he would have been more prepared, knowing full 
well this is a major issue, more prepared to come back with answers on this 
issue.  Instead it's a question of obfuscation.  It's a question of 
ignorance -- I don't have the documents.  It's a question of contradictory 
positions with respect to commitment. 
 
You people never did have a commitment and you misled the farmers of the 
province of Saskatchewan at a critical time.  You did so, cruelly and 
callously, and I say you're going to pay a big price for it, Mr. Chairman.  
Pay a big price. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, we have heard you 
for the last almost two hours now evading answers to questions that are 
very important to the rural Saskatchewan farm community. 
 
Mr. Minister, earlier this year the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool came out and 
put forward a proposal that said $500 million was necessary to help the 
farmers of Saskatchewan.  You and the Premier of this province endorsed 
that.  You led people to believe that you too agreed that the $500 million 
was absolutely necessary.  And now we find out from you and the Premier 
that really, even though you said you had a commitment, you don't have a 
commitment. 
 
All the while the whole point here, Mr. Minister, is the fact that farmers 
in rural Saskatchewan are suffering because of your total lack of 
competence in arranging an agricultural policy with Ottawa that comes 
through on behalf of farmers and gives them the support they so badly need. 
 
This reminds me of the whole process that we have gone through since 1986. 
Mr. Chairman, if the minister would care to return to seat and give me the 
. . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order.  Members are not to make reference to ministers' or 
members' absence or presence.  Order, order. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  All I was referring to is 
courtesy when I'm asking a question for the minister to remain . . . 



 

 

 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order.  If the member wants to challenge the Chair, 
there's a way of doing that without making reference in his debate.  If he 
wants to carry on with his questioning, he certainly has the chance to. 
 
Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- The point of order being this, Mr. Chairman. This is 
the Committee of Finance on interim supply.  It's important that the 
Minister of Finance, the person in charge of that, be here to answer, 
respond to questions. 
 
Now if the minister wants to leave, that's up to the minister.  You can 
call a halt to the committee, Mr. Chairman, but don't ask us to continue 
this committee when the Minister of Finance leaves. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order.  The Chair has no power to say which minister will 
answer the questions.  The minister can put someone in to . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- On interim supply? 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order.  The Chair has no power to force the minister to 
stay in his seat. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Minister . . . Mr. Chairman, when we are in interim 
supply and the minister has removed himself from a seat and is sitting in 
another seat, I don't think just because he can't take the heat on the 
Department of Agriculture questions that we're asking . . . I would simply 
ask you, Mr. Chairman, if it is . . . I will not ask the minister . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Point of order, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- State your point of order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Chairman, the member opposite, contrary to what 
the rules of this legislature would carry, has referred to the presence or 
the absence of a certain minister.  I believe that that is directly 
contrary to the rules. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Chairman, I would like to make the point of collective 
responsibility of cabinet ministers, a principle and a premise on which a 
cabinet of any government is directed.  And, Mr. Chairman, I make that 
point that is well known to anyone who has any familiarity whatsoever with 
respect to government. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order, order.  The Chair has already ruled on that point.  
I ask the members: if they want to rise and report progress, that's fine, 
or if they want to continue on interim supply? 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Mr. Chairman, I have a question for the Minister of 
Finance.  It has to deal with some superannuation plans.  I see that the 



 

 

minister has returned to his chair, so . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order.  The Chair has already ruled that members are not 
to make reference to absence or presence of members in the House. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- I see, Mr. Chairman, that the minister is prepared to 
proceed with the estimates now, so I will defer to my colleague, the member 
from Humboldt and then I will ask my question in a few minutes. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Well if the minister got the little breather that he needs, 
we can continue now.  I understand that he is under some severe pressure 
because there are a lot of people in the rural communities who hold you and 
your government accountable for making promises and then breaking promises. 
 
And that's what we're talking about here, Mr. Minister.  We've seen in 1986 
when a midnight phone call, and you were so proud of . . . it was as simple 
as that.  We saw in 1988 in a drought payment, when your Premier, the 
Premier of this province, was going around telling people there's going to 
be $40 an acre payment.  And I'll tell you, farmers didn't receive half of 
that for the most part.  That's the kind of credibility we're talking 
about. 
 
And now in 1990 we have a commitment written, given by you in the throne 
speech, given by the Premier on television, saying that there was a 
commitment and now we are finding there is no commitment.  And while you're 
playing your phoney charade with Ottawa, we are seeing thousands of farm 
families suffering; we are seeing foreclosures every day.  I'll tell you, 
Mr. Minister, that lies on your shoulders.  That's on your back.  And that 
is why your credibility is waning greatly in the eyes of Saskatchewan 
farmers. 
 
Mr. Minister, I ask you this question.  Am I right to assume that this 
interim supply motion will take the supply up until June 30? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, this second interim supply is to 
provide for two-twelfths, with the following exceptions, which will be in 
excess of two-twelfths: Education, school operating grants, $90,069,600; 
grants to libraries, $1,397,700; Health has two-twelfths with the following 
exceptions, where it will be in excess of two-twelfths by $1.1 million; 
Legislation, which will be in excess of two-twelfths by $3,137,600. 
 
So the total to be voted by the committee in excess of two-twelfths is 
$95,704,900, and it's made up of those three areas, Mr. Chairman, members 
of the committee. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- So, Mr. Minister, do you have allocated anywhere in there 
any payments corresponding with the delivery of moneys to farmers in 
conjunction with an agreement with the federal government to supply the 
loan that they're asking for, the grant that they're asking for for spring 
seeding that would hopefully total $500 million.  Do you have anything 
allocated in this interim supply? 
 
(1630) 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- The two-twelfths that's in there for agriculture 
would be just that, two-twelfths of the total to be voted in the budget. 
 
We're not about, as I said earlier, we are not, the other western premiers 
are not about to blink and be held hostage to the federal government or to 
let the federal government off the hook.  That might be your view; that 
might be your choice.  It isn't the choice of Saskatchewan farm groups and 
farm leaders, or of the western premiers. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Minister, you said earlier that the ratio that you 
would accept would be 1:8.  So what I'm asking you is then: when can we 
expect a settlement so that you would be putting in your portion and the 
federal government would be putting in their portion?  Even if it may be on 
your terms, let's assume that, when would you expect to allocate moneys to 
a program that would deliver to farmers the sum of $500 million? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- A point of clarification for the hon. member.  I did 
not say that we are purporting . . . or proposing a 1:8 ratio.  I said 
historically that has been the ratio over the last few years. 
 
We would just restate that we have put our cash on the table; so has Mr. 
Mazankowski in terms of stage one.  And now we're just saying to him, get 
the cheques in the mail to the farmers. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Well, Mr. Minister, it's very easy for you to say, get the 
cheques in the mail to farmers.  The point here is that you misled the 
farmers of Saskatchewan.  You and the federal government misled them 
together into believing that you supported the call for $500 million and 
that you had a commitment that the money was going to be there. 
 
And the point, Mr. Minister, is this: spring seeding is here.  In fact in 
the southern part of this province many farmers have completed their 
seeding.  You and Ottawa are playing your silly charade at the expense of 
these people.  Mr. Minister, you are playing the silly charade at the 
expense of the lives of farm communities.  You have a duty to deliver 
programs to rural Saskatchewan.  When you say there was a commitment . . . 
and now we can talk here all day about when the commitment was or what it 
was or how you're going to negotiate or what your stand is or what the 
federal government's stand is. 
 
The point is, Mr. Minister, there's nothing happening.  All you're doing is 
that you found out that your June window of election has closed, so now you 
are biding time until the next possible window of October for an election.  
And so in the meantime that you have to find something to do.  So what do 
you find to do?  You say, well, Mr. Mazankowski, we better do something, so 
we'll have this little charade. 
 
But the point is, Mr. Minister, the farmers of this province and you know 
-- and I've been into that constituency of Weyburn -- and they know that it 
is incumbent upon you and your federal counterparts not to be discussing 
this issue now when it's too late for many farmers.  In fact how many 
farmers, Mr. Minister, have gone under foreclosure because you have not 



 

 

delivered that money?  How many farmers are suffering?  You are the one who 
is saying that there has to be a commitment . . . or has been a commitment. 
 
What I'm saying to you, Mr. Minister, is that you have failed to deliver.  
You should have been discussing this with the federal government last year, 
last fall.  If you were interested in delivering a program in the best 
interests of Saskatchewan farmers, Mr. Minister, you know that would have 
been completed so that in your budget you could have had whatever portion 
that was needed, and farmers would have known, the federal government would 
have known what the actual program was. 
 
But no, you chose not to do that.  You chose to drag out this process, to 
drag out this process and look at your June window of opportunity for 
election, and when that closed, you're now looking at October. 
 
And I would suggest to you, Mr. Minister, that you're probably going to 
escalate this phoney war in whatever measure that you might think, whether 
it be fighting on the delivery of the money, or fighting with Ottawa on 
something else, because that's the only route that you have left to follow 
as far as your political gamesmanship goes with the federal government. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to ask you specifically, when you said in the throne 
speech that there was a commitment, what was the dollar figure attached to 
that commitment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- I think the Leader of the Opposition went through 
this in some detail for an hour or an hour and a half, Mr. Chairman, but 
certainly the hon. member has the right to re-ask the question.  And the 
answer hasn't changed. 
 
Our Premier got the commitment when the ministers of Agriculture met.  He 
announced that it would be $500 million; 90 per cent would go to the grains 
and oil-seed sector.  That's less than we would have wished for 
Saskatchewan, and now we would just ask they send the cheques out, please. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Minister, at what point did you find out that it would 
not be $500 million coming from Ottawa? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- As I said earlier, the announcement was made, if 
memory serves me correctly, at the ministers' of Agriculture 
federal-provincial meeting, and I'm just not sure on the date on that 
meeting, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Minister, do you agree that you and your Premier led 
people to believe that there was a commitment of $500 million that was 
going to be delivered? 
 
The farmers of Saskatchewan do not care where it comes from.  All they know 
is they have a government in Regina and a government in Ottawa who is 
responsible for the delivery of programs in order to support the lives and 
livelihoods of farmers in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you tell me whether or not you believe that the farmers 



 

 

of Saskatchewan, whether or not they think that your Premier, the Premier 
and Minister of Agriculture, was telling them that they were going to be 
delivered $500 million before the spring seeding? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- I can only reiterate again, Mr. Chairman, the Premier 
got the commitment, 500 million; send the cheques as soon as possible, Mr. 
Mulroney. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- That is simply not good enough and you know it's not good 
enough.  We have a crisis in rural Saskatchewan where over 10,000 farmers 
have notices of foreclosure, where we are losing businesses out of rural 
communities, where many farmers had to reduce the amount of . . . their 
seeding intentions simply because they do not have the cash, the cash to 
plant the crops that they wanted to plant in order to hopefully get a 
return this fall. 
 
Mr. Minister, I think that you know that what you're doing is totally 
wrong.  I think that you know that this charade between you and Ottawa is 
putting even greater desperation on the backs of Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
And for the life of me, Mr. Minister, I can't understand why you and your 
Tory friends in Ottawa use farm families as pawns in your political games.  
I'll tell you, we've seen election after election where every announcement 
of an ad hoc program delivering cash to Saskatchewan farm families has been 
arranged around political opportunism by you, your government, and the 
government in Ottawa.  Whether it be 1986 with the production loan program 
or the deficiency payment, whether it be 1988 with the drought payment.  
Every time it comes to delivering an ad hoc program, you gear it around 
your election fortunes.  And that is why, Mr. Minister, and members 
opposite, that you are so low in the eyes of Saskatchewan farmers now. 
 
I mean, I talk to a lot of farmers out there.  I talk to Tories and 
Liberals and New Democrats.  And there's one common theme that runs through 
every farmer that I talk to, that you, your government, and the government 
in Ottawa is playing politics with agriculture. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order, order.  I'd ask the member for The Battlefords to 
rise and apologize to this House for saying that the member from 
Qu'Appelle-Lumsden lied.  I'd ask him to rise now and apologize to the 
House. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Sorry. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- I just want to ask a couple of questions of the minister.  
You have been indicating that there's $500 million and the majority going 
to the grains.  Out of that $500 million that the federal government is 
putting up, I want to ask you what proportion of that has been committed to 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, as I said, of the $500 million, my 
understanding is that 90 per cent of that money would be earmarked for the 
grains and oil-seed sector.  And that roughly translates into 225 to $250 
million for Saskatchewan farmers, is our best understanding of that, Mr. 



 

 

Chairman. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- And I want to ask the minister whether there has been any 
give by the federal government in respect to them disbursing the 225 or 250 
million to Saskatchewan farmers who desperately needed it, and whether you 
have any commitment from them in respect to a timetable when they'll 
proceed with that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- In terms of timing, Mr. Chairman, I think what our 
Premier and other western premiers and the farmers have been working on and 
the farm groups, is once the federal government announced that they had a 
half a billion dollars available, albeit less than we would all have liked, 
negotiations were and had been under way relative to the formula that 
should be used to pay it out. 
 
I think that there's been sufficient negotiation and discussion there, and 
now we would just like to see the cheques out.  And I guess our view, we 
would like to have seen them out two or three weeks ago.  There's no reason 
for the further delay.  If somehow the federal government needs to have us 
on our knees and crawl to Ottawa to get the money, I think the farmers are 
hardly well served by that, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- My question to you though is, have you any reason to believe 
that the federal government is going to yield to the position of the four 
western premiers, three western premiers at least, in respect to matching 
dollars from the provinces?  Have you any progress in respect to that and 
can you relate it to the House and to the farmers of Saskatchewan, when 
they are intending to proceed? 
 
Have you any information that the federal government is prepared then, 
therefore since they have the four western premiers indicating that they 
will not in fact match the dollars, have you any indication from the 
federal government, Mulroney, or the Minister of Agriculture, Don 
Mazankowski, whether or not they are going to proceed with the payment on 
their own. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- I can't speak precisely for . . . or at all in fact, 
for the Prime Minister or the Deputy Prime Minister.  I can say our Premier 
is down there again today meeting with them.  I think he carries the 
additional weight, if you like, of just having come from the western 
premiers' meeting, who backed the Premier.  And as I said earlier, the 
Premier's been the chief spokesperson. 
 
So hopefully any delay that exists relative to making the pay-outs is and 
can be and has been resolved, and that those cheques will be forthcoming 
shortly. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- You're indicating to the House are you, Mr. Minister, that 
the difficulties have been resolved and that the cheques will be 
forthcoming very shortly?  Is that the position that you're putting forward 
here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well I hope those difficulties have been . . . or any 



 

 

delays or whatever the reason the delays were, have been or will be 
resolved shortly.  As I said earlier, our view would have been we'd like to 
have seen them resolved some long time ago. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Mr. Minister, what were the reasons for the delay, and the 
prospects now of immediate pay-out or very soon in the future?  What were 
the problems and have they been resolved?  Have you any indication that 
they've been resolved? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well I am obviously very optimistic, and I'm 
optimistic for these reasons.  Number one is the Premier wanted a 
commitment and got a commitment.  The commitment took the form of a half a 
billion dollars, less than we would have liked.  And now the next step is 
to devise the formula to have a fair and equitable pay-out of that.  I 
think there's been significant and enough discussion relative to that.  And 
now hopefully we can see those cheques in the mail and see them in the mail 
shortly. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Now I know you can hope and we all hope that it'll be 
resolved, but that's not the question I asked.  The question is, do you 
have any concrete evidence indicating that because of the representation of 
the Premier, that the federal government are now reversing their stand that 
you have to . . . for every dollar they put up, that it has to be matched 
provincially?  Have you any evidence that the federal government is in fact 
reversing  
 Dtheir position? 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- We have no intention of blinking or reversing our 
position or capitulating.  The farm groups are behind the Premier; other 
western premiers are behind the Premier.  We have responded; other 
governments provincially have responded.  It is now up to the federal 
government to do likewise, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Then the final analysis is then that the farmers are . . . 
although the Premier has been asking and the wheat pool has been asking for 
a minimum of $500 paid out prior to seeding, number one, that it's late, we 
didn't get it prior to seeding; and number two, that the amount that is 
going to come forward, at best, at the best that can come forward is 225 
million or 250 million.  That's exactly what you're saying. 
 
Now I want to ask you another question.  Since you're saying that the 
cheques should be out in the mail very shortly, have you . . . your 
government worked out any of the details in respect to the formula under 
which it would be paid out?  Is there any agreement in respect to the 
formula?  Because the farmers of Saskatchewan like to know. 
 
They don't want politics and goofiness from the Minister of Finance; they 
want action and they want indeed answers that they can rely on.  That's 
where we're at, Mr. Minister.  And come forward with these details, if in 
fact the details have been worked out. 
 



 

 

What is the position of the provincial government and their dealings?  What 
is the formula that they're asking the federal government in fact to use in 
respect to the distribution of half the amount that they are going to get 
in accordance with what was promised by the Premier? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well the formula as I understand it, and I may not 
have the most recent information and would defer you to the Premier for 
particular details on this agricultural issue, but as I understand it, 90 
per cent of the federal payment was to go to the grains and oil-seed 
sector, and that would translate into about 200 to $250 million for 
Saskatchewan.  And in terms of how that would be paid out in the formula to 
individual farmers, I don't have that . . . I'm not privy to that kind of 
detail, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Well are you saying that on this important issue of getting 
some assistance, that no details . . . and you are not privy to any of the 
details, that in fact if they get the federal money, do we have to wait 
then, Mr. Minister, to start working out the details?  That's the question.  
What formula has been advocated by your government?  What formula has been 
presented to your government from farm organizations?  That's the question 
and the people of Saskatchewan have a right to know. 
 
Are these payments in fact going to be channelled to those people who are 
in the most need and financial trouble?  Is it going to be a universal 
program?  Is it going to be on a seeded acreage program?  Do you know any 
of the details?  Surely if you're getting a commitment and you're working 
towards getting the money, you would also be working towards getting some 
of the details as to the formula of the pay-out.  That's all we're asking. 
 
I mean, you surely must have discussed that among yourselves, and surely 
the Minister of Finance would be able to provide to the people of 
Saskatchewan what formula may be used.  Is it going to be targeted?  That's 
the question we want to know. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, members of the committee, all of those 
are good and fair and reasonable questions.  As I said, I'm not privy to 
those kinds of details.  Federal agriculture officials, I suppose, would be 
the best source of answers there.  It may well be that our Premier, the 
Minister of Agriculture, is aware of those kinds of details.  Certainly I 
am not but those are all reasonable kinds of questions. 
 
I know the Premier, the Associate Minister of Agriculture have been in 
discussion with farm groups.  It may well be that they've had some 
particular discussion as to design and program pay-out, but I don't have 
those kinds of details, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- In respecting to matching dollars which the federal 
government had been requesting from the provinces, has there been any 
agreement as to what moneys that you have within the current agricultural 
budget which would be considered to be matching dollars in respect to the 
federal government? 
 
Recently I understand that the spring seeding program, that some $20 



 

 

million they would consider as being matching money.  I understand that 
they are looking at the rebate to the farmers, putting them back in the 
same position as they were in 1982 -- the equivalent to the purple gas, the 
rebate on the tax.  I want to ask you that, Mr. Minister, indeed. 
 
So I ask you, Mr. Minister, have any of the matching expenditures been 
defined and agreed upon in respect to getting federal dollars? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- As I said earlier, our view is that it's federal 
government's responsibility.  If they think they needed to see some cash 
from us, it's in there and it's in the budget clearly.  And I talked about 
the over $400 million commitment to rural Saskatchewan on March 29.  That's 
the position we've always taken.  There's more than enough, but that's the 
approach they're going to use, not that we are.  If that's the approach 
they're going to use, that they want to see our cash, it's there, and it's 
there in spades, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- That's not the question.  The question I asked you, whether 
you have any knowledge as to what expenditures within your agricultural 
budget would be considered matching dollars by the province in order to 
trigger off the payment of the amount that they have set aside for 
Saskatchewan.  That's the question I ask you.  Simple question; I should be 
able to get a straightforward answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- If they're looking for something to be matched, we 
would offer up the 400 and whatever -- 12 million I think it is.  As far as 
we're concerned the matching debate shouldn't be a debate.  This is an 
international situation.  The federal treasury should pony up.  We have 
done our part.  We've done our part to the tune of over $400 million, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- I want to ask the minister, you have indicated here and 
tried to deny that you used a couple hundred million dollars in respect 
that you raised in respect to the potash corporation, and you have 
indicated that you haven't spent it in current expenditures. 
 
I want to ask the minister whether any of the money is available, if push 
came to shove, and you're required to put up in order to trigger any 
federal money, I want to ask you whether you have any reserve money from 
the privatization in reserve which could be used in respect to helping the 
hard-pressed farmers, if indeed you have to match. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, that's a fairly incredible 
question when you think about it.  He's saying if push comes to shove, will 
you take some money from here or from there or will you find some new money 
or re-earmark some money to bail out the feds because they won't pony up 
the full amount. 
 
Now that is really an incredible question.  First of all, we have no 
intention of blinking because the farm groups and the farmers and the 
western premiers are united behind our Premier in not blinking in the face 
of Ottawa's delaying tactics. 
 



 

 

Now why would I, in the face of a question like this, why would I say, yes 
we do when clearly we are not about to blink.  If I was to say something 
like that it would be irresponsible of me, Mr. Chairman.  Give away somehow 
a strategy and let the feds off the hook?  That might be some kind of NDP 
logic but certainly isn't the logic or the view or the approach that this 
government here, on this side of the House is taking, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Mr. Minister, the point I'm making is that you have disposed 
of much of the assets of this province.  Secondly, you have shown or 
indicated priorities that you could in fact find $370 million for Cargill.  
And all that you could come up with in new programs this spring will cost 
your treasury $20 million.  That's the credit that the federal government 
is prepared to say in new money in the seed loan program -- $20 million is 
what you put in. 
 
But you got millions of dollars for Cargills.  You got millions of dollars 
for Pocklington.  You got millions of dollars for Chuck Childers.  But you 
can't take on this here crisis that exists in agriculture. 
 
I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, you say you're not going to blink.  Well 
I'll tell you what's happening across this province is that if you read The 
Western Producer, they have a map of the seriousness of the crisis in 
agriculture, and they indicate that 10,000 farmers in this province have 
received foreclosure notices or have quitclaimed their land. 
 
This is the major, major crisis, Mr. Minister, and I'm not saying that you 
don't realize that it is.  But what I am saying to you here is that your 
priorities are not proper.  You promised, your government promised a 
long-term agricultural program.  You broke that promise.  You broke that 
promise to the farmers of Saskatchewan -- no long-term program. 
 
Now in the heat of an election again, exactly the same scenario you are 
using, Mr. Minister, as was used in 1986, '85-86 -- production loan.  This 
time we get a seeding loan: half the amount, twice the interest rate.  And 
what do we get from the federal government?  Half the amount to try to bail 
you out of a political mess that you're in. 
 
I'll tell you, Mr. Minister, as the Leader of the Opposition indicated, you 
said you had a commitment from the Government of Saskatchewan.  You 
deceived the people of Saskatchewan because you indicated that they had 
$500 million as was being advocated by the wheat pool and other farm 
organizations.  You didn't have that.  You're going to at best get 225 to 
$250 million. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Minister, that that's not good enough.  The crisis 
today is twice, three times, four times worse than it is in 1985-86.  No 
doubt about it.  And the revenues of farmers have taken a drastic fall.  
And I'll tell you, you do have some responsibility, not in fighting the 
international war, but I'll tell you you do have responsibility that you 
didn't live up to, and that is putting in place a long-term agricultural 
policy that would assure the farmers of some reasonable income rather than 
drive them off the land as is happening today. 
 



 

 

That's the Tory legacy.  So-called friends of the farmers, and most of you 
people are from the rural. And we have a crisis today and the most that you 
could put up in your budget of new money, was $20 million.  I think that's 
disgraceful.  I think that . . . You talk about restructuring debt, 
restructuring debt, and you haven't moved on it, Mr. Minister.  And you 
have no intentions of moving on it because if you did you would have it in 
before the 10,000 farmers were driven off the land. 
 
And worse still, what a commitment to those that are suffering most. You 
deny your seed loan program to those who need it most.  That's the reality 
of it, Mr. Chairman.  This provincial government has not lived up to its 
responsibility.  The federal government is not living up to its 
responsibility. 
 
The problem that we got is a Tory government in Ottawa, a Tory government 
here in Regina.  That's the problem that we have, and until we get rid of 
the cause of the problem, I'll say to the farmers of Saskatchewan, there 
will not be a solution to the crisis in agriculture, not by a Tory in 
Ottawa, not by a Tory in Saskatchewan. 
 
(1700) 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, there is money for Tory priorities, but 
there is no money for the hard-pressed farmers that built this province.  
And this Minister of Finance tries to defend that he is meeting his 
responsibilities in agriculture.  Well I'll tell you, you ask the farmers.  
And I'll tell you, they don't agree with you.  And one thing is sure, 
farmers in Saskatchewan are saying today, they're playing politics again.  
That's what they're saying.  That is the decision reached by the farmers of 
Saskatchewan, and that decision, I say, Mr. Chairman, is accurate. 
 
I want to ask the minister also, why would a Department of Finance with the 
agricultural crisis of the nature that you have, why would you launch off 
into subsidizing a multinational corporation which certainly has the 
financial resources to build a fertilizer plant if it's viable?  Why would 
you in fact choose, choose to put that money into a multinational 
corporation project rather than alleviating some of the crisis there, and 
that is some restructuring of farm debt?  And why haven't you been in fact 
going that direction rather than the misguided ad hoc program designed only 
for political benefits, not designed to benefit the farmers of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
That's the questions that has to be asked, Mr. Chairman.  And they haven't 
been answered by this government, and we don't expect to get them because 
they don't have an answer.  They're deceiving the farmers.  They're playing 
politics with the farmers.  A Tory, as my leader said, is a Tory is a Tory, 
and we can't expect any difference from a provincial Tory government than 
we can from a federal Tory government. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:03 p.m. 
 


