





























































Hansard: June 12, 1990


 

 

June 12/90 
EVENING SITTING 

 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 
Bill No. 3 -- An Act respecting Custody of, Access to and Guardianship of 
Property of Children, Child Status and Parentage and Related Matters 
 
Clause 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm ready to go to clause by clause.  I'll 
have some specific questions for the minister on clause 4. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
Clause 4 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Mr. Minister, with respect to section 4, as you know, 
section 4 permits a parent to appoint one or more persons as a legal 
custodian of the child to take effect on the surviving parent's death until 
the child reaches 18 years of age.  And one of the things, Mr. Minister, 
that I think is missing in this section, is a requirement that the child be 
consulted with respect to the appointment of the legal custodian. 
 
Mr. Minister, when I talk about the Bill needing to reflect a theme of 
providing protection and security to the child and respecting the rights of 
children, this is one of the areas that I'm thinking of.  And I wonder, Mr. 
Minister, if you would consider bringing in an amendment that would ensure 
that the child is consulted before the legal custodian is appointed. 
 
I'm not wanting to interrupt the minister; I realize he's considering this.  
Just as a point of clarification, as he knows from second reading debate, 
we have in mind here consulting children who are 13 years of age or more.  
We're not thinking here in terms of consulting with children who are 12 and 
under.  But our position is that when someone becomes a teenager, if a 
legal custodian is going to be appointed for them, they should have a right 
to be consulted about that before a final decision is made. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I have a little difficulty because I can see some merit 
to the hon. member's . . . This is not a provision, though, where it's a 
court order situation.  This is a private matter within the family, and 
certainly traditionally in something like this, the parents have that 
responsibility.  That's not something that the United Nations convention 
requires either. 
 
So we have some difficulty because in the vast majority of circumstances it 
would be a parent acting in the best interests. To make a requirement in 
circumstances where it wouldn't be appropriate, and perhaps not desirable, 
may be unwise.  So we took the cautious approach on this.  I'm not standing 
here disagreeing with your argument.  I can see circumstances.  I suggest 
they would certainly be the minority of cases.  And I suppose my caution 



 

 

because it is a private matter, a family matter, would be, let's see if 
this works.   
 
Again, if there's a problem, we may have to come back to that question of a 
child over 13, and 13's an arbitrary figure and I understand that.  But 
again we're very uncomfortable imposing that type of provision in the vast 
majority of cases where the family and the parent is making a decision in 
the best interests of the child -- not an arbitrary -- and it's a happy 
relationship.  So we're very uncomfortable interposing that as a matter of 
course. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Mr. Minister, I can understand your argument and I think 
you're appreciating ours, but I think there are a minority of situations in 
which this becomes important.  And of course when we're talking about 
children's rights, as with anybody else's rights, these rights usually only 
need to be exercised in a small minority of circumstances. 
 
And, you know, one of the difficulties of this legislation, if I can 
compare it with The Family Services Act, is here, you see, a child 
basically doesn't become an adult until 18 years of age.  There's a whole 
set of other legislation  
_- and The Family Services Act is a good example -- where a child is an 
adult upon becoming 16, from the point of view of The Family Services Act.  
So we've got these contradictions too.  But basically what this legislation 
does is . . . You know, from the point of The Family Services Act, a 
16-year-old has a whole variety of rights, whereas under this piece of 
legislation a 16-year-old could have a custodian appointed for them without 
even being consulted. And we just don't think that's acceptable. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- You're correct.  The laws are different in intent and 
thrust.  This is The Children's Law Act; it's designed for a different 
purpose than is the other legislation.  I mean, you raise the age to 16 -- 
and I know you're not hanging your hat on that particular age because for 
all practical purposes, a 16-year-old is going to live where the 
16-year-old intends to live -- and the courts may be brought into this 
process. But at some point there's an age in that family relationship where 
the courts are going to be more aware of the child's stated desire.  I 
can't pick an age, and I don't think it would be wise to be absolute about 
it. 
 
Having said that, this is The Children's Law Act, and the question you 
raise: what happens if, by will, the deceased makes a direction by will as 
to where the child is going?  Or is the argument that the child then 
overrides the will?  That raises all sorts of legal ramifications which 
could affect the very basis of the will and the law in that regard. 
 
So again, on these we're recognizing that these are private matters.  We 
can ultimately get extreme in putting the government involved in private 
matters in many cases where it would be unwise.  And again, I'm not sitting 
here disagreeing with the hon. member.  We can both recognize circumstances 
where, in an unhappy situation, then the court is likely to get involved -- 
not in all cases, obviously, but a more likely case for the court getting 
involved.  But if it's a satisfactory family relationship, then I question 



 

 

whether we should intervene.  At least, let's see that it works.  Again, we 
may be back to deal with those minority of circumstances where there is a 
problem. 
 
Clause 4 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 5 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 8 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Yes, Mr. Minister, clause 8 is a very important clause in 
this Bill.  And of course it deals with making or rescinding an order for 
custody.  And, Mr. Minister, I want to put forward here again that this is 
where the courts should be able to receive recommendations from the 
children's advocate and this is where we think that a child should receive 
the right to be heard by the court if he or she has reached the age of 13 
years or more.  And finally we think that a child who's 13 years of age or 
more should be guaranteed the right to receive advice from legal counsel. 
 
I realize of course that the court can arrange for the child to receive 
advice from legal counsel, but at some point, Mr. Minister, the child's 
right to receive this, whether or not the court orders it, should be 
guaranteed in legislation.  None of this is there.  That makes that 
section, Mr. Minister, unacceptable to us and I'm wondering if you would 
consider bringing in amendments along the line I suggest. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Sections 8 and 9 clearly comply with the United Nations 
convention.  The convention states that the child shall be provided the 
opportunity to be heard in any judicial and administrative proceedings 
affecting the child, either directly or through a representative or an 
appropriate body in a manner consistent with the procedural rules of 
national law.  And in our view these sections 8 and 9 both require the 
court to take into account the wishes of the child to the extent that the 
court considers appropriate. 
 
Again you're making the argument that this should be mandatory in all 
cases.  I'm not persuaded that it need be mandatory in all cases, that the 
protections that are set out, including this new legislation, then the 
child can, with court order, receive legal advice.  The United Nations 
convention doesn't require it. 
 
Who does the lawyer take instruction from, is one of the difficulties.  If 
we're talking about a mandatory right to a legal counsel, you have a 
problem sometimes with a minor child incapable of instructing, so there has 
to be a discretion in the courts, in our view -- keeping in mind that the 
courts are required fundamentally to take into account the child's best 
interests. 
 
So the court will have to judge the child in whatever manner it does and 
then make a decision that the court believes to be in the child's best 
interests, be it legal advice, whatever the case may be.  So there is the 
flexibility there.  And I'm prepared at this stage in the development of 
the law to let this operate again, giving the courts the ability to make 



 

 

virtually any decision they really wish, whether it be appointment of 
counsel, guidance, or whatever. 
 
So it's not a simple issue.  There can be arguments made against it being 
mandatory, but certainly at this stage, I believe the protections are 
adequate. 
 
Clause 8 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 9 to 13 inclusive agreed to. 
 
(1915) 
 
Clause 14 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Mr. Chairman, just with a little bit of latitude from you, 
I just want to say to the minister -- because I don't want to dwell unduly 
on this -- that our concern with respect to the previous discussion is 
simply that we think that simply to put in a provision that the court is to 
take account of the wishes of the child to the extent that the court 
considers it appropriate, leaves too wide a variation for interpretation by 
the court and by different judges.  That is our concern. 
 
With respect to Part III of this legislation, one of the concerns we have 
is with respect to extradition orders.  And here the United Nations 
convention, Mr. Minister, is quite clear.  It clearly requires that there 
should be no extradition without children having the ability to participate 
in the decision-making process.  And we are suggesting, we propose that a 
child 13 years of age or more be given the right in law to state their 
interest before a court order is made on the matter of whether a child 
should be returned to another province.  Moreover, the child should have 
access to legal counsel, Mr. Minister. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, we're just not able to support this section of the Bill 
in its current form.  And I think here I acknowledge that on some of the 
other matters we've been stating, I guess it's a matter of interpreting the 
UN (United Nations) convention and its intent.  Here I think the intent is 
quite clear.  And I'm wondering if the minister would consider an amendment 
to implement the proposal that we've made. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- The difficulty with the hon. member's argument is that it 
goes contrary to the trends to lower barriers.  In other words, we let -- 
for want of a better word -- the primary jurisdiction that dealt with the 
matter make those rulings.  We're increasingly lowering barriers so that 
their orders are more enforceable in other jurisdictions. 
 
So your argument would go contrary to the trend and the direction that 
we're wanting to go, which is if Saskatchewan court makes an order, we 
would expect it to be carried out in another province.  To reverse that and 
interpose and put new rules in would go contrary to the trends which all 
jurisdictions are trying to move to.  So that's a very strong argument 
against the proposal.  And one of the reasons we came up with the direction 
we did is we're keeping very much in mind that we're trying to make these 



 

 

orders enforceable and more easily carried out in other jurisdictions, not 
more difficult. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Mr. Minister, the net effect of that is that the child has 
no voice before the court, no opportunity to state its interest, no right 
to legal counsel under this provision in the Bill.  I understand what 
you're saying, but on the other hand, what this means is that the interests 
of the child are not necessarily being held uppermost. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- It doesn't rule out the possibility that in the 
appropriate circumstances our courts can . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Right, but there's no guarantee. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- No, no, but understand that we're trying to balance two 
conflicting interests here: one of which is having a system whereby it's 
more easy to enforce court orders from another jurisdiction as opposed to 
make it more difficult.  And if a Saskatchewan court makes an order that 
the custody of the child, say, is in the mother here in Saskatchewan, the 
child is taken or goes to Ontario, we certainly want it easier for the 
Ontario courts to enforce the order that the child come back as opposed to 
running into the Ontario court, which would say, well we're going to look 
at all this all over again and present new evidence.  It would make it very 
difficult for the mother here in Saskatchewan. 
 
So you're asking for the reverse to that to happen, which is a child coming 
into this province.  It's still there for the court to make a decision in 
those circumstances where the court deems appropriate.  But we would hate 
to raise barriers to the enforceability of orders in other jurisdictions.  
So the courts have the power, the ultimate discretion, but we would 
certainly . . . We believe that those trends are correct.  The direction of 
ease of enforceability of the orders is the correct way to go and we would 
hate to impair that. 
 
Clause 14 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- The Chairman asks leave to go page by page.  Is leave 
granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Pages 8 to 10 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Page 11 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, section 
21 of the Bill states that, "Where there is a conflict between this Act and 
The International Child Abduction Act, the latter Act prevails." 
 
And once again, Mr. Chairman, we've got a concern here because The 
International Child Abduction Act makes no provision for legal counsel for 
children.  This is important because children in these situations are in 
some cases arrested and usually placed in detention. 



 

 

 
So, Mr. Minister, I'm suggesting that we propose access to legal counsel 
for a child who's in this situation, if they're 13 years of age or older.  
And I'm wondering whether you could be prepared to accept that 
recommendation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- We shouldn't be extreme because it would colour the 
intent of the legislation.  I mean these children are not picked up, put in 
detention, or anything else.  They are very well looked after and it's not 
a harsh result.  But it's basically the same question that you'd asked 
before and I freely acknowledge that we're balancing competing interests 
here. 
 
And I would simply say that we can't just look at giving all the powers to 
Saskatchewan courts on the one side to deal with every situation and then 
say that other courts can't deal with Saskatchewan court orders.  So we are 
trying to make it easier. 
 
The thrust we are trying to go is that a custody order made by a 
Saskatchewan court, we would want it easier to carry out that order, say in 
Ontario or British Columbia or where it is -- not more difficult.  So the 
trend is to try and ease the enforceability of the orders and to take your 
argument would make it more difficult. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- With respect to custody and access enforcement, Mr. 
Minister, I wonder if you'd agree with the proposal that we put forward in 
second reading -- that a child who's 16 years of age or older should be 
given the right to independently seek the enforcement of a maintenance 
agreement, Mr. Minister. 
 
As I said, I really find it quite amazing that under many pieces of 
legislation -- and The Family Services Act is a good example -- a child at 
16 is considered an adult.  I don't particularly agree with that but yet 
when we come to The Children's Law Act, a child at the age of 16 seems to 
have very few rights.  And one of the things that we think logically should 
be the right of a 16-year-old is to independently seek the enforcement of a 
maintenance agreement, Mr. Minister, and I'm wondering if you'd be prepared 
to look at that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- This Act doesn't deal with the maintenance question.  
That's family law Act, Family Maintenance Act which deals with that 
provision, so it's not applicable in this Act. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Well, Mr. Minister, there is some overlap between the 
legislation and I put this proposal to you.  We just finished discussing 
the other Bill.  Are you prepared to look seriously at ensuring those 
rights for a 16-year-old or a 17-year-old under the legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- To the hon. member, if you go back to The Family 
Maintenance Act, it is certainly possible for a child to make such an 
application under that Act.  And I refer you specifically to section 3, and 
that's the support obligations.  And if they're not carried out, the child 
would, we believe, have a right to become involved in that maintenance 



 

 

obligation.  So that's the appropriate place for that to be carried out. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- I hear the minister is saying then that he thinks that a 
16- or 17-year-old does in fact have that right. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- We believe that the child would, in the appropriate 
circumstances, have the right.  That would be determined by the court. 
 
Page 11 agreed to. 
 
Pages 12 to 17 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Page 18 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Mr. Chairman, I have one final point here and this is with 
respect to sections 32 and 34 of the Bill, which deal with the guardian's 
authority in managing property held on behalf of children, and with the 
security that a guardian has to provide. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, we discussed this in second reading and I put forward 
two proposals to you.  One is that it seems to me that it would make sense 
that a children's advocate be involved and receive information from all 
guardians who are holding property and managing it on behalf of children, 
on an annual basis with respect to the status of that property, and with 
basically the financial state of affairs of the property that's being 
managed, so that an independent third party is in effect safeguarding the 
child's interest. 
 
And secondly, I propose to you that a child who's 16 or 17 years of age 
should surely on a regular basis receive information about the financial 
state of affairs of the property that is being managed by the guardian, and 
that should just be as a matter of course. That information should be 
provided on a regular basis. 
 
The way the system works now, as I understand it, basically a child doesn't 
get a full reporting from the guardian on the status of financial affairs 
until he's reached the age of 18 and basically takes over the property 
himself. 
 
I would like to hear from you, sir, whether you would be prepared to 
introduce an amendment that would in effect ensure that 16- and 
17-year-olds have a right to this financial information and receive it, 
perhaps on a semi-annual basis, from the guardian. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- We believe that the right to obtain the information is in 
fact there.  What we're really talking about, I believe, is a procedural 
matter.  We believe that to have a child advocate do what the public 
trustee is already doing, which is a trustee for the property of a child 
under 18, would be a duplication.  Having said that, I am prepared to check 
with the public trustee and see whether there is a way of supplying that 
information just perhaps on a reporting basis without the need for an 
application, and I'll undertake to get back to you on that.  And if there 
are difficulties, we'll raise those with you and if not I certainly 



 

 

wouldn't have a difficulty in principle.  But if we do it that way it would 
solve the question that you raise. 
 
Page 18 agreed to. 
 
Pages 19 to 35 inclusive agreed to. 
 
(1930) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I move the committee report the Bill, Mr. Chairman.  And 
if I may quickly thank my officials, in particular, Mr. Moen and Miss 
Amrud.  This reform of family law that we have implemented this session, I 
think, is one long overdue and there's significant legislative initiatives.  
I appreciate the questions of the opposition critic on this, and I believe 
that these are a significant step forward in the development of the family 
law. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- I thank the minister for his undertakings to me.  I look 
forward to receiving a letter back from him on these issues, and I want to 
thank him and his officials this evening and we look forward to some of the 
changes that are in the Bill. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 
Bill No. 5 -- An Act respecting Child and Spousal Maintenance and 
Consequential Amendments resulting therefrom 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move that this Bill be now read 
a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 6 -- An Act to amend The Dependants' Relief Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move that this Bill be now read 
a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Bill No. 3 -- An Act respecting Custody of, Access to and Guardianship of 
Property of Children, Child Status and Parentage and Related Matters 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move that this Bill be now read 
a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Human Resources, Labour and Employment 



 

 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 20 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Would the minister introduce his officials to us, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Now with television I 
suppose one has to worry about whether it's left or right, I guess.  On my 
right, the deputy minister of Human Resources, Labour and Employment; on my 
left, the assistant deputy minister, Ron Kruzeniski; and directly behind 
me, Natalia Carroll, and she is the executive director of support services; 
and Pat More, the chief financial advisor. 
 
And I might advise you, Mr. Chairman, that present also is our seeing-eye 
dog, Beau, who is companion and assistant to Ron Kruzeniski, the assistant 
deputy minister.  So that if you're wondering about the stranger in the 
House, this is a well-behaved stranger here with his tail sticking out 
beside my desk.  And so this is probably a first for this legislature, that 
we have a seeing-eye dog.  And the opposition is in a good mood, and I 
would say that we're prepared to lend our seeing-eye dog to the opposition 
if necessary, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would say to the minister, well 
we'll see what happens and we'll take a look at a number of things tonight 
and draw conclusions at the end of the evening. 
 
Mr. Minister, first of all I'd like one of the pages to take over to you a 
list of standard questions regarding the operation of your office, your 
personal staff, trips, out-of-province travel, advertising, polling, and 
the use of aircraft.  Mr. Minister, if you would commit to me to respond to 
these in writing by a certain date, then that would be acceptable.  And 
I'll ask the page to take them to you to review, and if you want to respond 
to those in writing by a certain date, then we can proceed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- I've looked at the information and I was going to give 
it out to you now but it might get a little lengthy.  So in due course 
we'll send it over to you.  It's about the same as last year.  There's no 
major change in this department.  I've been minister for five years; it's 
sort of business as usual.  There hasn't been any major change since last 
year, so we'll send it over in due course, okay? 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Minister, by what date would due course occur, please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Depending on how busy we are, and how busy I am, I 
suppose we could do it by this Friday. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- That would be acceptable, Mr. Minister.  Thank you. 
 
Mr. Minister, as we review the performance of the Department of Human 
Resources, Labour and Employment this evening, there are a large number of 
major concerns that we'll be needing to take a look at.  A large number of 
major concerns as a result of the actions, or the inactions, of your 
department, which quite frankly impact on the large majority -- if not in 



 

 

fact every person -- in our province. 
 
It will come as a surprise to some in the province that your department is 
mandated to be responsible for in-migration, to attract people to the 
province of Saskatchewan.  Mr. Minister, it goes without saying that there 
is a large concern about the human tragedy that we're experiencing in 
Saskatchewan these days, in which we've lost already, so far in 1990, 
nearly 7,700 people.  Now I'm not talking about 7,700 people who have moved 
out of Saskatchewan, but 7,700 more who have left Saskatchewan than moved 
into our province. 
 
With the year being a third of the way through -- and those figures are up 
until the end of April 1990 -- a third of the way through the year we find 
that the number is, as a matter of fact, a third of the 23,700 that we 
lost, the net loss in 1989.  Now, Mr. Minister, the fact of the matter is 
that since 1985 there has been a net loss of some 70,000 people from the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, we will also be taking a look at the sorry Tory record of 
employment stimulation, and addressing the fact that from 1971 to 1981, 
under a New Democrat government, there was an average of 9,100 new jobs 
created every year.  From '82 to '89, under a PC government, Mr. Minister, 
there has been an average of 2,625 new jobs created per year.  And 
particularly sorry, Mr. Minister, is the job creation record of your 
government as it affects young people, and we will also be taking a look at 
your performance and your plans related to student summer employment, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, in addition to that, your department has developed itself a 
bit of a reputation for being weak in the enforcement of labour standards.  
And to add to the misery, Mr. Minister, I note in the budget document that 
you are intending to cut three positions from labour standards this year. 
 
Worker's compensation continues to be the source of a large number of 
complaints, Mr. Minister.  A large number of injury games, it seems to me, 
are being played, as reported to me by both injured workers as well as 
health-care professionals in Saskatchewan.  In addition to the injury game 
of deeming, it seems that now the mode is to play the injury game of 
pre-existing condition and soft tissue.  And we've all heard the complaints 
related to that, Mr. Minister. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, in the two and a half years that I have served this 
Legislative Assembly as labour and employment critic, when looking at the 
issues impacting working people in Saskatchewan, it seems to me that the 
number one ongoing issue, not always first in the minds of people but the 
number one overall and ongoing, lies in the area of concern for your 
enforcement of occupational health and safety. 
 
And so it is there, Mr. Minister, that I wish to begin this review of 
estimates here tonight.  I know now, in looking at the budget documents, 
that you will tell me that you have budgeted for six new positions -- the 
minister holds up six fingers, some from one hand, some from the other. 
 



 

 

Mr. Minister, I recognize that you will tell me that there are six new 
positions in occupational health and safety, and that on the other hand, 
you will not want to draw a large amount of attention to the cut in labour 
standards of three positions within your department.  And I suppose, Mr. 
Minister, that you will try to tell me and the people of Saskatchewan, 
working people in particular, that they're going to have to trade off 
attention to labour standards for attention to occupational health and 
safety.  And, Mr. Minister, I say simply to you that that is an 
unacceptable trade-off. 
 
(1945) 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, back in October 1988, your department, the occupational 
health and safety branch, made amendment to regulations which were passed 
by order in council.  And one particular regulation -- I refer to 
regulations in section 249 -- passed without meetings with anyone in the 
labour movement.  In fact, it would seem, as history has unfolded, Mr. 
Minister, passed without any consultation or virtually no consultation with 
industry. 
 
Prior to the change, Mr. Minister, of regulation 249, the regulations 
specified that, and I'll quote: 
 

 An employer shall ensure that no worker is raised or lowered by, or is 
required or permitted to work on, any platform suspended from a crane or 
front-end loader or on any hook, headache ball or other part of a crane or 
loader except with the written permission of the director, which 
permission may be subject to any conditions that the director may specify. 

 
And I want to underline that last phrase, Mr. Minister, because this is the 
phrase that was removed.  This, Mr. Minister, was an Act of deregulation, 
occupational health and safety deregulation which withdrew the phrase 
"except with the written permission of the director, which permission may 
be subject to any conditions that the director may specify." 
 
In other words, Mr. Minister, as a result of this deregulation of section 
249, regulation occupational health and safety, it no longer became 
necessary in order to meet approval for the operating of a free-swinging 
man bucket to have it inspected and approved by the director of 
occupational health and safety. 
 
Now it appears, Mr. Minister, that at that time, shortly thereafter, that 
K-Line construction, the subcontractor for SaskPower, not even K-Line 
construction was familiar with this deregulation of this occupational 
health and safety regulation, as K-Line construction, as history unfolds, 
Mr. Minister, it appears did go to the occupational health and safety 
branch for permission to use the man bucket. 
 
However, Mr. Minister, it became obvious that there was no permission 
required from the director.  No inspector went out to investigate and, Mr. 
Minister, as a consequence there was a tragedy in the province of 
Saskatchewan.  On March 7, 1989, in Outlook, Saskatchewan, 19-year-old 
Jason Greenwood was working in a free-swinging man bucket, a man basket, 



 

 

Mr. Minister.  And on March 7, he fell to his death.  It would seem, Mr. 
Minister, as well, that the attention of the occupational health and safety 
branch left something to be desired. 
 
And it would certainly seem, Mr. Minister, if it were not for the diligence 
of Jason Greenwood's family, in particular his mother -- motivated, I would 
add, not by revenge but motivated by love for her son and a desire to see 
changes made so that this kind of tragedy would not happen to another 
family in the province of Saskatchewan -- began to raise that issue of the 
deregulation of section 249 of the occupational health and safety 
regulations. 
 
Mr. Minister, you will also be aware that SaskPower contracted out that 
work . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I beg your pardon? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Can't you ask these questions one at a time? 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Well I'm outlining, Mr. Minister.  I have a series of 
questions that I will be asking you and I'm sure that you will do your best 
to answer.  I'm simply outlining the history, Mr. Minister, of the tragedy 
which has occurred, which has occurred at least in part, Mr. Minister, 
because of deregulation in the occupational health and safety regulations 
by your department. 
 
SaskPower, Mr. Minister, contracted out the line work in the North 
Battleford-Outlook area, was not prosecuted subsequently under The 
Occupational Health and Safety Act even though it appears clearly in the 
Act that they should have been.  Mr. Minister, it would appear then that as 
a result of a deregulation, four months subsequent to that period of time a 
tragedy occurred in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So let me begin, Mr. Minister, to ask some questions of you regarding the 
actions of your department related to what has become known in Saskatchewan 
as the Jason Greenwood tragedy.  Mr. Minister, let me begin by asking you 
this then: I ask you why it took four and a half weeks after the fatality 
for the occupational health and safety branch to prosecute K-Line 
construction, the sub-contractor involved in this accident. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the answer to that question is 
that when there's an accident of this nature you have to investigate 
thoroughly and properly, and four and a half weeks is not an unreasonable 
length of time to investigate such an accident. 
 
I might also say that the investigation was thorough and proper and that 
the prosecution resulted in a conviction of the employer on four counts, a 
total fine of $7,000, I believe.  The fine amount is in the hands of the 
courts and we cannot second guess the courts on their decision on how much 
they should fine.  And that is the explanation for the four-and-a-half-week 
investigation which led to successful prosecution, which will not assist 
Mr. Greenwood in any way but it will assist others in the future so that 
these kind of accidents won't happen.  And that's all we can do, is try to 
prevent accidents; we can't reverse them in this department. 
 



 

 

In answer to some of your preamble there, and in explanation, you have 
acknowledged that we are increasing by six the number of occupational 
health and safety officers, and I signed the order, I think it was late 
last night, for the hiring of additional five people.  We'd expect that 
those advertisements will go out fairly soon. 
 
The reason for the reduction in labour standards is that, partly at your 
request and partly at the request of the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour, 
we decided not to proceed with the employment benefits Act in 1988, and we 
did not need those people to implement the new Act which would have had a 
re-education process for people throughout Saskatchewan with respect to the 
details of the Act.  As it stands, the current Act remains and there is no 
need to spend money hiring three people to implement the existing Act 
because it's already there. 
 
Your argument that there's deregulation here, certainly the regulations 
were not the problem with respect to the death that you refer to.  First of 
all, you should know that at least 200 copies of the proposed regulations 
were sent out to the industry, to union members, to employers.  A copy was 
sent to the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour; they were asked for their 
input.  None of the people who received the 200 copies saw this particular 
regulation as a problem. 
 
The cause of the accident is not a problem of enforcement or a problem of 
the state of the law in this province.  The problem is that the company in 
question did not follow the regulations, which was clearly proven in court; 
that that accident, those people responsible for that company will have to 
live with for the rest of their lives, knowing that they didn't follow the 
regulations.  The court has already ruled on that particular question and 
has confirmed that the regulations were not followed so it's not the lack 
of regulations.  It's not lack of enforcement.  We try to enforce things 
but what you're saying is that to blame our department for every accident 
is like blaming the RCMP for every crime.  They cannot be everywhere, they 
cannot check everything. They have to do their best to prevent crime, and 
we do our best to prevent accidents.  It's very unfortunate that 
occasionally these accidents happen. 
 
But I can say that our safety record has improved year after year, ever 
since I've been minister. The number of fatalities has gone down and so . . 
. (inaudible interjection) . . . You're indicating it went up last year?  
Well we could check and see the significance.  The general trend has been 
down and I'd have to look at the most recent figures.  I'll look at them 
and then we'll go into the details. 
 
That's the situation, is that the law, if it has changed at all, has 
improved and been strengthened.  And we consulted with everyone, including 
the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour, and I don't know what more we can 
do.  We're hiring another six officers to go out there and enforce things 
even more.  That would be a record number of officers in the field in this 
province. 
 
And how many people?  Do we hire one person for every employer?  There has 
to be a limit to how many you can hire.  So we're doing everything that is 



 

 

possible, weighing the particular cost.  I mean you could double the police 
force in Saskatchewan, spend another $300 million on Justice.  There has to 
be practical limits on how much enforcement you can do. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Minister, if you were consulting, then there were a whole 
lot of folks that seemed to have missed the consultation.  Certainly, the 
unions that do work related to the use of the cranes were not aware of the 
regulation.  K-Line construction was not aware of the deregulation, Mr. 
Minister, because they went to your department seeking approval only to be 
told that they didn't have to have approval to use the free-swinging man 
bucket that was on the crane. 
 
Mr. Minister, it became obvious to a large number of people working at that 
site that it was in fact a dangerous, swinging man bucket.  Unfortunately, 
many of those workers on that site either did not realize that they had the 
right to refuse dangerous work, or if they realized, they felt that they 
didn't have an option of raising that, Mr. Minister. 
 
But it was obvious to people working on the site that it was not a safe man 
bucket that was being used and under the circumstance it was being used, 
Mr. Minister.  And had you not deregulated section 249 of the regulations, 
Mr. Minister, there had to have been approval from the director of 
occupational health and safety regarding the use of that bucket.  I 
believe, and many others believe, Mr. Minister, particularly those who are 
most affected by their employment in relationship to this kind of work, 
believe that it would have been obvious immediately to the occupational 
health and safety branch that the bucket, as it was used, was not safe and 
would not have met with the approval of the occupational health and safety 
branch. 
 
And I have to ask you, Mr. Minister, I have to ask you as a matter of 
responsibility to a large number of people who have been in touch with me 
regarding this tragedy, Mr. Minister, because it is a question that is on 
their minds: is it not true, is it not the fact of the matter that the 
reason that it took so long to reach the point of prosecution of K-Line 
construction is because your department was doing some backtracking and 
some scrambling; because your department became aware it was your act of 
deregulation, Mr. Minister, that contributed directly to the circumstances 
that led to this unnecessary tragedy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Let me say at the outset that workers have to look at 
a situation and decide whether it's dangerous or not and how dangerous it 
might be.  If any workers in Saskatchewan feel that a job they are doing is 
too dangerous, I ask them to telephone our department and discuss the 
implications of what their options are with respect to refusing dangerous 
work. 
 
We have offices throughout Saskatchewan.  We have a head office.  And I 
invite workers to phone our office and have their options and their rights 
explained to them directly from our labour standards officers.  That's 
probably the best way of them receiving information -- describe the 
situation while calling our department and our department will get the 
answer or send an inspector out to look at the job.  No one can be 



 

 

dismissed for refusing dangerous work. 
 
In the case that you refer to, the investigation showed that Mr. 
Greenwood's best friend and, I believe, Mr. Greenwood, went to the employer 
and complained of the dangerous situation.  Mr. Greenwood's friend quit 
employment of that employer.  Probably his friend should have phoned our 
department to advise us of the situation.  But he saw the danger of the 
situation.  Mr. Greenwood went back and worked in the dangerous situation.  
And if he had called us, we would have sent an inspector out; and if his 
friend would have called us, we would have sent an inspector out.  Had 
anyone called us, we would have sent an inspector out.  We can't follow 
every company around Saskatchewan. 
 
(2000) 
 
So this situation has to be brought to our attention, not here in the 
legislature but out in the fields when the dangerous situation is 
happening.  And when that is the case, we do send inspectors out and we 
deal with the situation.  It's unfortunate here that Mr. Greenwood decided 
to go ahead and do the job that was dangerous. 
 
And I say to those people who are still out there working -- because this 
will not help Mr. Greenwood -- but I say to those people who are out there 
working and in the legislature, we don't want to play to television but if 
it can be used as a means of advising people of their rights, then I'm 
prepared to do that. 
 
I say clearly that workers should telephone our department about a 
dangerous situation, discuss it with us.  We know that workers for the most 
part will not be frivolous about their request.  They can phone us directly 
or they could discuss it with their union representative.  In a non-union 
situation, we invite them to phone us directly.  That is the situation. 
 
I don't think you can honestly say that a four-and-a-half week 
investigation which was thoroughly completed and led to prosecution can be 
faulted in any way.  The investigation was done, the charges were laid, the 
evidence was placed before the judge, the judge convicted.  The judge 
levied what the judge judged to be an appropriate fine.  I see no fault in 
the investigation.  I see no fault in our department. 
 
It would be different if we were called and we didn't do anything, or we 
were advised of the situation and we didn't do anything.  When we're not 
advised of a situation, you can't expect the civil servants of Saskatchewan 
to anticipate where there may be a breach.  They do spot investigations, 
spot checks, but that is a spot check.  It's not a thorough check of every 
particular site. 
 
Unfortunately these accidents happen from time to time.  We had a recent 
example at the Shand power plant in Estevan where the trailers were parked 
a long way away from a crane.  If you saw the pictures -- they were quite 
clearly presented in the newspaper here in Regina -- while they were a long 
way away, another 35 or 40 feet would have been the appropriate length 
because that boom was long enough to kill and injure workers. 



 

 

 
Again, the workers have to give us some indication that there may be a 
danger and we can have our inspectors out there and move cranes and change 
work practices.  Those are the kind of things that we are prepared to do, 
and you cannot say that we are lax in enforcement. 
 
For example, my department ruled against the Department of Justice on a 
recent ruling with respect to occupational health and safety of the 
correctional centres -- a clear ruling by my department against the 
government, not against other employees, but our department ruling against 
the government itself, saying that there had to be some changes made, and 
the details of that will still have to be worked out. 
 
So we have tried to be fair in this and taking our responsibilities 
seriously.  This government has only two lawyers, and one of them is the 
Minister of Justice and I happen to be the minister responsible for 
occupational health and safety.  And I try to treat this department in the 
same professional manner as the Minister of Justice treats the Department 
of Justice in that there are professional people there who have to use 
their discretion, make decisions.  And I will not do any political 
interference with respect to the professional judgement of the workers in 
this particular department. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Minister, if enforcing the law is political interference, 
then what the workers of Saskatchewan are asking for, Mr. Minister, is 
political interference.  To enforce the law is what they're asking.  Mr. 
Minister, if we're advising workers of their rights this evening and that's 
part of our objective, then please, Mr. Minister, let's do it correctly.  
It is not the right . . . It's not limited to the right of Saskatchewan 
workers to call the occupational health and safety branch to report a 
concern about occupational health and safety. 
 
Mr. Minister, you know, or you should -- I believe you do -- that in 
Saskatchewan, workers have the right to refuse unusually dangerous work, 
period; not to have to report it to occupational health and safety.  They 
have the legal right in this province to refuse unusually dangerous work, 
period; to report that to the occupational health and safety committee; and 
are not required to go back and engage in that activity until it has been 
checked and either remedied or shown to be not unusually dangerous.  That's 
the law.  That's the right of every Saskatchewan worker in our province.  
So please, if we're going to use this forum to advise workers of their 
rights, let's advise them correctly of their rights. 
 
Now you say, Mr. Minister, that your department can't go out and prevent 
accidents by following workers around.  What a cynical way of saying, Mr. 
Minister, that this change to regulation 249 is acceptable to you.  Because 
you see, Mr. Minister, had you not deregulated regulation 249, had you not 
removed the requirement that your department would go out to the site, 
would look at the crane, would look at the man bucket and would investigate 
it, and then would rule it to be safe to use or require that alterations be 
made, Mr. Minister, that was the regulation that your department 
eliminated.  You took that regulation out. 
 



 

 

It was required until October of 1988 that your department went out and 
investigate that bucket before it was used.  And then in October of 1988, 
without consultation with industry, without consultation with labour, you 
deregulated that regulation, and in March of 1989, arguably, a Saskatchewan 
citizen paid the price for your government's deregulation of occupational 
health and safety.  And that's the fact of the matter, Mr. Minister. 
 
So when we're advising workers of their rights, let's advise them of what 
their rights are and do it correctly. 
 
And so I ask you, Mr. Minister, I ask you why it was, why did your 
department undertake this deregulation without calling a single meeting, as 
I understand, with those who are most actively involved with the use of 
swinging man buckets in industry?  We have circumstances where labour, 
organized labour in Saskatchewan says it was not aware of the regulation 
change until after the accident.  And obviously K-Line construction was not 
aware of the deregulation of regulation 249 because they approached your 
department to seek permission to use that bucket and were told that they 
didn't have to have permission. 
 
Mr. Minister, how was this change made without reasonable consultation, 
without having discussions with the people most affected and directly 
involved in the realities of the use of free-swinging man buckets? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Chairman, I wish the member opposite would stop 
politically grandstanding on the graves of dead workers.  We are discussing 
here a serious situation and what we have here . . . if we're going to get 
into the technical wording, let me refer to the regulations specifically on 
page 126 in the Occupational Health and Safety Act Regulations, subsection 
(4) of section 25 refers to: 
 

 No employer shall require or permit a worker to be raised or lowered by 
any powered mobile equipment described in subsection (2) or to work from a 
platform maintained in an elevated position by equipment of that type 
unless: (and it sets out (a) to (f) the requirements that that platform 
shall have). 

 
The former regulations said "without the permission of the director."  And 
this actually puts the onus on the employer to ensure that conditions (a) 
to (f) are met rather than have the director get permission to do these 
things, whereas the director was never going out into the field and 
actually inspecting the crane or the platform to see if conditions (a) to 
(f) were being met. 
 
When the guide-lines went out, including the labour leaders, who, I submit, 
did not do their homework on this or have since changed their mind, because 
we sent the guide-lines out, asked for opinions; nobody saw a problem with 
this wording change.  Now you're trying to grandstand on a wording change 
that you think will save somebody's life when I'm telling you that this 
subsection is more onerous.  It puts the onus on the employer to comply 
with this regulation and not on the director to exempt them from it or give 
them permission to be exempt from any part of this regulation. 
 



 

 

The directors were not going out looking at the devices.  So it was really 
a meaningless phrase that was there that is no longer there.  It is 
meaningless.  You're trying to make political mileage out of technical 
legal points.  I'm telling you that under this section of the regulations 
that employer was convicted and fined for not following the regulations.  
There is no deficiency in the regulations.  There is a deficiency in 
practice from time to time, and our department has to either be informed of 
that or find it on a spot check. 
 
So without going and reading clauses (a) to (f) -- I've already read 
subsection 4 of section 25 of The Occupational Health and Safety Act and 
Regulations -- I am telling you that you're making much about nothing, and 
that if there would have been anything significant in this, your friends in 
the labour movement, your friends in the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour, 
would have noticed it and would have pointed it out to me as they point out 
everything that they think is a detriment either to them in the work place 
or to them politically.  They never hesitate to point anything out.  They 
did not in this case.  I'm telling you they didn't because there was 
nothing significant about the change in the regulations. 
 
And stop going into this garbage about deregulation.  We have a book this 
thick.  Look at it.  Pay close attention.  This is not deregulation. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Minister, I have the book as well.  And it would serve 
the working people of Saskatchewan extremely well if your department would 
enforce the darn thing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- It may, Mr. Minister, as well . . . It may have made a 
difference if you would not have considered it to be irrelevant for your 
department to have approved, and having had to take some action to approve 
that man bucket. 
 
The issue in Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister, plainly and simply is your 
department's enforcement of the best doggone Occupational Health and Safety 
Act in all of Canada.  We have the best Act in Canada, but the Act is no 
stronger than the political will of the government to enforce it and you 
know that as well as I, Mr. Minister. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, you seem to not be all that co-operative in answering my 
question.  I find it odd, I find it odd, Mr. Minister, that those directly 
involved, including the contractor, including K-Line construction, were not 
aware of this change and sought permission to use that bucket from your 
department, were told that they didn't have to have permission to use it. 
 
Let us proceed, Mr. Minister, in the handling of your department of this 
particular case.  I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, why it was that the 
prosecution of your department was limited to K-Line, when K-Line reported 
to the Saskatchewan Power Corporation, whose safety supervisors also 
supervised their work.  Why was the prosecution of your department limited 
only to K-Line? 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm advised that we referred the charges 
to the Department of Justice, who made a decision on who should be 
prosecuted.  The Department of Justice prosecuted the employer in this 
particular instance.  We did not seek to override the opinion of Justice or 
their decision on who they should prosecute. 
 
(2015) 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Minister, I ask you then: is it not your view that under 
The Occupational Health and Safety Act, that SaskPower is responsible for 
their subcontractors? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- That's a legal question that would have to be decided 
by courts. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Minister, it looks to me as though it's fairly clear in 
the Act.  What you're saying is you don't have an opinion on that matter? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Chairman, section 14 refers to a requirement that 
the subcontractor be at the work site.  In this particular case, the work 
site was not at SaskPower but out in the field, on field, so to speak.  And 
Justice was  
 Dof the view that while the regulations put some onus on the contractor or 
the general contractor or the owner, that upon our examination of the Act 
and regulations, the advice we have -- and I concur with it -- is that it 
is questionable whether the regulation, as now printed, is based on the 
authority of the legislation, that being the Act. 
 
And under the proposed amendment, we intend to strengthen the regulatory 
power in the Act so that this legal question of whether the regulation is 
within the jurisdiction granted by the Act will be resolved.  But at 
present, without the amendment having taken place, and the instance you 
refer to, the decision would not be retroactive nor would the regulations 
be retroactive. 
 
I am advised that it's questionable whether that regulation would stand in 
a criminal trial where the regulation is based on a statutory authority 
that, in our opinion, is unclear as to whether that regulation has 
sufficient statutory authority with respect to the proposition that you 
have put before us here. 
 
So as I indicated, that would have to be a legal decision, depending on how 
a court would rule.  In this particular instance, it is apparent that 
Justice saw fit to charge the employer rather than a general contractor, 
and that Justice had some concern.  As I have relayed to you here, I concur 
with their concern and I am proposing that the new Act, when it is passed 
and brought forward here, will remedy this potential legal situation which, 
I suppose, in layman's language, would be called a technicality. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Minister, occupational health and safety is all about 
protecting the health and the safety of working people at work.  
Unfortunately, Mr. Minister, when taken to its extreme, the ultimate 
violation of occupational health and safety, in personal terms, is when 



 

 

working people in Saskatchewan lose their lives. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have in my hand a document entitled 1989 Safety and 
Occupational Health Annual Report by SaskPower, dated February 15, 1990. In 
reading the foreword of this document, Mr. Minister, I will quote to you 
the beginning of the final paragraph which makes reference to, in 1989, the 
impact of the ultimate extreme for working people who work for contractors 
to SaskPower.  And I quote: 
 

 Although contractor accidents are not included in our SaskPower Safety 
Report statistics, it should be noted that in 1989, there were 5 workers 
killed while doing work for contractors of SaskPower. 

 
Mr. Minister, as minister responsible for occupational health and safety in 
Saskatchewan, I ask you what you, your department, intend to do about this 
statement in the 1989 SaskPower health and occupational safety report? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Chairman, our department has had discussions with 
SaskPower with respect to the safety record of their contractors.  
SaskPower has had a reasonably good safety record and they are doing 
several things.  They have amended their contracts to put them in a 
position to terminate contractor's contracts where they violate or are not 
following safety regulations.  So SaskPower has taken the matter seriously 
and threatened and will cancel contracts where safety regulations are not 
followed. 
 
SaskPower has undertaken to our department to try to impose safety programs 
on their contractors.  They're taking this situation very seriously.  Of 
course SaskPower contracts out construction work which is inherently more 
dangerous than the maintenance work that their regular workers are doing, 
and so it would be the more dangerous work that is being contracted out. 
 
We don't find the five deaths to be acceptable and have dealt with 
SaskPower on this particular topic.  We expect that their contractors will 
have a better safety record.  SaskPower insists that they follow safety 
regulations and the government insists that they follow safety regulations. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Minister, I urge you to continue to press SaskPower to 
act with some diligence in ensuring that their contractors, Mr. Minister, 
will be providing substantially greater attention to occupational health 
and safety.  Obviously the prices that are being paid for the attention, in 
recent times, Mr. Minister, the prices that are being paid are far too 
extreme and certainly unacceptable. 
 
Mr. Minister, going back then to the K-Line case, it was, as you pointed 
out earlier, a decision of the court to impose a $7,000 fine for their 
violation of The Occupational Health and Safety Act. 
 
And I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, whether you believe that, as minister 
responsible for the Act and the enforcement of the Act and all that that 
takes, whether you believe that this $7,000 fine which, as I understand it, 
is the largest fine in the history of Saskatchewan, whether that was 
sufficient given the circumstances and whether that level of fine would act 



 

 

as a deterrent to other employers. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I'm not going to, in the 
legislature, second guess the judiciary.  I represent here two out of our 
three elements of our British parliamentary system.  I am a member of the 
Executive Council and a member of the legislature.  I'm not a member of the 
judiciary.  I don't intend to interfere in the way they do their job, so I 
will not comment on the adequacy of the fine. 
 
The only option I have as a member of the other two, Executive Council and 
the legislature, is to change the law, and we are proposing changes to The 
Occupational Health and Safety Act.  The committee has reported.  We are 
working on drafting amendments that will implement those reports.  And when 
those amendments are brought before the legislature, then the opposition 
will see what we have to say with respect to fines.  And that is the only 
way that I can comment or send messages to the judiciary. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Minister, and I would say to you that that's the most 
appropriate way for you to send a message, not just to the judiciary -- in 
fact, least of all to the judiciary -- to employers who have responsibility 
to respect The Occupational Health and Safety Act is more to the point. 
 
Mr. Minister, you refer to the review of The Occupational Health and Safety 
Act and the report of the council in September of '89.  And I'd just like 
to read into the record, before asking you my next question, Mr. Minister, 
the bulk of the section entitled, "Enforcement, Penalties, and Other 
Sanctions."  And I quote from the council's report of September '89: 
 

 The Council recognizes the need for increased penalties to encourage 
employers and employees to take action to improve occupational health and 
safety, and to encourage compliance with the Act and regulations by making 
the risks and costs of non-compliance unacceptable.  The Council believes 
certain actions leading to serious injury or death should result in fines 
and prison sentences comparable to those imposed for criminal negligence. 

 
 The present legislation (Mr. Minister, the one enforced now) establishes 

maximum fines of $10,000 with a limit of $5,000 for a first offence, as 
well as $500 and $1,000 per day for continuing offences.  A person found 
guilty of an offence may also be imprisoned for up to two years. 

 
 The Council debated, at length, the optimum level of fines.  Although 

there was consensus they should be raised significantly, the Council was 
unable to agree on a specific amount for the maximum fine but believes it 
should be in the range of $250,000 to $500,000. 

 
Now, Mr. Minister, you say that you're reviewing the Act in light of the 
recommendations from the council.  And the council is recommending not just 
minor increases in the maximum fine under the Act but, as a matter of fact, 
is recommending very, very substantial increases as an incentive for 
employers to follow the Act. 
 
(2030) 
 



 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I then wish to ask you whether you will be amending The 
Occupational Health and Safety Act and specifically the committee's 
recommendation regarding penalties to the Act; whether it will be your 
intent to follow the committee's recommendation or something close to it.  
If it's something close to it then, Mr. Minister, I would appreciate, and I 
know a large number of working people in Saskatchewan would appreciate some 
indication of just exactly what you're intending to do. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Chairman, we intend to amend The Occupational 
Health and Safety Act.  We intend to increase the fines; the exact amount 
has not been determined.  I intend to confer further with the occupational 
health and safety committee before we finalize the Act and then we will be 
bringing in amendments and, as indicated, intend to increase the fines. 
 
We will discuss further matters with the occupational health and safety 
committee.  I intend to reconvene them to submit further questions to them 
for their consideration before the final Act is brought before the 
legislature. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Minister, when do you intend to bring amendments to the 
Act before the legislature? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Well I intend to bring them at the earliest 
possibility but certain matters have arisen that are causing a delay and 
therefore I would expect that it probably wouldn't be until fall. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Minister, I would ask if you would confirm for me, that 
The Occupational Health and Safety Act in the current regulations -- and 
you may be considering reviewing these; in fact, I assume that you are -- 
that the current Act and regulations under the Act, do not deal with 
qualifications for the operation of cranes on job sites, with the 
qualifications for operation of cranes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Chairman, certification of crane operators is one 
matter that we are considering.  We are trying to work with apprenticeship 
to come up with an apprenticeship program.  We feel there would be a lack 
of certifiable crane operators at this time.  If we could come up with a 
compromise so that our existing crane operators could meet those standards 
that we will set, we will set the standards very high. 
 
So we were looking at certification.  It's a matter of being fair to the 
existing workers who have been out there and are experienced but would have 
to take some sort of additional training, and we have to establish that 
kind of additional training so that they have the opportunity to qualify as 
certified crane operators. 
 
So it is something we are considering.  The industry is amenable to the 
idea.  The crane operators have requested that and it's something we're 
trying to put together. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Minister, I would concur that the industry, crane 
operators as well as business, those who are both employed as well as 
employers, have a concern and would, I believe, by and large, the large 



 

 

majority would support the requirement that crane operators must meet the 
qualifications. 
 
Mr. Minister, is there a reason that at this point in time -- as a matter 
of fact, there is in occupational health and safety absolutely no 
requirement for training for occupational health and safety, for 
qualifications of having completed and having some defined ticket -- is 
there a reason why we don't have that right now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Chairman, over the years we've never had that kind 
of a training certificate in Saskatchewan.  Over the years it may not have 
been as necessary because there wasn't that much construction.  But 
recently we have more large projects under construction, and it's something 
we now have to consider. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I encourage you to do more than consider 
it, but to follow through on your thoughts and to implement a basic 
qualification for crane operators. 
 
Mr. Minister, occupational health and safety regulation 212 requires that 
as of January 1 of this year that a load gauge must be operative with any 
crane that has a rated load of 15 tonnes or more. 
 
Mr. Minister, as I've talked to people in industry, again, both employers 
and crane operators as employees; number one, it's virtually universally 
welcome that the load gauge is required.  But I've received a number of 
questions, Mr. Minister, as to why 15 tonne, when in fact British Columbia 
has a limit requiring the gauge for 10 tonne.  And, in fact, I've talked to 
more than one employer in Saskatchewan who would promote weight gauges, Mr. 
Minister, of five tonne; that that would be the requirement in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
When this regulation was set and became effective as of January 1 of this 
year for all cranes, why the limit of 15 tonnes?  Why not 10?  Or as a 
matter of fact, not even 5 as is suggested by some in the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- I'm advised, Mr. Chairman, that British Columbia in 
effect does not have such a regulation; that British Columbia is 
considering a regulation; that Saskatchewan is the first place in Canada 
that has this type of regulation.  We felt we would start at 15 tonnes to 
get the principle established and then work our way to 10 and lower.  
Because we were first in Canada we had to break new ground and we started 
with the cranes that were giving us the most problem, the larger 
high-capacity cranes.  And we are the only place in Canada that has these 
kind of crane requirements under section 212(1) for the determining of the 
weight load.  And I recall -- as I indicated earlier, I've been minister 
for five years -- I recall Mr. Lutz, Lutz, as we say in the part of 
Saskatchewan that I come from . . . Mr. Lutz is from Winnipeg, and has 
extensive experience in cranes, and he came around several years ago to 
lobby me with respect to crane safety. 
 
We then implemented some of his suggestions and we've gone further than 
anywhere else in Canada on this particular regulation, so it gets us back 



 

 

to your argument that our regulations are lax.  They are not.  They are as 
tight and as regulatory as any regulations in Canada considering our local 
requirements in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Well, Mr. Minister, if we enforce them in Saskatchewan then 
we will have something. 
 
Mr. Minister, you referred earlier as did I, to the occupational health and 
safety review, which was conducted last year.  Last August 22 in this 
House, you made a commitment in the Assembly to provide to me a list of all 
those people and organizations who presented briefs to this committee.  In 
fact if I remember correctly it was within a few days as you said. 
 
I still await that, Mr. Minister, and I would assume that we're over 300 
days, that we're at least a few by now.  And I would still welcome that as 
you committed in estimates of last year, Mr. Minister.  You also committed 
in the same question as a matter of fact that I put to you in estimates, to 
provide for me a copy of the report when it was ready, and I still await 
that as well, Mr. Minister, although I've managed to get a copy from other 
sources. 
 
However, setting that aside for the moment, Mr. Minister, I want to raise 
with you a question as to . . . now that the review has been done and the 
report has been made -- the review unfortunately being done largely in 
private, not public -- but the report has been made.  So the obvious 
question is: what will come of that report?  What effect will it have?  
You've said that you're currently reviewing and possibly this fall that you 
may be introducing some changes to The Occupational Health and Safety Act 
as a result of the recommendations from the council. 
 
Mr. Minister, many of the recommendations are quite serious and important.  
They refer to things as a lack of enforcement of the Act by the branch.  It 
should be no surprise that as Labour and Employment critic, I'm asking you 
some of the questions I'm asking tonight.  That point was made loud and 
clear by the review of the committee and its recommendations of the 
occupational health and safety council.  As they said, there's a lack of 
enforcement of the Act by the branch.  I assume that that's partly why you 
have decided to increase the staffing in occupational health and safety, 
and with that I agree and concur. 
 
You said as well, Mr. Minister, that there is declining worker involvement 
and participation in work place health and safety and that the worker's 
right to refuse dangerous work has been reduced.  That seems to be somewhat 
obvious to me even earlier in these estimates here tonight when you were 
recommending that what workers should do is call occupational health and 
safety when, as a matter of fact, according to their rights by law in 
Saskatchewan, they need only to refuse to do unusually dangerous work on 
the job, period. 
 
Obviously, Mr. Minister, if there is confusion in this Assembly by those of 
us who are assigned legislative-related responsibilities to deal with this 
Act, there's no wonder that there is confusion in the minds in Saskatchewan 
workers about their right to refuse dangerous work, and that's exactly what 



 

 

the report said. 
 
It said as well that there's a lack of meaningful education for workers.  
It said that penalties and enforcement measures are inadequate, and we've 
talked about that already.  The report also, Mr. Minister, said that 
there's a rising accident rate in small business and a neglect of 
occupational health and safety in agriculture.  It recommended some 
educational initiatives in that regard. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you've already advised me that you're intending to act 
on these recommendations perhaps as early as this fall.  You say there is a 
snag, I know not what.  But I ask you, Mr. Minister, upon which 
recommendations of the council do you intend to act, and what proposals do 
you have for positive change? 
 
If you want to just address the first question first, that's fine with me.  
But as you review that report and your officials review that report, they 
obviously say that by and large the occupational health and safety remedy 
in Saskatchewan is not legislative action related but it's administration 
related.  That that's where the real need to improve the protection of the 
workers, their health and their safety on the job, that's where the focus 
must lie. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, as you review that Act, what do you see as the 
priorities, and upon which kinds of recommendations -- as specific as you 
could please -- do you intend to take some action? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Chairman, first of all with respect to commitments 
I might have made last year, I always keep my word if I can remember it.  
We will check Hansard and see what commitment was made and we will try to 
live up to that commitment.  The report is a public document now.  We are 
in a process of drafting amendments to the Act. 
 
And you keep complaining that I have indicated in this Assembly that 
workers can call up my department.  I did not say that they . . . There is 
a no law that says they can't refuse to do dangerous work.  But what you're 
insisting on is that they should have confrontation; they should throw up 
their hands, throw down their tools, decree we're not working any more, and 
sit there and see what happens.  I mean, what we are suggesting is that the 
workers have that right, but we are also going beyond that.  I am saying, 
call our department, get a clarification of your rights, get information, 
report the situation to our department, seek the advice of our department, 
ask for an inspector rather than confrontation immediately.  If at all 
possible, things should be worked out. 
 
(2045) 
 
If it's an instant situation, yes, you know, if you're close to a 
telephone.  But we encourage people to phone our department and seek our 
advice.  Report to us dangerous situations.  So why do you insist on 
saying, there is a law and that we don't understand there's a law.   We 
know perfectly well what the law is.  We're going above and beyond the law 
in saying that we will assist workers in working out these problems.  So 



 

 

don't try to distort the situation.  We know what the law is.  We are 
trying to assist workers. 
 
I have given the commitment here that workers should phone our department 
and we will assist them in those manners:  information, enforcement, advice 
. . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Education.  You use the word education.  Workers are 
not experts in occupational health and safety law and we're prepared to 
give them that information by simply having them phone and ask a question.  
You know, they can come home, call our office whenever -- at noon or 
whenever they get time off or whatever -- they can go to the company phone 
and phone us and say, here's the problem.  What should I do?  I mean, we're 
not withholding that kind of information from them.  We encourage them to 
seek it. 
 
With respect to occupational health and safety changes, we are prepared to 
enact most of the recommendations of this particular report.  And for you 
to ask me the details of what will be in the amendment Bill before the 
draft is complete, I can't give you those details.  I can say most of the 
recommendations we are prepared to implement into law.  I want to confer 
further with the committee before we finalize the last draft of the Bill, 
but we've already made some policy changes that are recommended.  For 
example, we've increased the expenditure on occupational health and safety 
by $726,000, and six people.  We have added a farm safety program 
enhancement of $150,000, and one additional person. 
 
We have occupational health officer training program which has been 
implemented, which we didn't have before.  We have an information education 
unit forum to monitor and resource industry training programs, enhanced 
education program for committees, assist small business; and for that we're 
putting two person-years in.  We find that small business is an area that 
we have to spend more education and enforcement in because we're not 
reaching the smaller businesses and their safety record is not as good as 
the big business. 
 
And we've put in an Informatics program development to assess and improve 
statistical data with workers through the Workers' Compensation Board.  
We're monitoring the committee's activities to see how successful they are 
in their occupational health and safety activities.  We're priorizing high 
risk or poor performance employers so that we are inspecting them more 
often.  We're getting that information through workers' compensation claims 
costs. 
 
We're having quarterly meetings between Workers' Compensation Board and the 
occupational health and safety branch to compare their injury statistics 
with occupational health and safety.  So these are a lot of policy changes 
that we've made already as a result of this particular report being turned 
over to our department.  We are now preparing a draft of the legislation. 
 
I will confer further with the Occupational Health and Safety Council.  We 



 

 

will complete the final draft and then we'll bring forth the legislation.  
So I submit that we are making constant improvement. 
 
I'm also the minister responsible for the Workers' Compensation Board.  So 
there's a synergy there where my department deals with the same minister as 
at Workers' Compensation Board and we are taking every effort possible to 
improve the safety record in this province.  And the safety record in this 
province has improved year after year after year.  And there may be a 
glitch where there's a bad year for a large accident, or two or three 
things that happen in a particular year but if you look at the trend line 
the fatality rate and the injury rate are down. 
 
Now that can be verified by workers' compensation statistics.  It can be 
verified by having the lowest rates of workers' compensation in Canada and 
the highest benefits.  That is in part due to the safety record and in part 
due to prudent investment by the Workers' Compensation Board. 
 
And I will give credit here: the credit goes to myself, to my predecessor, 
to your government ministers, to the Liberal government ministers, and to 
the Douglas government ministers before that, and the Gardiner government 
ministers before that, and the Patterson government -- all three political 
parties when in government have run the Workers' Compensation Board quite 
efficiently, have constantly improved upon it, and it is now a model for 
the world.  And I have visitors . . . I've had visitors from New Zealand, 
visitors from the United States, I have spoke to people in Europe, and our 
Act and our board as a model and clearly, while we may not be perfect, we 
are certainly respected world-wide for our compensation and for our health 
and safety record. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you touched on a large number of topics 
and we'll proceed dealing with a number of those. 
 
People will understand, of course, Mr. Minister, that when it comes to 
workers' compensation, occupational health and safety, that the strength of 
what we got in Saskatchewan is the legislation.  Legislation that came in, 
I may add, under a New Democrat government. 
 
When they look at the implementation of those Acts and the administration 
of those Acts, and you go back to the 1986 workers' compensation review, 
80-85 per cent of the recommendations related to administration, not to 
legislation.  The same is true as well, of course, in the review of 
occupational health and safety, Mr. Minister. 
 
And so I would certainly admit that your government inherited a couple of 
fine Acts, excellent Acts, not without need for some improvement.  But, Mr. 
Minister, your attention to making those Acts work, to administer them in 
the spirit of the Act has been something less than famous, Mr. Minister, 
and certainly has room for improvement. 
 
And I welcome your comments about the additional staff in occupational 
health and safety.  I welcome your comment that you will be intending to 
respond to the large majority of the recommendations from the occupational 
health council, Mr. Minister. 



 

 

 
But I just can't let pass your one -- I hesitate to use the word goofy, Mr. 
Minister -- comment, but I can't think of a better word right at the 
moment.  You know, what's goofy is that we're standing here debating the 
legislation when we both know what the legislation is.  You and I both know 
that the legislation in Canada says that a worker being required to do work 
that he or she considers to be unusually dangerous has a right to refuse, 
on the spot. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Agreed. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- The minister says he agrees; so far we're in this together.  
Mr. Minister, I'm of the opinion that that is not a right that is used 
mildly or frivolously by Saskatchewan workers.  The track record indicates 
that, Mr. Minister.  But somehow, when to suggest to Saskatchewan workers 
that it is an extension, in fact it is even better to refuse work that they 
believe to be dangerous at the time, that somehow it's even better to keep 
doing it and to find a phone somewhere and to call your department and talk 
to them.  Mr. Minister, somehow there's a leap of logic that took place 
here.  My goodness gracious, if they were making that phone call by 
cellular phone, judging by recent reports in the media, the Prime 
Minister's office would get the message before you got it. 
 
Mr. Minister, obviously what there has to be is an assurance to 
Saskatchewan workers that they do have the right to refuse dangerous work.  
Mr. Minister, we both know that the Act works best when it's being 
followed.  And we all know as well that the Act requires that all employers 
with 10 or more employees is required by the law -- required by the law -- 
to have an occupational health and safety committee: an occupational health 
and safety committee which has at least co-chairpersons; at least as many 
members on the committee; and at least as many chairpersons on that 
committee for the workers as well as for the employers; that has the 
responsibility of ensuring that there is occupational health and safety 
education. 
 
Your department has a responsibility to assist in that.  Your department 
has a responsibility to provide information about the Act and regulations.  
Your department has a responsibility to assist in the education, to provide 
follow-up to the meetings of those minutes. 
 
Mr. Minister, therein lies the problem, therein lies the problem.  The 
Occupational Health and Safety Act requires that a good number of work 
places in this province with 10 or more employees have to have an 
occupational health and safety committee, and they don't because your 
department is not requiring them to follow the law. 
 
Now the best way to deal with an accident, Mr. Minister, is to prevent it.  
Preventative remedy is much more desirable from everybody's point of view, 
than corrective.  It's less painful.  In fact I would argue, Mr. Minister, 
it is less expensive.  I've seen research which suggests that a dollar put 
into accident prevention into occupational health and safety can be proven 
to result in $10 of saving in dealing with the consequences of accidents.  
So it's not just in workers' best interests, it's in employers' best 



 

 

interests and collectively in our society, Mr. Minister, it's in all of our 
best interests. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I would ask . . . you made some reference to the number 
of people working in your department and you've pointed out -- I believe 
you pointed out; it's in the budget document -- that with the increase of 
six this year, we will now be up to 51 employees in occupational health and 
safety -- exactly the number that you inherited in 1982-83 when you came to 
government -- 1982-83, the budget document showed 50.7 employees in 
occupational health and safety. 
 
We both know that it dropped in 1984-85.  It dropped the first couple of 
years down to 37.7 and has now been increasing and I compliment you for 
increasing it by six this year to 51, which gets you back to where you 
started.  That's where you're at now, Mr. Minister. 
 
And I would ask you, Mr. Minister, if you would tell me how many 
occupational health and safety officers your budget this year allows for.  
And, Mr. Minister, with respect to the work-load of those officers, how 
many work places are assigned to each of them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Chairman, there are a total of 21 people in 
inspections.  The manager is a mines inspector, a manager of the safety 
unit.  There is in Regina an assistant manager plus seven officers; there 
is in Saskatoon a senior occupational health officer plus six officers; 
there's one stationed in Prince Albert, and there are four additional 
officers in mine safety. 
 
Mines is one area that have over the years been considered quite unsafe, 
and so we have four officers dealing with mines -- that's uranium, potash, 
coal, all the mines in Saskatchewan.  In total there would be 21 of them 
out for the industry in general in Saskatchewan . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Pardon? 
 
With respect to cranes, I'll get you the answer.  I know I have some 
information on that. 
 
(2100) 
 
Mr. Chairman, let me add to that answer about the 21 inspectors.  There are 
an additional 6 information and training officers who go out and do 
educational work but are not actually occupational health and safety 
inspectors but do educational and information work. 
 
With respect to cranes, as long as I've been the minister we did not have 
an expert in cranes.  Effective January 1, 1990 we hired an individual -- I 
don't suppose I should give his name, it doesn't matter much -- an 
individual who for 25 years was in the crane business in Saskatoon, 25 
years experience, and is a certified crane operator. 
 
Effective January 1, we have an experienced crane operator, and more expert 
than we've ever had in our department, and this is the individual we 
dispatched immediately to the unfortunate crane accident at the Shand power 



 

 

plant.  And then we have an experienced occupational health and safety 
inspector with respect to cranes. 
 
As a matter of fact, when we heard of the accident our director instructed 
this individual, who was on a day off, to immediately charter an airplane 
and fly to Shand and immediately take charge of the site.  That was done.  
That investigation continues and we anticipate the report will be available 
in two or three weeks, two weeks probably, the final report will be 
available.  They've gathered their information.  I'm advised they expect to 
have the report completed in the middle of July.  What the department has 
done is they've gathered all the information; they have to compile the 
report. 
 
There is a complication which I would think is a good complication, and 
that is an indication there will be a coroner's inquiry, an inquest.  I at 
one time was a coroner, I know how these things work.  It is my opinion 
that since there is a coroner's inquest that the report should probably be 
held pending the coroner's inquest, because as a result of the coroner's 
inquest other things can happen.  I know that if charges are laid in a 
court, then that supplants the coroner's inquest again. 
 
So while the report will be ready in the middle of July, we will have to 
look at the legal options on the report with respect to how it would affect 
the coroner's inquest.  We would make all of that information available to 
the coroner on the inquest, to call the witnesses, to have all the 
information that we have available to the coroner.  With respect to 
publishing the report or releasing the report, we have to check the 
legalities because we are now in a coroner's inquest situation. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Minister, when making presentation to the occupational 
health and safety review committee, it's my understanding . . . I can't 
document this, Mr. Minister, because you haven't sent me the list of the 
presenters so that I can ask them all for copies of their presentations. 
 
By the way, that was August 22 in Hansard last year where I made that 
request, and I'm sure that you'll follow that up.  I'll try and find the 
page number here and shoot it over to you so it'll be easy to find. 
 
Mr. Minister, it's my understanding though that a good number of the 
presentations express their concern about it being difficult, more 
difficult than it had been in the past, to receive copies of the Act and 
the regulations.  That seems to me to be fairly basic.  Those are 
government produced documents, Mr. Minister.  Will you be taking some 
action to make those more available, more readily available and without 
charge to occupational health and safety committees? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Chairman, the Act and regulations are available.  
I understand there is a cost of 6.50; we pay the postage and handling on 
them.  They're available from the Queen's Printer, from our office here, 
and the office in Saskatoon.  They're a considerable cost in putting out 
all of this material, and in order to be fair, the cost of -- I think I 
showed it to you earlier, it's actually a book -- that there is a 6.50 
charge. 



 

 

 
The government has a deficit which we are trying to address, and so, 
therefore, we are trying to restrain our printing and publishing budgets.  
And this department has been coming in on budget the last few years -- as 
the departments that I am in charge of have been in a habit of doing 
recently -- and we don't intend to change that. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Minister, I've heard them all now; the explanations 
you're addressing, our deficit.  When we're paying $500 million this year 
alone in interest on the deficit entirely created by your government, I 
find it odd, Mr. Minister, that we're fighting the deficit by charging 
$6.50 for a copy of the regulations of The Occupational Health and Safety 
Act. 
 
When we're saying that it is a major concern that workers' will become more 
informed of their rights for occupational health and safety protection, as 
well as employers for their obligation, that it would seem to me, Mr. 
Minister, that it would be $6.50 well spent by the taxpayers and I would 
not recommend that this be one of the primary tools used to fight the 
massive debt created by your government. 
 
The page number I referred to, for the information of your officials, Mr. 
Minister, I believe, it's at the bottom of my copy here, I believe it's 
4339 of Hansard of last year. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I would like you to advise me, if you would, how many 
employers were fined in 1988-89, and what was the total amount of those 
fines consequent to The Occupational Health and Safety Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Chairman, we don't have the information available 
today, but the department is prepared to make a calculation and send you 
the information. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- And, Mr. Minister, would you do that along with the 
information you committed earlier? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- And last year's. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- And last year's, yes.  If I can get last year's promise and 
this year's promises and we can have all those by the end of the week, that 
would be just dandy, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, you and I both know that The Occupational Health and Safety 
Act requires all employers with 10 or more employees to have an 
occupational health and safety committee which will meet at least, I 
believe, it's quarterly, Mr. Minister. 
 
My question is: how many employer situations -- and I recognize that 
sometimes there's a bit of a grey area as to whether it's when you have one 
employer with a number of sections, whether that's all one occupational 
health and safety Act, or they should be separate -- but in the view of the 
branch, Mr. Minister, how many employer occupational health and safety 
committees should there exist by law?  And how many in fact even exist, 



 

 

never mind whether they're operating and meeting regularly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Chairman, there are 2,580 committees in existence 
in Saskatchewan.  If there are any that don't exist, so to speak, where 
there should be a committee and there isn't one, we welcome the member from 
Moose Jaw giving us the information and we'll see into the matter and make 
certain that where they should be, they will be established. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Well, Mr. Minister, as per the Act, I would encourage your 
occupational health and safety officers who are doing their spot checks to 
visit those employers and to ensure that there are occupational health and 
safety committees in existence and operating.  That's not terribly 
difficult to verify.  Minutes from those meetings are supposed to be 
submitted to your department and reviewed.  There are some questions as to 
whether that actually happens or not. But this is not a difficult task to 
do.  And I would encourage your occupational health and safety officers to 
in fact do some checking and to ensure that those committees exist in all 
those work places in which they're required by law.  And you and I both 
know, Mr. Minister, that there are far too many employment circumstances 
and locations where committees should exist and don't. 
 
Mr. Minister, I picked up a copy of the 1989 Sixtieth Annual Report of the 
Workers' Compensation Board, and I turned, Mr. Minister, to page 11 of that 
report and it just about blew my mind.  Mr. Minister, what I noted was that 
in 1981 there were 1,012 claims settled for permanent disability -- 1981, 
1,012.  It then indicates, Mr. Minister, that since 1981 there has been a 
steady decline in the number of permanent impairments claims settled, to 
the point where in 1989 -- this is almost unbelievable, Mr. Minister, in 
fact I'd say it is unbelievable if it wasn't officially published in the 
records here -- in 1989 there were 91 permanent disability claims settled. 
 
Mr. Minister, from 1,012 in 1981 to only 91 in 1989, that, Mr. Minister, is 
a drop of 91 per cent.  Or in other words, Mr. Minister, last year the 
Workers' Compensation Board found it appropriate to settle, to provide, 
only 9 per cent permanent disability claims as compared to the number in 
1981. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I asked this question because I have absolutely no idea 
what in the world has changed to cause in 1989 for there to be only 9 per 
cent of the number of permanent disability settlements with injured workers 
in the province of Saskatchewan over the course of the term of your office.  
And, Mr. Minister, as I said before, and you will verify this by looking at 
page 11 of the report as I am, that there has been a steady decline 
throughout the year that your government has been in office. 
 
Mr. Minister, to say that this decline is unusual is a drastic 
understatement.  And I ask, Mr. Minister, for your serious explanation as 
to this 91 per cent reduction in settlements for permanent disabilities. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, to quote my grandmother: "Papier 
ist geduldig." And I will supply the members opposite with a translation, 
which is not always a courtesy that we get on this side.  And the 
translation of that German expression is that: paper is docile, you could 



 

 

train it to do what you want. 
 
And the member opposite here goes back to 1981.  And let us give those 
reasons for the discrepancy, and there's a combination of matters.  First 
of all, you have a backlog which we no longer have.  Secondly, you've 
changed systems in 1979.  Probably you had a backlog when you changed the 
system from 1979 to 1981, and when you changed the system you went from a 
specific injury type chart which was referred to in the industry as the 
meat chart -- so much for a broken hand, so much for a lost limb.  And this 
province went to a rehabilitation system. 
 
When you go to a rehabilitation system you're not going to have 
statistically as many permanent settlements because you're going to 
continuously pay people while they are being rehabilitated.  In addition, 
injuries are down.  That will be reflected in statistics at workers' 
compensation.  So you've taken a statistic from 1981, you've taken a raw 
statistic from 1989, and you've said, therefore because this happened in 
1981, this is the cause of it. 
 
(2115) 
 
And you have to take into account there may be five or six factors involved 
in a change in statistics.  You are not comparing the same kind of 
settlements.  You're not even comparing the same Act because you're looking 
at a backlog from an old system that didn't work that other provinces are 
now throwing out. 
 
I commend your government at the time for throwing out the old system and 
bringing in a new system.  We have constantly made improvements on that 
system.  Other provinces are following that system.  I would say you've 
quoted for us a raw statistic, and it is very raw: Papier ist geduldig. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I too learned some German phrases when I 
was a young lad growing up but I won't repeat any of them in the Assembly 
here, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, accepting your argument here then, let's compare to '82.  
That's okay with me.  In 1982 the report shows that there were 36,942 
claims in total; 1989, 33,319, a drop of some -- quick mathematics in my 
head tells me -- 3 to 4 per cent; 1982 says 592 permanent impairments; 
1989, 91, a drop of -- quick mathematics in my head -- some 85 per cent.  
Total claims down 3 per cent; permanent disabilities down 85 per cent. 
 
Mr. Minister, if that's your definition of apples to apples, okay, that's 
fine with me.  I simply have a great deal of difficulty accepting that 
there's 85 per cent employment activity going on in the province today. 
Granted, there is less activity going in the province today, I grant you 
that; that's been one of your government's great contributions to 
Saskatchewan, is less employment.  I suppose one of the consequences of 
that, the only good news on that, is that there's less injuries of working 
people because they've got less jobs to get injured at. 
 
Without getting into that form of argument for the moment, Mr. Minister, 



 

 

comparing in your terms then apples to apples, how do you account for a 3 
per cent drop in the number of claims in total, and an 85 per cent drop in 
permanent disabilities, other than to say that there's some harsher 
interpretation of the eligibility for injured workers in Saskatchewan, for 
permanent disability, under the workers' compensation administration? 
 
Mr. Minister, is it possible to give it any other interpretation than that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- I'm not going to get into a debate on raw statistics 
based on flaws in logic.  I mean, it's like saying, last year 150 trees 
fell on people, causing death.  Conclusion: trees are dangerous; therefore 
we should cut down all trees.  I mean, there are flaws in logic.  You have 
to look at all factors.  You are not looking at all factors.  You are 
isolating statistics picked out of here, and a statistic picked out of 
there, and coming to conclusions that have nothing at all to do with it. 
 
I've given you five factors that have to be considered.  There's no need to 
repeat them.  I'm saying, let's not get into mathematics off the top of 
your head.  Let's not get into comparing an old Act, backlogged with a new 
Act, in a new system where injury is down, and say, therefore, you're not 
doing anything because injury is down.  I'm pleased that injury is down; 
I'm pleased that the number of claims are down.  I don't apologize for the 
number of claims being down.  Let's not get into false logic here.  If the 
number of claims are down, that's good. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Well, Mr. Minister, we're venturing into goofiness here now.  
You tell me what years you want to compare.  Pick the years.  I'm talking 
numbers straight out of your report, Mr. Minister.  I'm talking about your 
department's report of claims settled.  I'm talking about your department's 
report of permanent disabilities.  I understand those other factors.  What 
in the world that has to do with trees falling on people's heads is beyond 
me, Mr. Minister.  Let's not engage in frivolous debate here. 
 
Mr. Minister, when I look at this, the stark conclusion and the one that 
I'm afraid is the major factor in this is not what has been happening by 
attention to occupational health and safety, because I get around this 
province.  People are not saying . . . I'll tell you, of the things that 
they're saying to me there's one thing that I have never yet had a single 
living soul other than yourself, Mr. Minister -- and only through 
implication from you -- I have never yet had a single living soul say to me 
that the attention to occupational health and safety is way up; it's being 
enforced according to the Act.  Not a single person has ever suggested 
occupational health and safety in this province and to your government has 
been enforced according to the Act and therefore the number of permanent 
disability settlements is down because of this determined effort on the 
part of your department to enforce the Act. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, you're obviously not . . . well maybe I won't make the 
assumption.  I'll give you one more opportunity to provide to me and the 
people of Saskatchewan, injured workers of Saskatchewan most significantly, 
an explanation as to why this dramatic drop, without leaving people left 
with the only obvious conclusion, and that's that The Workers' Compensation 
Act and the benefits subscribed to that Act are being provided with a 



 

 

different kind of spirit than was previously the case.  And a spirit, I 
would add, Mr. Minister, that's less sensitive to the injuries of working 
people. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Chairman, NDP logic can be hard to understand at 
times.  Let me try to explain this for the member.  Page 10 of the report 
of the Saskatchewan Workers' Compensation Board, they wrote three lines 
that compare 1987, '88, '89.  I don't have statistics that go back to 1981.  
If you'll look at the trend in that document it is as follows: total claims 
1987, 36,735; total claims 1988, 35,915; 1989, 33,319;  Everybody can see 
that the total claims are going down, the number of injuries are going down 
over that three-year period.  Fatalities in 1987, 27; 1988, 23; 1989, a bad 
year, it ballooned back up to 36.  Now I have no explanation why 1989 was a 
bad year.  Some things have to be left to God to decide.  We are making 
constant effort to keep that statistic down, fatalities. 
 
But then look at the next line -- permanent impairment: 1987, 32; 1988, 
110; 1989, 91.  Temporary impairment: 1987, 15,354; 1988, 15,075; 1989, 
13,706.  No time loss accidents: 1987, 21,272; 1988, 20,707; 1989, 19,486.  
It is now clear for everyone to see that there is a general trend, 
fatalities going down.  A bad year in '89 but generally the fatalities are 
down, down, down every year except for '89.  We don't understand exactly 
why.  We'll see what happened. 
 
Temporary impairment down.  Total claims down.  Permanent impairment down.  
Now if you were saying that when you were government there was much more 
permanent impairment, I don't see the logic of telling me that that is 
wonderful.  I'm telling you that there is less permanent impairment, there 
is less temporary impairment.  I submit that is good.  I don't care if you 
think that more permanent impairment in 1981 shows that your government did 
more for occupational health and safety. 
 
Quite honestly I don't see the logic.  I don't think anyone else will see 
the logic.  What logic is there in saying that when you were government, 
more people were permanently injured, and therefore because the number of 
permanent injuries is down while we are government, we are not doing our 
duty?  We are not enforcing occupational health and safety? 
 
Well okay, if we aren't enforcing occupational health and safety, then the 
employers are doing a better job, or the employees are doing a better job, 
or my employees going out and educating people are doing a better job.  But 
for some reason, whoever gets the credit, injuries are down; permanent 
impairment is down; temporary impairment is down.  Wouldn't you agree that 
that is good? 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Minister, I would if it was.  I am not saying it's 
desirable to have permanent impairment.  Goodness gracious, let's get out 
of the goofy logic here.  And if you want to refer to 1987-88-89, you make 
my case again, Mr. Minister.  What I'm saying is, when a worker is 
permanently disabled, the worker should have a permanent disability 
settlement.  Now there's an odd notion, it would seem, to some on that side 
of the House, that when workers are permanently disabled, they should 
receive a permanent disability settlement. 



 

 

 
The numbers you just quoted to me, Mr. Minister, make my case.  You refer 
to the total claims from '87 to '89, a drop of some 8 per cent 
approximately.  Then, Mr. Minister, you refer to the fatalities and 
unfortunately there was an increase of some 33 per cent, '89 over '87.  
Permanent impairment, Mr. Minister, a drop of some 32 or 33 per cent in 
permanent impairment claims settled. 
 
You'll notice, Mr. Minister, that page 10 does not refer to claims, as you 
state.  It refers to claims settled.  You're telling me that somehow there 
is not reason for suspicion about the accuracy of the administration within 
the spirit of the legislation, when the claims settled are going down 8 per 
cent, but the permanent disabilities in the years you choose, Mr. Minister, 
have dropped some 32 or 33 per cent -- claims settled.  I underline the 
word "settled". 
 
Mr. Minister, I don't believe for a second that there are workers in this 
province who are wandering around looking for an accident so that they can 
get themselves a workers' compensation claim.  Let's get that notion out of 
our heads right now.  What we're talking about is the way the Workers' 
Compensation Board deals with fairness and with sensitivity and in the 
spirit of the Act and the letter of the Act, with a claim from an injured 
worker. 
 
Now we can continue this debate about logic and numbers all night, if you 
want, I suppose.  And obviously we have a difference of opinion, and I've 
asked you to give me an explanation other than that there is a different 
spirit of administration in arriving at those settlements.  You've chosen 
not to offer that to me, Mr. Minister, and so I can only conclude that 
there is not a defensible argument other than a different spirit in the 
dealing with the claims from injured workers. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, I'd like to therefore move to another topic because 
this one seems to be fruitless to deal with.  I'd like to move to that 
mandate of your responsibility, Mr. Minister, which says the Department of 
Human Resources, Labour and Employment has a mandate to attract people to 
our province to promote in-migration. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you have been accomplishing that objective in reverse 
spades, Mr. Minister.  Because if we're getting in-migration in 
Saskatchewan today, they're coming in backwards.  We know, Mr. Minister, 
when we review the records that last year in 1989, Saskatchewan suffered a 
net loss of some 23,705 people -- approximately 36,000 who left, 
approximately 12,000 who came back in, and a net loss of 23,705: 1989.  
Second highest loss in all of Saskatchewan history, exceeded only by the 
right wing Ross Thatcher Liberal government in the year before Allan 
Blakeney formed the NDP government in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
We know as well, Mr. Minister, that the trend this year has not changed.  
So far from the January 1st to the end of April of this year, Mr. Minister, 
we have had a net loss -- net loss -- of 7,656 people, nearly 7,700 people, 
nearly 2,000 people a month, very close to the same rate as last year.  
We've gone through a third of the year and we've lost a third the number of 



 

 

people this year as we lost last year. 
 
(2130) 
 
We know since your piratization agenda was implemented with a vengeance 
back in 1985 that Saskatchewan has had a net loss of 70,000 people, a 
population equivalent to the cities of Moose Jaw and Prince Albert 
combined.  I'm not saying 70,000 people left Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister, 
since 1985 -- in excess of 100,000 people left -- but we suffered a net 
loss through out-migration of 70,000 people, over half of those between the 
ages of 15 and 34.  And there's no reason to believe, Mr. Minister, that 
the trend is changing this year from what we've seen so far. 
 
Mr. Minister, you will know as well as every one of us in this House the 
human consequence, the human tragedy of people, and particularly our young 
people, leaving Saskatchewan, looking for education, employment 
opportunities, and to make their futures elsewhere, Mr. Minister. 
 
I hazard to say, Mr. Minister, that there is not a single home in 
Saskatchewan that has not been touched directly by this human tragedy: a 
son or a daughter or a sister or brother, a mother or father or next door 
neighbour, a best friend who hasn't given up and left Saskatchewan to make 
their future elsewhere.  The member from . . . former minister and the 
member from Yorkton in debate on a private members' motion some three or 
four weeks ago reinforced that same point as he described his own family 
members who have left Saskatchewan in recent times seeking educational, 
employment opportunity elsewhere, Mr. Minister. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, you will be aware that the Executive Council some three 
years ago put together a forecast of the economy and the population of 
Saskatchewan and forecasted that time that Saskatchewan would be engaging 
in significant out-migration, loss of our people.  Your department is 
charged with the responsibility of formulating strategies to attract people 
to our province.  My goodness gracious, it would be nice if you had 
strategies that even kept our people here in the province, let alone 
attract people back, Mr. Minister, that we've lost. 
 
And so I ask you, Mr. Minister, we're in estimates: has Executive Council 
put forth a new economic prediction?  They've done their analysis.  What is 
Executive Council now recommending . . . not recommending, but talking 
about or predicting will be the population impact in Saskatchewan over the 
next five years, Mr. Minister?  What are the predictions? 
 
Obviously this is a mandate of your department.  You must take a look at 
these things.  What are the predictions of your government, Mr. Minister, 
and what are your plans?  What are your plans to engage in the 
responsibility you're mandated with to promote and encourage in-migration 
with people outside of Saskatchewan into our province? 
 
And, Mr. Minister, it would be a jewel for me and many in this province if 
you would also make reference to what kinds of new strategies for creation 
of employment in this province you've got in mind.  You are the minister 
responsible for Employment and economic development in this province.  That 



 

 

is a major, major responsibility for the government.  What are the plans to 
get our Saskatchewan people working and to carry out the mandate of your 
department to attract people from outside our province back into 
Saskatchewan, the people who have left? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Chairman, if we in this province dwell on the 
problems without any vision for the future, without any policies for the 
future, then this province will not have a future.  And members of the 
opposition have no policy and members of the opposition have no vision of 
the future, and they groan, they moan. 
 
If they have a policy I encourage them to state their policy of what the 
solution is here.  We seek . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Call the election and you'll see the policy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Oh, the member opposite there from Regina Rosemont 
says, call an election and you'll see the policy.  Well if you have a 
policy, why are you hiding it?  I defy you to show me a policy, if you 
actually have one.  The members shout from their seat . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well the member says that we would steal their policy. 
 
Well if it were a good suggestion, yes, we would invoke it.  But we haven't 
even heard of bad suggestions from the members opposite.  No policy 
whatsoever.  They say they don't have any bad suggestions.  I agree they 
don't have any bad suggestions.  They don't have any bad suggestions; they 
don't have any good suggestions; they don't have any suggestions. 
 
What the members opposite give us is, things are bad, things are bad.  But 
give us one positive way of making a change.  Show us some vision.  I will 
show you some vision right now, Mr. Chairman.  I will show the member 
opposite some vision.  I am not concerned that they will steal our policy, 
because if they did it would be good for Saskatchewan.  Let me show you 
some vision. 
 
We have to look at not what is wrong but what can be done.  We have to look 
at an economic policy change, economic reform, because this province has 
got into a situation where we have not been able to keep up with the world 
economy.  We need economic reform.  We have an economic policy which this 
Assembly has passed on community bonds, an opportunity for citizens in this 
province together with all other groups and organizations like 
co-operatives and service groups, non-profit organizations, to invest in 
their own community, guaranteed by the Government of Saskatchewan in 
principal, where they risk their profit. 
 
And they apply themselves to build their community, and they can make as 
much profit as they want because profit is not a dirty word.  There is no 
limit on how much money the people can make investing in their own 
community.  But we will only guarantee their principal.  We are including 
in that program the youth of this province because there has to be a future 
for the youth.  And there has to be an attitudinal change. 
 
I say to the members opposite and to everyone: try this some time.  If 



 

 

you're ever in a school, ask a graduating class: what will you young people 
do when you graduate? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Go to Alberta. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Well the members opposite shout negative things.  The 
member from Rosemont says: go to Alberta.  Well how could they go to 
Alberta?  They have a free-market economy in Alberta.  How could they 
possibly live in such an unbearable situation as having to go to Alberta or 
British Columbia where there's a free-market economy?  Why, if people voted 
with their feet, to go to a free-market economy? 
 
Well let us go back to the little test that you should conduct every time 
you show up to a graduating class in a high school.  And you ask them: what 
will you young people do when you graduate?  And I would expect about 63 
per cent of them will tell you they will go on to university or to SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) or to other 
education after grade 12. 
 
And then say to the remaining 35 per cent: well what will the balance of 
you do when you finish high school?  And I would expect almost everyone of 
them, when you add these two groups up, will say either they are going to 
continue their education or get a job.  And you say to the ones that are 
going to continue their education: what will they do when they graduate 
from university or technical school? 
 
I venture to say almost all of them will say, I am going to get a job.  
Well that is a noble objective but someone should ask them also, who are 
they going to work for.  Because if every young person in Saskatchewan 
wants to be an employee, who are they going to work for if none of them 
aspire to be employers? 
 
And unless you give those young people the opportunity to be employers in 
Saskatchewan, rather than employers in Alberta or British Columbia, then 
there will not be jobs in Saskatchewan.  We have to have an attitudinal 
adjustment.  The young people have to be directed by the education system 
and by the adults of this province to become employers.  Then there will be 
jobs in Saskatchewan, and no sooner. 
 
So we have to have an economic policy of opportunity -- opportunity for our 
people in our communities, opportunity for our youth.  And therefore in 
community bonds, there's a provision requiring youth directors in the 
community bonds corporations. 
 
There will be additional matters that will be brought forward by this 
government to assist youth in becoming winners and becoming employers, in 
adopting a positive attitude and in participating in building their own 
province rather than going and building other provinces. 
 
There has to be, in addition, a resolution of the world trade wars and 
therefore we have to make every effort to solve our world trade wars with 
respect to the GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) negotiations 
that are coming up now. 



 

 

 
I can tell you, last year I attended Geneva as part of a labour conference, 
the International Labour Organization, and at the same time I dealt with 
GATT matters with our Canadian ambassador on GATT and went over the 
problems of world grain wars.  This year I'm the minister responsible and 
we will continue -- both myself and the Premier, who is an expert in 
world-wide trade -- we will continue to try to solve these trade problems 
that are causing us economic harm in Saskatchewan. 
 
We will continue with expansion of former Crown corporations in the free 
market, and therefore you will see continued expansion by Weyerhaeuser who 
is now considering a second pulp mill.  I'm sure you saw that on the news.  
You didn't raise it today; that was not of importance.  It was positive, 
wasn't it?  You couldn't talk about the possibility of Weyerhaeuser 
building a second pulp mill.  No that would be something positive and a 
negative party like yourselves couldn't ever talk about anything positive. 
 
There has to be a plan.  We will continue in the free market with 
corporations that have been set free to do business Canada wide like 
WESTBRIDGE who is looking at expansion Canada wide.  We will continue with 
corporations who've had benefit of government policies like the new health 
card.  So that Co-op Data Services is now doing business world wide. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Belgium. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- The members opposite refer to Belgium.  They are also 
dealing with IBM in Australia.  They are attracting world-wide contracts 
all started by this government having some vision in implementing modern 
technology rather than sitting around talking about the past, rather than 
tilting at windmills as you people of the flower generation are apt to do 
day after day.  I am telling you that there has to be vision and there has 
to be some resolve and there has to be the courage of leadership so that 
the people of Saskatchewan have a future. 
 
And there are some policies for you to consider.  And if you want to steal 
those policies, go ahead, make them part of your platform.  I am pleased to 
see that those kind of policies are a consensus.  And if you don't agree 
with those policies, then come up some of your own so that at least we can 
examine that so people have a choice.  They have a choice between a 
positive party here and a negative party there. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Well, Mr. Minister, Mr. Minister, you say an attitude 
adjustment is necessary, I agree.  But that attitude adjustment does not 
start with the people of Saskatchewan, that attitude adjustment starts with 
you and with the Premier and the members of your cabinet and the two or 
three back-benchers you got.  That's where the attitude adjustment has to 
start if we're going to get some action in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- You want to talk positive?  You want to talk positive?  Let's 
talk positive, Mr. Minister.  This party has talked for some time about the 
only formula that works in terms of generating the economy and getting some 



 

 

jobs in the province of Saskatchewan, and that's the mixed economy 
approach.  The mixed economy, Mr. Minister, that balance of the private 
sector, the public sector, and the co-operative sector, and you have wiped 
two of those off the map, Mr. Minister.  You have put all your eggs in one 
basket and it is a failing formula for which the people of Saskatchewan 
have paid an immense price for your ideological experimentation in 
privatization, Mr. Minister.  That's the reality. 
 
Mr. Minister, there was a time in this province in which small business 
expanded, and there will be a time again in this province in which small 
business expands.  Small business in this province, Mr. Minister, is the 
key to generating employment.  That's where most of our people are.  
Small-business people in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister, make 
their decisions based on their confidence in the economy.  And in the 
history of Saskatchewan it has been so far and it will be for a long time 
to come, Mr. Minister, a reflection of the confidence that they have in 
their government, their government's  
 Dability to manage their own books and to lend some direction and some 
stability to the economy of the province, Mr. Minister.  That's the 
reality. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I take a look at history in the province of 
Saskatchewan, and there is an interesting reality, Mr. Minister, that you 
may not like to refer to.  It has to do with the population of this 
province.  Mr. Minister, it has to do with the historical tradition of the 
New Democratic Party promoting the mixed economy approach to the management 
of our economy in this province, Mr. Minister.  And when you take a look at 
the facts, there can be no other interpretation than that. 
 
(2145) 
 
Mr. Minister, when we take a look at the history of Saskatchewan over the 
last 50 years, Mr. Minister, what we see is this.  For the last six years 
of the Liberal administration prior to the Tommy Douglas CCF administration 
in 1944, there was a continuous drop in population -- a continuous drop, a 
decline in our population, Mr. Minister, which Tommy Douglas inherited and 
continued for three years, because it takes awhile to put your own mark, 
provide your own leadership to the economy of the province. 
 
Mr. Minister, that continued to drop for three years.  It stayed stable for 
five years.  And then, Mr. Minister, for 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 
12, 13 consecutive years, the population increased, Mr. Minister, until the 
Liberal government came to power in 1964, Mr. Minister. 
 
And what did that Liberal government do?  It inherited an upswing in the 
population, and it continued with what it inherited for four years.  The 
population rose from 942,000 to 960.  But then the right-wing 
administration of Ross Thatcher, Mr. Minister, and their ideological 
commitment to only the private sector, Mr. Minister, began to take place 
and population dropped for three consecutive years, down to 926,000.  At 
which point Allan Blakeney New Democratic government came into power, 
inherited the down swing, and that continued, Mr. Minister, to 1974, in 
which we reached the population of 899,000. 



 

 

 
And then, Mr. Minister, the mixed-economy approach of a New Democrat 
government began to take place.  And for 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 consecutive 
years the population of Saskatchewan began to turn up again, rising from 
899,968.  Mr. Minister, that was the reality that you guys inherited in 
1982, an increase in population.  And that continued for five years.  And 
then, Mr. Minister, piratization settled in, and the population began to 
decline.  And so we've gone from a high of 1987, a population of 1.015 
million, down, Mr. Minister -- by my calculations at this point today -- to 
some 997,000, and if you want me to explain the calculation, I will. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you want to talk positive, then let's take a look at the 
track record of the two administrations, the approach to the economy, and 
the results in the impact on people and the creation of jobs, and the 
impact of our population.  That's the reality, Mr. Minister.  From 1971 to 
1981 in the province of Saskatchewan, under an NDP administration there was 
an average of 9,100 new jobs created every year -- 9,100 a year, Mr. 
Minister.  From 1981 to 1989, under your administration, there's been an 
average creation of only 2,625 jobs, Mr. Minister.  Now that's performance 
the PC style.  You tell me that's positive.  The people of Saskatchewan 
tell me that's not positive.  It's anything but positive, and that's the 
reality. 
 
Mr. Minister, when you inherited government in 1981 there were 21,000 
unemployed, an unemployment rate of 4.7 per cent; 1989, 36,000 unemployed, 
an unemployment rate of 7.4 per cent. 
 
And then we have, Mr. Minister, we have our youth, the youth of our 
province, those people that we are losing in droves, who are voting with 
their feet, as you say, and that's exactly correct as they're leaving 
Saskatchewan to make their futures elsewhere, Mr. Minister. 
 
And what's happened with youth employment?  Mr. Minister, in 1981 young 
people between the ages of 15 and 24, there were 110,000; 110,000 between 
the ages of 15 and 24 employed in the province of Saskatchewan.  Under your 
administration, Mr. Minister, that has dropped consistently year after year 
after year after year after year, to 1990 in which case now we have 84,000 
young people employed in the province of Saskatchewan, a drop of 26,000.  
And that's performance PC style, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, in 1982 the young people age 15 to 24 represented about 19 
per cent of the population of the province.  Today that's dropped to 16 per 
cent of the population of the province because unfortunately, Mr. Minister, 
they're leaving.  In net migration, Mr. Minister, 1985 we lost 575; a net 
loss of 575 young people between the ages of 15 and 24; 1986 we lost 
another net 3,251; 1987, another net loss, 2,100; 1988, another net loss, 
3,116; 1989, another net loss of young people, 5,598. 
 
Mr. Minister, that's your record.  That's your record set beside the mixed 
economy approach of a New Democrat government, Mr. Minister.  So I ask you 
that in light of that record: what is your government doing to directly 
address the need for employment of our young people? -- our young people, 
Mr. Minister, the most energetic, the most enthusiastic, the most creative, 



 

 

our newly educated people who are leaving this province in droves to make 
their futures elsewhere, Mr. Minister.  What's your plan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- I really think . . . would anybody want to be governed 
by that?  Is that the choice we have in this province?  What we just have 
gone through there is really the price of wheat over the last 20 years.  
When the price of wheat is good, the economy is good.  When the price of 
wheat is bad, the economy is bad.  Without diversification, only the price 
of wheat has mattered.  The price of oil has helped; the price of potash 
has helped.  And that's what you're talking about there: commodity prices. 
 
With the NDP, they tell us they have one policy, a mixed economy -- a mixed 
economy, like where? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Like Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- A mixed economy, they think, like Saskatchewan.  A 
mixed economy, like where? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- And Europe is moving towards it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- They say a mixed economy like Europe is moving 
towards.  Well I am saying to you that we should have a mixed economy like 
British Columbia, and a mixed economy like Alberta, and a mixed economy 
like Ontario, and then our citizens would be a lot more prosperous. 
 
But the member opposite says, a mixed economy like eastern Europe.  We had 
here in this gallery, Mr. Chairman, the economic advisors to Lech Walesa, 
his chief economic advisors.  I introduced them in this Assembly.  The 
members opposite, they always stand up and acknowledge their union brothers 
but they would not stand up and acknowledge their Solidarity brothers from 
Poland.  Why would they not do that?  Because those members of Solidarity 
said to me, we want to join western Europe, we want a free-market economy, 
we want to be prosperous like western Europe.  I said to those individuals, 
why don't you lead for the time being an eastern European common market.  
And those advisors to Lech Walesa said to me, right here in this building, 
we do not want to be the richest country in eastern Europe we would rather 
be the poorest country in western Europe.  They want to be the poorest 
country in a free-market economy so that they have an opportunity to 
prosper.  They are tired of the system they had there before.  And the NDP 
promise us a mixed economy. 
 
Here's what you get when you elect an NDP government.  If anybody believes 
that small business would benefit then consider more regulation, more red 
tape -- bright red tape I might say -- more bureaucracy.  Four thousand 
more bureaucrats than there are today were here when we were elected -- 
more bureaucracy. 
 
A payroll tax, like the NDP put on in Manitoba.  Tax people for hiring 
people. 
 



 

 

A gift tax.  Our youth can't remember the gift tax, they can't remember the 
death tax.  But I tell you that there are widows and orphans in this 
province, there are farmers who went broke paying the NDP's gift tax 
because they believed, the NDP believed people should not be allowed to 
accumulate wealth; they should not be allowed to save money and pass it on 
to their children. 
 
That's what the NDP believed; they cannot deny it, I was there with them, I 
argued against it.  I stood up to Walter Smishek and I said, get rid of 
that tax.  He denounced me, he called me down, and we had a fair vote by 
show of hands with the NDP on that gift tax on widows and orphans.  And I 
can tell you this, the vote was 131 to 2.  I convinced one other sane 
person among the NDP that we should not tax widows and orphans.  Don't deny 
what was going on in that party.  Don't deny that you haven't changed.  
Don't deny that you would tax widows and orphans again.  Ask Simon De Jong.  
He's already put out a news release saying we should tax widows and orphans 
and farmers with an inheritance and a gift tax.  That's the kind of mixed 
economy they want for us. 
 
They want a land bank so that they can own the land.  They want to go back 
to a mixed economy so they can buy the pulp and paper mill for a second 
time and lose another $91,400 a day.  How many people do they want laid off 
at WESTBRIDGE in Regina because they want to mix up that company in their 
mixed economy?  How many other people do they want to lay off throughout 
this province because they are opposed to Crown corporations expanding? 
 
That is what the NDP policy is today.  That's the most they can come up 
with here is a mixed economy.  And I say a mixed economy like who?  Where 
is there an example of a mixed economy that anyone aspires to?  That debate 
ended in 1989.  The world is going to a free-market economy, to freer trade 
-- all of those things the NDP are opposed to. 
 
They know so little about the world that this goes over their heads just 
like it did when I told them years and years ago.  They deny that I was 
ever a member of their party.  I will bring my card in here and I will 
prove that in 1976 I quit that party because there were some people in the 
world who understood that that philosophy was going nowhere.  Deng Xiaoping 
understood; Dubcek understood in Czechoslovakia; Gorbachev was a head of 
the KGB, and even he understood that that system was going nowhere. 
 
But the NDP, 14 years later is still advocating a mixed economy.  I will 
agree with a mixed economy, but the big disagreement we have is the 
percentage of the mix, because your percentage of a mixed economy is 95 per 
cent socialism and 5 . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order, order please.  We've only got a few minutes left 
and the decorum in this House is dwindling appreciably.  I wonder if both 
members could just retain themselves a little bit and we could maybe finish 
these estimates at 10 o'clock.  Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, I'm not 
going to respond to those comments because it's hard to imagine the . . . I 
don't want to give any dignity to the comments that the minister just 



 

 

talked about.  Mr. Positive himself talking about bashing the opposition 
for why the economy is in such a mess.  And this government has put their 
faith in this new super-minister who just went into a tirade for 10 minutes 
about why we're in trouble and blaming the opposition.  They put their 
faith in him, in his poof economics. 
 
So we've got a minister of economic development who believes in poof 
economics, we've got a Premier who believes in magic.  The problem is, 
Saskatchewan families and Saskatchewan young people are paying the price.  
They're paying the price for your lack of managing the finances of the 
province, your lack of managing the economy. 
 
The proof is in the results.  The proof is not in the rhetoric, Mr. 
Minister, the proof is in results of whether it's high taxation, 
small-business bankruptcies, families leaving, quotas on universities, 
whatever indicators you take, the poorest job creation record in Canada.  
The proof is in the results and your record is very dismal.  You've now got 
the highest rate of family poverty in all of Canada.  You can't deny those, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I would like to pursue a little bit about the issue of 
youth unemployment.  I'll give you something very straightforward to deal 
with, and that is the job creation record under the Opportunities youth 
employment program.  And I think you've got some explaining to do, Mr. 
Minister; you've got some accounting to do for your record as it relates to 
youth unemployment in this province. 
 
And I'd like to indicate, just very briefly, your government's record with 
regards to Opportunities youth employment program.  In 1986-87 -- this is 
taken directly from the budget -- in 1986-87, which was the election year, 
you budgeted $8.5 million on youth employment and you created 10,384 jobs, 
for an average of $800 per job under that program.  In 1987-88 you cut that 
by 53 per cent, the year after the election.  In 1988-89, same as 1987-88.  
In 1989-90, you cut another 22 per cent from that budget -- almost a 
million dollars you cut.  Now 1990-91, in this budget, you've cut another 
$500,000 dollars from the Opportunities youth program, for another 16 per 
cent over last year. 
 
(2200) 
 
Now considering that in the election year of 1986-87 where you created 
10,000 jobs at $800 per job, based on this year's budget you will create 
about 3,226 jobs or 7,150 fewer than you did six years ago under this 
program.  In other words, Mr. Minister, your government, you as the 
Minister of Economic Development responsible for employment, you in this 
budget have allocated only 31 per cent, only 31 per cent of the amount 
which you budgeted in 1986-87. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, it's no wonder that young people are having to leave the 
province.  It's no wonder that the labour force since 1982 for young people 
has dropped by some 26,000 in the labour force, as my colleague had pointed 
out.  You are forcing young people to leave.  So put your rhetoric aside, 
and I want to know from you, and we know that the $500,000 was cut from 



 

 

your budget from this program because the minister responsible for the 
Public Service Commission indicated that the 500,000 that is directed 
towards the environment has come from his department. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, given the high unemployment rate for young people, given 
the fact that tuition fees have increased for students who wish to return 
to university, given the fact that we've got over 50 per cent of our record 
out-migration rates who are young people, why on earth as minister 
responsible for youth employment, would you have allowed the youth 
opportunities employment program to be cut by some half a million dollars 
in this budget?  Why would you have done that?  Why would you have allowed 
that, given the employment situation for young people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Chairman, in 1985-86, the program was a joint 
federal-provincial program of which the federal government's share was 40 
per cent.  When you take out the federal government's share you have a 40 
per cent reduction immediately. 
 
In addition, each year we have been budgeting the actual uptake, and 
because the actual uptake by employers is down, that is an indication that 
the market economy is absorbing more jobs than in the past.  There's no 
need to throw more government money into student employment when the 
economy is already providing those jobs. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Minister, you're ignoring the reality about the economy 
providing the jobs.  The fact of the matter is the economy isn't providing 
the jobs.  You had the worst employment record creation increase in all of 
Canada last year.  We're the only labour force that was reduced because so 
many people were leaving. 
 
So don't give me the line that the free-market economy replaced the jobs 
that were lost in this program.  And I would suggest that, as you did when 
you made those cuts, you again are indicating tonight that there wasn't the 
take up on that money, therefore you reduced the budget.  What you actually 
did, Mr. Minister, is you restricted the criteria for those who could apply 
for that money.  You know that.  You didn't allow NGOs (non-governmental 
organizations) and municipalities and local governments and community and 
church groups, to apply for that money. 
 
So don't play games about the fact that people didn't apply to use the 
program; there wasn't the up take.  That is not true.  You restricted the 
eligibility.  And those are important sectors that you have . . . who 
created jobs for young people in the past that you took out of that 
program.  You wouldn't allow the criteria to include them.  So you 
restricted the criteria, and then you used the fact that there wasn't the 
uptake, as an excuse and a rationale for cutting further. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I have a couple of questions, and one is: why do you not, 
given the high unemployment rate, why would you not consider, or will you 
give consideration to including those eligible to apply, the same groups 
that were eligible in 1986-87 and 1987-88?  Will you do that? 
 
And secondly, while you're up, given that you've only budgeted some $2.6 



 

 

million, which is over $7 million less than just four years ago, will you 
give consideration if you really believe that young people are important to 
the province of Saskatchewan, that they're an investment, and that you want 
them to remain here, will you give consideration to finding the money -- 
say from Cargill, that you're directing towards Cargill, or the other 
variety of ways in which you are wasting money -- will you give some 
consideration to redirecting, at least to the '86-87 levels, some $7 
million to youth employment.  It's not too late.  Will you do that, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the suggestion that any money is 
given to Cargill is utter nonsense.  The provincial government has invested 
in the Saskatchewan Fertilizer Company, the creation of jobs, and the jobs 
will primarily be in the Regina-Moose Jaw area. 
 
The member from Moose Jaw expresses dissatisfaction, and I suggest he will 
live to regret his opposition to the Saskatchewan Fertilizer Company 
building a plant in the Moose Jaw area. 
 
But we have found that the criteria was very loose and that the government 
was subsidizing, as you indicated, churches, municipalities.  This was a 
transfer of taxpayers' money to either other taxpayers' organizations or to 
churches.  And we feel that it's not the duty or responsibility of the 
government to support churches, nor is it the duty for the government to 
support church groups, nor is it the duty of the government to support 
municipalities other than in the manners prescribed by this particular 
budget where the millions of dollars go to the rural municipalities and the 
urban municipalities. 
 
There were cities who were hiring up to 50-plus students in any event, and 
were getting $50,000 from the government.  It was the . . . municipalities 
in this province do not have a deficit.  The provincial and federal 
governments have deficits mostly due to transfer payments from the federal 
government to the provincial government and from the provincial government 
to the local municipalities.  And therefore you have to look at where the 
greatest need is.  We have to control our deficit to reasonable numbers. 
 
It is nonsense to suggest for anybody to come here in this Assembly and 
say, money is given to Cargill, therefore you should give money to churches 
and you should give money to municipalities.  We tightened the criteria.  
We excluded grade 11 and less.  We felt that the government did not have 
money to subsidize jobs for grade 9's, 10's, and 11's who were not going on 
to secondary education at that particular time and that there was a 
responsibility of parents to take care of their children and that the 
energetic grades 9's, 10's, and 11's would find work in the private sector.  
And those that have been energetic have found work. 
 
And so for all of those reasons, which I submit are logical, the 
responsibility of government is a lot greater than the responsibility of 
opposition.  The government not only has to come up with good ideas, it has 
to find the money to do it and it has to find it in a fair manner.  The 
opposition can be whimsical and have a wish list. 
 



 

 

Governments have to make difficult choices.  These choices have been made.  
These choices are made for the future of Saskatchewan, not for immediate 
gratification of how many millions can immediately be spent on groups that 
will hire students for a short period of time.  We have decided to 
concentrate on the wealth producing sector of society, the market economy, 
the job creation sector.  We are in the business of creating jobs, not 
transferring taxpayers' money. 
 
Therefore -- and the member asked the question and he shouts from his seat 
and he is very far back here in the opposition, in the furthest row.  And 
until he shows greater wisdom he will probably not move up into the benches 
where it requires greater wisdom.  So he can have simple solutions, but the 
responsibility of government is greater than just having a wish list. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Well, Mr. Minister, there is another theory about moving 
forward to the front benches and I have to admit, Mr. Minister, that at 
times I'm inclined to think it's not entirely false.  And it's called the 
Peter Principle, Mr. Minister, where individuals rise to their highest 
level of incompetence, Mr. Minister.  And, Mr. Minister, you may find 
yourself being referred to as an example of the Peter Principle some day, 
formally if not informally. 
 
Mr. Minister, you talk about a wish list.  All the member from Saskatoon 
Eastview was saying is that he wishes that when you had a program that 
worked, that you would continue to use the program that works.  That's all 
he wishes; that's all the young people of Saskatchewan wish regarding the 
youth employment program -- the summer youth employment program, Mr. 
Minister. That's all he was saying. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you referred to the Cargill plant as well and, Mr. 
Minister, I would only wish as well that when there is a Moose Jaw firm, 
fully qualified to create 25 jobs and put up some steel buildings, that's 
in a city that's some 15 miles or so from the site of the Cargill 
fertilizer plant, I only wish, Mr. Minister, that a Moose Jaw firm would 
have a chance to bid on that job -- just a chance to bid, Mr. Minister, and 
to create 25 jobs in the city of Moose Jaw. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, let's move along to another topic. And I ask you, Mr. 
Minister, if your department or your government have provided a grant of 
any kind to a firm here in Regina that goes by the name of diversified 
human resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- I've heard of Diversified Services in Moose Jaw, but 
I've never heard of diversified human services.  Nobody seems to recall the 
name.  They can check further to see if anything has been done in that 
regard. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Minister, the name, as I said, is Diversified Human 
Resources.  I'm not referring to a firm in Moose Jaw -- here in Regina. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Does anybody here know about that firm?  My officials 
who keep track of things shake their head.  They know nothing of this firm.  
It should be listed in the Public Accounts if they received more than 



 

 

$10,000.  We know nothing of this. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Apparently, Mr. Minister, it's a firm that makes claim to 
having received a grant from you, as a matter of fact, is how it was 
described.  Mr. Minister, it's a firm that advertises regularly in the 
Regina Leader-Post Help Wanted section offering services to those seeking 
employment for a specified fee.  In other words, Mr. Minister, it sells 
information about job opportunities. 
 
It's my understanding as I look at The Employment Agencies Act, Mr. 
Minister, that the practice of collecting a fee for providing information 
about job opportunities is prohibited by this Act.  It's against the law in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, what this firm seems to be doing is in clear violation of 
this Act, and I would like to ask you, Mr. Minister, if you're familiar 
with the services that they are providing.  You may not be providing a 
grant, but if you're familiar with the services they're providing and if 
they are providing the services as I described, then what your department 
will do about that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Chairman, now that the member from Moose Jaw North 
has raised the question, we will try to track down this firm, look into the 
matter, and see if they are breaking any laws. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- And I would assume, Mr. Minister, that if they are breaking 
any laws that you will take the appropriate action? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- We don't tolerate law-breaking in this province.  This 
government has always been for law and order, and we will maintain law and 
order.  There's never been any question about that. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Minister, if I was to list the number of your own laws 
that your own government has broken, we would be here for several minutes, 
Mr. Minister.  We need not get into that, that's not directly related to 
Human Resources, Labour and Employment.  I would simply ask you to enforce 
the law as it exists, Mr. Minister, on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, your budget shows for this year that labour standards branch 
was cut by 17 per cent for some $202,600.  There was a cut of three 
positions, Mr. Minister, and I would ask you if you would identify -- I 
would not ask you if, I would ask you to -- identify the personnel 
positions that were cut from the labour standards branch, Mr. Minister, and 
what programs have been cut or reduced as a result of this reduction in 
your budget. 
 
(2215) 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Chairman, this reduction of three person-years in 
the budget, I submit, is not a great hardship to any of our workers because 
what happened was that we budgeted for implementation of the employment 
benefits Act.  You made representations against the employment benefits 



 

 

Act.  I submit that this was a loss to the workers in Saskatchewan.  The 
Saskatchewan Federation of Labour made representations against the 
employment benefits Act. 
 
They said, oh we like most of it but there's some things we don't like.  
Their choice was that they'd rather not have anything, and I said, all 
right.  If you represent workers and you the NDP don't want the employment 
benefits Act, there's no use fighting with the people you're trying to 
help.  That Act has not been brought before the legislature for 
implementation.  The three people budgeted for were not hired.  And, 
therefore, there is no need to keep their three vacant positions on the 
payroll.  It is that simple.  I don't think we can default it for not 
hiring people we didn't need. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you and I both know that it was a flawed 
Act and it wasn't all it was cracked up to be.  In fact it was a long 
strike from it.  And every apparent improved benefit or protection for 
employed workers had a loophole you could drive a Mack truck through, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
I kind of suspect that not only Saskatchewan Federation of Labour but a 
large number of other organizations who submitted to you their opinions, 
and copies to me of their opinions about that Act, all drew a unanimous 
conclusion.  I'm still waiting to receive my copy of the first endorsement 
of that Act as being good for working people, Mr. Minister.  And I would 
concur that you took the right course of action by not introducing that 
Bill in the form that it was drafted and presented to this Legislative 
Assembly a couple years ago. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could provide to me, and you may not be able 
to do this tonight and may choose to do that in providing written 
information to me at a later date, the number of inspectors, labour 
standards inspectors at the branch -- or labour standards officers I should 
say -- that the branches had in each year from 1980-81 through to '88-89, 
or let's make that '89-90, and the number of spot checks that those 
inspectors have done through those years.  You may not have that 
information here and if you would provide it to me in writing at a later 
date that would be satisfactory, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Well, I'll ask my officials to do the research and see 
what information they can come up with. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- That's one of the less firm commitments that I've heard for 
some time, Mr. Minister, and I would simply ask that that be provided if at 
all possible, and I don't think it should be terribly difficult. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, the prosecutions for labour standards have dropped 
dramatically.  In 1984 there were 55; in 1985, 44; in 1986, 42; in 1987 
there were 20; in 1988 there were 7; in 1989 we were down to 2 prosecutions 
for labour standards violations.  Two thousand nine hundred and forty-six 
complaints; two prosecutions, Mr. Minister. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you could provide an explanation that would 



 

 

build the confidence of working people in the strict adherence to enforcing 
the labour standards of your department that has resulted in this constant 
decline.  And the record in 1989 of one prosecution for every 1,473 
complaints that were brought -- an explanation of that would be 
appreciated, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- I'll give you the same answer as last year.  We have 
made a conscious effort to settle these matters rather than drag people 
through the courts.  The statistics show . . . (inaudible interjection) . . 
. The members opposite chirp from their seats and they laugh and they scoff 
and they chew their gum in the House and they generally behave that way.  
And what I'm saying to them is that it is not acceptable to be 
confrontational, to try to intentionally drag people through courts when 
you can settle the matter. 
 
Lawyers of Saskatchewan know about that.  Reasonable citizens know that.  
They try to avoid court.  They try to settle their matters.  But the NDP 
want everybody dragged through the courts.  Do they all wish to be judges?  
No, we're not going to hire an extra five or ten judges to process all this 
confrontation. 
 
I explained it last year.  I explained it clearly last year and I will give 
you the same explanation and you can go through your same charade.  But 
will you just look at last year's answer and it is as follows:  we are 
making a conscious effort to settle these matters.  The statistics reflect 
that.  Not as many people are being dragged into court.  As a last resort 
we take people to court.  As a last resort last year, two people had to be 
taken to court.  We think that is a successful record.  We think that it 
expedites matters.  We do not believe in confrontation. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- That's an abrogation of your duties. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- And the member, the former union rep from the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, says that that's an abrogation of our duties.  
Well I know that you union leaders like to be in court; you like to be in 
strikes; you like to be in conciliation; you like to be in mediation.  It 
is your reason for being.  Without confrontation, you would all be 
unemployed. 
 
We are talking here about a system where we are trying to reasonably settle 
matters. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Well, Mr. Minister, on occasion you do extend goofiness to 
new heights, and I think we just experienced one of those.  I do 
appreciate, Mr. Minister, that you just gave me the same answer as last 
year.  I was hoping for a little more frankness, and quite frankly, I was 
hoping that you'd fess up about the application and diligence with which 
your department is enforcing labour standards requirements, Mr. Minister.  
Unfortunately you choose not to do that and to side-track, and so I won't 
belabour the point. 
 
I just, Mr. Minister, note in the minds of working people in Saskatchewan 
the dismal record of your enforcement of labour standards.  I want to know, 



 

 

Mr. Minister, if there are any plans for privatization of labour standards 
enforcement that you're working through your mind these days. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Chairman, I hadn't really thought about it until 
the member opposite started complaining about how inefficient my department 
is, and I was thinking, how else could we do this better?  If you agree 
that we should not contract this out, then let my officers continue with 
their job.  You can't have it both ways. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Minister, let's get this very clear.  You're the minister 
responsible for labour and employment, you're the minister responsible for 
piratization.  Are you saying in this House tonight, Mr. Minister, that 
you're considering privatizing the enforcement of labour standards in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- The answer is no, we are not. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Well, Mr. Minister, we're in this together then. 
 
Mr. Minister, the largest number of complaints in 1988-89, 51 per cent, 
originated in the service sector.  And I am wondering, Mr. Minister, 
whether changes will be made to The Labour Standards Act to address the 
obvious difficulties that workers are experiencing in this sector, or 
whether there are any changes that you're looking at in terms of 
enforcement of labour standards in this sector, which is the source of the 
majority of labour standards complaints. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- The first change we're contemplating is an increase in 
the minimum wage to $5.00 per hour effective July 1, 1990, which is only 
about two weeks from now.  We are contemplating improvements, but there is 
relatively little consensus on what shape or form the improvements should 
take.  So we are studying the matter further and we will look at what 
improvements can be made, what's logical, what's acceptable.  We don't get 
any thanks from you or your friends, the union leaders every time we try to 
make improvements, so for no thanks it's rather difficult to make 
improvements. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Well, Mr. Minister, if there was something to be thankful for 
I would be the first to say that.  There has been occasion in the past, Mr. 
Minister, when I recognized that you've taken action that I consider to be 
appropriate and I don't hesitate to do that when that's the case, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, you've made some reference through our discussion 
tonight to considerations to changes to The Occupational Health and Safety 
Act, possibly as soon as this fall.  I understand from your last comment 
that you're considering some possible changes to The Labour Standards Act.  
The workers' compensation review committee, Mr. Minister, and you may want 
to comment on that, is about to begin its job at some time in the not too 
distant future.  That may be leading to the possibility of changes to The 
Workers' Compensation Act. 
 
We've made no reference here tonight, Mr. Minister, to The Trade Union Act.  



 

 

Just in wrapping up these estimates, I would appreciate some indication to 
you from these four major Acts within your jurisdiction, The Occupational 
Health and Safety Act, Workers' Compensation Act, Labour Standards Act, and 
Trade Union Act, as to whether it is the current thinking of government 
that you're considering some amendments to those Acts.  Is there anything 
anticipated in this session, and/or in the 1990-91 fiscal year, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- We're not anticipating any amendments in this 
particular session to any of those Acts.  I've indicated earlier The 
Occupational Health and Safety Act is being drafted.  At the earliest 
opportunity we're anticipating bringing in amendments there.  We are not 
really that far down the road with respect to drafting amendments to any of 
the other Acts you've referred to, and so I wouldn't expect any legislation 
in the near future 
 
The member asked on The Workers' Compensation Act.  The committee of review 
-- we are trying to locate a suitable chairperson.  And in a rare occasion 
of agreement in Saskatchewan the government, the opposition, the employers, 
and the employee reps all seem to agree on who we should have for a 
chairperson.  As you and I have discussed earlier, there is a legal 
complication with respect to appointing that chairperson.  If we can 
overcome that legal complication, we will by agreement appoint that 
chairperson.  If we cannot, the government will seek another chairperson, 
and that may delay it further.  We anticipate in the next few weeks.  I had 
hoped it would have been done by now but we are seeking a legal solution to 
that technicality.  If we find a legal solution, the best chairperson that 
we can find that we all agree upon will be appointed, and they will 
commence their work when they report, and necessary amendments will be made 
at the earliest opportunity, as we have done in the past. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Minister, I concur with that and would certainly, as I've 
said to you, be committed to assisting in seeing that chairperson selected 
and that process begin as soon as possible. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 8 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Minister, in Regina, for special 
needs transportation, the funding comes for that bus service from the city 
of Regina as well as from your department under your disabilities 
directorate.  The special needs transportation system is severely 
overloaded.  It was set up in 1975 and since that time has only a total of 
30 per cent increase in funding in all of those years.  It's been frozen 
for some years now. 
 
In Regina, sir, they want to operate a special pilot project this year.  It 
involves use of cabs, I understand, as opposed to the minibuses for some of 
the people who are not bound to a wheelchair, that is those who can use 
walkers and that type of thing.  They're slightly more mobile, if you like, 



 

 

than those who are forced to use the minibus because they're 
wheelchair-bound and don't have their own vehicle. 
 
The cost of this special pilot project, Minister, is estimated at about 
$150,000 which, I'm sure even you would agree, is not a huge amount of 
money.  But the last time I checked with the special needs transportation 
people, they were still uncertain as to whether your department was 
prepared to commit some extra funding for that special pilot project on a 
one-year basis. 
 
I'm simply asking you: have you decided you are going to provide some of 
that money or all of that money?  And if not why not?  If so, let me be the 
first to congratulate you for in fact providing that money. 
 
(2230) 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Well to the member from Regina North, it's difficult 
to find extra money for the city of Regina when money is scarce.  And if at 
all possible we will find extra money for the city of Regina.  But we are 
on a tight budget, we have to allocate where the need is greatest.  And I 
will see, during the course of the year here, whose buses in which city 
have worn out, which are in the greatest need of repair.  And if the uptake 
in the other cities is not as great, I would allocate special money to 
Regina. 
 
But as we speak today I cannot promise special money for the city of 
Regina.  But if there is any money that's available due to lack of uptake 
or if the need is ascertained to be greater here in this special case than 
someone else's bus . . . I mean we have constant problems with people's 
buses wearing out and I've gone out and looked at some of them to see the 
state of some of these buses and we've issued the money for those buses. 
 
I can't promise any special money for the city of Regina.  We'll take the 
argument into consideration, and if the money can be found we'll see what 
we can do. 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Minister, you're right.  The buses, many of them do need 
replacing, but that's not what I'm referring to.  I'm not talking about 
replacement of the worn out buses.  I'm talking about the special pilot 
project where they feel that they can provide the cost, the service, at a 
much reduced cost per passenger.  This is a pilot project.  It's one to try 
it out.  If it works -- because they've conceived the idea here in Regina 
-- if it works you may in fact have an opportunity to do two things: 
provide better service to people who require special transportation; and 
secondly, to save some money for the taxpayers and for your department.  So 
there's two things. 
 
But I'm not talking about replacing the worn out buses, although if you 
want to replace them, that would be welcome too.  I'm talking of the 
special project; that is, they want to run for one year to in fact see that 
it will work, to see that it is cost effective, to see that it enhances 
service and saves some money. 
 



 

 

Can you find the money for that, or have you found the money for that?  
I'll look forward to your comments on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- We are concentrating on replacement of existing buses, 
which are always wearing out, and there's considerable pressure to replace 
existing buses throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
Part of the mayor's letter, with respect to the city of Regina --  and I 
hope we're on the same topic here -- is that accordingly our 1990-91 
submission to the municipal transit for the disabled program includes a 
request for funding of a computerized scheduling service and a 
demonstration project using taxis for carriers. 
 
It sounds like an interesting proposal and there's an indication that the 
city of Regina is doing internal studies.  He indicates, we now have some 
preliminary findings from their study.  There is no formal application.  I 
said, if extra money could be found for this special request from Regina, 
we will consider it on its merits, but we have to concentrate on replacing 
existing buses.  If extra money can be found, this sounds like a worthwhile 
project, and we would examine it in detail to see what could be done. 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Very, very briefly, Minister, are you saying that the city of 
Regina needs to put in a special request?  Because my understanding of the 
request was they were asking you if the money would be available.  Are you 
saying they need to put in a special letter applying for a specific amount 
of money?  All I'm interested in is what does the city of Regina have to do 
to access that money?  End of questioning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Well, from the city of Regina I would need more 
details on the request as to what the special project is and how it would 
function and how it would save money in the long run -- how it would be a 
better service.  I need a little more information. 
 
But I'm telling you that I don't have extra money for Regina.  I don't have 
an extra $120,000 for Regina.  I said if I could find the money somewhere 
within the budget that I would try to spend it for their proposed project.  
But I don't have an extra $120,000.  We cannot simply vote an extra 
$120,000.  It would mean a tax increase of $120,000.  You have to 
understand, the budget is here, you're asking for special money; if I can 
find it, I will do it. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Chairman, final question of the estimates.  Mr. Minister 
. . . Well now with a little encouragement we could go a little longer if 
the member from Meadow Lake would like. 
 
However with a straightforward answer, Mr. Minister, this is it: payment to 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation last year $1,270,000; this 
year $836,700 -- a reduction of about some 34, 35 per cent, Mr. Minister. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you are not going to believe this, but ministers prior 
to you have been given some wild and wacky explanations that the reductions 
in property management payments, which have been consistent throughout the 
piece as I can see as I look through the budget document, Mr. Minister, the 



 

 

explanation has been improved efficiency, if you can believe that. 
 
Now, you may be able to believe that, Mr. Minister, but I can't believe 
that.  My colleagues can't believe that, and the people of Saskatchewan 
can't believe that, quite frankly, Mr. Minister.  And, Mr. Minister, I'm 
wondering why the reduction of about 35 per cent.  Has there been a change 
in rental of facilities or services provided by the property management 
corporation, Mr. Minister?  This kind of reduction looks strangely like 
cooking the books, quite frankly, and fixing the budget to try and work 
towards a balanced budget in what was thought at one time, I believe, by 
your government to be an election year. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, what's the explanation for this reduction?  And please, 
please, Mr. Minister, something serious, nothing wild and ridiculous such 
as improved efficiency by the property management corporation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Chairman, our rent went down 35 per cent because 
we negotiated a better rate with the Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Same facilities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- More or less the same facilities but our renovation 
was lower so that was a saving.  So part of that was less expense on 
renovation because we had the same facilities.  We didn't do any 
renovations so the costs that were there the year before weren't there this 
year.  And in addition, we were grouching about our rate and we got a 
better rate. 
 
Item 8 agreed to. 
 
Items 9 to 11 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 20 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Chairman, on behalf of the opposition, I would like to 
thank the officials for their assistance in providing the information this 
evening and to wish the officials every success in their challenges in the 
year ahead in meeting the responsibilities of the department that affect a 
lot of Saskatchewan people, and I want to wish them every success in 
reaching department objectives. 
 
I would like to thank the minister for his answers to my questions, 
although obviously we didn't agree that all the answers -- I didn't find 
myself agreeing -- that all the answers were quite as good as perhaps he 
may have felt.  But I do thank the minister for his answers. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to commend the 
officials in my department for the work they've done in the past year.  
They are very prudent managers, they always seem to come in on budget.  
They have delivered services to the public to the best of their ability.  I 
would say that the opposition will agree that these individuals have been a 
credit to the people of Saskatchewan, and I am pleased to have such 



 

 

excellent people working with me and I thank them personally. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:40 p.m. 
 


