





























































Hansard: March 19, 1990


 

 

March 19/90 
 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
The Speaker: -- I beg to inform the Assembly that I have received a 
communication from the private secretary to Her Honour the Lieutenant 
Governor stating that Her Honour will open the fourth session of the 
twenty-first legislature at 2 o'clock p.m. today, the 19th day of March, 
1990. 
2:02 p.m. R 
Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor was then pleased to open the session 
with the following speech: 
 
Mr. Speaker, 
 
Members of the Legislative Assembly: 
 
This legislative session opens at a crucial time. 
 
We have entered a new decade that has already seen extensive and 
unprecedented upheaval.  Who would have thought we would ever see the 
tearing down of the Berlin Wall or democratic elections in the Soviet 
Union?  Eastern European countries are only now adopting political systems 
and standards we have enjoyed for centuries.  We are reminded that many of 
Saskatchewan's early pioneers came to this province for the freedom and 
democracy their former countrymen are now only beginning to imagine. 
 
Facing challenges for Saskatchewan 
 
While it is appropriate that we pause to reflect on our good fortune to be 
participating today in one of our long-standing democratic traditions, we 
must recognize that world-wide change presents many major challenges for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Only a few years ago, many countries relied on our grain to feed their 
population.  Those countries have now decreased their reliance on imported 
food by propping up agriculture at home with massive subsidies.  Our 
competitors have also entered the grain wars with hundreds of millions of 
dollars of subsidies. 
 
The effect on Saskatchewan farm families has been severe.  For the first 
time since 1933, realized net farm income is expected to be minus nine 
million dollars.  Many farmers and their families are taking second jobs to 
maintain the family farm.  Young people leave rural areas to find work.  
Families, businesses and communities, both rural and urban, are hurt by the 
economic impact of the crisis in the farming economy.  Saskatchewan people 
are paying the price for the subsidies received by farmers in Europe and 
the United States. 
 
Interest rates throughout the world are being kept artificially high to 
accommodate overheated economies.  The Saskatchewan home owner, small 
business person and farmer are now shouldering the effect of the high 
interest rates caused by Central Canada's boom. 



 

 

 
World prices for natural resources have plummeted.  Resource revenues 
cannot alone drive our efforts to diversify our economy. 
 
In short, the world has declared economic war on Saskatchewan.  We must now 
decide how we will respond to protect ourselves and ensure new and enduring 
prosperity. 
 
Change is all around us 
 
As we move into the 1990's, one thing is certain -- we will witness more 
change in this decade than we have seen in the past 100 years.  It is 
apparent we cannot rely on conventional wisdom to provide answers to the 
difficult problems we face.  We must adapt.  We must mobilize.  We must 
develop a unified response in allocating our resources. 
 
Saskatchewan people have always pulled together in times of crisis, and 
found creative and even unconventional solutions to difficult problems.  
Together we must face the new challenges of the future with the same sense 
of hope, conviction and co-operation that has kept Saskatchewan strong in 
the past. 
 
My government has already taken major steps to help the people of 
Saskatchewan adapt to, and take advantage of, the changes the next decade 
will bring.  My ministers have succeeded with bold new measures to keep 
pace with change.  But in some cases they have moved too quickly and 
without adequate prior consultation to provide the measures they believed 
were needed to deal with the challenges we face. 
 
Building the new consensus 
 
At the present time, there is no broadly based consensus on what changes 
are required.  Saskatchewan people have their own individual ideas on what 
steps are necessary to prepare for the future.  They need more opportunity 
to share their ideas with their friends, neighbours and fellow 
Saskatchewanians.  We need to build a new Saskatchewan consensus if we are 
to conquer the challenges of tomorrow in a responsive and united way. 
 
The public has told my ministers that they want to be consulted on the 
steps to be taken to achieve the new consensus.  Saskatchewan people want 
to make choices about the future of their economy and society and be active 
participants in the process of change. 
 
My government will reach out to every sector of Saskatchewan society in an 
unprecedented process of priority setting and consensus building toward the 
creation of a plan, a blueprint for the future.  To guide the development 
of this blueprint, my government is creating "Consensus Saskatchewan."  
Consensus Saskatchewan will invite people from all across the province to 
participate in the development of our new alliance.  A group of one hundred 
citizens from all walks of life will be called on to make recommendations 
on how best to take Saskatchewan through the next decade and into the next 
century.  These one hundred people will focus on proposals within four 
specific priority areas the public has identified. 



 

 

 
The people have identified their priorities 
 
During recent public consultations with my ministers, the people of 
Saskatchewan identified four fundamental priorities they want to address in 
partnership with government and other sectors to prepare Saskatchewan to 
meet the challenges ahead.  These priorities will form the basis of a new 
Saskatchewan consensus: 
 

 People have told my ministers we must continue to expand and diversify our 
economy.  We must get further away from "having all our eggs in one 
basket".  They want to see more manufacturing and processing in this 
province.  They understand now that wheat alone is economically unstable. 

 
 People have told my ministers they are worried about the future of their 

communities.  They have seen local businesses closing and a smaller 
economic base to support their schools, hospitals and other services.  
They want the government to work with them to maintain the viability of 
their hamlets, villages, towns and cities.  They want to be able to 
attract businesses and services to their communities.  They want to create 
opportunities.  They do not want to leave. 

 
 People have told my ministers they need the support, the skills and the 

opportunities to be able to contribute and build their own way of life.  
They want their children to attend school in Saskatchewan, work in 
Saskatchewan and raise their families in Saskatchewan. 

 
 People have said they want to see better management of our resources.  

They want waste eliminated.  They want their governments to make sensible 
choices, provide strong leadership and renew their commitment to service 
and efficiency. 

 
My government's agenda is built around these four fundamental priorities.  
They are the pillars on which my government's program is based. 
 
EXPANSION AND DIVERSIFICATION OF THE ECONOMY 
 
The Saskatchewan economy has been built on the strong co-operative effort 
of individuals, local communities and government working together toward a 
common cause.  This co-operative spirit has funded our schools, our 
hospitals and our social programs.  It provides meaningful jobs for 
Saskatchewan people.  It supports our families.  It sustains and develops 
our communities.  It is the foundation of our stability and prosperity for 
the future. 
 
The farm crisis affects us all 
 
World events are threatening our traditional economic base.  The farm 
sector is in severe difficulty.  The Euro-American subsidy wars, low grain 
prices, drought, growing debt and high interest rates have reduced farm 
income and are undermining the viability of even the most efficient family 
farm.  This situation affects the rest of the economy dramatically.  Small 
businesses throughout the province feel the effect when farmers do not have 



 

 

cash.  Our efforts to diversify the economy are slowed down when interest 
rates rise and grain prices fall. 
 
My government has protected farmers in the past from world subsidies, 
drought and high interest rates.  Recently, my first minister, along with 
representatives of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, Pork Producers, Western 
Canadian Wheat Growers and Canola Growers Associations argued in Geneva for 
changes to the GATT, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, to 
eliminate unfair advantages for small grain growing countries.  My 
government will continue to seek adjustments to international trade 
arrangements to help our agricultural sector. 
 
Protection for Saskatchewan farmers 
 
My government has received a commitment from the Government of Canada that 
financial assistance will be provided to farmers for spring seeding.  
Ottawa has also agreed to establish a mechanism to help counteract the 
international grain subsidy wars.  My ministers will press the federal 
government to fulfil these promises as soon as possible and in a way that 
ensures fairness and adequate assistance. 
 
My first minister has met with major lending institutions to obtain their 
commitment to bear a share of responsibility for solving the farm financial 
situation.  Farm Credit Corporation, banks and credit unions must agree to 
work in partnership with both levels of government and individual farmers 
to find solutions.  My government expects its own lending institutions to 
show leadership for lenders in dealing with the farm cash flow and debt 
crisis.  A review of the mandate of the Agriculture Credit Corporation with 
respect to farm financing will be undertaken. 
 
Diversification can provide long term solutions 
 
Protection alone is only a short-term answer.  Longer term solutions lie in 
diversifying our economy to reduce our reliance on wheat. 
 
The world situation presents opportunities.  The expanding North American 
free trade arena is providing the basis for new diversification 
opportunities.  The rapid growth of the European market-place, particularly 
the Eastern European sector, demands considerable attention.  My government 
will pursue initiatives in the Soviet Ukraine to encourage development of 
business and cultural ties with our Ukrainian friends.  My government will 
sponsor delegations of Saskatchewan people to Eastern Europe.  Trade and 
agricultural emissaries from this province will be designated as Honorary 
Ambassadors of Saskatchewan.  This will demonstrate my government's 
commitment to the struggle for economic and political freedom of the people 
of Eastern Europe, while we seek to take advantage of the economic benefits 
for this province. 
 
Development of natural resources 
 
My government believes that our rich natural resources must be developed 
before they leave the province so that we benefit from the creation of 
other industries and the added value of these products as they leave 



 

 

Saskatchewan.  Steps have already been taken by my government to provide 
for development of our resources: 
 

 Irrigation has allowed the development of our soil resources to support 
new specialty crops; 

 
 We now produce, cut and package paper in Saskatchewan from our raw timber; 
 
 Heavy oil is converted into usable gasoline through our upgrader 

technology; 
 
 Hogs are processed into bacon and other pork products to support a rapidly 

expanding market in Canada, the United States and even the Soviet Union; 
 
 Rather than just exporting natural gas, we will soon be using it to 

produce fertilizer; and 
 
 We are developing our own Saskatchewan ingenuity and exporting technology 

rather than intellect.  Space technology on the Canadarm, communications 
technology for the Anglo-French channel project, and Saskatchewan health 
card technology in Europe were all developed from home-grown Saskatchewan 
talent. 

 
Development of small business 
 
Major new developments create an opportunity for small businesses to 
support and service the needs of the larger industrial base.  Small 
business is the backbone of our Saskatchewan communities.  Small business 
keeps local economies moving during difficult times for our agriculture and 
resource industries.  They cannot do that, however, without the support and 
commitment of local communities and diversification of the 
agricultural-based economy. 
 
Partnerships with citizens 
 
Saskatchewan people are telling my ministers they are ready and willing to 
personally participate in economic growth and diversification.  Over 
200,000 individual bondholders and shareholders have raised over 1.7 
billion dollars during a period of drought and constrained economic growth.  
This allows Saskatchewan savings to work at home to finance economic 
development and diversification projects.  Equity participation in SaskOil, 
Westbridge Computer Corporation and the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 
will allow those companies to grow and expand into national and 
international companies from their Saskatchewan base. 
 
Employees can have a direct and personal stake in their work place.  Today, 
more than 2,300 employee owners and shareholders exist as a result of 
public participation initiatives in the Meadow Lake Sawmill, DirectWest, 
Printco Graphics, Great Western Brewing Company and several Crown 
corporations.  Labour organizations have joined with the government to 
encourage employee ownership of small and medium-sized businesses through 
labour-sponsored venture capital programs.  Other unions will be encouraged 
to follow the example of the Canadian Federation of Labour to develop new 



 

 

ways, in partnership with my government, for employees to put their savings 
and energies into financial security for their members and economic 
development and job creation in their own communities. 
 
We must plan together to build Saskatchewan 
 
My government has begun a process of consultation to develop the expanded 
partnership for economic development and diversification.  A newly created 
Economic Diversification Council will be asked to develop an economic plan 
that will: 
 

 Build on our traditional agricultural and natural resource strengths to 
diversify the Saskatchewan economy; 

 
 Strengthen the existing manufacturing and service base to provide a solid 

foundation for future growth; 
 
 Develop new industries to respond to emerging opportunities such as high 

technology; 
 
 Upgrade our expertise as international traders, exporters and marketers; 
 
 Improve the promotional and developmental activities of all economic 

development organizations and agencies; and 
 
 Ensure the Saskatchewan economy has a strong base to meet the 

opportunities of the century ahead. 
 

SECURITY AND STABILIZATION OF COMMUNITIES 
 
My government has confidence in the ability of Saskatchewan people to take 
responsibility for the growth, diversification and betterment of their own 
communities.  Historically, we have been successful in addressing our 
economic and financial problems in a co-operative way. 
 
On the national level, my government will press for a Canadian consensus on 
a process for constitutional reform.  My ministers call on the other 
governments of Canada to rely on the great Canadian spirit of compromise 
and common sense to reach a solution to the present constitutional impasse. 
 
While everyone is concerned with the development and protection of our 
world community, we all tend to look to our local communities first for a 
sense of stability and security.  Particularly in times of crisis, we want 
to focus our resources on our families, friends and neighbours.  
Saskatchewan people are telling my ministers that the farm crisis requires 
that we continue a co-operative partnership to strengthen our communities 
by diversifying our economy.  People are prepared to actively participate 
and take action to protect their communities. 
 
Partnerships at the community level 
 
Over the past few years, my government has been building partnerships with 
communities throughout Saskatchewan. 



 

 

 
As a result of a positive working relationship with the aboriginal people 
of Saskatchewan, my government will continue to pursue novel initiatives to 
improve the social and economic well-being of these people. 
 
My government has created rural development corporations to respond to 
local demand for economic and social development.  Funding for local groups 
to provide seed money for new small businesses that would otherwise not 
have received consideration from traditional lending sources has encouraged 
business in rural Saskatchewan.  It has also fostered a new sense of common 
purpose for communities as they join in partnership for local enterprises. 
 
Investing locally 
 
This experience shows that people throughout the province are prepared to 
stand behind their local community.  But too much debt is not productive 
and limits development of a truly secure and diversified local economy.  In 
addition, the demand for Potash Bonds and the interest in investment and 
savings instruments demonstrate that there is money available in this 
province which can be mobilized for local communities.  People are telling 
my ministers that they are prepared to invest in their own community. 
 
In response to this demand, my government will introduce Community 
Development Bonds.  These bonds will place the financial strength and 
protection of a government guarantee behind Saskatchewan people who invest 
to diversify their local economy.  This will allow local money to be safely 
working as equity in their community.  It will result in a strong 
partnership between people, their community and government for growth and 
diversification. 
 
Improved rural services 
 
Over the past eight years, my government has sought opportunities to 
decentralize government services and operations.  Rural Service Centres 
across the province provide a variety of agricultural and business services 
for rural people at one convenient location.  When complete, the network 
will have over 50 service centres and an additional 12 centres located in 
municipal offices. 
 
Agricultural Credit Corporation and Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation 
are now vital community  citizens of Swift Current and Melville.  In 
consultation with communities, my government will consider other proposals 
to bring government services closer to the people they serve. 
 
Delivery of services to communities 
 
My ministers want to ensure that all communities, both rural and urban, 
benefit from all possible modern day amenities.  Individual line telephone 
service is almost a reality for every home in Saskatchewan.  Following 
extensive consultation on changing population and trading patterns, SaskTel 
will be introducing the 40/40 plan.  This service will provide telephone 
subscribers with forty minutes of toll-free calling to exchanges within a 
forty mile radius.  A major rate restructuring to provide the best service 



 

 

available at the lowest possible cost as we move into the computerized 
information age will be part of this package.  SaskEnergy will continue the 
Rural Gasification Program which has already provided natural gas service 
to over 21,000 rural families. 
 
The demand for power and electricity for industrial and domestic uses has 
been significant and is growing at a rapid rate.  My government will 
consult broadly on options for providing the necessary sources of 
electricity and power to drive our economic base of the future. 
 
Preserving our natural gifts for future generations 
 
Saskatchewan people want to ensure that the environment we now enjoy will 
be maintained and protected from the kind of pollution and environmental 
damage we see elsewhere.  The world's growing demand for protection of our 
precious natural resources was recognized early by my government through: 
 

 Development of water management plans and extensive irrigation projects 
throughout the province; 

 
 Preservation of 1.9 million acres of critical wildlife habitat land since 

1984; 
 
 Signing of the federal-provincial Soils and Water Conservation Accord 

which included the planting of over 22 million trees in the first two 
years of a five year plan; 

 
 Introduction of the North American Water-fowl Management Plan in 1986 and 

the recent establishment of the Saskatchewan Wetlands Conservation 
Corporation; 

 
 Creation of the Round Table on Environment and Economy; and 
 
 Implementation of the Agricultural Chemical Collection Program in 1989. 
 

In this Session of the Legislature, my government will also provide for the 
creation of an annual report  on the environmental health of the province.  
This "State of the Environment" report will provide the public with an 
overview of current trends in resource conservation, development and 
integration of environmental and economic concerns.  In partnership with 
the Round Table on Environment and Economy and local communities, my 
government will continue to pursue waste management initiatives and other 
environmental projects to maintain our clean environment. 
 
Recent events have resulted in some uncertainty about environmental review 
procedures for development projects.  Provincial and federal agencies are 
sorting out legislative and jurisdictional responsibilities and new federal 
environmental assessment legislation is expected this year.  The public is 
also undecided about how projects should be evaluated.  My government will 
consult with all affected groups and individuals to determine the best way 
for environmental impact to be assessed. 
 
GROWTH AND WELL-BEING OF PEOPLE 



 

 

 
The farm crisis not only affects our economic and business life, but also 
puts a strain on individuals, families and friends in rural and urban 
communities alike.  The protection and growth of the individual has been 
identified as a major challenge.  Consensus Saskatchewan will be called on 
to determine a common view on what is required to support the development 
of our most valuable resource -- our people. 
 
Children -- our hope for the future 
 
Children are of particular concern.  Children look forward to the future.  
They are not intimidated by change.  Ask any parent who has watched their 
child master a complex computer game whether their child is afraid to take 
on the challenges of tomorrow.  Saskatchewan parents do, however, want to 
ensure their children are provided with the best possible opportunity even 
in difficult times.  They want to see their children take advantage of 
future change. 
 
Children need the strength and support of family life to reach their full 
potential.  They also need a nutritious diet with which to grow and 
develop.  Most families can provide this.  Some families need help.  
Governments, school boards, churches, volunteers and professionals have 
assisted my government to determine the extent of hunger in Saskatchewan.  
My government, through the Family Foundation, will introduce measures to 
co-ordinate and develop programs for the elimination of hunger in this 
province.  These programs will be based on community needs and strengthened 
by community involvement. 
 
Success through education 
 
Our children's success in the complex and rapidly changing economy of the 
future depends on an education that recognizes that memorizing facts will 
not be enough in an age in which knowledge will be constantly changing and 
advancing.  Education must arm our youth with a basic foundation of human 
values and skills that they can apply to technology, information and 
scientific advancement we cannot even contemplate today.  The new Core 
Curriculum is a leader throughout the world in providing those fundamentals 
for the future. 
 
Partnerships between home, school and community are key to ensuring that 
our hopes and dreams for the success of all children are achieved. The 
importance of family involvement in education will be emphasized. 
 
As we move through and beyond 1990 -- United Nations International Literacy 
Year -- we must ensure that illiteracy is eliminated. The technologically 
advanced SCAN network will provide distance education opportunities to 
people isolated for geographic or other reasons. In partnership with the 
universities, the Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology 
and the regional colleges, more first and second year university classes 
and technical programs will be available in communities outside Regina and 
Saskatoon. 
 
Supporting Saskatchewan families 



 

 

 
Many of our traditional notions about families are being challenged and 
changed. The families of today are undergoing tremendous change. Many 
families are experiencing stress. There are more single parent and blended 
families. Women working outside the home are challenged to find a balance 
between work and family responsibilities. A solid foundation of social 
programs ensures families remain strong and those in crisis receive the 
support of a caring society. Our responsible and compassionate approach to 
these matters has been demonstrated by the initiatives undertaken on behalf 
of Romanian orphans and the outpouring of affection for them by 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Last October, my government established the Family Foundation.  In 
partnership with community groups, families and churches, the Foundation 
has already identified local issues affecting families and will sponsor 150 
"Forums About Families" workshops throughout the province this year. 
 
Achieving self-sufficiency 
 
My government is committed to providing people with the opportunity to 
achieve dignity and pride through self-sufficiency. Since the introduction 
of welfare reform in 1984, training and employment opportunities have been 
created for more than 21,000 people on social assistance. In the coming 
year, the focus will be to help more people realize their potential. In 
consultation with those on social assistance, my government will pursue 
ways to make welfare a springboard to self-sufficiency. 
 
A healthier population through prevention 
 
Countries around the world are experiencing a crisis in health care. 
Technology is allowing procedures never before imagined. But costs are 
spiralling. We have learned that increased spending does not ensure 
healthier people. As in other countries, Saskatchewan's challenge is to 
ensure our health system is doing the right things and doing them in the 
best possible way. 
 
The report of the Commission on Directions in Health Care will focus on 
important issues affecting our health care system. A consensus must be 
developed for the future of our health care system. My government is 
committed to examining the Commission's recommendations in partnership with 
the people of Saskatchewan. Consensus Saskatchewan will play an important 
role in examining public reaction to the report of the Commission. 
 
Without good health, our children cannot learn. Our adults cannot be 
productive. Our seniors cannot enjoy their golden years. Our goal is a 
healthy population. Preventing illnesses and accidents is the best way to 
achieve health for all. 
 
My government believes that individuals, communities, medical professionals 
and governments share responsibility for health. New partnerships have 
developed through the introduction of the "Everyone Wins" program, through 
the AIDS education program and through the work of the Cancer Foundation 
and others to launch breast cancer screening pilot projects. Prevention is 



 

 

the best health policy. 
 
Government has responsibility to ensure that the best treatment services 
are available for people, when needed. But individuals and professionals 
have a responsibility to ensure services are used in the most efficient and 
effective way possible. As a first step, my government has established a 
Technology Assessment Group to evaluate and recommend high technology 
acquisitions for provincial health care. 
 
Under the guidance of the Advisory Committee on the Safe Use of Medicines, 
my government will develop educational programs to inform people about the 
safe use of prescription and over-the-counter drugs. Initially these 
programs will be targeted to assist seniors. 
 
Saskatchewan has always been a world leader in health care. The development 
of the computerized health card technology has reaffirmed this status. 
Belgium, Japan and the State of Maryland have shown interest in using our 
technology. My government will continue to develop uses for this technology 
in health care. 
 
RESPONSIBLE AND EFFICIENT MANAGEMENT OF RESOURCES 
 
The economic and fiscal challenges faced by the province have been made 
clear. Some difficult decisions have already been taken to ensure that 
resources will be available to put the basic needs of the people of 
Saskatchewan first. By being a prudent manager of our limited resources, my 
government will find the resources needed to protect Saskatchewan people 
from factors beyond their control. 
 
Steps have already been taken: 
 

 Ministerial salaries have been rolled back; 
 
 The size of the public service has been frozen; 
 
 Internal government expenditures have been held at zero per cent for the 

next two years; 
 
 Government departments are being consolidated; 
 
 Restrictions on travel and advertising have been implemented; 
 
 The home program has been cancelled; 
 
 The gas tax rebate program has been eliminated; and 
 
 Mortgage protection, while retained, has been adjusted to reflect the 

increasing pressure on interest rates. 
 

These were not decisions my government took lightly. Sound management 
choices had to be made to put our limited resources where they are most 
needed. 
 



 

 

We must all work together to manage our resources 
 
Steps that have already been taken cannot be viewed as the total solution 
to the management of our resources. My government has already asked 
recipients of government funding to join with them to find more efficient 
ways to spend public money and eliminate waste. Agencies and third parties 
receiving government funds will be required to prepare detailed public 
financial statements for the people of Saskatchewan to know how and where 
their money is spent. 
 
Saskatchewan people are telling my ministers there are basic criteria that 
must be met by any business or social agency seeking to forge a partnership 
with government and the people of Saskatchewan: 
 

 Sensitivity to provincial, urban, rural, multicultural and individual 
concerns; 

 
 Good management and public accountability for the use of public funds; 
 
 Service orientation, with good community relations; and 
 
 Commitment to the social and economic fabric of the local community. 
 

My government is committed to ensuring that its partnerships for the social 
and economic development of Saskatchewan meet these criteria. 
 
The people have told my ministers it is critical all elected public office 
holders act in the performance of their duties with the utmost regard for 
the interests of the people of Saskatchewan. To avoid even the appearance 
of any wrongdoing by my ministers, my first minister will implement a set 
of guide-lines for the ethical conduct of cabinet ministers and legislative 
secretaries. These guide-lines, enforceable by the Premier, will be made 
public. 
 
With the input of Consensus Saskatchewan, my government will investigate 
the benefits of access to information rules, and laws for the protection of 
personal information held in Government records. 
 
The federal government is transferring costs to the province 
 
My government is committed to working co-operatively with the Government of 
Canada, other provinces and municipal governments in areas of shared 
responsibility. We must ensure the needs of all Saskatchewan people are 
addressed and that our people receive their fair share of benefits and 
support. 
 
My government is concerned about the transfer of more and more federal 
funding responsibility to our province. It is straining our capacity for 
health care, education, justice and social service programs. My government 
is committed to resolving this issue. Federal responsibility for services 
for our large treaty Indian population is of particular concern. My 
government, in partnership with Indian people, intends to press Ottawa to 
fully assume its responsibility for services for Indians in this province. 



 

 

 
A commitment to service and efficiency 
 
The people of Saskatchewan expect and deserve a government that is 
committed to strong fiscal management. My government, through Consensus 
Saskatchewan, will seek ways for stricter accountability for the use of 
government money and resources. Waste will not be tolerated. Efficiency is 
essential at all levels. The people have told my ministers that service to 
the public is critical. A reaffirmation of the delivery of quality service 
will take place in all levels of the public service. My ministers will 
continue to have open dialogue with the people of Saskatchewan to ensure 
programs and services are meeting their needs and that the public is 
receiving value for its hard-earned tax dollar. 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
My ministers have pledged themselves to work with the people of 
Saskatchewan to ensure a better, more prosperous life as we move towards 
the 21st century. 
 
The steps my government has laid out will help us get back to more 
prosperous times while maintaining the essential services we will require 
to meet the challenges of the next decade and beyond. 
 
Over the past decade, our province and our people have experienced the 
effects of rapid global change. Much of the change has been good, bringing 
economic and social freedom and individual expression. We can expect to 
experience an even faster pace of change in the future. My government 
proposes to lead this province through the next decade and into the next 
century on an agenda developed through broad consultation with the people 
of Saskatchewan. All people of this province will be active participants in 
the process and will share in the benefits. My government is committed to 
providing the solid leadership expected and deserved by the people. Through 
consultation, a new consensus will be built and a new plan developed. This 
plan will be a blueprint to take us through this decade of change and to 
lay the foundation for a new century -- Blueprint 2000. 
 
Strengths of Saskatchewan people 
 
My government believes in the strengths of this province and in all of its 
people. Our strength is in our heritage, our achievements, our creativity 
and innovation, our courage and our spirit. People have come from all over 
the world to settle in Saskatchewan. Some came to avoid persecution. Some 
came for the opportunities this great province has to offer. My government 
pays tribute to them. They are Saskatchewan. 
 
The future will bring us new strength, new possibilities and new 
determination to face the many challenges ahead. Our hope is strong. My 
government's commitment to the people will ensure that we meet tomorrow 
with enhanced prosperity and security. 
 
During this session the Public Accounts for the last fiscal year, together 
with Estimates for the year commencing April 1, 1990, will also be 



 

 

submitted to you. 
 
I leave you now to the business of the session, with full confidence that 
you will favourably discharge your duties and responsibilities. 
 
May Divine Providence continue to bless our province and guide this 
legislature in all its deliberations. 
 
God save the Queen. 
2:43 p.m. R 
Prayers 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Pro Forma Bill 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- I move that a Bill respecting the administration of 
oaths of office be now introduced and read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill read a first time. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Introduction of Pages 
 
The Speaker: -- I wish now to inform the Legislative Assembly that the 
pages for this session will be: Cindy Boyko, Mark Ehmann, Todd Howe, Karen 
Reutlinger and Michelle Schweitzer. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

TABLING THE SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 
 
The Speaker: -- I beg to inform the Assembly that in order to prevent 
mistakes I have obtained a copy of the speech of Her Honour the Lieutenant 
Governor which I now lay on the Table. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Speech from the Throne 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member for Swift 
Current: 
 

 That the speech of Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor be taken into 
consideration on Tuesday, March 20, 1990. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Printing of Votes and Proceedings of the Assembly 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member for Swift 
Current: 
 



 

 

 That the Votes and Proceedings of this Assembly be printed after first 
having been perused by Mr. Speaker, that he do appoint the printing 
thereof, and that no person but such as he shall appoint do presume to 
print the same. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

TABLING OF LETTER FROM DEPUTY CHAIRMAN OF COMMITTEES 
 
The Speaker: -- I wish to advise the Assembly that I have received a letter 
from Mr. Don Toth, MLA, resigning from the post of Deputy Chairman of 
Committees.  I hereby table the letter. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Election of Deputy Chairman of Committees 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member for Swift 
Current: 
 

 That Rod Gardner, Esquire, member for the constituency of Pelly, be 
elected Deputy Chairman of Committees of this Assembly. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I move this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: -- Before putting the adjournment question, I wish to draw to 
your attention that the music you have been listening to this afternoon is 
provided to us by the Regina Police Junior Band.  They are playing under 
the direction of Mr. Arthur Neale. 
 
I want to say how very much we enjoyed listening to the band and their 
music.  Our thanks to Mr. Neale for his fine selections and to the band on 
a fine performance. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Further I would like to invite you to the Speaker's tea 
which will be held immediately following the Chamber ceremony.  The 
receiving line will be directly outside the Chamber doors.  You may then 
proceed to room 218 and the Legislative Library which are down the west and 
east wings. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 2:48 p.m. 
 


