















































Hansard: May 30, 1990


 

 

May 30/90 
 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: -- According to order, I have examined the following petition and I 
find it to be in order: of certain residents of the province of 
Saskatchewan praying that the Legislative Assembly may be pleased to urge 
the provincial government to reverse its decision to relocate the 
Saskatchewan Liquor Board store from its present location in the Market 
Mall to a new location on 8th Street, Saskatoon. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'd like to 
introduce to you, and through you to all members of the Assembly, some 
important visitors from China and their Canadian hosts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce to you Mr. Chen.  He's a professor of 
hydraulic engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.  With him is 
his wife, Ms. Wu, associate research professor and head of the geotechnical 
division, China Academy of Railway Sciences, Beijing, China. 
 
Accompanying them are Del Fredlund, head of civil engineering, University 
of Saskatchewan; and Wayne Clifton, senior principal, Clifton Associates 
Ltd. Mr. Clifton is the president of the Association of Professional 
Engineers of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the guests are standing in your gallery.  I ask all members of 
the Assembly to welcome these guests. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is a pleasure today to 
introduce to you and to all members of the Assembly, 22 grade 8 students 
from from Allan School, Allan, Saskatchewan.  Mr. Speaker, they are sitting 
in the west gallery.  I'm meeting with them, Mr. Speaker, for pictures and 
drinks at 2:30 and we'll be also having a time of questions and discussion.  
I'm looking forward to that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they are accompanied today with their teachers, Mr. Reid and 
Mrs. Field; and chaperons, Mr. Larry Sommerfeld, Mrs. Kushinski, Mrs. 
Pederson, and Mrs. Mikelson; and also the bus driver, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Don 
Armstrong. 
 
I wish to thank this group for coming in.  Since I've been an MLA in '78, 
there's been hardly a year that Allan high school hasn't been represented, 
or the Allan School, and I think it's incumbent of them and we thank them 
very much. 



 

 

 
Mr. Speaker, I'm asking all members of the legislature to welcome this 
group and wish them a good day here and a good trip home and thank you all, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure today to 
introduce some students on behalf of my colleague, the member from 
Rosemont.  Mr. Speaker, I introduce to you and to my colleagues in the 
legislature, 80 grade 5 students in the east gallery, from McLurg School in 
north-west Regina.  They are accompanied by three teachers, Verna Taylor, 
Ann Wood, and Carol Grant. 
 
I look forward to meeting with them after question period, Mr. Speaker, and 
to hopefully have an opportunity to discuss some of the issues that are 
important to them.  I would ask all members to join with me in welcoming 
this fine group of school kids from McLurg. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Speaker, I, too, would like to join with my 
colleague from Arm River in welcoming the students and teachers and others 
here from the Allan School.  I had a very good working relationship with 
the people in Allan School for a number of years, and I believe that the 
students are here today probably would have been in grade 5 when I was 
still visiting the school.  Allan School has been a leader in many 
different ways, Mr. Speaker, and continue to do so.  Some top scholars 
coming out of that school, leaders in dry grad programs, and many other 
programs, a program for the gifted.  And the last time that I saw some of 
these students and Mr. Reid was at the creative problem solving bowl in 
Saskatoon last week.  And as I understand from Mr. Reid that that was a 
very successful venture. 
 
So I would just add my words of welcome to the people from Allan here as 
well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure again, as I have 
every year, to introduce some students from my constituency, Wilfrid Walker 
School.  Mr. Speaker, these youngsters are from grade 4 and 5, they number 
23, and they are in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I'd like to add that this is a bilingual class from Wilfrid Walker School, 
and they are accompanied by Marcel Magotiaux, he is the teacher; and the 
chaperon is Mrs. Anderson.  So I want to wish them a nice visit to the 
Legislative Assembly.  I'll have an opportunity to speak with you in a few 
minutes.  Meanwhile, enjoy yourself, enjoy question period, and I'll be 
talking to your later. 
 
Meanwhile, please welcome these students to our Legislative Assembly today. 
 



 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to introduce to you a group of 
grade 12 students from Stanley Mission in northern Saskatchewan seated in 
your gallery.  Mr. Speaker, they're accompanied by the teacher, Mr. John 
Tarves; and chaperon, Martha Roberts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'd like to welcome them in their own language, the language 
of Stanley Mission, which is Cree, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Federal Funding for Agriculture 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 
Associate Minister of Agriculture.  Mr. Minister, yesterday we saw your 
lack of commitment to Saskatchewan farmers.  Despite your call for $500 
million from the federal government, besides the call for $500 million 
pay-out from the farm groups and the opposition, and besides your statement 
in the Speech from the Throne that you had a commitment, we now, farmers 
now have $5 an acre payment -- about half of what was called for and about 
half of what was needed. 
 
My question to you, Mr. Minister, is: where is the rest of the money? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, yesterday we met with the farm 
organizations to discuss some aspects of how we should handle the payments 
that are going to be coming from the federal government.  And I believe 
that in any occasion that I've dealt with the federal government and I've 
seen as a producer -- any Government of Saskatchewan deal with the federal 
government -- I believe that facts and figures point to this Premier's role 
and his record has shown to the province of Saskatchewan and the 
agriculture community that he is up and away the best agriculture Premier 
we've ever had in the province of Saskatchewan's history. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Well, Mr. Minister.  A new question, Mr. Speaker.  Farm 
groups, the opposition, and indeed your government all agreed that $500 
million was necessary.  But it wasn't the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool that 
negotiated; it wasn't the National Farmers Union or the wheat growers who 
negotiated.  It was your Premier who negotiated.  It was your Premier who 
negotiated with Ottawa and failed to come up with the commitment that was 
supposedly there.  He failed to deliver on a promise that he made to 
Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question to you is: what possible excuse can you or any 



 

 

other member over there offer the farmers as to why you're such abject 
failures. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, if our record is an abject failure, then 
what is theirs? 
 
I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that through the years that we have 
worked together with the various organizations in agriculture there has not 
been, to this date, the unanimity that was evident in the room there 
yesterday in regards to the kinds of things that we have done.  I could 
provide for you the record that the Sask Wheat Pool said that they were 
prepared to stand behind the Premier in his discussions with Ottawa.  The 
Regina chamber of commerce -- the Regina city council, excuse me -- said 
the the same thing, the SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association) said the same thing.  All the people are starting to recognize 
that here sits the best agriculture minister in the Canadian history. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- A new question, Mr. Speaker.  If you're so confident, Mr. 
Minister, why doesn't your confident Premier call an election and find out 
what the farmers think about this whole situation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Minister, you told the farmers of Saskatchewan you had 
a commitment from the federal government and that cash would be in hand by 
spring seeding, in time for spring seeding.  Yesterday you were saying that 
the payment was expected in late July at the earliest.  All this time lost, 
all this grief of uncertainty that farmers are suffering, Mr. Minister, 
this is the amount of money that was on the table for the last two months.  
How do you justify playing your political games, how do you justify the 
time lost, and how do you justify manipulating the lives and livelihoods of 
Saskatchewan farmers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, when the Premier made the observations 
about $500 million at the pool convention last fall, we had nothing 
committed by the federal government.  The Premier took that observation 
made by the Sask Wheat Pool and took it to Ottawa and and said, look it, we 
need to have some money for our producers who are having a problem; will 
you help us?  And what have they done?  They have promised us $240 million, 
and that is significant more than what we started with when we were 
discussing with the Sask Wheat Pool their options earlier on this year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- New question, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, in 1985 your 
Premier promised a long-term stability program.  In 1990, we have seen 
nothing.  You, by way of motion in this legislature, had big plans -- $500 



 

 

million this spring, $400 million this fall, a billion dollar contingency 
fund.  And what do we have?  We have $5 an acre, no long-term programs, 
more ad hoc-ery, and more political gamesmanship on the part of the 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- I ask you, Mr. Minister, why would any farmer in this 
province have any faith in your pronouncements or your ability to negotiate 
in the light of what's happened? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, over the years we have contended for the 
agriculture sector of this province in many different ways.  We have dealt 
with issues that I can recall as a producer of grain, livestock.  All 
through the history of the '70s and the '60s and into the '80s, I farmed 
under those conditions, and I believe that this Premier and this Minister 
of Agriculture are the best again that the province has ever had.  And his 
negotiation skills with the federal government far exceed any of the skills 
that they demonstrated. 
 
And I can also recall during your term of office, the prime minister of 
Canada coming to Regina, Saskatchewan and throwing the wheat in your face 
and telling you to go sell it.  And what did you do?  I'm also going to 
tell you what he did in Salmon Arm.  He told you what to do with your 
agriculture policies.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is not demonstrated by this 
Premier anywhere across Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Executive Compensation at SIAST 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Speaker, we have just witnessed the abject failure of 
one minister and I want to direct my question to the Minister of Education, 
and hopefully he can provide us with somewhat of a better answer for the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question concerns the science and technology institute, 
SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) as it is 
called.  I have before me, Mr. Minister, a print-out listing executive 
salaries, perks and compensation for a 10-month period last year.  The 
total compensation package was $741,000.  Since during that period of time, 
SIAST averaged eight top executives per month, that works out to $9,300 per 
month for each top-level executive. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to ask you how you justify $9,300 per month for each 
top-level executive at SIAST, and at the same time you demand that students 
have to pay an increase of 10 per cent in tuition fees?  Mr. Minister, I 
want to you explain this misplaced priorities to the people of 
Saskatchewan, and particularly, the young people of SIAST.  Would you 
explain that? 
 



 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, maybe when the member opposite 
provides me with the same information that he seems to have from the 
University of Regina and the University of Saskatchewan, I'll be prepared 
to look at it.  I'm not prepared to accept the information that he's 
providing here today in the same way that he provides . . . has provided 
information in the past. 
 
He's totally inaccurate in so many things that he brings into this House.  
He talks about exorbitant expenditures for the corporate offices.  He talks 
about exorbitant expenditures with regard to honorarium and expenses for 
the board.  So Mr. Speaker, I'm not prepared to accept the information that 
the member is putting forward. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question for the minister.  Mr. 
Speaker, the minister doesn't have to take my word for it.  What I present 
to him are order in councils; what I present to him are documents of the 
government, not mine.  These are your documents, Mr. Minister, not mine. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have a new question for you.  Yesterday, Mr. Minister, you 
will remember we discussed the problems that St. Peter's College was having 
and how the Benedictine Fathers, who run the school, are afraid of its 
future, and in the letter that I tabled in this House have indicated that 
they may have to close . . . consider the closing of St. Peter's College 
because they cannot deal with the $100,000 deficit. 
 
I want to know, Mr. Minister, have you been in contact with the Benedictine 
fathers since yesterday and have you explained to them that you could wipe 
out their $100,000 deficit by the one month payment to your top executives 
at SIAST?  Will you make that . . . make a commitment today in the House, 
if you have not been in contact with the Benedictine fathers, that you will 
do that shortly, and tell them that it's not the lack of money but it's 
wrong priorities and misplaced priorities by your government that has 
caused the problem. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm not prepared to accept for a 
minute that the executives at SIAST are earning any more accordingly than 
any other institution. 
 
With regard to St. Peter's College, we are in fact in touch with St. 
Peter's College today.  And the fact of the matter is that . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- They couldn't even get a meeting with them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- And the member from Quill Lake says they couldn't 
get a meeting.  The fact . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The Minister of Education is answering.  



 

 

It's difficult if the hon. member continually interrupts. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- The fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, that the 
intent in the letter that we received, and I did receive a copy late 
yesterday afternoon, Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is that it had 
been indicated there'd been several requests for meetings with me.  The 
fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, we have not received any requests for 
meetings with me.  I would be very happy to meet with the people from St. 
Peter's.  So that certainly is inaccurate. 
 
I would also point out, Mr. Speaker, that in checking some of the figures 
on the grants that St. Peter's College has received, that all of the 
figures were not accurate as presented.  The fact of the matter is that an 
additional grant was made to St. Peter's College last year to address some 
of their problems. 
 
Another fact, Mr. Speaker, is that the policy of the payments or the grants 
that go to St. Peter's College and to other affiliated colleges was changed 
back in 1988.  It's no longer based on a per pupil basis.  I would think, 
Mr. Speaker, that the people at St. Peter's College understand that. 
 
We are talking to them today.  We're aware of the situation and we will 
continue to work with St. Peter's College in the same way that we'll work 
with all of the other affiliated colleges in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question for the minister.  Mr. 
Speaker, I'm somewhat disappointed that the minister for the second time 
has accused the Benedictine monks at St. Peter's College of being dishonest 
when they indicate in their letter that they have requested a meeting with 
him and were unable to do so. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to ask the minister a new question.  Mr. Minister, I 
have also before me here a cancelled cheque dated February 2, 1990 to pay 
the Saskatoon Ramada hotel $2,921 for a three-day goals and planning 
workshop, and then eight days later a further consultant's bill of 4,638 
for something completely different, a planning and goals seminar.  And I 
have also here a cheque to pay about $1,000, a cancelled cheque to register 
the assistant to the president at a management course in Manhattan this 
January. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The hon. member is presenting a rather long 
question which provokes a rather long answer.  Obviously members on both 
sides of the House get rather upset and I suppose you have a point.  But 
keep our questions reasonable; keep your answers reasonable. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister is this.  This 
totals close to $10,000 . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Now the other problem is that the gentleman 
is interrupting vociferously hon. members and we can't hear the question.  
Now if the members will just settle down and stop throwing recriminations 



 

 

about who's being loud and who isn't, the reality is that members are 
interrupting the member from Saskatoon South.  That's the reality.  Please 
put your question. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Speaker, as I indicated, these cancelled cheques are sum 
to a total of almost $10,000 for senior executives, and my question to you, 
Mr. Minister, is this:  how can you justify expenditures of close to 
$10,000, in addition to all the other expenditures I've already indicated, 
for top executives, and then have SIAST plead poverty and ask the students 
to make up these huge expenditures and the deficit that has been caused by 
these expenditures? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I find the comments of the 
member opposite just really appalling.  For a member to stand in this 
House, the member to stand in this House and discredit the type of work 
that is being done by the people of SIAST . . . Mr. Speaker, I would ask 
why doesn't the member also raise issues with regard to the University of 
Regina, the University of Saskatchewan, the workshops that they have, the 
Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation, and any other of the groups that are 
involved in education in this province? 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the things that we enjoy in this province is the fact 
that our universities and SIAST are autonomous bodies responsible for their 
own offerings to the students, also the programs that they offer, also the 
workshops, the opportunity for inservice.  Now why this member chooses to 
stand in this House and continually have personal attacks, day after day, 
on the board of SIAST, on the president of SIAST, on the chairman of the 
board . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would point out, just to show how this member likes to stand 
up in this House and give misinformation, not too long ago, Mr. Speaker, he 
indicated that some $132,000 was being spent by the board on travel and 
lodging and on honorarium and all of these things, when in fact, Mr. 
Speaker, the amount was $70,614, not 132,000 as he indicates. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to tell the people . . . Mr. Speaker, I 
want to simply remind the people of Saskatchewan that all the documents 
that I am quoting from are government documents.  They are not my 
documents; they're all government documents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have listed in this House, I have listed in this House 
expenditures by top executives of close to $1.6 million -- $1.6 million to 
top executives appointed by the government.  We have a deficit at SIAST of 
$1.9 million.  And what does this government do?  Instead of cutting back 
at the executive level, they are asking students to make up this deficit.  
I'm asking you, Mr. Minister, when did you decide that SIAST should become 
a corporate body to serve the executive members that you appoint and not 
the students of this province?  When did you decide that? 
 



 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, the member can stand there and 
whine and wail all he wants.  The fact of the matter is he is not quoting 
from government documents.  He is not quoting from government documents.  
Let's make that perfectly clear.  He's talking about documents that he may 
have received from SIAST, which is not a government document. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, the SIAST board of governors and administration, I 
think have clearly demonstrated that they want to be more efficient.  There 
have been cut-backs with regard to the staff at SIAST.  There have also 
been some changes and reorganizing done within administration within the 
four campuses.  So they are making an effort. 
 
But if the member is suggesting that there should not be workshops or 
inservice for any of the people involved with SIAST, Mr. Speaker, or with 
education in general, I certainly do not support that in any way 
whatsoever, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Agreement with Weyerhaeuser 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I direct my question to 
the minister of the Crown investments corporation.  Is the minister aware 
that in 1989 the Weyerhaeuser corporation of Tacoma, Washington, reported a 
profit of some $377 million?  In the same year, it claimed it could not pay 
the people of Saskatchewan the $10 million in dividends it owes this 
province, nor any of the principal on the purchase price of PAPCO's (Prince 
Albert Pulp Company) assets, because it had a cash flow problem, Mr. 
Minister.  Will you confirm this, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, what I can confirm is that Weyerhaeuser 
is meeting the terms and conditions of the agreement that was negotiated 
with the province of Saskatchewan, unlike the allegations that were made in 
this House by that member last week, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- New question, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, you never even 
attempted to answer the question. 
 
But a new question, Mr. Minister.  And the question here is not whether or 
not Weyerhaeuser is living up to the terms of its agreement; the question 
is the competence of a government which would draw up such an agreement 
which would allow this forest giant to not pay any of the money it owed the 
people of Saskatchewan, even in a year in which it had a profit of $377 
million. 
 
If this is not a sweetheart deal, Mr. Minister, could you tell this House 
how many other Saskatchewan residents are allowed to make that kind of a 



 

 

windfall profit and not have to meet their financial obligations to this 
province?  How many of our farmers, Mr. Minister, do not have to meet their 
obligations because they have a cash flow problem?  They most certainly 
don't get away with it. 
 
And how many of our citizens with mortgages and have a cash flow problem, 
but cannot defer their payments with the 8 per cent interest that you give 
Weyerhaeuser from Tacoma?  Would you explain this to the House, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- As I recall, Mr. Speaker, in part of the ongoing 
history of the economic opportunities that Weyerhaeuser is creating in this 
province, as I recall history in this legislature, Mr. Speaker, three very 
large and thick documents outlining just about everything possible that 
could be outlined relative to that deal, was tabled in this House.  And 
somehow it's taken the hon. member two or three years to read through those 
documents, Mr. Speaker.  Or maybe he hasn't read through them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The reality is, Mr. Speaker, that Weyerhaeuser is involved in a very, very 
successful undertaking in Prince Albert, Saskatchewan.  I don't know why 
the hon. member continued to attack this company.  They are providing jobs 
and opportunities.  They're providing taxes, income tax from their 
employees.  They're an excellent corporate citizen.  Their educational and 
retraining program there is probably second to none. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would argue that the hon. member is driven by pure petty 
politics.  He can't describe Weyerhaeuser in any other way other than using 
words like he used last week, multinational; this week, forest giant. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the reality is the NDP are against economic diversification 
and development in this province.  They're against creating job 
opportunities, Mr. Speaker.  They're against having value added to some of 
our raw products, whether they be our forest products.  They're against 
those kinds of jobs and opportunities and the standard of living that it 
brings to the communities of this province like Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think this kind of cheap attack, we've gone on long enough in this 
House with that kind of attack. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, you 
talk about educational opportunities, and the Weyerhaeuser corporation will 
not hire an individual in this province unless they have a grade 12 
education.  They're imposing their values on our citizens of this country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- I have two narrow supplementary questions, Mr. Minister, 
and I'd like you to answer those questions.  Has the Weyerhaeuser 
corporation paid the $63.5 million dividends that it owes this province?  I 



 

 

ask you that question as a supplementary. 
 
And the second supplementary question:  of the $236 million capital, how 
much money has been paid to the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, what Weyerhaeuser has done is turn an 
operation that was bleeding the farmers and the taxpayers of this province 
to the tune of $91,000 a day, it's turned it around to something now that 
is injecting $45,000 a day into this province's treasury, Mr. Speaker.  
That's what's happened with Weyerhaeuser, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- And I'll tell you what, Mr. Speaker.  I challenge 
that hon. member to a debate in Prince Albert, Saskatchewan, and let's get 
the facts on the table relative to this deal.  Enough is enough, Mr. 
Speaker.  Put his money where his mouth is, Mr. Speaker, that's what I say. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Mr. Speaker, I ask another supplementary question.  I'm 
only going to ask you one supplementary this time, Mr. Minister, because I 
asked you two and it got you confused.  I'm going to ask you one 
supplementary question.  Mr. Minister, how much of the $63.5 million that 
Weyerhaeuser owes this province in dividends has been paid to date? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, the terms and 
conditions of the agreement are being kept, Mr. Speaker.  The terms and 
conditions of the agreement . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- The terms and conditions of the agreement have been 
kept, Mr. Speaker, in spirit and in law, Mr. Speaker.  And I'll tell you 
what -- there's a hidden agenda over there.  They either want to 
nationalize this thing again, buy it back for a dollar.  I say they should 
come clean with the people of Saskatchewan or quit the personal attacks, 
Mr. Speaker.  That's the issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Mr. Speaker, another supplementary.  Mr. Minister, you 
haven't answered one question that I asked you today -- not one question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- All you have done today is got up and rant and raved in 
this House and you have never answered one of the questions.  I am going to 
ask you once more, Mr. Minister, another supplementary.  Is there $10.5 



 

 

million still owing on the dividends from Weyerhaeuser to the province of 
Saskatchewan for the assets of PAPCO? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, the key question here is -- has the 
agreement, have the terms and conditions of the agreement been met, Mr. 
Speaker?  That is the simple question, and the simple answer is yes, 
contrary to the allegations and accusations, the cheap allegations and the 
cheap accusations made by the hon. member in this legislature, Mr. Speaker.  
If he has some difficulty, I challenge him to go to Prince Albert, 
Saskatchewan, and make those allegations on the front steps of 
Weyerhaeuser, Mr. Speaker.  That's what I challenge him to do. 
 
The question is, has this created jobs, has it created opportunities, has 
it created money for the provincial treasury . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Hon. members come to order; all hon. members 
come to order.  The member for Saskatoon Nutana, would you come to order. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 31 -- An Act to amend The Urban Municipality Act, 1984 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill to amend 
The Urban Municipality Act, 1984. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next 
sitting. 
 

Bill No. 32 -- An Act to amend The Local Government Election Act 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill to amend 
The Local Government Election Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next 
sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 29 -- An Act to amend The Crown Minerals Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, I am pleased today to rise and move 
second reading of The Crown Minerals Amendment Act, 1990. 
 



 

 

There are several main measures incorporated into this Bill.  One provision 
will provide the minister with the explicit authority to enter into 
agreements with other governments on the sharing of information having to 
do with the enforcement of taxation legislation.  By sharing information, 
Mr. Speaker, our respected governments are better able to ensure that taxes 
and royalties are collected in accordance with our Acts and regulations. 
 
Legislative amendments are required to provide the authority for entering 
into such agreements.  In the absence of the amendments, confidentiality 
provisions of The Crown Minerals Act would preclude such sharing.  The 
proposed legislation will require that the shared information be kept 
confidential by the government receiving the information and it'd be used 
only for the purpose of administrating taxation legislation. 
 
Another provision of this particular Bill, Mr. Speaker, will ensure that 
the powers of the regulations under this Bill will supersede any unitized 
oil and gas agreements or Crown leases that specifically identify lease 
rental rates.  Some Crown leases and unitized agreements, Mr. Speaker, 
contain clauses outlining royalties that were in effect at the time they 
were entered into without provision for making changes when royalty 
structures or rates change. 
 
This Bill will also place a ceiling on the maximum amount of compensation 
that can be received by a company  
whose oil and gas rates were acquired by the Crown in 1974. 
 
The Bill will also provide authority for making changes to the mineral 
titles of such lands to correct . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Now I'm going to ask one or two hon. members 
to refrain.  You've been carrying on a constant dialogue between you.  
We're having difficulty hearing the Minister of Energy and Mines, and let's 
pay the minister the courtesy of allowing him to speak without constant 
interruption. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As I said before, the Bill 
will also provide authority for making changes to mineral titles of such 
lands to correct errors and omissions in the process of registering title 
to those rights which were occurred in 1974. 
 
A major portion of this Bill will allow the Crown to transfer to the 
rightful legal owner, title to certain mineral rights which are currently 
the subject of cumbersome trust arrangements. 
 
These trust arrangements arose from events dating back to the 1940s and 
1950s, Mr. Speaker.  Numerous individuals sold their mineral rights to 
certain companies in return for shares in the companies, and a trust 
certificate entitling the holder to a beneficial interest of one-quarter or 
one-fifth were issued.  Hundreds of these mineral titles were eventually 
surrendered to the Crown because the companies were no longer interested in 
developing the properties and they did not wish to continue paying the 



 

 

mineral rights tax on those particular properties. 
 
Currently, with the exception of the trust interests, the Crown owns the 
rights to these surrendered lands and would like to lease some of them for 
development.  But because of its role as trustee for the owner of the trust 
certificates, it is unable to proceed in situations where the owners of the 
trust certificates cannot be located or where their agreement to the terms 
of a leasing arrangement cannot be obtained. 
 
The Bill which is before the Assembly will allow the Crown to conduct a 
search for the owners of the trust certificates and to convert that trust 
certificate into a full legal title when they are located.  This will 
remove the Crown from the current role of trustee, and the Crown will be 
free to pursue the leasing of these particular lands. 
 
In circumstances where the owners of the trust certificates, Mr. Speaker, 
cannot be located, their share of any revenues from the mineral lands will 
be held for them for up to 10 years.  If at any time during that 10-year 
period the owners of the trust certificates identify themselves, they will 
receive the amounts collected on their behalf, as well as the appropriate 
legal title. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The Crown Minerals 
Amendment Act, 1990. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  In light of the fact that the 
Bill was just received and tabled in the House very recently, I want to 
adjourn the debate and allow for my colleague, the member from Regina North 
West, to review it, and he'll have words to say on the Bill later. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 28 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt that Bill No. 28 -- An Act respecting Investments by 
Saskatchewan Residents in Support of Community Diversification and 
Environmental Protection be now read a second time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee 
of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
(1445) 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Northern Affairs Secretariat 



 

 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 48 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Would the minister introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  With me today are, beside 
me, Lorne Kovack who is the acting secretary of the Northern Affairs 
Secretariat, behind Lorne is Alison Stickland who is the assistant 
secretary, and behind me is Brian Goffin who is the La Ronge branch 
manager. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, in the last 
session of the legislature, there were a number of amendments passed with 
respect to The Northern Municipalities Act.  And even if northern 
municipalities are not a jurisdictional interest of yours, certainly they 
must be an interest of yours because it affects northern affairs and 
northern interests. 
 
My question to you concerns an apparent problem with this Act which now 
prevents northern municipalities from participating fully in economic 
development initiatives as anticipated by the Act.  And I wonder if you 
have any comments to make today on this problem with the legislation and 
how it affects northern people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- Mr. Chairman, legislation, I believe, is forthcoming 
from the Urban Affairs department.  Certainly I can't speak regarding the 
timetable for that, but certainly we'll be supporting the improvements to 
that legislation when it is introduced in the House.  I can't speak for the 
Minister of Urban Affairs regarding the timetable for that legislation. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- No I appreciate that, Mr. Chairman, that the minister 
himself would not necessarily have the details on the timetable of any 
legislation because again I recognize that that's clearly within the realm 
of responsibility for the Minister of Urban Affairs. 
 
I did want to ask you however, if you've had any discussions with people in 
the North respecting the Act, the fact that there was a problem with it and 
how it might have affected economic development initiatives in northern 
Saskatchewan, which I don't need to tell you as the Minister for Northern 
Affairs certainly as a matter of high priority and a matter of great 
concern if not grave concern, given the economic conditions in northern 
Saskatchewan in many of the communities.  I wonder if you can relate to us 
the level of concerns expressed to you by people in northern Saskatchewan 
on this important matter. 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- Certainly I don't think I have any argument with the 
statements made by the member.  I have spent a lot of time in the North and 
we have consulted, had dialogue with these people. There's no question that 
there's a concern for their economic, I suppose, progression.  They want to 
do it . . . I know that they want to do it for themselves and we certainly 
support their independent look at being able to do things for themselves.  
I know organizations such as the north-west municipalities association is a 



 

 

big proponent of this type of philosophy.  And certainly I will be 
encouraging and working with these people in all economic projects that 
they may request my assistance on. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Can I then ask, Mr. Minister, if you've had any 
specific representations from people in northern Saskatchewan to express 
concern about the fact that the kinds of opportunities that were outlined 
in the legislation last year now seem to be denied to them, notwithstanding 
the fact that there are supposedly some amendments coming.  Can you relate 
to us any specific representations that you've had from people in northern 
Saskatchewan to express concern about this matter? 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- To my recollection I have never had any direct 
inquiries regarding the legislation.  Certainly I've talked to different 
groups within the North regarding specific economic projects and, you know, 
we've thrown things around.  But regarding the legislation specifically, to 
the best of my recollection, I don't recall anything specific in that way. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I'm 
sorry for the lateness in sending that letter across.  I will ask you a 
question on the contents of that document. 
 
But I first want to start by asking you, in the supplementary estimates, if 
you could explain the extra expenditure of $392,000. 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- Mr. Chairman, in relation to the question, I would 
explain to the member that in October of 1989, a separate budget was set up 
when I became the minister in charge of the secretariat.  And as result of 
that split, we received from the economic development vote or budget, 
$222,900; and also we received an incremental increase of $87,700.  As 
well, we had a cost allocated to us of 81,400 which is 50 per cent of the 
SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation) costs, which would 
come, I believe, to your figure of $362,000. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Mr. Minister, could you indicate what that money was for 
from the economic development branch?  Was it just for general revenue for 
your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- Yes, the complete vote was in that department.  Of 
course up to October 3 all the costs to that point were deducted from that 
allocation and the remaining allocation was transferred to this . . . we'll 
call it to the department on an individual basis. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could indicate some of the 
activities, the major activities -- not all the activities of the northern 
secretariat -- but some of the major accomplishments that you were involved 
in, or your department, in the last year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- Mr. Chairman, to just briefly mention some of the 
activities of Northern Affairs, I think the one that comes to mind foremost 
is just the great relationship and the vision that the north-west 
Saskatchewan municipalities association has, not only within themselves but 
with government, as they attempt to forge ahead economically in the North.  



 

 

It's a group of young people who are really trying their best to make 
progress in the North, and I certainly wanted to remember those people in 
my statement. 
 
We as well facilitated the Cumberland House settlement and development 
agreements.  We transferred the farm and 50 per cent of the current assets 
to the Ile-a-la-Crosse Economic Development Corporation. 
 
(1500) 
 
The Gary Tinker run in which I had a little part to play, not so much of an 
economic thing, but certainly a morale booster to the North.  And I was 
really quite honoured to work with the Minister of Health in welcoming Gary 
Tinker to Regina.  We also had the honour, the Minister of Social Services 
and I, in a visit to the North to Buffalo Narrows to attend a banquet in 
honour of Gary Tinker, and he was honoured by his peers in the community.  
Certainly a highlight of my work in the North, my visits to the North. 
 
We've also encouraged many, many tours by ministers and MLAs to all parts 
of the North over the past two years, and we received many, many accolades 
from the people of the North in saying that it was nice that we took the 
time to visit and to listen to the people and to socialize with them, go on 
tours, see the North.  Certainly it was of mutual benefit; it was a 
learning experience for me as well as many other MLAs and ministers that 
were up there.  And as well certainly appreciated by people of the North. 
 
Another one that comes to mind that we worked on was the construction of 
the La Loche road and we were glad to -- though we're not active as 
Northern Affairs Secretariat in the actual construction of it -- it was 
certainly our role to facilitate a lot of arrangements in that project as 
well.  Those are some of the projects that I've been involved in since I 
took over the department in October. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  If the member from 
Weyburn would, in question period, would answer the questions.  He sits 
from his seat and bellows away but, Mr. Chairman, all through the question 
period today, never answered one question.  And he knows full well why he 
did not answer. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Let's have that debate then.  Let's get it done. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- To the member from Weyburn, we'll have that debate just as 
soon as you call an election.  You call an election and we'll have that 
debate.  We'll let the people of Saskatchewan decide whether it was a good 
deal or a bad deal.  We'll let the citizens of Saskatchewan decide that. 
 
Mr. Minister, we'll get back to your estimates now.  I want to thank you 
for that information.  I most certainly appreciate the fact you do go up 
and see what's happening in northern Saskatchewan and socialize and meet 
with the citizens up there.  And we have a lot of young individuals who are 
on town councils now and they need the support of government.  And I'm 
pleased to see that you were up there for the dinner for -- not Jerry 
Tinker but Gary Tinker, Jerry's son.  I know he most certainly appreciated 



 

 

the fact that you were there. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, I want to . . . and you indicate that you transferred 
the farm at Green Lake and you're involved with the farms in northern 
Saskatchewan.  I wonder, and I'll be specific now, if you could indicate 
how much money the government received for the farm at Silver Lake and who 
was the individual group that purchased the Silver Lake farm? 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- Though we certainly facilitated some of the 
negotiations in that transaction, I would like to inform the hon. member 
that the actual transaction is with the Department of Agriculture.  And we 
just don't have those, either the figure or the name, available.  You would 
have to get it through the Department of Agriculture. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Mr. Minister, being the minister in charge of the northern 
secretariat encompasses you being available to all concerns in northern 
Saskatchewan.  You deal with the walk-a-thons, and you deal with the town 
councils, which is municipal affairs.  And you yourself are the Minister of 
Parks and Renewable Resources.  You cover everything in the North pretty 
well.  When you're up there, you are the Minister of Northern Affairs which 
is not just one particular item, so I . . . and I realize you do not have 
that information, but I ask you as the Minister of Northern Affairs if you 
would provide in writing with the name of the group or the individuals who 
purchased the Silver Lake farm, and the amount of money that was paid by 
this group and the terms that they had for purchasing the Silver Lake farm 
at Green Lake. 
 
Mr. Minister, I know you're not the Minister of Agriculture, but when 
you're in northern Saskatchewan you become the minister of Urban Affairs, 
as you indicate.  You've been out on the highways, the road to Fort 
McMurray, so you become the spokesperson for Northerners through your 
ministry to all departments.  And I would just ask if you would provide 
that information for me. 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- I have certain concerns, and I want the member to 
know that I always want to co-operate with members opposite and certainly 
answer their questions, but it would be very imprudent of me to obligate 
another minister with that type of information.  I wouldn't even wish to 
make a statement on it being available or not being available.  That is not 
the issue.  It would just be imprudent of me to obligate another minister 
to release information which he may or she may or may not want to do.  And 
I just have to accept that position. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I'm sure you would not release that 
information without the consent of that minister.  I know you better than 
that.  And I just ask you if you would consult with the minister in charge 
and, if you can, provide me with that information.  And if you can't, then 
just let me know one way or the other. 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- Though I would still first of all suggest to the 
member that he may wish to make a direct inquiry to the Department of 
Agriculture, but notwithstanding that answer, I have no problems in asking 
on your behalf if you so wish that I do that.  And I will suggest to you 



 

 

now that we have no problems with asking for that information on your 
behalf if that is your wish. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Minister.  That information would 
be to myself, but I have many constituents in northern Saskatchewan that 
you have responsibility for and they are concerned about this, and I want 
to know.  So if you would just . . . if you can provide me with that 
information, fine; if you can't, then just let me know. 
 
I now want to turn to . . . I'm going to cover some of the items that would 
be under your ministry under Parks and Renewable Resources as you cover 
that northern area.  And I want to bring to your attention the letter that 
I passed over to you from one of the band members, Elmer Campbell from 
Dillon.  And I just want to go down to the last paragraph, the conclusion, 
and Elmer Campbell indicates that the cost . . . I just want to put the 
whole paragraph in Hansard, Mr. Minister, and I'm quoting from a letter 
from Elmer Campbell who is a councillor for the English River Band, the 
Buffalo River Band at Dillon and it's dated May 25, 1990, which I have 
turned over a copy to yourself, Mr. Minister: 
 

 The conclusion that will be gathered from the information from the fire 
cache concerning men and equipment cost on that fire versus the stand-by 
crew, will be that the stand-by crew is a money saving program and is 
worthy of being re-instated. 

 
 Thank you for your time and co-operation. 
 

And as you know, Mr. Minister, there's been a major fire in Dillon, in the 
Dillon, St. George's Hill area in the last week, and that is where your 
department, sir, has cut off the stand-by crews that were there for two 
years, and I had asked you if you had considered reinstating them. 
 
And now we take a look at the fire that we have just encountered up there 
which started in the garbage dump at St. George's Hill and jumped the 
highway and turned out to be a major fire.  When I was up there last 
Friday, there was 128 men on there, not including the aircraft and the 
fixed-winged aircraft and the helicopters and all the other equipment.  So 
this has turned out to be a very expensive fire that had that crew that you 
laid off, Mr. Minister, been in place, there would have been no fire. 
 
So what they're asking for, the band at Dillon, and I've asked you before 
and I'm asking you again, Mr. Minister -- and I don't expect you to answer 
that today -- but my question to you and my request is that you give 
consideration to reinstating the stand-by crews that you released.  Because 
you just have to take a look at what's happened in the last week and the 
tremendous cost that has been incurred which would not have taken place had 
those stand-by crews been in place.  So I just ask you if you would 
consider reinstating those crews or take a serious look at that, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- I would like to thank the member for the letter.  I 
of course, as he suggested himself, did not have an opportunity to review 
the facts that are contained in the letter.  And I'm not suggesting that it 



 

 

isn't correct.  I'm just not . . . I can't tell you the circumstances 
regarding the manpower situation and just who was brought in to fight that 
fire -- if it was a regular crew or if it was stand-by crew from somewhere 
else or just what the situation would be. 
 
But I would thank you for the letter and certainly get back to both 
yourself and Mr. Campbell, the councillor, with a reply to this letter.  
Certainly I will obligate Parks and Renewable Resources to do that for you. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Minister.  I want to ask you a 
number of questions and I think that you probably will have to provide me 
in writing with the answers to these questions.  You're going to have to 
check them out.  I just want to ask you those questions. 
 
And I'll start off with domestic fishing licences that we have in northern 
Saskatchewan.  And this is for individuals who live in northern 
Saskatchewan who have always used a domestic licence.  And they get the 
licence through your department to get fish to feed their families, and in 
some cases individuals will have that and they will not only provide fish 
for their own families but they will do that for their grandmothers and 
grandfathers and senior citizens alike. 
 
It's always been used and it's not a policy that drains the lakes.  It's 
just, they put one net in, or some of them just put a few floats in, or a 
few yards of net I should say, so that they can catch enough fish to eat.  
Depending on the time of the year they may just need three, four floats.  A 
net has 50 floats in; that's a hundred yards of net.  And if it's at a time 
of year when the fishing is not that good, then they're allowed to put in a 
hundred yards of net, which is 50 floats. 
 
And now the policy seems to be changing.  I don't know if it's changed 
locally, but I had a call from an individual from Ile-a-la-Crosse yesterday 
who has always had a domestic licence.  That individual not only provides 
for his young family, but he gives fish to his grandmother and his 
grandfather, individuals who need that fish to supplement their diets. 
 
Not only that, Mr. Minister, but it costs a lot of money to live in 
northern Saskatchewan.  The price of the goods and services are just so 
great compared to what it is in Regina or what it would be in Shellbrook or 
Meadow Lake or places like that.  And whenever they can use the fish from 
the lakes, which they've used all their lives, and now there is . . . some 
of the individuals up there will have a job.  And some policy or policy 
maker within the department has indicated that if an individual has a job, 
well then they no longer can take advantage of that fish that they've used 
all their lives, and their fathers and grandfathers have. 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Minister, I would ask if you would, through your department, through 
Northern Affairs Secretariat, and to your other department that you're also 
minister of, if you would look into that problem and specifically in 
Ile-a-la-Crosse.  And if the policy is changing where Northerners are no 
longer allowed to use a domestic net to feed their families, then I would 



 

 

ask you to take a serious look at changing that back. 
 
And I give you a good example of why it should be, over and above the 
examples that I gave you prior to this: the high cost of living in northern 
Saskatchewan.  But in all our northern communities we have individuals who 
have treaty rights.  And under their treaties, they are allowed to fish for 
food.  So an individual living right beside each other, one being a treaty 
and one not being a treaty, the treaty can go out and can fish under his 
treaty rights, a domestic net; whereas the other individual who has always 
had these rights, goes up and gets a domestic licence, has had that right 
taken away from him.  And that creates friction also. 
 
And I would ask you, Mr. Minister, in the specific cases in 
Ile-a-la-Crosse, if this policy change has taken place, if you would 
reconsider changing that policy back, where the individuals who require 
domestic licences, who have had domestic licences in the past, will be able 
to continue to use a domestic licence for fishing for their own personal 
use. 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- As the Minister of Northern Affairs, I will 
endeavour to bring it to the attention of the Minister of Parks and 
Renewable Resources, and we'll get back to you with a reply on this issue. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Minister, and I trust that you 
will do that. 
 
I now want to just touch on another item that you'll have to get back to me 
to, Mr. Minister, once you sit down with yourself and decide which way 
you're going to go on this.  And that is you've had correspondence from the 
Sled Lake area regarding the beaver dams that have interfered with the 
spawning grounds of the fish in Saskatchewan, specifically in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
More and more this is becoming a serious problem, Mr. Minister.  I was 
first made aware of this about four or five years ago by Tom Laliberte and 
Narcisse Merasty --  Tom Laliberte coming from Dore pé Lake and Narcisse 
Merasty coming from Sled Lake, which you have correspondence from Mr. 
Merasty, indicating that there was more and more beaver dams blocking the 
spawning grounds for our fish. 
 
And I think, as you take a look at what's happening in the fur industry 
right now, there's just becoming too many beavers.  You take a look at the 
way they destroy the forest around our lakes and our rivers and our 
streams.  And if you look at the dams that they're building up and you talk 
to the individuals who have been there for years, and they indicate that 
it's a serious problem with the beavers regarding spawning grounds.  They 
totally disrupt those spawning grounds.  And if a fish does get in there 
and spawns and is lucky enough to get out, the young fish that are hatched, 
they don't get out.  They end up dying in those rivers and streams in those 
spawning grounds. 
 
I've noticed it myself where beavers have dammed up rivers and ordinarily 
you would go there in the spring and they would just be crawling with 



 

 

jackfish and pickerel and mullets, and that's no longer happening and 
you'll see that the beaver dams are doing this.  And those individuals up 
there with a lot of experience and a lot of years under their belt indicate 
that that is the problem. 
 
Another problem, it's coming now loud and clear, is from Beauval, and that 
is the beavers are damming up the rivers and the creeks that are running 
into the Beaver River south from Beauval down towards Green Lake.  And I 
would just ask you, Mr. Minister, through yourself and your departments -- 
pluralize that -- if you would look at that seriously and consider the fact 
that we have to take some steps on these beaver dams or we're just going to 
have a lot of our spawning grounds that are gone.  And to hatch those fish 
down South and replant them up there will never, ever work.  We have to 
make sure that those spawning grounds are protected. 
 
And I would just ask you, Mr. Minister, if you would take a serious look at 
that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- Certainly I'm not aware of the facts and the 
circumstances, but if they are as you describe them, they are serious and 
should be checked into.  And certainly we will bring this matter to the 
attention of the Minister of Parks and Renewable Resources. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Minister, and I'll now turn over 
to my colleague from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Yes, Mr. Minister, when I'm reading my Estimates of the 
Northern Affairs Secretariat for this year, 1990-91, I notice that at the 
bottom it states that: 
 

 Expenditures for the vote Northern Affairs Secretariat were included 
within the vote Economic Development and Tourism in 1989-90.  The 1989-90 
estimates have been reallocated to reflect the transfer of this 
expenditure to the vote Northern Affairs Secretariat in 1990-91. 

 
Now I notice that the expenditures are relatively overall the same.  I 
notice in administration, it's gone up from 465,900 to 480,000.  And then I 
notice that drop in the property management from 162,700 to 80,000 and the 
program expenditures from 628,600 to $560,000. 
 
I was wondering, Mr. Minister, when it shifted from Economic Development 
and Tourism, whether or not there was any major shift in regards to what 
Northern Affairs Secretariat was doing and whether or not it was doing much 
the same thing as before?  Has there been any changes in regards to what 
the Northern Affairs Secretariat does?  And if so, could you let us know? 
 
Maybe, Mr. Minister, before you get into the aspect of the changes, maybe 
give us an overview on exactly, for the public, an overview of what the 
Northern Affairs Secretariat actually does in regards to programming? 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- And that's a good question because I think the 
programs for the North are very important, and I agree there should 
certainly be no reduction in the programs to the North, and there certainly 



 

 

aren't. 
 
You asked me what I consider a very important question and that is some of 
the purpose of the Northern Affairs Secretariat.  And I could start by 
giving you sort of the straight answer as it comes from the objectives and 
purposes of the secretariat, and I think you're probably aware of most of 
them.  But if I could just quickly summarize it to say that we co-ordinate, 
promote, develop, and implement policies of the government designed to 
posture and advance the general development of northern Saskatchewan, and 
to ensure that the Government of Saskatchewan is advised as to the views of 
residents in northern Saskatchewan respecting the delivery of programs and 
provision of services in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
I suppose I sort of see myself as being -- with all due respect to the MLAs 
of the North who I certainly have no reason to make this a personal 
reflection -- but I sort of visualize myself as another MLA of the North, 
if you would take that the right way, in sort of interacting with . . . and 
I know you weren't in the room a little earlier when I discussed it with 
another MLA, some of the things that I was involved in my short term in the 
North. 
 
I could quickly bring to your attention things like the north-west 
municipalities association, which I've had numerous meetings with now.  The 
transfer of the farm and 50 per cent of the current assets to 
Ile-a-la-Crosse Economic Development Corporation.  The just great, great 
feeling we had in supporting Gary Tinker and his walk to Regina and his 
very valiant efforts; and how after that he was recognized by his community 
with what I considered a very large banquet, well attended by the 
community.  The Minister of Social Services and I had the honour of 
attending and making a presentation on behalf of the government. 
 
We're involved in, oh, things like facilitating the La Loche road project.  
We don't do it directly, but we do it, you know, other departments do it 
and we kind of facilitate it. 
 
So I think to summarize it, I just sort of see myself as sort of being an 
MLA of the northern residents. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- So basically the role of the minister therefore is like an 
MLA role which then you deal with any issue of development in regards to 
northern Saskatchewan.  I mean that's my understanding of your statement 
and also your very initial comment, of course, in regards to the objectives 
of Northern Affairs Secretariat in promoting and co-ordinating development, 
you know, of the North. 
 
Now probably one of the major issues in the North in regards to the whole 
area of economic development has been the issue of employment.  I noticed 
in your comments you didn't make any statements in regards to mining, 
although we know that of the approximately $1 billion that is taken out 
from the North every year, you know, the vast majority of that is in the 
area of mining. 
 
We look at, about a couple years ago we had about $700 million worth of 



 

 

uranium production.  And I looked at SMDC at that time and they had made 
$112 million, you know, profit in those two years before the privatization 
scheme took place.  So one of the major issues, major points of contentions 
for the North has always been economic development and jobs.  So I want to 
look at the issue of jobs and ask a few questions in relation to the jobs 
aspect. 
 
In the late '70s, many of the people said yes, we will agree to development 
in the North, providing we have consideration for the environment, 
providing we have consideration for people in regards to jobs, and 
providing that there is a training component in regards to the development. 
 
(1530) 
 
And as I reviewed the situation, it was very, very difficult for me as an 
MLA to really discern and really make out from a developmental position 
exactly how the North was developing in regards to the issue of jobs.  You 
know, I would raise questions once in a while with the mining issue, and I 
will get a little bit of a report, and I would get a list of workers that 
were working at a particular mine at a particular time in a particular 
month. 
 
I am wondering, Mr. Minister, what you have come out with at this time to 
deal with the issue of jobs and mining development in the North.  What is 
your present policy and what kind of statements can you state to the 
Saskatchewan public today as to where you're at; whether you've made 
significant improvements, you know, on a year-to-year basis since the 
government has been in power and where we're at, where are we heading right 
now in that old area of jobs for people in northern Saskatchewan as it 
relates to mining? 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- In checking our statistics regarding the northern 
people, Northerners employed within the mining industry, our information 
suggests that that figure is growing gradually.  Through the last 10 years 
it's gone up.  We certainly will never be satisfied.  We'll encourage it to 
go higher. 
 
But it has reached the point now where our statistics tell us that 35 per 
cent of all mine employees are northern residents.  And we're extremely 
optimistic as new projects would come on stream that the Northerners will 
continue to be a part of what you suggest has to be their economic growth. 
 
And I as the Minister of Northern Affairs will certainly be encouraging 
each of these projects as they come along.  I will actively lobby them so 
that the Northerners are very much a part of the labour force of future 
projects in the North . . . future mining projects in the North. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- I guess, Mr. Minister, I was really concerned about the 
issue of jobs.  And I think we've studied it many times before in this 
legislature, that jobs are extremely important for everybody in the world.  
I mean it forms not only the basis of a person's identity in respecting 
what they do on a daily basis . . . But when we look at the record, you 
know, for northern Saskatchewan, we're looking at 50 to 80 per cent 



 

 

unemployment in the communities of northern Saskatchewan.  And although the 
official record may not be that high, the fact is that we have only a 
certain amount of the people working, you know, from the North.  So we know 
it's an extremely . . . it's way too high, you know, whatever statistic 
that we present. 
 
And we know also that for the people, as I travel around each community, 
it's . . . unemployment is really a devastating experience.  I see and I've 
talked quite often about the suicide rates, you know, climbing in the 
North, and my point has always been one where the suicide rates are 
directly related to the unemployment rates in the North.  When you looked 
at the research reports, whether you look at the First World War period or 
during the Dirty Thirties or in the modern era, and you look at the 
research, most of the research will point out that for every 1 per cent 
rise in unemployment, you have a 4 per cent rise in suicide rates because 
it's such a devastating experience for people to take away their means of 
livelihood as you go in. 
 
Now this becomes an even more . . . it even becomes to be one of a 
paramount problem for the North because the unemployment rate is so high.  
And, you know, while people complain of being squeezed out of trapping and 
fishing in many ways by tighter and tighter regulations for them, the 
alternative, which is jobs for many of our youth growing up and for many of 
the middle-aged who are unemployed right now, is not growing fast enough. 
 
And one of the things I'd like to find out from the minister because the 
new minister now in charge of the North . . . It's been very difficult for 
the people to get proper records.  During the early days when the Northern 
Affairs Secretariat was formed you were supposed to get, you know, 
according to the Key Lake report with the Human Rights Commission, there 
was supposed to be at least monthly reports in regards to how we were 
supposed to . . . how we were doing in regards to their jobs. 
 
And later on the Northern Affairs Secretariat function in that area was 
diminished or knocked off, or at least it was never really strengthened.  
It was as if the role of the Northern Affairs Secretariat was no longer 
there in that particular regard in making sure that we not only have a 
monitoring function, but being capable of saying, look, if we can't do it 
that way, then let's put it in the lease agreements. 
 
And many of these things came out in the lease agreements.  We needed to 
employ 50 per cent of the people in Key Lake.  We needed to employ them 60 
per cent after two years. And these were put in as legal documents, because 
people said in the long history of the North since the development took 
place in mining, you know, from the early '20s, that you needed to have 
some document to be able to say yes, we are doing something about it; and 
yes, these are not only abstract documents, that these are real people that 
are getting jobs from this and that community. 
 
So I'm asking you, Mr. Minister, are you in favour of, number one, 
providing greater access for the documentation to the public at two levels, 
one, the level of general statistics, you know, to be published monthly as 
to where we're at in regards to employment rates on this and that mine in 



 

 

northern Saskatchewan, and stating how many people are working from what 
community? 
 
I know it will be difficult to do the latter part in regards to this and 
that community, but as being the third MLA, as you said you were, and from 
MLA to MLA then, I would say, would you be prepared then to provide me with 
the documents.  You know, since we've had better records from about the 
'79-80 period, could you get those records for me on the months of January 
and the months of June, those people that were working at the mines from 
northern Saskatchewan?  Could you provide that document on a year-to-year 
basis from about '79 to the present? 
 
Mr. Minister, the reason why I ask you that is this: it would help me and 
it would help you look at where we're heading.  And we could know which 
communities we've served in the past and which communities it shifted to 
later on.  And in all due fairness to all communities, we know that we are 
not only servicing three, four communities, we're servicing all the 
communities.  So that type of information would be very important for you 
in regards to planning, in your planning function. 
 
And I was wondering if you would be able to provide those documents, you 
know, for me -- you know, the yearly document since January, the 
generalized statistics in January and July on a yearly basis.  And on those 
years . . . on those months, to provide me with the names of the people 
that were working in those mines from northern Saskatchewan.  And then we 
would have the evidence and then I would no longer be asking questions. 
 
And if this was regularly done, then all we would be doing is raising 
questions about this and that community.  But every year since I've been an 
MLA since '86, I've been raising this question.  And every year I get a 
generalized, you know, percentage -- you know, whether it's 25 per cent or 
26 per cent or 28 per cent, or today you throw out a figure of 35 per cent. 
 
So I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, are you prepared to provide me with that 
information of the people that work in the mines from northern 
Saskatchewan, with the specific names of the . . . and the communities they 
come from, because that was the original goal of the development in the 
North in the late '70s and '80s, and I want to see whether or not you've 
changed your policy on that.  Would you be prepared to provide that type of 
information, Mr. Minister? 
 
(1545) 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- First of all, in just a general way, I wanted to 
certainly reaffirm my support for the general employment programs of the 
North.  And I certainly want to say that it was obvious to me that the 
people of the North want to work. 
 
Now you've narrowed it down to the mining situation.  But I think we could 
broaden that statement and say that, you know, they are looking for jobs 
just in any economic project that is a possible . . . either developed by 
industry such as mining companies or as well economic projects that could 
be put together by people of the North themselves.  And so just generally 



 

 

that way, I don't think you or I have a problem with supporting that type 
of thing. 
 
Regarding the surface lease agreements, they call for, the surface lease 
agreements call for human resource agreements with the Department of 
Education.  This information is provided on a confidential basis.  They 
report those employment statistics to Education and are made public from 
time to time, but are released by them, not by us.  And really it is up to 
the . . . the onus is not on us to release that information; it is an 
agreement between Education and the mining companies to release that 
information to the public. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Minister, I'm actually very appalled with your 
statement. Because initially, when the whole thing came about in the late 
'70s and the early '80s, those were supposed to be public documents.  Now 
you're telling me that those are secret and confidential documents in 
regards to the fact that only the Education minister and the mining company 
can access. 
 
I mean, the reason for people saying yes to development was for them to 
find out whether or not their people were working there.  What you're 
telling me is that you, as a minister in charge of the North who is 
supposed to co-ordinate and promote development, doesn't even have the 
capacity to do that because you don't even know what the information is.  
That seems to be what you're telling me. 
 
All I'm asking you is for very basic information, the number of people . . 
. And I very deliberately did not add forestry and wild rice, etc., because 
I knew that it would be difficult to get all that information.  So I 
deliberately narrowed it down to the field of mining because those 
documents were more readily available because of the system that was in 
place already by the late '70s. 
 
And so I'm asking you again, Mr. Minister, as a minister . . . I mean you 
can always talk to the Education minister, or you could always ask him for 
the information.  All I'm asking you is that whether you as a minister will 
take it upon yourself.  To be able to promote development in the North, you 
need information as a minister.  Will you be able to get that information 
and provide it to me? 
 
And again, the specific information that I would like is, every January and 
July I would like to know how many people are working from northern 
Saskatchewan in those mines, and that's all I'm asking for.  I'd like their 
names and from what communities they're from.  And that documentation 
should be there because initially there was always supposed to have . . . 
according to the human rights agreement initially, those documents were 
supposed to have been tabled on a monthly basis, and then a yearly report 
done. 
 
Now I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, whether or not, in light of the . . . And 
the other thing that you mention, Mr. Minister, maybe I'll deal with that 
in a following question.  So I will just ask you, will you provide for me 
the information on January and July of every year since about '79 of the 



 

 

people who are working in the mines from northern Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- I would suggest to the member that the general 
information that you sort of talk about, I believe is available.  I've got 
a real problem . . . in fact I don't think it could be done because of 
agreements that are in place, to give you specific names and addresses of 
people.  That's the part I referred to as being very confidential records 
of a mining company. 
 
But I would invite you to write a mining company and possibly ask them for 
that information.  If they wish to release it to you, we really have no 
problems with that type of thing.  But for me to suggest that I can get it 
for you, I don't think that's possible. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Minister, how can you promote and co-ordinate 
development if you don't have the facts in front of your hands?  All I'm 
asking you is asking how many . . . See, if you're proud of the people that 
are working in the mines, then you should know the names of the people.  
You have to be able to at least deal with real people from northern 
Saskatchewan, from real communities.  That's what I'm asking you.  I'm 
asking you to provide that information. 
 
The excuse that you make that the mining companies cannot give out 
addresses and so on, is a phoney excuse.  I'm not asking for the person's 
address; I'm asking for the person's name and what community they're from, 
from northern Saskatchewan.  I'm not asking for their address; I'm asking 
for their name and where they're from.  I was able to access that type of 
information before, and all of a sudden this government becomes closed, 
very secretive. 
 
Mr. Minister, you've had new agreements in 1988.  So I'm going to ask you 
one more time: why don't you provide that information?  I mean you should 
be proud of your government's record on employing people, but right now 
you're keeping everything secret.  All you're saying is the mining 
companies, the big mining corporations can hide everything from the people.  
Why don't you just utilize your role as a minister and say, yes we'll 
provide you with that information; we're proud of the government's record 
and here it is.  Why don't you do that, Mr. Minister? 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- I have to inform the member one more time that our 
surface lease agreements and our human resources agreements both call for 
confidentiality regarding that information and we are just bound not to 
release that information.  And it's not a case of wanting to or not wanting 
to.  We're just bound by contract not to release that information. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Minister, I'm going to have to report back to my 
constituency and say the PC government simply will not review . . . Year 
after year you make tremendous statements of all your concern about jobs 
and people in northern Saskatchewan.  All of that is phoney nonsense, 
complete boloney, because you will not provide me with the information of 
the specific people that work at the community level.  You have absolutely 



 

 

no pride in the people from northern Saskatchewan and their fight for real 
jobs in real mines in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- I mean what we are asking for is general historical 
information so that we know where we are going; so we're not coming here 
every day and asking a minister like yourself and say, oh, I don't know 
anything.  We're a secret government.  Only the big corporations determine 
exactly what type of information is required.  We can't even provide you 
with the names from certain communities of people. 
 
I find that absolutely amazing that in this day and age that you will not 
provide that information.  And yet the trust of the people in development, 
the real reason why they wanted to partake in development is so that one of 
the main reasons was jobs.  A few years later a PC government, all they can 
say is, oh, secret -- this is all confidential information. 
 
These people are there and proud of their work.  They want to be on record 
that that's where they're working.  And I am really appalled as a new 
minister that you can allow this type of nonsense to continue.  I thought 
that you would come in as a new minister and say, yes, we are proud of 
doing these things; yes, we are proud of our record employment, that these 
are the people that are there. 
 
But yet what I see is again the same secret agenda of the PCs -- the secret 
agenda that we cannot give access to the people in regards to the 
information that they require on the historical record of northern 
Saskatchewan.  That is the type of thing that you're telling me, Mr. 
Minister.  I am really, really appalled with the fact that you will not 
present me with that information. 
 
And also one of the other things for information.  In 1988 when those new 
resource agreements came in, the ones that you give an excuse for to shift 
in to the educational process, well those are new.  That's a new argument 
you're making.  So why not provide me with the one then from '79 to '88 
because that excuse you're giving me is a very new excuse.  The resources 
agreements that are transferred to education were '88. 
 
And I might tell you one other thing, Mr. Minister, that is appalling about 
those new resource agreements.  When those agreements were made in '79 to 
'81 and when the discussion took place, people said we want employment of 
50, 60 per cent at the mines.  And they said we want to respect the people 
that live in northern Saskatchewan.  We could use six months residence in 
northern Saskatchewan to be able to get a job, and people said no.  We want 
people who were born and raised in northern Saskatchewan to get those jobs 
because the unemployment rate of 80 to 90 per cent in certain communities 
was where it was occurring at the community level.  They wanted to get 
those jobs. 
 
They were saying the suicide rates are too high on our youth.  They're 
killing themselves because they have no future to look forward to; that the 
drug and alcohol problem is climbing and the government simply doesn't 



 

 

care.  So the point that was made, Mr. Minister, is this: they said, look, 
we want to hire people in northern Saskatchewan who have lived in the North 
at least 15 years or half their lifetime and they were of Indian ancestry. 
 
Because legally, Mr. Minister, under the human rights Act, you could not 
define a Northerner unless you had the three situations under the Human 
Rights Code, which was of Indian ancestry, women, and the handicapped.  And 
one of the things that I look at is this, Mr. Minister.  That was a 
standard we used. 
 
In 1988 you changed the standard.  The new standard says that the 
Northerner is anybody who goes to live in northern Saskatchewan for three 
years.  So your statistic of 35 per cent is according to the new standards 
that you set which is three years.  And I find it very strange, Mr. 
Minister, whether or not that is even legal.  I wouldn't think that 
according to the human rights Act your definition of a Northerner would be 
legal.  You could be challenged by the mobility clause of section 15 of the 
Canadian constitution, basically because you could not have 
geographical-type hiring under a concept of Northerner unless they were of 
an affirmative action basis under section 15 of the Canadian constitution, 
as it is then transferred under the Saskatchewan human rights Act in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Therefore the initial definition of Northerner, being a person 15 years and 
half their lifetime and of Indian ancestry, was the standard that was 
raised at that time.  Now you have a new standard which says three years 
and anybody.  There's also another clause in there that says 10 years, but 
the real standard that is used is a three-year one. 
 
So I'm asking you, Mr. Minister, in that regard, could you give me at least 
a general statistical evidence on January and July without the names from 
the beginning of '79 to '80?  Provide me with the general information 
utilizing two systems: the 15 years and half your lifetime and of Indian 
ancestry system; and the one that's new, that's the three-year clause.  
Could you provide me with that evidence, Mr. Minister? 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, I ask leave to introduce some guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, it's my pleasure to introduce a group of 
students from grade 5 and 6 school . . . or ages 5 and 6, from the 
Cowessess community recreational centre at Grenfell.  Mr. Speaker, I'd like 
to introduce their . . . or Mr. Chairman, they're in your gallery, seated 
in your gallery. 
 
There are 27 grade 5 and 6 students accompanied by their teacher, Mr. John 
Pollock and Mrs. Eleanor Agecoutay -- I trust I pronounced it right -- and 
Mrs. Sandi Delorme. 
 
I would like to invite the members of the Assembly to welcome the students, 



 

 

and I look forward to meeting them in a few minutes for pictures and some 
refreshments and possibly try and answer any questions they may have.  
Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Why is the member from Wilkie on his feet? 
 
Mr. Britton: -- While there is a break in the action I would ask permission 
to also introduce some guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to 
introduce to you some students from Handel on behalf of my colleague, Mr. 
Baker.  They are from Handel school in Handel, and they represent grades 6 
to 12.  And, Mr. Speaker, we will be meeting with them a little later for 
some refreshments and some questions in the Speaker's boardroom. 
 
The teachers, Mr. Speaker, is Rick Burton, Owen Sebastian.  Chaperons 
include Carolyn Glessing -- I hope that's right -- and Bernie Heintz and 
Joy McFarlane-Burton.  Their bus driver, Mr. Chairman, is Gordon Cey. 
 
And we will also be having some pictures, and I want to welcome them here.  
I would like to wish them a very interesting visit and a safe journey home.  
Handel, as you know, is very close to Unity, where I live, and I would ask 
you to welcome them in the usual manner. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Northern Affairs Secretariat 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 48 
 
 Item 1 (continued) 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. member 
that regardless of what percentages -- and you can always play with 
statistics -- but there has been, the fact remains that there has been a 
steady increase in northern employment over the last 10 years in the mining 
field. 
 
The matter of specific names of individuals are still a matter of . . . 
well they're matters of private agreements as part of our surface lease 
agreements and our human resource agreements.  That information is just not 
released.  Some general statistics of course are available. 
 
I think to prove that we are committed to helping the people of the North 
and their participation in mining projects, certainly we could go to the 
mining companies and ask them to exactly what type of statistical 
information they would provide for us that may be of some benefit.  But I 



 

 

would commit myself only to asking them to provide that on a voluntary 
basis because of past agreements. 
 
But there's no question.  I certainly want it to go on the record as saying 
that we are committed to a greater percentage of northern employment in our 
mining industry.  We are confident that as new projects come on stream, 
that the Northerners will be a very, very important part of the labour 
force of those projects.  Training programs are provided, both through 
education and also through the mining companies themselves.  I mean, in 
talking to the mining officials, there's no question that they want to be 
in a very sincere partnership with the people of the North. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Minister, I find your comments to be extremely 
disappointing.  I thought that we had a new minister who would take a new 
role on and be sincere about his job.  I thought you had a certain amount 
of integrity in being able to deal with the issues that relate to your job, 
which means the whole question of development in the North and more 
particularly the question of economic development and jobs.  But I come 
here to raise only one question of information: to find out what the 
historical record.  And here you can stand up and tell me absolutely 
nothing.  How in the world can you plan anything if you know nothing? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- If you don't know absolutely anything about the people in 
those communities, how can you say, yes we're good on the question of 
employment.  Employment means real people, real communities.  We can't go 
on and on and bring in new statistics with very, very different standards.  
We had standards that high before; your standards are way down low now in 
regards to the definition of a Northerner, and it's even suspect legally. 
 
But the fact remains even all of that you should still be able to provide 
me with the information.  A democracy requires information.  A democracy 
requires these things. 
 
The secrecy that you state in regards to blaming the big companies -- what 
you're saying is that the companies demand absolute secrecy from the people 
and the companies are therefore not interested in democracy.  That's what 
you're telling me.  You're telling me that the people who come and mine in 
the North do not have a democratic interest at all in regards to the 
employment of people in the North.  Because you yourself as a minister 
cannot do a proper job as a minister of promoting and co-ordinating 
development unless you have the information.  What you're telling me is you 
don't have it.  So I am extremely, extremely disappointed. 
 
In other places of your government when we have asked information, the 
historic record is very, very straightforward.  Whether it was GigaText, 
you were hiding facts, you were hiding corruption, you were hiding 
mismanagement;  when we want information on $370 million you spend in 
regards to Cargill, everything is secrecy and cover-up. 
 



 

 

This is the type of government that you as a minister are perpetuating in 
regards to northern development and I am extremely disappointed.  I think 
all you are worried about is the give-aways.  The fact that you are 
privatizing SMDC (Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation) and now 
that's Cameco -- that's all you're interested in.  All you're interested in 
is bending over backwards for the big corporations.  You do not consider 
even the people as real people in the North.  I think that that is 
absolutely appalling in this day and age. 
 
I would also state that back in 1985 the Northern Affairs Secretariat said, 
hey -- after all the criticism that was heaped upon them -- they said we 
will have a northern development advisory committee formed and they said 
this northern development advisory committee was a first form of Consensus 
Saskatchewan.  They appointed people from northern Saskatchewan to talk 
about the involvement of people in the North and to co-ordinate the 
development of the North. 
 
But this government only used that thing . . . And I remember one leader 
saying at that time, they said, hey, what the government needs is not 
another hearing board, what they need is to really listen to the people of 
the North; what they really know is to start acting on the questions of 
employment, start acting on those issues of providing information to the 
people.  That's what the people are saying in northern Saskatchewan.  So 
when you look at the Northern Affairs Secretariat and also the northern 
development, you did away with that.  You didn't even involve people in the 
formation of it; you didn't even involve people when you knocked it right 
off.  You don't even have a system of advisory capacity now.  The only 
thing you now have is ConSask.  The first ConSask of northern Saskatchewan 
people would speculate and maybe even say it was the Northern Development 
Advisory Council. 
 
I knew that there was good individuals that were involved in the Northern 
Development Advisory Council, but the impact was minimal, and that was the 
expectation of the people in the North because this government has treated 
the North from a very colonial viewpoint.  They don't give them, provide 
them information.  They don't provide them the documentation; everything is 
secret.  The whole colonial mentality of your government, you know, really 
shows through in this line of questioning that I have. 
 
And the other issue that I was going to try and get into -- and because of 
time I just want to mention it -- Mr. Minister, we talk about subsidies to 
the North as part of the development strategy.  We provided about $14 
million to the uranium companies on a royalty tax roll-back in the past 
couple of years.  Now what people said is at the same time that you had a 
royalty tax roll-back on the big corporations, which amounted to about $14 
million, you were able to take the subsidy away for fishing.  The people 
who do fishing were making a little bit of money in regards to pickerel and 
also in regards to sturgeon, but you completely took away all that subsidy, 
and you only left it for the other fish such as whitefish which doesn't, 
you know, sell as well as pickerel and sturgeon. 
 
So what you did was you took away those subsidies.  But you tend to 
subsidize Cargill Grain to the tune of $370 million.  And yet you will 



 

 

force people off the places where they fish and where they trap with 
stiffer regulations and the demise of subsidies.  You even still subsidize 
liquor, whisky, wine, everything, beer in northern Saskatchewan and you 
took away the food transportation subsidy in northern Saskatchewan.  And 
this is the type of operation that you're having in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
And you have the gumption to come and tell me that they have integrity, 
that . . . So I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, since you're not going to give 
me any information, whether or not at least this one thing that you might 
do.  Will you as a minister stand up for the children and the families of 
northern Saskatchewan?  Will you stand up in this legislature and say, yes, 
we will bring back some sort of food transportation subsidy for the people 
of northern Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Will you do that, Mr. Minister?  Will you proceed to do 
that?  And I don't want the usual argument of increasing the welfare rates 
of 25 per cent . . . of $25, which only buys, you know, four quarts of milk 
in one month.  I don't want that argument.  I want to know whether you will 
have a proper food transportation subsidy, seeing that it was brought out 
in the health care task force.  Will you at least minimally do that, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- I would just briefly like to respond to the member.  
I, first of all, was interested to hear his endorsement of Consensus 
Saskatchewan, and that was important to hear, and I appreciated hearing 
that from the member.  He also referred to the matter of integrity, and 
that concerns me a lot because that's an important trait that we all try to 
maintain as best we can. 
 
And integrity, sir, integrity works two ways.  I told you on two different 
occasions that we have an agreement, or we were bound by agreement that we 
couldn't release that information.  So I'm not suggesting that I'm holding 
it back on some sort of a sinister plan. We are bound by an agreement not 
to release that information. 
 
We are continually striving to employ the people of the North in the mining 
industry. And as I suggested, as more and more projects come on stream I'll 
be the first one to be at the door of these mining companies suggesting 
that the Northerners must be a very important part of their work force.  
And I ask you to join me in supporting that type of a . . . 
 
But to get into an argument about the statistics, and one or two particular 
statistics, I can't see the merit of it.  As I suggested we can ask, but 
it's not the most important thing.  The important thing is to get the 
people of the North working.  That's the most important thing. 
 
I would like to . . . you asked me a direct question and I think, sir, you 
deserve an answer, and that's regarding the food subsidy.  I would like to 
inform you that in the recent directions in health care recommendations, 
that they suggested that that be reviewed. And I would suggest that for the 
moment we wait and see just what comes out of those discussions. 



 

 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- We've heard promises providing records for people in the 
North.  What we've seen today is that the promise was not forthcoming.  
People want to know information of the North, of their own people working.  
They're proud of their people working in these mines.  They want to know, 
but you will not provide that information.  I would say as a minister you 
shouldn't get down on your knees in regards to the corporations that's 
doing lease agreements.  You should demand that the people in the north 
want jobs.  And they want jobs.  You should also make a demand that next 
time you sign a contract that that information is available for the people 
of Saskatchewan.  Will you do that in the next contract and make sure that 
that information is made public, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- I would inform the member that certainly I will take 
his advice and recommendations under consideration. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Item 2 agreed to. 
 
Vote 48 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Economic Diversification and Investment Fund 

Vote 66 
Northern Affairs Secretariat 

 
Item 8 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1990 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Northern Affairs Secretariat 
Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 48 

 
Items 1 and 2 agreed to. 
 
Vote 48 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I would just like to take a 
moment first of all to thank my officials for not only their work with me 
in estimates but also their work throughout the year.  They are very 
valuable and dedicated career people and I appreciate their dedication and 
professionalism. 
 
I would also at the same time -- though we get into the odd debate -- I do 
notice certainly a sincerity, especially from the two members of the North, 
regarding issues of mutual concern, and I want to assure them that together 
we will work to help the people of the North.  Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



 

 

Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I want to take this 
opportunity also to thank the minister and his staff for the information 
that they've given us today.  And we most certainly will be looking forward 
to the answers to the questions that we proposed to you.  Thank you very 
much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1630) 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Family Foundation 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 31 
 
Item 1 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd like to introduce my official, Dan 
Perrins, who is the president of the Family Foundation. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to join 
with the minister in welcoming Mr. Perrins to the Assembly.  I have a very 
high regard for the skill of this gentleman and I assume that he will do a 
good job at keeping the minister out of trouble.  He's got a big job on his 
hands, but I've got a lot of regard for him. 
 
I would like to first of all thank the minister . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- He hasn't an enviable job. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Yes, it's not an enviable job, but good luck. 
 
I'd like to first of all thank the minister for the letter that you sent me 
on March 20 outlining your responsibilities, and I'll talk a little bit 
later about those, Mr. Minister.  I recognize as the Family minister that 
you've got very, very broad responsibilities.  I recognize that there are 
many major challenges to your position; that there are rapid changes in 
society and that there are many complexities that our families have to deal 
with; that there are no easy solutions; that your job as Family minister is 
very tough.  And so at the outset I want to acknowledge the magnitude of 
the responsibility that you're faced with. 
 
Now having said that and giving allowances for the very difficult job that 
you're involved in, I want to say, Mr. Minister, that I'm going to be quite 
critical, quite critical of the record of this government as it relates to 
families, as it relates to young people and seniors.  And I'm going to be 
constructively critical, and I'm going to be fairly critical of how you've 
carried out your responsibilities to date.  And I hope that you don't take 
that personally and that your feelings aren't hurt as they were a couple of 
weeks ago. 
 
Mr. Minister, I'll make a few comments and then I have a series of 
questions for you.  I hope we would all agree that families which exist in 
. . . 
 



 

 

Mr. Chairman, I would wonder if the member from Weyburn would allow me to 
make some comments.  We'll get to the Finance estimates, which is quite 
another story, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, I'm sure we agree that there are many kinds of families -- 
traditional families, single parent families, blended families -- that very 
few of us likely in this House are not affected in some way by a variety of 
new family configurations that exist in the community in our families. 
 
And I think that one of the strengths in Saskatchewan has been that our 
families have been the backbone of the province of Saskatchewan.  All of us 
look to our families for support.  We look to our families as a source of 
nurturing and growth and a sense of security.  And families are a place of 
acceptance and love for all of us.  And I think all of us would agree that, 
given the importance of the family structure in our society, that we need 
to do as much as we can, government and communities, to be as supportive to 
families as possible.  And I know that you agree with that. 
 
I know that you also would agree that our young people are very precious, 
that the young people are our future, and that they have a right to 
opportunities.  They have a right to grow and develop and they have a right 
to pursue their dreams and goals.  They have a right to look for some hope, 
to look forward to the future with some hope. 
 
I know you would agree that our senior citizens, which you're the minister 
for, our senior citizens which are growing in number and percentage of the 
population are also an important part of families, that our seniors built 
this fine province, and that they are demanding to have a continuing voice 
in decisions which affect their lives.  Seniors as well need financial 
security, and they certainly need resources.  And maybe most important of 
all seniors are wanting to be independent as long as possible.  And I have 
many, many seniors in my constituency, in fact a very, very high 
concentration of seniors in my constituency.  And a lot of those people are 
very dear friends and I know that you value the contribution that they have 
made. 
 
I would like to suggest, Mr. Minister, that Saskatchewan young people 
today, Saskatchewan families and Saskatchewan seniors, are living in times 
of increasing economic stress and in times of . . . living in times of 
increased social and psychological stress.  And I would like to look at a 
few of these developments for a minute, if I could. 
 
 First of all, in terms of the increasing economic stresses on our families 
-- and I think there are many indicators that demonstrate this and you will 
be aware of them -- the first one I'd like to take a look at is the poor 
performance of the Saskatchewan economy as it impacts on families.  And I 
know that you wouldn't deny that the economy of the province has been in 
difficulty.  And I would suggest, which is clear to most people of the 
province, that that has been increasingly the case during the 1980s. 
 
I think we saw today, despite the minister's good faith and his personal 
integrity, there really is no government plan to deal with economic 
development in the North, particularly involving Northerners and people of 



 

 

aboriginal background, in terms of an economic plan. 
 
The minister was not able to articulate any economic development plan for 
the North today, and I think that that is very sad, given the high 
unemployment rate there.  And I will be asking you some questions on that 
later, Mr. Minister, in terms of your . . . what consultations and what 
advice you have given to the minister responsible for northern development. 
 
Mr. Minister, in terms of the poor performance of the Saskatchewan economy, 
we know that over the last six or seven years, consistently, our economic 
growth has been below the national average.  In fact, during the last two 
or three years, we have had the poorest economic record of any province in 
Canada.  And I would hope that the Minister of Finance from Weyburn, 
instead of chirping from his seat, would look for ways in which to provide 
financing for job creation for young people and for Saskatchewan families, 
and would not make light of this very tragic situation of unemployment and 
out-migration for our people. 
 
So unemployment, of course, is a major problem in the province where we 
have created only an additional, on the average in the last four or five 
years, 3,700 jobs per year -- as I say, the lowest performance of job 
creation of any province in the country.  Now this is public information, 
and I know you're aware of that. 
 
We've consistently, during the 1980s, have had an unemployment rate of 
anywhere from 8 to 10 per cent and higher in Saskatoon, which is my home 
town.  We know in the North that unemployment is near 80 per cent.  We know 
that in Saskatchewan, youth unemployment is right now over 17 per cent -- 
double, almost double the general average.  We heard today again that in 
the North youth unemployment is somewhere around 90 per cent. 
 
We also heard today there is . . . we know that there's devastating poverty 
in the North, and we were looking for a commitment.  My colleague from 
Cumberland was looking for a commitment today from the minister of northern 
development that we would reinstitute the food subsidy so that northerners 
would not be starving.  And that commitment was not forthcoming, and I will 
be putting that question to you, because I assume that as Minister of 
Families, with the high poverty rate in northern Saskatchewan, that you're 
concerned about that. 
 
In terms of the economic performance, Mr. Minister, out-migration since 
1982, we have a net out-migration from the province, of some 62,000 people.  
Well that's equivalent to the loss of 62 communities the size of Carnduff, 
Saskatchewan, which is my home town.  And that's the kind of impact we're 
talking about. 
 
That out-migration, Mr. Minister, has been tearing families apart in the 
province.  And I know that you are concerned about that.  With 
out-migration, we're continuing to export our future, Mr. Minister.  We're 
losing our tax base and we're losing, in many ways, the brightest minds of 
young people and young families from the province. 
 
In 1981 we had 21,000 people unemployed in Saskatchewan.  Today we've got 



 

 

42,000 people unemployed in Saskatchewan -- exactly double.  Now you know 
and I know that the situation would be much higher if it weren't for the 
fact that 62,000 people have left, net out-migration, who would be added to 
those unemployment stats. 
 
We know that since 1982 -- again this is your information -- that the youth 
labour force has dropped by 20,000 young people; 20,000 fewer young people 
in the labour force today than there were in 1982. 
 
We know, Mr. Minister, that in 1987, 1988, 1989 we set new records in the 
province for personal and business bankruptcies, small business 
bankruptcies.  We know that in 1989 and since you've become minister -- 
1990 I mean, 1990 -- the trend is even up 27 per cent over 1989, which was 
a record level of business bankruptcies. 
 
And you are the minister.  And I will be interested in what kind of advice 
you gave to the Minister of Labour and Employment and the Finance minister 
regarding support to small business, because there was no evidence of that 
in the throne speech or the budget. 
 
In terms of the performance of the Saskatchewan economy, we now have got 
the highest per capita debt in all of Canada.  And the interest charges 
alone, as you will know, on that debt represent the third largest 
expenditure in the recent budget that you people brought down. 
 
We know that we now have the highest tax rate, family tax rate.  Talk about 
putting pressure on families.  We have the highest family tax rate in all 
of Canada, Mr. Minister -- 1,500 new taxes per family, an average family of 
four, since you came to power; 1,500 a year, that's per year, and I won't 
go through the litany of taxes.  But that's roughly the economic picture as 
viewed by public records and as viewed by the vast majority of Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
And one has to ask, Mr. Minister, why the Saskatchewan economy in the 1980s 
has performed at such a terrible level.  And I want to say that, right off 
the bat, I'm going to acknowledge that we've had a drought; I'm going to 
acknowledge that we've had low grain prices; and I'm going to acknowledge, 
the Minister of Health, I'm going to acknowledge that there's been 
international subsidy wars.  I'm going to acknowledge that, and I'm not 
minimizing the impact of those. 
 
But I'm also going to say that you people, you people have dismantled the 
mixed economy in the province.  You people have done that.  You people have 
privatized whether or not it's made economic sense -- which it hasn't done 
on almost every case.  You have essentially given away our assets.  You 
have given away future assets that would affect the ability of this 
province to recover from the financial mess, from the 12, 13, $14 billion 
debt that we're sitting in.  You people have given away those assets. 
 
You people dismantled the department of co-ops.  It's you people that won't 
fund the centre on co-op studies at the university.  It's you that haven't 
recognized that in the mixed economy that co-ops have been an important 
sector in that three-engine approach to . . . which has been very 



 

 

successful over the years in Saskatchewan.  And since you came to power in 
1982, in terms of the overall economic pie, the co-op sector has lost 7 per 
cent of that economic pie. 
 
And that isn't surprising because basically one of the first things you did 
is you phased out the department of co-ops and served a pretty strong 
signal that the co-op sector didn't fit into your plans.  You people 
supported deregulation.  You people have supported erosion of the wheat 
board, and you people have supported the free trade agreement, talking 
about this great market that we were going to have and all these jobs that 
were going to be created.  And in fact many, many jobs have been lost since 
that agreement, Mr. Minister. 
 
(1645) 
 
And you people are the ones that have been involved in these high risk, 
putting up all the money, high risk megaprojects, as we found out today in 
question period -- putting up all that money which has not been paid, 
putting up all those . . . giving away all those assets in Weyerhaeuser 
when they're not even paying.  They're not even paying us any dividends 
from the profits they make -- 300-and-some million dollar profits and 
couldn't even pay $10 million in dividends.  You people are the ones that 
struck that deal, Mr. Minister. 
 
And what you've done by doing all of these, making all of these decisions, 
Mr. Minister . . . I know you don't like to hear this and you're getting 
impatient, but sit and listen because I'm going to talk until I'm ready to 
sit down.  What you have done is that you have put Saskatchewan young 
people, Saskatchewan farm families, Saskatchewan families and seniors in a 
very vulnerable economic position.  That's the situation that you've put 
this province in. 
 
Mr. Minister, in this area the Saskatchewan public is very forgiving, Mr. 
Speaker, but this is the area -- the way you have handled the economy -- is 
the area in which the Saskatchewan public is the most concerned about you. 
 
In sum, Mr. Minister, you people have mismanaged the economy of the 
province which has caused incredible unemployment and incredible poverty.  
Well I hope you're not denying that we've got incredible unemployment in 
the province.  We've got incredible poverty, we've got business 
bankruptcies, and we've got record out-migration.  Now surely you recognize 
that that's a major problem in the economic systems.  I know you blame poor 
people but I'm going to come to that later. 
 
Now there are many examples of other areas where you have mismanaged the 
economy, and I will only mention one, but there are many examples.  You 
people, since 1982 . . . Our oil revenues alone have lost some $2.4 billion 
-- money that used to come to the treasury of the province, money that 
could be used for health care and education, money that could be used for 
taxes so you wouldn't have to tax ordinary families and place more stress 
on them.  That's the single most important thing you've done to devastate 
families in Saskatchewan is the way that you have mismanaged the economy. 
 



 

 

Now I would say, Mr. Minister, that as Family minister, if you are not 
advising the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Human Resources and 
Labour and Economic Diversification, or whatever his reorganized title is, 
on how to turn that situation around, then you'll be missing the 
opportunity that you have as Family minister because you can see the impact 
of these failed economic policies on families. 
 
Now there are other measures, Mr. Minister, that have been placing 
increasing economic stress on families and I would like to talk for a 
minute about the farm crisis.  Again, as I acknowledged before, we've had a 
drought and we've had low prices. 
 
However that has not been the only answer, Mr. Minister.  In eight years, 
eight years of this government with a Premier being the Agriculture 
minister for many of those years, and five years with your PC buddies in 
Ottawa, the PC Prime Minister, you people have brought in no policies to 
support farm families.  You've brought in no policies to deal with 
long-term income stabilization programs.  You make commitments that you 
weren't able to keep, like the $500 million that was supposedly coming from 
the throne speech, that we never got. 
 
You've not dealt with farm debt.  You have not dealt with land transfers.  
You have not dealt with policies that would allow for land transfers 
despite promises in 1985 to do all those things. With a Premier of the 
province being Agriculture minister, you've not dealt with any of those.  
All you've had is ad hoc programs year after year after year while farmers 
wait and go into debt further.  And all you gave them in the budget was 
more debt.  And so you have not dealt with the agricultural situation. 
 
The Premier's 1978 or '79 article where he supported large corporate farms, 
basically is what has happened.  Being the Agriculture minister he has been 
able to make sure that by design that that has happened as we've lost a 
thousand farm families per year since 1982.  So as the Premier, going back 
to his 1978 or '79 article where he promoted larger farms, he's been able 
to ensure that that's happened. 
 
Now as a result we've got more farm stress.  We've got legal actions 
against farmers, foreclosure actions against farmers initiated by both the 
federal and provincial governments.  They're the biggest culprits in terms 
of the foreclosures on farms and putting stress on farmers.  We've got 
young people leaving the farm.  They're actually leaving the province.  And 
in fact what has happened is that the policies of this administration have 
accelerated the depopulation from rural Saskatchewan.  The overall 
consequences being a devastation on the family farm, the unit in the family 
farm -- devastation economically, psychologically, and socially.  And as a 
matter of fact, there hasn't even been a recognition of that in terms of 
some of the support groups who can't get help from the government to 
support farm families. 
 
The third thing I'd like to talk a little bit about in terms of the stress 
that the policies of this administration have put on families, has been the 
restricted and inadequate income support programs for families generally.  
Now Saskatchewan has a proud history of supporting her families; we've got 



 

 

a proud history of providing income supports.  And during tough times 
particularly throughout our history, we have come to the aid of families 
who needed that kind of support. 
 
What we've seen by your administration, during the tough times when 
families need more supports, that's when you've cut the supports to 
families.  And I won't go through all of the list of all of the cuts that 
were made to family support agencies in 1987-88, '88-89 year, but basically 
since this administration came to power, the purchasing power of people on 
income assistance, financial assistance has dropped some 35 per cent. 
 
You've frozen the family income plan for three years in a row.  And I know 
there's a $10 increase per child this year, which I appreciate.  But 
there's been a three-year freeze despite the fact that the inflation rate 
and the cost of living has substantially gone up. 
 
You people cut the native court worker program, phased that out, despite 
the fact that our northern jails are filled with a disproportionate number 
of native people.  Our Pinegrove jail is filled with almost 100 per cent 
women.  You people cut out the native court worker program. 
 
Now we have got the highest . . . for a while we had the second highest 
rate of family poverty.  Now I understand we've got the highest rate of 
family poverty.  And I mention this, Mr. Minister, because when you became 
the Minister of the Family we had the second highest poverty rate.  Now 
we've got the highest rate of family poverty. 
 
And so it's clear where you say back in one of your articles here, that 
I'll talk a little bit about later, that you're going to have significant 
influence in cabinet.  That's what you said when you got your appointment.  
And it's clear that we have slipped to the situation where we have a higher 
rate of families living in poverty in Saskatchewan than any other province.  
And I would say with respect, Mr. Minister, that that has to reflect on you 
and how you've carried out your responsibilities as Family minister. 
 
We've got 64,000 children living officially below the poverty line in this 
province.  That hasn't improved since you became the minister.  Seventy per 
cent of all working mothers in Saskatchewan live below the poverty line.  
The national average is only 56 per cent.  So again, we're well worse than 
the national average, Mr. Minister.  We've got 42,600 families in 
Saskatchewan who live in poverty, officially live below poverty.  Again, 
that has not changed in the seven or eight months since you've been a 
minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, regarding food banks.  The minister who chatters from Weyburn 
might be interested to know that in 1982 we did not have a food bank in the 
province.  Today we have 12 food banks in the province, Mr. Minister.  And 
I might say again, that since you have become minister there have been two 
more food banks -- two more food banks.  Carlyle, the new food bank in 
Carlyle has started up since you've become minister; a new food bank in 
Melfort since you've become minister. 
 
Let's take a look at the food bank stats for a minute here.  For example . 



 

 

. . Mr. Chairman, could I have the floor please? 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- If we could . . . there's only a few minutes left, if we 
could just continue, I think things will run a whole lot smoother. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much. I appreciate having the floor.  Mr. 
Minister, the food bank stats.  Now I know the Minister of Finance doesn't 
want to hear this because this reflects on his lack of leadership as the 
Minister of Finance in bringing down that budget that did not alleviate 
this poverty, Mr. Chairman. 
 
The food bank stats in Saskatoon, my home town -- in 1989, 28,000 people 
were fed from the food bank.  Now this is based on a CBC program of . . . 
the director at the food bank from May 24, on CBC radio, and she says that 
these people are pensioners.  Now you told me . . . you've said in this 
House, Mr. Minister, that pensioners have never been better off than they 
are today.  But the director of the food bank in Saskatoon is saying that 
the bulk of the people coming in for food are pensioners, single parent 
mothers, and teenagers.  That's what she's quoted as saying and I'm sure 
you have access to that story. 
 
But she also says that people are coming in devastated at having to ask for 
food.  She went on to say that 2,900 families per month are being fed by 
the Saskatoon food bank.  That 50 new families . . . oh, the minister from 
Yorkton wants to know where's she getting the figures from.  Fifty new 
families per day are additional families going in to use the food bank.  
And she says that these people are in desperate straits and they're living 
in poverty.  So what's happening, Mr. Minister, again since you have become 
the Family minister, the trend is going up, not down, which says something 
to me about your impact on your colleagues and your ability to help deal 
with the poverty situation. 
 
The food bank stats for Prince Albert, again the trend is going up.  1986 
-- I know this is painful for the government -- but 1986 in Prince Albert, 
8,200 people had to use the food bank; 1987, 11,000; 1988, 12,000; and 
1989, 14,000.  The trend is going up.  It's getting worse.  The poverty in 
Prince Albert is getting worse. 
 
Regina food bank stats.  I won't review the details of the Regina food bank 
stats, but I can tell you, from 1986, '87, '88, '89 is the very same, the 
stats are the same as they are in Prince Albert and Saskatoon.  The number 
of children using food banks, the number of families using food banks is 
continuing to increase -- doubling -- doubling in Regina since 1986.  
During this term of your government, the number of people using foods banks 
in Regina has doubled. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, you're losing ground on the fight for poverty.  You're 
going in the wrong direction -- $740,000 to fight poverty.  So you're not 
dealing with the situation.  There's no question about that. 
 
Now, as I said, prior to 1983 there were no food banks.  Now there are 12, 
with new ones opening every day. 
 



 

 

Education.  What's happening in education?  Now we on this side of the 
House view education as an investment in our students and our young people.  
In education, again this province has had a proud tradition.  We've got 
universities that are known across the nation and internationally in terms 
of their research and the quality.  Years of underfunding by this 
government have resulted in an education system where in this last budget 
we've spent the lowest per capita of any province on education.  This is 
from a government that says it's committed to education.  We've spent the 
lowest percentage of our budget on education of any province in Canada -- 
of any province in Canada. 
 
We have quotas for the first time under your administration.  We've got 
shifting cost to municipalities.  We've had cuts to special education 
programs, Mr. Minister, and we've got a 50 per cent increase in high school 
drop-out rates since 1982 -- a 50 per cent increase . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . That is true; that is a 50 per cent increase. 
 
(1700) 
 
The technical schools, again, Mr. Minister, we've got waiting lists.  
You're the people that fired the instructors back in 1986-87.  You're the 
people that don't allow people at Kelsey, who were in apprenticeship 
programs because of the economic situation we're into, to gain a placement 
so that they can go back to school after their experience.  They don't have 
that opportunity. 
 
As we saw today, you're too busy spending money on office refurnishing and 
remodelling and executive salaries and travel to provide . . . and then you 
cut back on the instructors and you cut back in the spaces, Mr. Minister.  
That's what you're doing in the technical school program.  So there are 
many . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order, please.  It being past 5 o'clock, we'll rise and 
report progress. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:02 p.m. 
 


