





























































Hansard: March 22, 1990


 

 

March 22/90 
EVENING SITTING 

 
SPECIAL ORDER 

 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in reply which was 
moved by Mr. Toth. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Prior to the 
supper break, I was discussing the important initiatives that are taking 
place in the Department of Education, and the tremendous effort that is 
being made by this government to ensure that our boys and girls are 
prepared for not only the remainder of this decade but also for the 21st 
century.  We understand that with times changing so rapidly that it's 
essential that we ensure that our educational programs change as well, 
because when we consider that the last major overhaul of our curriculum 
took place back in 1963, we can fully understand why there was a necessity 
to take a very broad look at changing all of the programs, and as a result 
we see what is happening with our core curriculum today. 
 
This is something, Mr. Speaker, which is very much in line with the throne 
speech and our emphasis and the significance of Consensus Saskatchewan, 
because this government has over the last number of years been very 
involved with consultation with the Saskatchewan people, and very 
specifically with education. 
 
When we consider that some six or seven years went into the planning for 
the new core curriculum as a result of the Directions report, there was a 
tremendous amount of consultation that took place over that period of time, 
and the fact that so many people have been involved and all of the 
different players involved in education, this is going to be very, very 
successful.  We know that it will be successful for the fact that the 
teachers were involved.  They have a role to play; they have a stake in 
this.  We also know that the parents have been very, very involved, the 
trustees' association, the directors of education. 
 
So as a result of all of the input that we have had and the consultation 
that has taken place over this number of years, I am very, very optimistic 
that this will be successful as we move into the implementation.  We are 
now just completing the first year of that implementation, and I look 
forward to the changes that are going to be taking place over the next 
number of years.  We also have emphasized, Mr. Speaker, the tremendous 
importance in having that partnership between home and school and 
community, and that's something that we want to continue to build on. 
 
Prior to the supper recess, I had also indicated that 1990 is International 
Literacy Year.  And we have a concern in this province, as you'll find in 
many other parts of the world, with the fact that there are so many people 
that have difficulty with reading and writing -- when one considers that in 



 

 

this province that probably around 20 per cent of our population doesn't 
have an education beyond grade 9 and many people probably would have very 
few reading and writing skills.  So in line with that, Mr. Speaker, we have 
a major campaign under way to attack the literacy problem.  And in 1988 we 
entered into an agreement with IBM Canada Ltd. to introduce computer-based 
literacy instruction into Saskatchewan.  Now this represents the first 
major application of such instruction anywhere in Canada. 
 
Literacy programs are being made available through our regional colleges, 
through the campuses of SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 
and Technology), Read Saskatoon, and the Regina Public Library.  The 
regional libraries are assisting by providing additional reading resources. 
 
To this point, Mr. Speaker, over 4,000 adults have enrolled in literacy 
programs, and over 1,500 volunteers are helping to provide instruction, and 
that's really tremendous, Mr. Speaker, and it points out the tremendous 
effort that is being made by Saskatchewan people to attack this very 
pressing problem.  Seven permanent instruction sites are already in place, 
along with four mobile units that can travel from community to community, 
and by 1991 we expect that 26 Saskatchewan communities will have regular 
access to computer-based literacy training. 
 
I was very pleased this morning to have the opportunity in the city of 
Yorkton to participate in the official opening of the PALS (Principle of 
the Alphabet Literacy System) lab in that particular centre.  And we had 
several graduates that received their certificates today, and I can tell 
you, Mr. Speaker, a tremendous amount of pride and satisfaction with these 
people of a variety of ages that have spent the last 20 weeks involved in 
the PALS program in that city.  Our province-wide reading campaign, an 
undertaking of the provincial library, further promotes the development of 
literacy skills.  Its purpose is to promote good reading habits among 
kindergarten to grade 4 students and their parents. 
 
Another area that I want to deal with, Mr. Speaker, is that of evaluation.  
We have major new initiatives in evaluation under way at the present time.  
The Saskatchewan school improvement program helps more schools with each 
passing year.  Our various teacher exchanges and student award programs 
recognize and reward achievement on the part of the key players in the 
school system.  Our independent schools and private vocational schools 
continue to make major contributions. 
 
Our commitment to French education remains strong.  At the same time we are 
responding to Saskatchewan's demographic realities with new emphasis on 
heritage language instruction.  We're continuing to explore new ways of 
getting the community at large more actively involved in what transpires 
within the school walls.  At the same time we're examining ways for the 
school to reach out into the community in a more direct fashion and address 
some of the social problems that we know can hamper learning. 
 
Undertakings such as these require resources, they require funding.  And I 
want to clarify, Mr. Speaker, this government's record with respect to 
financial support for education.  Our level of funding, Mr. Speaker, is 
almost 80 per cent higher than it was at the beginning of this decade.  



 

 

More than $840 million was committed to education in the 1989-90 fiscal 
year.  One out of every $5 the government now spends goes to upgrading the 
potential of our students of all ages. 
 
Now we've heard members on the other side of this House try to point out 
that this government spends less on education per capita than any other 
province in Canada.  Well, Mr. Speaker, this is just absolutely not true.  
They've indicated that we spend something in the neighbourhood of $744 per 
capita.  Well when you consider that we have a million population, and 
we've spent nearly $850 million in this current year, Mr. Speaker, you can 
see that it is substantially higher than they have indicated.  In fact 
we're not at all lowest in Canada, we rank somewhere around fifth or sixth 
in the nation in regard to the expenditures, but they continue to put out 
this misleading information.  We heard the Leader of the Opposition 
indicating that here in this House just a couple of days ago. 
 
Since 1982 we have increased annual funding for the kindergarten to grade 
12 school system by over $160 million, or 60 per cent.  A total of $360 
million has been provided for upgrading existing facilities and building 
new schools over that same time period.  Post-secondary funding has 
increased by over $150 million or 90 per cent since 1982.  Financial 
assistance to our post-secondary students is eight times greater than that 
provided in 1982, and the number of students receiving assistance has 
tripled.  New measures have also been put into place to help students with 
special financial needs such as the disabled, natives, Northerners, and 
single parents. 
 
Members opposite like to talk about cuts to education funding, Mr. Speaker.  
This makes it necessary to provide them with a few facts.  The province's 
share of funding for the total cost of the kindergarten to grade 12 school 
system now stands at approximately 51 per cent.  This is roughly where it 
was in 1982.  The most recent survey by the Council of Ministers of 
Education showed that Saskatchewan student-teacher ratio was the third best 
in the country, better than the ratio for all three of the so-called "have" 
provinces. 
 
We spend the same proportion of our provincial budget on education as our 
more well-to-do neighbour to the west, a healthy 20 per cent.  Manitoba 
spends 18 per cent of its total budget on education. 
 
During the past fiscal year, our two universities received $207 million in 
operating and capital funds.  This figure does not include substantial 
allocations from other departments. 
 
A further $70 million was provided to SIAST in 1989-90.  Keep in mind that 
university enrolment has increased by almost 70 per cent in the past decade 
while enrolments in skill training programs have grown by 20 per cent since 
1982. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that all levels of education could use more money, but 
the fact of the matter is that the amount of money that we put into 
education has to be in direct relationship to the ability of the taxpayers 
to pay. 



 

 

 
We hear a lot of concern raised today about the fact that there's a 
shortage of space on our university campuses, particularly in Saskatoon.  
We understand as well that when surveys were being done by the Liberal 
government back in the 1960s and the NDP government in the 1970s, that the 
analysis was showing that the enrolment in Saskatoon would not exceed 
10,000 students.  We can from that obviously understand why there was not 
much happening in so far as increasing the space.  Now what we have seen 
though in the 1980s is that there has been a rapid increase in the number 
of students who want to carry on with their university education.  So we're 
caught in a time of trying to catch up with building more space at a time 
when the economy has been down and dollars are just a little bit scarcer. 
 
The past few years have not been banner ones for Saskatchewan economically, 
but we have maintained and increased our level of support for education 
despite the combination of drought and low resource prices.  We have 
maintained our level of support even though transfer payments from the 
federal government have struggled to keep pace with provincial needs.  Our 
schools can always use more money, Mr. Speaker.  What we must ask ourselves 
is, where it is to come from? 
 
Both municipal and provincial funding for schools is borne by the taxpayers 
of Saskatchewan.  Federal transfer payments are borne by the taxpayers of 
Canada, including Saskatchewan.  We can therefore increase our education 
funding in two ways: we can either raise taxes or reduce spending in other 
areas, neither of which is very, very popular, Mr. Speaker.  Fiscal 
responsibility is part and parcel of good leadership.  This means being 
able to priorize and allocate in a time of stiff competition for scarce 
resources. 
 
We have consulted, Mr. Speaker.  We have responded to the feedback we've 
received.  We have priorized on the basis of legitimate need rather than 
greasing the squeaky wheels.  In short, we have maintained financial 
support for our schools in a fiscally responsible manner and we will 
continue to do so. 
 
Our task through the 1990s and beyond is threefold.  First, we must provide 
our students of all ages with the knowledge and skills they will need to 
play rewarding, meaningful roles in our knowledge-intensive society.  Their 
employment prospects are directly dependent on their level of educational 
achievement.  Moreover, their ability to play constructive, meaningful 
roles as citizens is similarly dependent on their ability to understand the 
issues that confront them. 
 
Second, we must impress upon them that the process of learning is one that 
lasts for a lifetime, not just for 12 or 15 years of formal schooling.  The 
world store of available knowledge is growing at a tremendous rate, Mr. 
Speaker.  This touches all forms of gainful employment and all forms of 
social interaction outside the work place.  To stop learning is to lose 
touch, to become alienated from the world around you. 
 
Finally, we must impress upon our students that there is more to education 
than preparing for responsible citizenry and acquiring marketable skills.  



 

 

Our schools are training grounds, in a sense, but they're also much more.  
They are also the custodians of learning for learning sake.  If our 
students do not acquire a love of learning here, then where? 
 
The debates surrounding our school system overlook the fact that learning 
is just plain fun.  We learn much of what we do, not because it is likely 
to have market value but because it gives us pleasure.  It broadens our 
horizons.  It helps us to understand the other 5 billion people that reside 
on this planet.  We must never lose sight of this, Mr. Speaker.  If we do, 
we reduce the learning process to a mere shell of what it can and should 
be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the Speech from the Throne, and I do so 
because it enables us to build on our strengths and make Saskatchewan an 
even better place to live.  It charts a course whereby our schools can 
continue to contribute to economic growth and diversification through 
contemporary courses of instruction and other innovative programs.  It 
allows us to focus our schools on the development of Saskatchewan's 
greatest resource: our human potential, in all its manifestations.  It 
looks to the local needs of communities of all sizes by recognizing that 
our learning institutions are central to their security, central to their 
economic well-being, and very often social centres as well.  By maintaining 
the health of our existing learning institutions and making programs more 
widely accessible, we help bring stability to communities all over 
Saskatchewan in what is a relatively turbulent time. 
 
(1915) 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you consider the four main points within the Speech from 
the Throne, economic diversification, developing human potential, helping 
local communities, and continued fiscal responsibility, Mr. Speaker, we 
have indeed an excellent blueprint for this government and for this 
province in the months ahead -- four good reasons, Mr. Speaker, why all 
members can support the Speech from the Throne.  Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm very happy to enter into this throne 
speech debate this evening, a historic debate in the sense that it may be 
the last throne speech debate before a general election is called.  In 
entering the debate, Mr. Speaker, I want to address four pressing issues 
that I believe we face in Saskatchewan and in Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The first of those, Mr. Speaker, is the constitutional crisis that we 
currently face in Canada.  The second is the out-migration crisis that we 
face in the province of Saskatchewan as a result, in large part, of the 
policies that the PC government has pursued over the last eight years.  The 
third, Mr. Speaker, is the environmental crisis that we face globally and 
here in Saskatchewan.  And the fourth issue, Mr. Speaker, that I want to 
address is the pressing question of poverty and hunger in our province, 
with 45,000 people in the last year having had to rely on food banks in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 



 

 

And I want to turn now, Mr. Speaker, to the question of the constitutional 
crisis that we face in Canada, and I particularly want to comment on the 
English-only resolutions that we see being passed by municipalities here in 
Saskatchewan and in other parts of the country.  Because, Mr. Speaker, I 
think the unity of our nation is in jeopardy today as it has not been for 
some time. 
 
The disunity is in large part being flamed by the debate around the Meech 
Lake accord.  And that accord, Mr. Speaker, in my judgement, has some 
serious inadequacies.  But it's also a reflection, Mr. Speaker, the 
disunity is also a reflection of many other serious grievances including 
regional inequality in Canada, increasing economic hardship in the poorer 
parts of our country, and the unfairness of the free trade agreement. 
 
Recently, as I mentioned, a number of municipalities in Saskatchewan have 
been passing English-only resolutions.  Whatever their intent at the local 
level, these resolutions are clearly being interpreted by Quebec and by 
francophones across Canada as a rejection of bilingualism.  Mr. Speaker, I 
believe that members of the legislature in this province must stand up in 
opposition to these English-only resolutions.  We live in a bilingual 
nation with a multicultural composition.  These English-only resolutions 
are not consistent with the bilingual multicultural vision of Canada that I 
believe the vast majority of Canadians share. 
 
If we do not speak out in opposition to these resolutions, we will run the 
risk of watching a continued build-up of the sentiments that could 
ultimately cause Canada to break up.  At the same time the inequities in 
Canada, which are flaming dissension in our country, must be addressed.  
The Mulroney government must begin to work with the provinces to eliminate 
regional inequalities in Canada.  And unfortunately since Prime Minister 
Mulroney has been elected, Mr. Speaker, we have seen increasing regional 
inequality in this country. 
 
We need a national government, Mr. Speaker, that will work to end poverty 
in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- What we have seen instead, Mr. Speaker, is a government at 
the national level under which the poor become poorer while the rich become 
more wealthy, and a tax system that has simply made those inequities even 
more severe. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we need a government that will act to remove Canada from 
the Canada-U.S. Free Trade Agreement and the economic hardship that that is 
creating for Canadians.  That, Mr. Speaker, I believe, would go a long way 
towards creating a more united Canada.  And on all those fronts the 
Mulroney government has failed Canadians, Mr. Speaker, and has created 
disunity in this country. 
 
As for the Meech Lake accord, I believe some form of amendment is 
imperative.  And one of the elements of the accord that most troubles me is 
the proposed formula for future constitutional amendments.  The Meech Lake 



 

 

accord in effect locks the hands of future generations of Canadians to 
change the constitution, because there must be unanimous agreement by all 
10 provinces and by the Government of Canada under the amending formula 
proposed by Meech Lake. 
 
Historically, history clearly tells us that such an amending formula is 
totally unworkable.  In fact, Mr. Speaker, the current inability of the 10 
Canadian provinces to agree on the proposed accord shows us that such an 
amending formula is unworkable.  And one of the things that must clearly be 
changed if Meech Lake is to be approved is that unworkable amending 
formula, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I want to turn the question of the out-migration crisis in this 
province, which I believe is one of the issues most on the minds of 
Saskatchewan voters and most on the minds of the voters in my constituency 
-- my own constituents, Mr. Speaker.  There is a lot of insecurity that is 
being created in communities around this province as people watch their 
friends and neighbours leave for other parts of Canada.  And as members of 
this legislature will know, last year we saw more than 23,700 people leave 
the province of Saskatchewan, a higher level of out-migration than at any 
previous time in our history with the exception of the year 1970, when 
under the Liberal government of Premier Ross Thatcher, 28,358 people left 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the New Democratic Party has put forward a number of 
proposals for turning this out-migration crisis around.  And we have said, 
Mr. Speaker, that to begin with, it's time to change our approach to 
economic development in the province of Saskatchewan.  Instead of relying 
on foreign investment from foreign companies like Cargill and Weyerhaeuser 
to stimulate our economy, it's time instead to begin a process under which 
the Saskatchewan government works co 
_operatively with small business here in Saskatchewan and with the 
co-operative movement here in Saskatchewan to rebuild our economy. 
 
It's time, Mr. Speaker, for the Saskatchewan government to begin using the 
public sector again as well as a vehicle for stimulating the economy in 
this province.  And in this sense, Mr. Speaker, our commitment to a mixed 
economy model is fundamentally different from the members opposite, and we 
believe it's one of the key vehicles for stemming the out-migration that's 
currently taking place in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we in the New Democratic Party are calling for a policy of 
full employment in this province, that that should be the number one 
priority of the provincial government here in Saskatchewan.  And we have 
advocated that there are many approaches that can be taken to this, but one 
of them involves, Mr. Speaker, investing in our environment in the province 
of Saskatchewan.  We believe, Mr. Speaker, that jobs can be created in 
Saskatchewan through a government investment in recycling, through a 
government investment in reforestation and replanting our clear-cut 
forests, and in many other environmental initiatives, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have said, Mr. Speaker, that one of the keys to stemming the 
out-migration exodus in this province is to begin addressing the deficit.  



 

 

And instead of running up a higher deficit every year, as this government 
has over the last eight years, a deficit that in government departments 
alone now exceeds $4 billion, it's time instead, Mr. Speaker, to see a plan 
as our leader has proposed whereby the deficit in this province will be 
retired over a 15-year period.  That is key to stemming the out-migration 
exodus in this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we have said that one of the keys to keeping our young 
people at home is to make sure that they can gain entrance to our 
post-secondary education institutions in this province once more.  And we 
have said that we will provide the money to the University of Saskatchewan 
to lift quotas in the College of Arts and Science at that university, and 
that we will re-establish the spaces that this government has eliminated at 
Kelsey, the 500 student spaces that have been eliminated, Mr. Speaker.  
Those, Mr. Speaker, are some of the keys to stemming this out-migration 
crisis that we face. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, we are saying that it is time that the 
privatization of our public assets, including our natural gas resources and 
our potash and our forest resources, was stopped in the province of 
Saskatchewan.  It's only by regaining control of our natural resources in 
this province, a control that is being forfeited by the members opposite, 
that we can hope, Mr. Speaker, to have any real ability to control 
unemployment in the province of Saskatchewan.  You can't control 
unemployment if you don't have any control over your natural resources, Mr. 
Speaker, and this government is forfeiting that control, and we in the New 
Democratic Party will work to regain that control for Saskatchewan people 
after the next election, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to turn to a third issue, and that is the pressing 
environmental crisis that we face at a global level and right here in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  And, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that I was 
disappointed with the lack of new initiatives in the throne speech that 
would advance the state of the environment in the province of Saskatchewan.  
The one positive initiative which will provide . . . was the proposal for 
an annual State of the Environment report, which will provide the public 
with an overview of current trends in resource conservation.  Depending on 
how this is prepared, Mr. Speaker, it could prove to be a useful monitoring 
and education tool. 
 
But I was hoping, Mr. Speaker, to see the government make some 
announcements with respect to recycling or reducing greenhouse emissions 
into the environment or banning the sale of products that contribute to the 
depletion of the ozone layer, and I heard no such announcements in the 
throne speech, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I call on the Government of Saskatchewan today to implement a 
six-point program to protect Saskatchewan's environment, and I want to 
outline what I personally believe those six points should be, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Point number one, Mr. Speaker, is that the government should set an example 
in environmental protection in the province of Saskatchewan.  It's time, 
Mr. Speaker, for government cabinet ministers to drive smaller cars in this 



 

 

province.  It's time, Mr. Speaker, that all paper used by government 
departments and Crown corporations should be recycled in the province of 
Saskatchewan.  I'm tired, Mr. Speaker, I'm tired of us constantly throwing 
away tons of paper every month, just in this legislative building alone, 
and it needs to be brought to a halt, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It's time, Mr. Speaker, that the provincial government purchase only 
environmentally sound products -- only environmentally sound products, Mr. 
Speaker -- and that would involve a fundamental change in the purchasing 
policies of the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Point number two, Mr. Speaker, is that I believe the Government of 
Saskatchewan should work to encourage reuse, recycling, and a reduction in 
wasteful consumption such as unnecessary packaging, in the province of 
Saskatchewan.  In this regard, I would like to see the Government of 
Saskatchewan promote the use of bottles again -- for pop, juice, and beer 
purposes.  I urge the Government of Saskatchewan to work with 
municipalities in this province to institute a blue box recycling program 
throughout the province of Saskatchewan, beginning with our major urban 
centres. 
 
Mr. Speaker, hundreds of people in my constituency have told me over the 
last year that they want to see a recycling program put in place in this 
province and in the city of Saskatoon, and I say that the time is now for 
the Government of Saskatchewan to act on that need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to urge the Department of Consumer Affairs in this 
province to introduce legislation that will introduce a phased-in ban on 
the sale of product lines that use excessive amounts of packaging.  I 
think, Mr. Speaker, it's time to say no to the sale of products that use 
excessive packaging in the province of Saskatchewan, and force 
manufacturers to market their products in packaging materials that will be 
less environmentally harmful and that minimize the amount of material that 
is used in that packaging. 
 
Third, Mr. Speaker, the third key point in such a new environmental program 
for the province of Saskatchewan should be that the provincial government 
should pursue a purer food policy and should seek to reduce the use of 
pesticides in the province of Saskatchewan.  Active support should be given 
to all producers in Saskatchewan seeking to convert to more environmentally 
sustainable forms of agriculture. 
 
(1930) 
 
Organic food production and marketing should also be supported by 
government.  The provincial government should ban aerial spraying within 
one mile of lakes and rivers in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  
The provincial government should introduce legislation that would require 
all persons living in cities, towns, and villages to post notices on their 
properties when applying pesticides or herbicides. 
 
I would also like to see the province, Mr. Speaker, encouraging urban 
municipalities to ban pesticide use within their municipality completely.  



 

 

I'm very conscious, Mr. Speaker, that the process of reducing pesticide use 
in agriculture must be a gradual and phased-in one.  But as an urban 
representative, Mr. Speaker, in this legislature, I see no reason why the 
application of pesticides in urban centres could not cease immediately.  
Such a step would enhance the safety and well-being of all urban residents 
and particularly children, who often play on lawns or run in parks that 
have recently been sprayed with pesticides. 
 
Point number four, Mr. Speaker.  I believe that Saskatchewan must do its 
part to respond to the global environmental crisis specifically by 
addressing the questions of our province's contribution to the greenhouse 
effect and to the depletion of the ozone layer. 
 
I call upon the Saskatchewan government to stop constructing coal-fired 
generating stations like Shand in the province of Saskatchewan, because 
coal is clearly the fuel that most significantly contributes to greenhouse 
gases in the atmosphere, and the world, Mr. Speaker, just can't stand to 
have any more coal-fired generating stations. 
 
I call upon the Saskatchewan government to invest in a massive program of 
energy conservation designed to increase the efficiency with which we use 
energy in our province, designed to reduce fuel bills, and designed to 
reduce energy consumption in our province. 
 
And I also call on the Saskatchewan government to place restrictions on the 
sale of new ozone depleting products in our province, and to require that 
material containing CFCs (chlorofluorocarbons) be recycled at local solid 
waste disposal sites across the province.  And I think for instance, Mr. 
Speaker, of refrigerators and air-conditioners in automobiles.  When they 
are disposed of, Mr. Speaker, right now in Saskatchewan, no effort is made 
to remove the CFCs from those products.  Those CFCs just leak out at local 
dumps around the province and then, of course, make their way into the 
atmosphere.  There is no reason, Mr. Speaker, why we in Saskatchewan 
couldn't be doing the same that Burnaby is in British Columbia, and that is 
requiring that those CFCs be recycled when those waste products are 
disposed of. 
 
Mr. Speaker, point number five: the Government of Saskatchewan should 
undertake a major program of reforestation and soil conservation in the 
province of Saskatchewan.  Some progress is being made in this regard, Mr. 
Speaker, and I want to acknowledge that the government has taken some 
preliminary steps in the area of soil conservation in terms of its recent 
agreement with the federal government, but much, much, more needs to be 
done.  With more than a million clear-cut acres of forest in northern 
Saskatchewan and with Saskatchewan soils having in some cases lost up to 
half their organic matter, this program of forest and soil renewal is key 
to the economic future of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And finally point number six.  The Government of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
I believe -- and I call on the government again to do this and to do this 
now as I have over the last many years in this legislature that I have 
served -- the Government of Saskatchewan should phase out uranium mining in 
the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, as alternative employment is put 



 

 

in place for all workers affected.  We can not, Mr. Speaker, continue to 
ignore the fact that the two countries to which we sell most of our uranium 
do not use much of the uranium that we do sell to them for civilian 
purposes, and stockpile the large bulk of it for military purposes, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
As I have said in this legislature before, out of every 10 pounds of 
uranium that leaves the Key Lake mine and is exported to the United States, 
only one and a quarter pounds is used for civilian nuclear electrical 
generating purposes, and the other eight and three-quarter pounds, after 90 
days, become the property of the U.S. military, Mr. Speaker, and remain in 
the U.S. enrichment plants built primarily for manufacturing nuclear 
weapons.  And that depleted uranium is drawn on in those plants to 
manufacture things like the hydrogen bomb and the MX missile.  And, Mr. 
Speaker, as long as I am in this legislature, I will continue to oppose 
that practice that the government of Saskatchewan refuses to do anything 
about. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I also call on the Government of Saskatchewan to abandon 
its plans for a nuclear reactor in the province of Saskatchewan.  We don't 
need a nuclear reactor in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  That 
will not be a solution to our energy needs in this province.  Those energy 
needs can be met through a program of energy conservation and investment in 
safe renewable forms of energy like solar energy and wind energy and 
hydrogen in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, I say as part of this sixth point, that the 
Government of Saskatchewan must say no to a slowpoke reactor at the 
University of Saskatchewan being proposed in the middle of my constituency, 
Mr. Speaker.  And, Mr. Speaker, I say no to a slowpoke at the University of 
Saskatchewan for four important reasons. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, because I don't think it makes sense to take 
untested technology, which this slowpoke reactor is, untested technology, 
and locate it in the midst of the most densely populated part of 
Saskatchewan -- the University of Saskatchewan campus.  That just makes no 
sense whatsoever. 
 
Second, Mr. Speaker, I say this project doesn't make economic sense.  It's 
going to cost $50 million to revamp to infrastructure and the heating 
systems at the University of Saskatchewan just to accommodate a slowpoke 
reactor on the campus.  I say to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan: think what 
could be done to improve the quality of education at the University of 
Saskatchewan if this $50 million was instead applied to an investment in 
hiring more faculty and staff at the University, upgrading library 
programs, improving access to computer facilities at the University, and 
above all, lifting the quotas in the College of Arts and Science. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, that a slowpoke reactor does not meet our needs in 
Saskatoon because, Mr. Speaker, it will vent low levels of radioactive gas 
into the atmosphere and poses the risk, the remote risk albeit, but 
nevertheless the risk of a nuclear accident occurring at the University, 
particularly in the event that the radioactive fuel bundles, when they are 



 

 

being removed from a slowpoke reactor on campus were dropped, Mr. Speaker, 
and radiation went into the environment as a result of that. 
 
That kind of a nuclear accident, Mr. Speaker, is something that the home 
owners in my constituency who live in the neighbourhoods adjacent to the 
slowpoke reactor, Mr. Speaker, if the reactor was to be located on campus, 
that is something, Mr. Speaker, that those residents are very concerned 
about.  And I might add, not only are they concerned about it from a health 
and safety point of view but they are concerned because their insurance 
policies provide no protection in the event of a nuclear accident.  And, 
Mr. Speaker, finally I say that this project should be put aside, Mr. 
Speaker, because the proponent, Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd., has lost its 
credibility. Mr. Speaker, it's lost its credibility with the people of 
Canada, Mr. Speaker. It has lost its credibility first of all in the sense 
that it has not been able to sell a reactor anywhere in the world for 10 
years; and secondly, Mr. Speaker, in the sense that every reactor that it 
has sold has lost money; and thirdly in the sense, Mr. Speaker, that AECL 
(Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd.) was prepared to sell reactors to countries 
like India and Pakistan and South Korea, knowing full well that those 
countries would use those reactors for nuclear weapons purposes, as they 
have done.  And so, Mr. Speaker, I say this slowpoke reactor project is a 
desperate attempt by AECL to maintain their economic viability in Canada, 
and we should not artificially keep this useless Crown corporation alive 
any longer. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to comment on one other important issue before I 
sit down, and that is the pressing concern that we have on this side of the 
Assembly about the growing crisis that we see in Saskatchewan at our food 
banks.  As I mentioned, 45,000 people in the province of Saskatchewan last 
year relying on food banks -- half of that number, Mr. Speaker, being 
children, 22,000 children in the province of Saskatchewan -- relying on 
food banks in the last year alone.  And I say, Mr. Speaker, that that is 
immoral, that in one of the bread-baskets of the world we have thousands of 
children going hungry.  And this government has watched that situation 
develop over the last four years and they have done nothing, Mr. Speaker.  
The first time, Mr. Speaker, that we have a recognition of hunger in this 
legislature is in this throne speech where finally, six months before an 
election, the government is acknowledging that hunger exists in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we in the New Democratic Party say that it is time for a 
government that is prepared to make a commitment to end hunger and to end 
poverty in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  And that is a 
commitment that our leader has made, and it's a commitment that I, as a 
member of this side of the House, am very proud of, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we have outlined a detailed program for ending hunger and 
poverty in the province of Saskatchewan, and I want to comment on just a 
few of the highlights of that program in the three or four minutes that I 
have remaining to me. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, we believe on this side of the Assembly that the 
key to ending hunger and poverty in Saskatchewan is a government that is 



 

 

committed to a policy of full employment in the province of Saskatchewan, 
and we believe that the best way to achieve that is a mixed economy 
approach to economic development. 
 
And we also believe, Mr. Speaker, that special efforts must be made to 
provide economic opportunity for Indian and Metis people in this province 
who have been hit particularly hard with unemployment, Mr. Speaker.  And we 
believe that it is time for a government that will structure economic 
development for Indian and Metis people, so that it takes place under 
Indian and Metis control.  And that is a very significant policy change, 
and one that members opposite have consistently refused to follow. 
 
Third, Mr. Speaker, with respect to the pressing problem of unemployment in 
northern Saskatchewan, where unemployment rates exceed 60 per cent, we 
believe that the time has come to create a northern economic development 
fund financed with a portion of northern mineral and forestry royalties, 
and directed towards community and co-operatively controlled economic 
development projects and low-interest loans for small business owned by 
Northerners, so that we can begin to get real community-based employment 
creation in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, a second key element to ending hunger in the 
province of Saskatchewan is that at long last we have a government that is 
prepared to establish a special provincial fund that will allow any school 
board or school or day-care centre in this province that believes it has a 
problem with hunger in its school or in one of its schools or day cares, to 
apply to the special provincial fund and to obtain sufficient funding to 
establish and operate a school breakfast and school lunch program with a 
nutrition education component, anywhere in the province of Saskatchewan 
where hunger is a demonstrated problem. 
 
And third, Mr. Speaker, we say that the time has come that the Government 
of Saskatchewan must ensure that the working poor in this province, people 
who are working full time -- 38, 40, 45 hours a week -- can make ends meet 
as a result of their labour.  Mr. Speaker, we have a government in this 
province that has created a cheap labour policy, and I say it's time to end 
that cheap labour policy.  It is time, Mr. Speaker, to talk about a higher 
minimum wage in the province of Saskatchewan, because right now, Mr. 
Speaker, someone can work at minimum wage full time and they're still 
living more than $1,500 below the poverty line even if they're a single 
individual.  And that is truly shameful, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We say that it's time to have an independent minimum wage board in the 
province of Saskatchewan with representatives from employees and employers 
across this province that will establish a just minimum wage for 
Saskatchewan people, and that will have as part of its mandate a minimum 
wage policy on a phased-in basis that will ultimately eliminate poverty for 
single individuals living on minimum wage in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
(1945) 
 
We say, Mr. Speaker, that it's time for changes to the labour standards 
legislation in this province that will ensure that part-time workers 



 

 

receive employment benefits prorated to those provided to full-time workers 
in the same work place.  That is key, Mr. Speaker.  There is no reason in 
Saskatchewan why part-time employees should not receive the benefits on a 
proportional basis that full-time employees do, and yet we see that 
happening again and again in work places across this province, and that 
injustice must be ended. 
 
And Mr. Speaker, we say that it is time to ensure that we expand publicly 
funded and administered educational programs in this province to meet the 
demands for training that we have in Saskatchewan.  It's time to move away 
from the government's approach of expanding and fostering private 
vocational schools in the province of Saskatchewan, all too many of which 
rip off students who are attending those schools, and start investing our 
resources again in publicly funded, affordable, post-secondary education in 
the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we say it's time to tackle the poverty and hunger problem in 
this province in the North by seeing the reinstitution of the northern food 
transportation subsidy in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  I 
recall when that subsidy was dropped, Mr. Speaker.  I recall that it was a 
government, Mr. Speaker, that was so uncaring about the people of northern 
Saskatchewan that in the same week that it dropped the northern food 
transportation subsidy, and as a result of that sent food prices in remote 
northern communities sky-rocketing, the cabinet who did that in the same 
week, Mr. Speaker, set an unlimited amount -- lifted the cap, in other 
words -- and allowed an unlimited amount of money to be spent by cabinet 
ministers on accommodation for out-of-province travel and on meals, Mr. 
Speaker.  And I say that that symbolized everything about the priorities of 
the PC government opposite, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We say, Mr. Speaker, finally, that it is time to revamp income security 
programs in this province.  And, Mr. Speaker, that not only means higher 
social assistance rates and higher family income plan rates in the province 
of Saskatchewan, both of which have now been frozen for more than five 
years -- in fact, Saskatchewan assistance plan rates have been frozen for 
eight years by this government.  But perhaps even more important, Mr. 
Speaker, what it means is revamping the social assistance system so that 
there are some real financial incentives for those who want to work and can 
work to go out and take work without being penalized by members opposite, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The longer I'm Social Services critic, the more I understand, Mr. Speaker, 
what this government has really done to the poor in terms of keeping them 
down.  And, Mr. Speaker, one of the key elements of their policy is to 
establish regulations under the Saskatchewan assistance plan Act in which, 
when people work, they can keep virtually nothing of what they earn if 
they're on social assistance. 
 
For instance, Mr. Speaker, someone is on social assistance in the province 
of Saskatchewan.  They get self-employment in the summer; let's say they're 
landscaping.  Do you know, Mr. Speaker, that under the policies of the 
members opposite, someone can work full time at a landscaping job, be on 
social welfare to support a family, and not keep one cent of what they 



 

 

earn, Mr. Speaker, all summer?  Talk about injustice.  This is a 
government, Mr. Speaker, that says that if somebody is working part time 
and they can't quite make ends meet, Mr. Speaker, and they have to apply 
for social welfare, that for the first three months they're on social 
welfare every penny they earn at their part-time job will be deducted from 
their cheque.  What injustice, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These regulations are being proposed and implemented by the same government 
that rhetorically talks about getting people off welfare.  Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I've discovered from the hundreds of people who come through my 
office that that rhetoric is just nonsense, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we on this side of the House will revamp the social assistance system 
to ensure that people are always further ahead when they work than when 
they are on social assistance, Mr. Speaker.  We will provide real financial 
incentives for those who want to work and can work, to be able to take work 
and be further ahead.  And if they have to be on social assistance to 
supplement their income, they will still be much further ahead than under 
the policies of the current government.  And I challenge the government 
opposite to revamp their policies to fall in line with our philosophy, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, those are some of the ways that we on this side of the 
House intend to tackle the problem of poverty and hunger in the province of 
Saskatchewan.  We want to see a decent income security program in this 
province, Mr. Speaker.  We want to end the eight-year freeze on income 
security payments in this province, and we feel, Mr. Speaker, that if this 
government would take the family income plan and use it as a vehicle for 
providing an income supplement, a fair income supplement to working 
families to take them up close to the poverty line, that that would make an 
enormous difference in terms of eliminating poverty in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I want to close by saying that those are some of my 
personal priorities and some of the priorities of the New Democratic Party.  
These, Mr. Speaker, are priorities that the throne speech has totally 
failed to address, Mr. Speaker, and for that reason, Mr. Speaker, I will be 
voting against the throne speech when the vote comes next week.  Thank you 
very much. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I've been listening 
very closely to the members opposite but before I rebut to what I've heard 
and what I want to say this evening, I'd first of all like to congratulate 
Her Honour on a very fine throne speech which she presented to this 
Assembly a couple of days ago.  I want to also indicate to you, sir, that 
my congratulations on your appointment of the Clerk of this Assembly and a 
Deputy Clerk for their first times in those capacities here in the 
legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- And also welcome the new pages that are serving us very 
well here in this Assembly. 



 

 

 
Mr. Speaker, if you would have noted that when the throne speech was read, 
that the thrust of the throne speech basically came back to the basics of 
Saskatchewan -- the basics of Saskatchewan which is agriculture.  
Agriculture, Mr. Speaker, is in one of the most devastating situations 
we've ever had in Saskatchewan's history since the 1930s.  And I want to 
say to you, Mr. Speaker, that I'm very upset here because basically from 
the members opposite, other than the first day of trying to become a . . . 
put this Assembly into some sort of a showboat scene, they indicate that 
they were going to go with us on this emergency debate.  We shut down the 
throne speech for a day just to speak on agriculture alone as an emergency 
debate here in this Assembly.  And we gave them as a government, we gave 
the NDP the opportunity to join with us in passing a resolution of this 
Assembly asking Ottawa, asking the federal government, to help us with aid 
for our farmers here in Saskatchewan. 
 
And when we went back into the throne speech, Mr. Speaker, I want to 
indicate to you I have not heard one word from the members opposite, one 
word mentioned about agriculture.  That is where their priorities are, sir.  
Their priorities are in the gutters of politics.  They do not wish to 
discuss farming because, Mr. Speaker, the NDP know nothing about farming.  
And I want to indicate to you that that is my greatest disappointment.  I 
have gone through two question periods now, Mr. Speaker, two question 
periods in this House since we've had this emergency debate, and not as of 
yet had the NDP asked any one of our ministers of an agricultural question, 
as an update as to what's happening in Ottawa if there is any update to be 
given.  And if we stood on this side of the House to ask those questions, 
Mr. Speaker, they would say that we were staging something. 
 
I challenge these members to get back to the basics in Saskatchewan.  The 
farmers need us to get together here in this province and work together and 
get some consensus across this province as to what the direction we want to 
take with agriculture. 
 
All I've heard is a mockery, Mr. Speaker, of decent people, a mockery that 
they've made in trying to get into the . . . and accuse ministers and 
accuse board members, and prejudge people in what had taken place with STC 
(Saskatchewan Transportation Company).  They've been trying to get back 
into some pretext of a GigaText scandal, and all this kind of stuff, Mr. 
Speaker.  Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that's all behind us. 
 
We have a future.  We have to look at a future here in Saskatchewan, a 
future that is out there where real people are after some real answers.  
And I'm appalled; I'm appalled by the Leader of the Opposition where he was 
on a television talk show, phone-in talk show the other night, and what 
does he do?  He accuses farmers in Saskatchewan of having RVs (recreational 
vehicles) and toys on their farm lands, that that's what they're doing with 
all the moneys that the government's been handing out to them -- buying RVs 
and toys for their farms.  This is what the Leader of the Opposition is 
saying about farmers, about agriculture, about people.  I could not believe 
it. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that when I speak, I speak on behalf of my farm 



 

 

communities in the constituency of Cut Knife-Lloydminster, and I speak with 
the communities in my constituency.  I look in my constituency and I like 
to say this much to you, and I'd be fair and honest to the members of the 
opposition.  My riding had an opportunity of have rain, and no 
grasshoppers, and next to no drought.  There was a couple of areas that had 
less rain than others, but on the whole our area had been fairly well off, 
and in the area of having a good return in bushels of . . . during the 
harvest time.  And when it comes down to where the hurt really came in was 
just basically in the commodity prices, and that hurts everyone.  And when 
I see what's taken place and how it's hurt, the commodity prices have hurt 
my farmers in my area, I can understand the double and triple hurt of the 
people in the South and the central and eastern regions of this province.  
The north-west was not as beat up as the rest of this province and we've 
tended to hang on a little longer and not feel that hurt as others have for 
the last, well, since 1982 when the interest rates have actually 
sky-rocketed at 24 per cent. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, if you go back to the years of '81 and '82, I 
want to indicate to you that it's not me that's saying it but it's farmer 
friends of mine, that have indicated that when interest rates had 
sky-rocketed to the 24 per cent margin, that that's when the troubles of 
agriculture began.  I want to say that when they asked for help from this 
provincial government in that day it was under the NDP administration.  The 
now leader was an attorney general at that time and the premier was Allan 
Blakeney at that time.  And when they were asked to help the farmers, both 
of them and all members -- and I see some of the familiar old faces over 
there that were there then -- they turned their backs on those farmers, 
they turned their backs on Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what has happened, they had a more interest on bringing back 
an unfinished constitution to this province, to this country, and that's 
our legacy of the attorney general of the NDP in those days and now the 
Leader of the NDP Opposition.  No interest, no interest in what really 
makes Saskatchewan tick at all.  The man is out of touch with Saskatchewan, 
and I don't think he's ever had a real feel for Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to say that when the members talk here, they've talked about the 
exodus of people.  Yes, I'll be the first one to stand up and say, yes, 
we've had some people leave Saskatchewan.  But I want to remind the members 
opposite that under the good days where you had a good royalty return on 
oil and potash and our resources here in the province of Saskatchewan, what 
did you do?  I'll tell you what you did: you closed in oil wells and gas 
wells, and you closed down forestry in this province, and you closed down 
the every little bit of resource that could have created many jobs in the 
days of when the world economy was still flowing fairly strongly.  Those 
people left and were forced to go into the Williston basin area for oil 
jobs and forced to go to Alberta for jobs and down East, etc.  And I want 
to say that you closed the doors to business. 
 
(2000) 
 
If you would have been inviting . . . If you would have invited the people, 
the business people into this province when you had the opportunity to 



 

 

invite them, when you had the dollars, when you had a flow of resources, we 
could have been what Alberta is today.  We could be what British Columbia 
is today, with a population base, with a growth base, with a business base 
in this province that would have been next to none.  What do we have to do?  
We have to take over an era . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- I think you grabbed the wrong speech there, Mike. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- Well make fun . . . The member from Elphinstone is making 
fun, and fun he may make, but I'll say this, that the people on the street 
are not going to be fooled any longer.  I want to say to you that there are 
people that have gone into Alberta and there are close friends of mine that 
are in Alberta, but I'll say this; I'll say this.  They're coming back, 
they're coming back because . . . I'm going to give you an example of an 
upgrader in Lloydminster -- Lloydminster, Saskatchewan, just outside the RM 
of Wilton.  We're going to have a $350 million injection into the 
Saskatchewan economy in Lloydminster, Saskatchewan.  We're going to have 
people from all over this province, young people coming to work in 
Lloydminster, Saskatchewan.  Prince Albert, Yorkton, Saskatoon, Hodgeville, 
Belle Plaine -- you name it; they're coming. 
 
And they say where we went through, we went through hard times in 
Lloydminster.  We had a 48 per cent vacancy rate in Lloydminster, and now 
they're claiming that by December of this year we'll be down to a zero.  
There won't be a place to be gotten in the city of Lloydminster and 
outlying areas. 
 
People are going to have to come back and build because it was the 
initiative of this government, the initiative of the federal government, 
and the initiative of the Alberta government, along with Husky, that the 
member from the Quill Lakes has condemned in his speech, in his rebuttal in 
this Assembly in this session.  He condemned the upgrader in Lloydminster.  
And I want to indicate to you that it's just the return of the condemnation 
that you people had given to the people of Saskatchewan when you had the 10 
or 11 years under your reign. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- I want to indicate to you, I want to indicate to the NDP, 
Mr. Speaker, and I want to indicate to the people of Saskatchewan, that it 
was our government that has finally brought some competition with other 
governments into this country, and we are now competing along with other 
governments to bring industry into Saskatchewan.  And I'll say this, I'll 
say this: if you would have done that same thing when the Lougheed 
administration in Alberta was competing with Ontario and Quebec and all 
across this nation for industry to come into Alberta, if you'd have done 
that under your Blakeney administration here in Saskatchewan, we would have 
had those kinds of businesses here.  Those kinds of resources and 
technology and everything else . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Why aren't you doing it, then? 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- Well, the NDP ask why we aren't doing it, and the member 



 

 

from Regina Rosemont he sits there babbling from his chair, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to indicate to you that let's take the Alameda-Rafferty project.  
That member from Regina Rosemont, he was against the project.  He is the 
one that got all of his little red-neck colleagues outside this Assembly 
and banned against the project, and they, Mr. Speaker, have done everything 
and anything to stop that project.  But I want to indicate to you that that 
little member there is just about on his last leg as far as leaving his 
central little army here in Regina, Mr. Speaker, because the guy, along 
with his leader, were asked to leave the Estevan area.  They were asked to 
leave the Estevan's constituency.  They couldn't stand him.  They couldn't 
stand him, and he . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That's right, a 
member said he does not have the kind of guts to go back into that riding 
at all, even himself. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there is just one project that if the NDP would not have 
opposed, that we could have had jobs and young people working over the 
term. 
 
But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I'm proud of the throne speech.  I'm 
proud of the way the throne speech had gone, basically because, Mr. 
Speaker, I wanted to speak to you on the idea of the consensus, the 
Consensus 100. 
 
I'm kind of excited about this, Mr. Speaker.  The NDP have made a joke 
about the Consensus 100 as they were speaking, but I want to indicate to 
you that that's just exactly what it is to them -- it's a joke.  They, as a 
government back in the '70s, have never consulted with the people in 
Saskatchewan.  They never consulted about potash take-overs and uranium and 
all this other thing that they now so much agree with our administration 
that we did the right thing in doing what we're doing to get it out of 
debt.  But they don't admit it, Mr. Speaker; they don't admit it.  They 
admit it to us on the sly, but they won't admit it to the people out there. 
 
But this Consensus 100 is one of the most positive things that this 
province . . . ideas that this province could ever have come up with, in 
our Premier.  As far as I'm concerned, this gives everyone an opportunity, 
one of the greatest opportunities of getting a most broadest consensus that 
you would ever be able to ever establish in this province.  And I'm excited 
about the fact that some of my people out in the riding Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster -- away from me as just their member, but away from the 
government and away from this rhetoric -- can sit down and establish 
policies and present their outlook and their viewpoints to the government 
and to suggest the direction they'd like to see the Government of 
Saskatchewan take into the 21st century. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I'm sure when we get a consensus that the 
members opposite will finally find that agriculture will be one of the main 
parts of the focus of this consensus.  I would say that without . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . The members asked me how would I know.  I 
would say that, without guessing, because agriculture is the mainstay of 
Saskatchewan, is number one.  I want to say in a comparison, and if the 
member really wants to know why I feel this, I'll say this: we have a 



 

 

megaproject in Lloydminster, the upgrader, the Lloydminster upgrader.  That 
project is about a $3 billion project.  Once in its lifetime it's a $3 
billion project.  Agriculture in this province is that yearly.  Agriculture 
spends through every community in this province, every city in this 
province, over $3 billion every time they plant the crop, every time they 
go into the field, seasonally.  That is an annual megaproject, and that is 
why I say you can have all the megaprojects, you can have all the other 
things and frills that you wish to present in Saskatchewan, but agriculture 
is the main source.  So I want to say that I'm looking forward to their 
consensus as to the way that they'd like to see this government head in 
terms of agriculture. 
 
The Premier, Mr. Speaker, when I speak of him I want to speak of him as 
saying this. I would say to you, Mr. Speaker, that our Premier is probably 
one of the greatest leaders that's ever been in Saskatchewan's history or 
indeed in Canada. 
 
I want to say it for this reason, Mr. Speaker.  Because if it was not for 
our Premier, the Premier and the member from Estevan, agriculture I don't 
know where it would have been if it would have been for relying on other 
people to bring it to the forefront.  But our Premier brought it to the 
forefront.  And he brought it to the forefront, not this year, Mr. Speaker, 
but he had brought it to the forefront years ago. 
 
And I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, that over the years, although we 
have had contributions from the federal government . . . We cannot allow 
the contributions to stop.  And I want to say this. Our Premier and this 
government has over the past years brought over $6 billion into the 
Saskatchewan farm economy, and, you know, Mr. Speaker, we all know that it 
hasn't been enough to do the job. 
 
So when it comes to the members opposite talking about education and 
talking about health care and talking about all these other sorts of 
things, I want to say, although we're having to shore up in agriculture, to 
go to the wall for agriculture, we also had to maintain our education and 
our health standards in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we took government in 1982, the budget for health care in 
this province was something like around $700 million.  Mr. Speaker, the new 
budget is not . . . But I would kind of guess myself without not knowing 
the final figures, but I'll guess that there's going to be an increase in 
health care in this new budget, I'll just guess that. 
 
But I'll tell you this; I'll say this to you, sir, that we've more  
 Dthan doubled health care under this administration.  And that, Mr. 
Speaker, was basically due to the fact that we took the moratorium off of 
health care in this province.  We took the moratorium off of health care in 
this province, and we also, Mr. Speaker, we also have decentralized health 
care in this province. 
 
I want to indicate to you that now where I come from, as far as the 
moratorium is concerned, is where the members opposite have shut down a 
hospital in my riding in the community of Lashburn and have refused to 



 

 

build hospitals in Lloydminster, in Maidstone, and Cut Knife.  And I want 
to say to you, sir, and I'm proud of this government and this 
administration, that those hospitals are now replaced and running strong.  
I want to say to you that it is one of the economic benefits to a community 
as well as a good care facility and good opportunity for these people to 
stay close to family. 
 
I want to say with the fact of education, when we came to power in 1982 we 
had about a $600 million budget in Education.  Mr. Speaker, we now today, 
being criticized by the NDP because we haven't done anything in education, 
have now more than doubled education expenditure in this province.  And now 
I'll tell you . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The members are 
criticizing. 
 
(2015) 
 
There is over $800 million just in governmental expenditures in education, 
Mr. Speaker, and then when it comes to the other portion which brings it up 
to about $1.2 billion, is the actual local ratepayers' tax hit out in our 
local areas, which comes out to about $400 million roughly.  I will say to 
the member opposite that that's where you can come up with your $1.2 
billion educational fund in this province since we've come to power. 
 
So you see, Mr. Speaker, we've been working for families.  We've been 
working to keep families closer.  We've been working to expand in our 
education facilities.  And we've also been expanding, and trying to expand, 
the attitudes and ideas and the individualistic drive of people in their 
own areas. 
 
We've been, Mr. Speaker, trying to our best to also give the people an 
opportunity to believe that Saskatchewan . . . believe in themselves and to 
believe that Saskatchewan is the place for them to settle.  And I know, 
like up in my particular constituency, sir, that the average age in my 
riding right today is an age of 33 or 34 years of age now, and it's full of 
young, aggressive people starting up in new businesses and also, Mr. 
Speaker, a lot of the younger fellows and gals are taking over the family 
farms and taking on a big challenge. 
 
So I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, that these are the kind of 
fundamental things that we should be talking about in this Assembly.  We 
should be talking about togetherness.  What people out there tell me is, 
why can't the opposition and the government get along so that we can solve 
some of these economic dilemmas?  Why can't you quit the desk-beating and 
all these kinds of things and the name-calling and . . . They make fun 
again, they make fun again, but this is what they're saying, sir.  And 
anyway, when it comes down to the real thing, Mr. Speaker, we gave the NDP 
the opportunity to just do that, but they've refused.  And they refused 
that, like I said earlier, on that emergency resolution for agriculture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are in 85 years of confederation and, Mr. Speaker, above 
all, above anything, we should all be thinking in the realm of firstly 
being Canadian.  And I think, Mr. Speaker, when we look back at our 
pioneers and the struggles and the aspirations that they would have had 



 

 

years ago, I can only say to you, Mr. Speaker, that those challenges 
haven't gone away in the sense that there are no challenges today.  I want 
to say that the challenges today are probably as tough and rough and hard 
as they've ever been.  Maybe we've got more comforts in life but today -- 
and you look into the '30s and you look back at people starting into their 
farm life, farm career, and building a life for themself -- our world 
economic situation, sir, is putting a real burden on the people here in 
this country and I think it's time that we all pulled together, we put our 
political differences away, and we try to come up with some nearby 
consensus. 
 
The debate here symbolizes, Mr. Speaker, the importance of our democratic 
and parliamentary institution.  Every member of the Legislative Assembly 
has taken a sacred oath to serve the best interest of the people who 
elected us.  And this is a special bond, and it's a sacred and special bond 
between the people and their elected representatives.  That's basically, 
Mr. Speaker, the point I'm trying to make.  The Speech from the Throne 
affirmed that partnership between the people and government, and in the 
1990s people want a government that is responsive, a government that 
listens, and a government that will work in partnership with them for the 
common good of society.  Mr. Speaker, that's what they like to see in an 
opposition. 
 
We live at a time in our history, as I had indicated earlier, when all 
around the world we see that people are saying they want governments that 
are there to carry out the will of the people. 
 
The election in East Germany was a powerful message.  The people there said 
they wanted freedom and economic prosperity.  The election in Nicaragua was 
another powerful message.  The people in that nation voted for freedom and 
economic prosperity.  All around the globe, each and every day, we hear 
reports of the move to democracy and the march to freedom. 
 
Now we live in Saskatchewan . . . I should say we here in Saskatchewan have 
a proud history and heritage when it comes to our democratic and 
parliamentary institution.  At the opening of every legislative session we 
have this debate, and, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to hope that each one of us 
take this debate seriously.  It is a time for us as a government and as a 
province and as legislators to affirm for Saskatchewan where we have been 
and where we are and where we are going. 
 
In listening to the Speech from the Throne at the opening of the session, I 
was inspired by a genuine commitment of the government to listen to the 
people of Saskatchewan and work in genuine partnership with people to build 
for the future. 
 
The history of Saskatchewan has been one of building through co-operation.  
The partnership of which I speak is not some political slogan designed for 
the moment, but rather the partnership of which this government speaks is a 
genuine commitment to the people and the long-range future of Saskatchewan.  
The times require leadership and, as I had indicated earlier, not partisan 
politics. 
 



 

 

The Speech from the Throne clearly stated the goals and objectives we face 
in building a new and better Saskatchewan.  Allow me to state the four 
pillars of building a better future for this province.  Together, we as a 
province must expand and diversify the economy.  We live in a world 
increasingly and more competitive.  International trade is vital to our 
economic growth, and we cannot live isolated from the realities of the 
global economy.  The member from Rosemont may think we can, but I have news 
for him.  In the 1990s, to ensure new jobs, new economic development, and 
new opportunities for Saskatchewan people, we must have an expansion and 
diversification of the economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the second pillar of Saskatchewan partnership is the security 
and the stabilization of communities.  Saskatchewan is the total sum of 
many communities that make up this great province of ours.  We are indeed a 
province of communities; every city, town, village, hamlet, rural 
municipality, has a unique identity in Saskatchewan's mosaic.  The future 
of Main Street in Lloydminster, Cut Knife, Maidstone, Delmas, Sweetgrass, 
is the future of every unique and special community this province is -- and 
this province is the future of Canada. 
 
Together that makes us the province of Saskatchewan, and if they grow and 
prosper we all grow and prosper.  Building communities is part of the 
special partnership in Saskatchewan.  The security and stabilization of 
communities is one of the four pillars of partnership.  Mr. Speaker, every 
community throughout Saskatchewan and indeed throughout Canada are a 
growing concern and about the very future of Canada. 
 
And I have listened, Mr. Speaker, to those concerns on coffee row in 
constituencies all across the province, and people are very concerned about 
Canada's situation as a nation.  At this crossroads in Canada's history, 
I'm reminded of the words of John Diefenbaker, and we all know them.  He 
believed in one Canada, one nation, and he once said, before all else, 
let's be Canadians.  Before all else, let us be Canadians and affirm our 
faith in the future of this nation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the third pillar in the partnership as stated in the Speech 
from the Throne is the growth and the well-being of people.  This 
government has listened very carefully to what people have said about the 
quality of life they expected in the province.  Saskatchewan people want us 
to continue building on our quality health care system -- it is very 
important to our people of the province -- and to have a health care system 
that is second to none in Canada. 
 
Saskatchewan people want a clean environment, a healthy environment.  They 
want this government to work in partnership in protection of the 
environment.  Saskatchewan people want their children . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  There's too much interference with the hon. 
member from Cut Knife-LLoyd, both sides of the House.  Would you allow the 
member to continue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

Mr. Hopfner: -- Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, as I was indicating, want 
quality education for their children.  They want a government that shares 
their desire to build a first-class education system in this province.  
Well, Mr. Speaker, I indicate to you that we have a first-class education 
system in this province, and we plan on maintaining that first-class 
education system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(2030) 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- Through the new Family Foundation, and the Minister of the 
Family, we will work in partnership with Saskatchewan families to enhance 
the quality of family life in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fourth pillar in the partnership is the responsible and 
effective management of resources where we can do many of these very, very 
well thought out programs.  Our water, our forests, our minerals, all of 
these precious resources must be managed in partnership with people for the 
long-range development of Saskatchewan in our programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wish to take a few moments to address some of the other 
remarks that were made by members opposite, and those, Mr. Speaker, where 
the member from Saskatoon University had indicated that we have no programs 
or would have no programs for part-time workers in the province. 
 
I want to indicate to you, sir, that our Minister of Labour last year had 
presented a paper for proper benefits for part-time workers in this 
province.  And what did the NDP and Barb Byers do?  They opposed it.  They 
unequivocally opposed it.  Part-time workers could have had many benefits, 
many more benefits than what they have today if the opposition would not 
have been so radical in their approach to oppose it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I thank this government for recognizing part-time and low 
income earners, and by that, thank them for the increase in the minimum 
wage.  And I thank them on behalf of the young people and indeed all the 
people in my riding.  And I'm sure it was accepted very well right across 
this province. 
 
I want to indicate to you, sir, that when it comes to meaningful and 
responsible government, I want to give my ministers and my Premier a 
bouquet.  I know it has not been easy for them.  I know that the moneys are 
not there -- the people are taxed to no end, and they can't afford no more 
taxes.  And I implore upon all governments, all levels of governments, to 
hold the tax, to trim where they can, because that's the request of my 
people in my riding.  I ask my ministers and this government to become more 
efficient throughout all their departments because that is what my people 
are asking for me to say here in this Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- I want to thank the Minister of Finance for the opportunity 
he had given people in my riding to actually take the role of Finance 



 

 

minister in the province, for the province.  And I want to thank those 
participants for taking the initiative and the leadership for indicating to 
the Minister of Finance to become more of a main organizer for all 
government departments and to make sure that they are spending their money 
in a very, very frugal way. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there are many, many things that could be said on the 
throne speech, many more things that I know my colleagues are going to be 
talking about.  But I want to indicate to you that I am looking forward to 
serving my constituents for quite some time yet, sir, and I want to thank 
them for giving me the opportunity to represent them here in the 
legislature. 
 
I know that there are many people that are maybe much more able to deliver 
a more colourful speech, sir.  But I want to indicate to you, sir, that 
what I'm saying here tonight is not for me to be in some sort of a contest 
against the Leader of the Opposition that had been speaking for quite some 
time using quite a number of words that even I'm sure yourself would have 
to use a dictionary and find the meaning to.  But in the substance of his 
speech I know I've said a great deal more than he has in the little time 
I've been here. 
 
So I implore, I actually ask and beg the members of the opposition to take 
another thought on them opposing the throne speech, because when you do 
oppose the throne speech, you're opposing agriculture, you're opposing 
education, you're opposing health, you're opposing consensus, you're 
opposing seniors, you're opposing children, you're opposing families.  Mr. 
Speaker, these are the kinds of things, these are the kinds of 
opportunities where an opposition has a right, has a way to gain some 
respectability with the public of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I don't know why I should be trying to have them come and join with us 
in our plight for the people here because it can only do me harm by having 
the opposition gain in popularity.  But I want to say that, Mr. Speaker, if 
they are truly supporting agriculture, if they are truly supporting health 
and education, if they are truly genuine, there is no way that they can 
oppose the throne speech. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure to speak in 
this debate on this throne speech.  I don't have many complimentary things 
to say about it, but as the member for Regina North East constituency, it's 
an honour to rise in this House and speak on behalf of those constituents 
who I represent and have represented since 1985.  It is a constituency that 
has people from all walks of life, people who I think it's fair to say are 
representative of every part of the world. 
 
Those people, Mr. Speaker, are interested in the affairs of government.  I 
know in the phone calls I have received since the throne speech there is a 
considerable amount of disappointment in the fact that this throne speech, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, did not address the concerns of those people in Regina 
North East constituency. 



 

 

 
Now I'm going to begin my comments on the Speech from the Throne, Mr. 
Speaker, by putting it into the Saskatchewan context.  Let's look at what 
the situation in this province is today.  It is important to point that out 
in order to identify, Mr. Speaker, how this throne speech and the lack of 
initiatives by this government have failed to address those issues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this province since 1985 when this privatization government 
opposite began to apply their ideology to the privatization in 
Saskatchewan, we have had a net out-migration of 65,000 people -- 23,000 
last year alone.  Now, Mr. Speaker, that is the highest rate of 
out-migration -- the second highest rate of out-migration since the 
Depression of the 1930s. 
 
We have thousands of children who are going hungry, and the number of 
children who are having to use the food banks, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in this 
province grows every week.  People are using the food banks in a way, Mr. 
Speaker, that we should not see in this province which used to be called, 
and still is called, and still should be called the bread-basket in the 
world. 
 
Education is struggling.  Now the Minister of Education rose in this House 
earlier today and he talked about the great things that this government has 
done in education, and the member who just sat down did likewise.  Well 
there will be another time when I will want to speak on it at greater 
length, Mr. Speaker, but I want to just use one example to indicate how 
wrong those members are. 
 
I have here a letter which has been written to myself, and I know it's been 
written to all Regina members by the Regina School Division, in which they 
indicate just exactly how well this government has treated school 
divisions.  In 1981, the provincial portion of funding for education, the 
provincial grants, covered 43.5 per cent of the education costs in this 
Regina School Division.  Do you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what portion in 
1989 the provincial grants covered of the cost of this school division?  It 
was only 34.5 per cent. 
 
And this is the story, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and the Minister of Finance 
keeps interrupting because he knows that the answer that he will provide in 
his budget isn't going to be a good one either.  But this is an example of 
the kind of neglect that this government has shown in the field of 
education, and that's the reason why, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, order.  Allow the member to make his 
comments. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for . . . The Minister 
of Finance, who was at one time the minister of Education before he was the 
Minister of Finance, feels very sensitive about this.  And I'll tell you, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, if I was him I would be sensitive because I would not 
be able to hold my head up in public when it came to talk about the 
education record of this government. 
 



 

 

Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- So I think all of what the members opposite have said, 
Mr. Speaker, is disproven by this one . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, would the hon. member inform the House 
whether the formula today is the same . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Seems to me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we have struck a 
nerve over there.  But let me move on, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, order.  All members of the House will have an 
opportunity to address the throne speech, and I would ask you to allow the 
member for Regina North East for make his comments. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Now that the Minister 
of Finance has left the House maybe we could . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, order.  Members know they're not to make 
reference to absence or presence of any other members of the legislature. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, a point well taken.  Let me 
continue.  I pointed out the problem that exists in education, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker.  I want to list a couple of more items.  The job creation record 
in the province of Saskatchewan in the last several years has been the 
worst in Canada.  We're losing farm families at a rate of 1,000 farm 
families a year, Mr. Speaker.  Our deficit is $4 billion, accumulated.  
That's not the total debt of the province, which is now in the area of 
between 12 and 13 billion dollars, but the operating deficit of this 
government which inherited a surplus of 139 million dollars, is now been 
jacked up to 4 billion dollars.  We have small businesses in this province 
who are struggling, barely able to survive, and many of them are closing 
their doors. 
 
(2045) 
 
Before this session I wrote, in fact I had delivered to most of the small 
businesses in my constituency, a little survey.  I wanted to know what they 
thought of the record of the government, and what the government was doing 
for them, and what the situation was. 
 
I want on the record, Mr. Speaker to give to you some of the results of the 
survey which I took.  I asked the question, because the government opposite 
has supported initially, very strongly, the GST, the goods and services tax 
that Mr. Mulroney is proposing to put in on January '91.  I asked: do you 



 

 

think the federal GST of 7 per cent will affect your business?  
Seventy-eight per cent of them said, a lot; another 19 per cent of them 
said a little.  That's almost 100 per cent, and they all said it was going 
to affect them in a negative way.  I said to them, some people say that the 
provincial government's policy of privatization will provide new jobs and 
investment opportunities, while others say that the government has gone too 
far with these plans.  Which idea is closest to your own way of thinking?  
The government has gone too far -- 53 per cent of those businesses that I 
surveyed said the government has gone too far.  I wish the minister of 
economic . . . the new super Minister of Economic Development was here to 
hear that . . . I'm sorry . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  The members are not to make reference to 
absence or presence of other members of the House.  I would ask the member 
to refrain from that. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I agree.  But for the record for the Minister of 
Economic Development, I want him to be aware of this, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  
I asked: do you feel that the financing for a business like yours is 
getting easier or harder to obtain?  Seventy-five per cent of my business 
people said it is harder to obtain.  I asked: should the provincial 
government be taking more of a role in helping businesses like yours to 
obtain financing?  Sixty-three per cent said yes, there is a bigger role 
for the provincial government to take.  I asked: do you feel the provincial 
government is doing enough to help keep local business taxes low?  The 
answer was no, by 66 per cent.  That is the response of that part of our 
community and our economy that creates 75 per cent of the jobs in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now I give you these examples, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to, as I said earlier, 
put the whole throne speech into the Saskatchewan context.  But what does 
this government answer to these things, Mr. Deputy Speaker?  Well they say 
they're going to establish a committee of 100 people which is going to 
develop some kind of a consensus. 
 
I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there already is a consensus.  The business 
community has a consensus, and the consensus is that this government is not 
doing a good job but is managing badly.  School boards are expressing a 
consensus and they're saying that education has been given short shrift by 
this government opposite, and therefore they're finding it difficult to do 
the kind of job that they are mandated to do.  The public of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker, has developed a consensus and it's saying that it's time to 
have an election so that all of the people of Saskatchewan can express that 
consensus and set the direction for the 1990s and not some hand-picked 
group of a hundred people whose role it will be to prop up the government 
and hopefully be used to bail the government out of its political problem. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I heard the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster talk about 
the need for ministers who will be more efficient.  Now, Mr. Speaker, that 
is the member who I believe is the Legislative Secretary to some other 
minister as well as being the Whip or the Deputy Whip -- whatever his title 
is -- and he is one of almost every one of those members who has an extra 
paying job, in most cases for doing nothing. 



 

 

 
Here we have a government that speaks about the need for ministers to be 
more efficient but it appointed in last fall a cabinet of 20.  It appointed 
for the first time something called associate ministers.  That's a first 
for Saskatchewan.  Not a first that we should be very proud of.  We have, I 
believe, 10 legislative secretaries.  If that government is really serious 
in saying that there has to be more efficiency of government, that's where 
they could start, by reducing the size of the cabinet, by doing away with 
the associate deputy ministers, and by reducing, if not doing away with, 
all of the legislative secretaries. 
 
I want to comment just briefly on the remarks of the Minister of the 
Environment who spoke earlier this afternoon.  I'm not going to take a 
great deal of time, but one of the things that that minister said -- the 
member from Melfort  
_- he said that the throne speech was about change, and that's where he 
ended.  He didn't talk about the change except the change that's happening 
in other parts of the world.  One would have thought that he would have 
spent some time talking about the change that's needed in Saskatchewan. 
 
I know the kind of change that's needed here because it's reflected by 
people all over this province, the change that's needed here is a change in 
government.  There is a crisis of confidence in Saskatchewan; there is a 
crisis of inadequate leadership in Saskatchewan, and before investors are 
going to make investment decisions and before people are going to make 
longer range plans, they need to have an election so that they know what 
the future is going to be, whatever the result is.  And that's why it's 
more important then ever that there be an election called instead of 
structuring some silly notion of a consensus committee which people all 
over this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are saying is nothing but a joke.   
We need leadership, and what we have is a Premier and a government who has 
abdicated its responsibility. 
 
Now the member also boasted, the member from Melfort also boasted about the 
free trade agreement.  Well I don't know how anybody could stand in this 
House and boast about the fact that these people supported a free trade 
agreement that has resulted in a loss of 75,000 jobs in Canada.  That's 
what he's boasting about.  And what I found even most disturbing of all is 
that that was the Minister of the Environment who stood in this House and 
all he could say about the environment, and I quote to you, is that, "There 
will be more talk about the environment."  That's all he said. 
 
We've had enough talk. We've had enough reannouncements and reannouncements 
on reannouncing in throne speeches about the environment.  We need some 
action.  We need a government who is going to be serious about abiding by 
its own environmental laws.  We need a government who is not simply going 
to reject the laws or put them aside when it makes a political decision on 
some project, as it has done with the Cargill operation, and decide they're 
not going to apply the environmental assessment process, for some strange 
reason.  And the Minister of the Environment thinks that all that needs to 
be done now is some more talk -- trying to buy time for the election, Mr. 
Speaker, until it is over. 
 



 

 

I want to make a comment about the situation in the agricultural sector.  
The Leader of the Opposition, the member from Riversdale, spoke eloquently 
about that in his remarks and in the debate here on Monday.  I think the 
first question period we had in the House last Monday told it all.  When 
the Premier was asked to explain the commitment which he said in his throne 
speech that the federal government had made to provide funding to 
Saskatchewan farm families, he stood in this House, in his place, and he 
could not answer any of the questions.  He could not say the kind of 
funding that was there.  He could not say how it would be made available.  
He did not say who would be eligible.  He was not able to say how much was 
available. 
 
And when the Premier was asked, Mr. Speaker, to incorporate in that 
resolution some responsibility on behalf of the provincial government, some 
responsibility through the agricultural credit corporation, he instructed 
his caucus to vote against it, and he washed his hands clean.  I find that, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, totally unacceptable.  Why would not any government in 
this province, where agriculture is so important, take some of the 
responsibility that it is able to take?  Forget about the banks . . . no, 
no, don't forget about the banks.  Try to make them do what they should do.  
Try to make the federal government do what it should do, through the Farm 
Credit Corporation and through the assistance to farmers who need to put 
the crop in.  Of course we should do that.  But for Heaven's name, here is 
an opportunity for the Government of Saskatchewan to set an example by 
saying, through the agriculture credit corporation, that it will not take 
legal action against farmers until they are financially in better shape, 
until there is funding available -- and the Premier leads his caucus in a 
vote against that.  That does not say very much for the commitment. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think there is a reason for all of that.  I 
think there is a policy that's being implemented in agriculture that has 
been unstated.  I think that that policy was stated by the Premier back in 
1977 when he wrote as a university professor, an agricultural economist.  
That is the philosophy that he adheres to and that is the policy that's 
being implemented, when the Premier said that, and I quote: 
 

 Realizing that most of our food is produced by less than 20 percent of the 
farmers, who tend to be good businessmen as well as producers, society may 
not wish to support higher food prices or "producer security" so that the 
non productive 80 percent of the farm population can live in the country 
-- at a profit. 

 
The present Premier of Saskatchewan said that, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  And so 
is it any wonder that when farmers express concern about the continuous 
delays in providing the much needed cash so that they can get their crop 
in, and the Premier stands in his place -- he only uses political rhetoric 
and stalls some more -- that one can only conclude that that policy which 
he stated several years ago is being implemented. 
 
That's the reason for those delays.  Every time there is a delay when the 
farmers need help, more farmers go.  One thousand farm families a year go.  
In 1985 they said there would be a long-term agricultural program.  We 
still don't have it and 1,000 farm families a year have gone.  The policy 



 

 

of this Premier is being implemented, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think more 
deliberately than some people realize, by the kind of approach that they 
have taken. 
 
Now let me turn now to some specific remarks about the area of the 
environment.  Let me begin by saying that the failure of this government to 
protect our environment is no less than all of its other failures, in fact 
in some ways, Mr. Speaker, even worse.  While all over the world the 
concern is growing and action is being taken, the government of this 
province only pays lip-service to the issue which may very well determine 
whether there is any future for human life on this planet. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- They try to portray their speeches as some kind of form 
of action.  But yet all their approach is an approach of crisis management.  
And they only act when they get caught. 
 
The throne speech makes some passing reference to -- and I'm going to read 
it: "State of the Environment report." 
 
But I ask this: who will prepare this report?  What resources will be 
provided in order that this report may adequately be prepared?  Given the 
record of the government on not carrying out its commitments, can anyone 
really believe that this will happen, or is it another stalling tactic 
until the next election?  And finally, will it only be used as a way for 
the government to cover up its own negligence as has been the case in the 
past?  I say to you, sir, that such a report will serve very little useful 
purpose if it is not independently and objectively prepared.  If it is 
simply prepared by the officials of this government and by the politicians, 
it will not be a report worth tabling in this House. 
 
Now it's ironical, to say the least, for the throne speech to talk about 
environmental review process, and that's the other topic that it mentioned 
very briefly.  And I read the words from page 10 of the throne speech, and 
it said the following: 
 

 Recent events have resulted in some uncertainty about environmental review 
procedures for development projects. 

 
(2100) 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the issue on the environment in this province has got 
nothing to do with uncertainty.  It's got nothing to do with sorting out 
provincial and federal jurisdictional responsibilities.  It's got a great 
deal to do with the credibility of the environmental review process which 
has been badly eroded because this government has deliberately set out to 
discredit it by not adhering to it. 
 
The issue is clear and simple . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, the 
Minister of Education is back in the House . . . or the Minister of Finance 
trying . . . 
 



 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  I think the member from Regina North East 
has been a veteran of this House for many years, and I think he knows 
better than to make reference to people's absence or presence in this 
House, absence or presence . . . Order, order.  So I'd ask the member from 
Regina North East to refrain from making reference to absence or presence 
of other members of the legislature. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, I shall continue and hope that the 
Minister of Finance does not continue to interrupt.  The issue, as I began 
to say before he did so rudely interrupt, is very clear and is very simple.  
The government refuses to accept a notion that an adequate environmental 
impact statement and public review should be part of the approval process 
of any major project on any project which may have environmental 
implications.  That government opposite refuses to accept that fact. 
 
The Rafferty project is a very good example.  It has received a 
considerable amount of debate.  It was a deliberate attempt by this 
government opposite, by all those members opposite to bypass the 
environment review process in order to have a political project which the 
Premier and the member from Souris-Cannington wanted in their 
constituencies. 
 
And what has been the net result of that?  It has created suffering for 
workers in the city of Estevan, it has shattered some expectations that 
were there, and it even has resulted in the demotion of two cabinet 
ministers -- the former minister of the Environment and the former Deputy 
Premier, who are no longer holding their positions. 
 
Now I ask, Mr. Speaker, has the Premier learned anything from that?  Not at 
all, because the same kind of process continues.  As I said earlier, 
nothing is clear about jurisdiction. 
 
We have in Saskatchewan a proposal for a pulp mill at Meadow Lake by a 
company called Millar Western.  It's a major project.  It may be a good 
project, but the government refuses to allow a public review of this 
project to take place.  It refuses to allow public hearings to take place 
so that the concerns which are legitimately expressed by people in the 
North, by people in the community, by people in Saskatchewan, so that those 
concerns can be addressed and be answered. 
 
Now there's talk about a zero liquid effluent process at the pulp mill, and 
I think that's commendable if that's the fact.  I don't question that.  But 
these things should be given an opportunity to be provided as clear 
evidence at a public hearings. 
 
I thought it very interesting that when this pulp mill was announced, the 
Minister of the Environment said, and the company said, that there would 
have to be two years in which effluent would be dumped into the Beaver 
River.  And when asked at one of those public relations meetings in Prince 
Albert by one of my colleagues: why can't you do this right away at the 
beginning of the operation of the pulp mill?, an official of the Millar 
Western said at a public meeting: because it's not possible to do. 
 



 

 

Well some politics come into this now, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  And the 
minister now announces that he's going to give approval, and all of a 
sudden some magic wand has been waved and somehow it now is possible to be 
done.  I say to the minister, look carefully at who's fooling who; or are 
you the one who's trying to fool the public?  Why did you say at the 
initial announcement that there would have to be a dumping of two years?  
And the company confirmed that there was no other choice.  And now the 
company says they can live by the new requirements.  I think that should 
have to be proven in a public review process so that the public can be 
assured. 
 
Now there's a question of the operation of the mill.  And I'm not being 
critical of this one mill; I could apply this in any other situation.  We 
have witnessed other so-called high-technology projects in the province 
which, to say the least, have failed to live up to their engineering 
standards and which have resulted in environmental contamination.  That's 
happened, Mr. Speaker.  You just have to look at Cominco . . . or Cameco 
and the spills that are continuously taking place, of wastes at that 
operation and uranium mines across northern Saskatchewan.  Surely that 
should be the subject of a public review process.  Surely the public should 
have an opportunity to be assured of what kind of safety measures are going 
to be in place to make sure that those kind of accidents don't happen. 
 
And with respect to another question, Mr. Speaker, with respect to the 
fisheries.  What was the effort that was done with respect to that in an 
environmental impact statement?  Well essentially, Mr. Speaker, all that 
happened was that a few interviews with sports fishermen in the area were 
taken.  There were no aquatic field studies conducted, only some 
interviews.  The loss or the diminishment of the fishery would impact on 
not only the sport fishery but the domestic fishery and outfitting 
businesses as well.  Don't you think, Mr. Speaker, that that should be 
subject to a public review so that the evidence could be provided to show 
that all of those questions and all of those things had been addressed, 
because they were not addressed in the environment impact statement, and 
the Minister of Environment knows that. 
 
I give you another example why a public review should be done.  Communities 
downstream from this mill, communities like Beauval, and Cole Bay, and Jans 
Bay, Canoe Narrows, Ile-a-la-Crosse, Buffalo Narrows, Dillon, Turnor Lake, 
and so on, people living in these communities come from the land.  They 
live off the land.  They fish and they trap and they hunt, and tourism is 
important. 
 
But you know that the environmental impact statement failed to go far 
enough with respect to answering those concerns.  It failed to go far 
enough in its demonstration to these people that their traditional 
life-styles and traditional sources of income would be guaranteed.  A 
public review process was necessary and is necessary to address those 
concerns because they're still being expressed. 
 
What about the impact of the demand of the pulp mill on the forest 
ecosystems and the associated resources?  This environmental impact 
statement, which this minister has okayed, failed to discuss the impact of 



 

 

the removal of several hundred thousand cubic metres of wood from the 
forest in the Meadow Lake area.  All that has been essentially ignored in 
the environmental impact statement and must be considered to be a serious 
error in process, and yet no public review process is being required.  
Everywhere else in Canada it's required.  In Alberta, the Minister of the 
Environment there is putting a stop to some of the projects that were being 
proposed there and is saying, look, we got to get serious about this and 
we're going to have to hold some public review hearings before they go any 
further.  But in Saskatchewan, where they talk in two paragraphs about the 
environment in the throne speech, the Minister of the Environment has 
decided it's not necessary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Millar Western pulp mill has a mill in Whitecourt, Alberta.  
Millar Western in Whitecourt, Alberta has been served several control 
orders issued by the Alberta Environment department because effluent levels 
from its stacks have been beyond the limits set in the operating permit 
under the Clean Air Act.  There is wood wastes and ashes that are spread 
around the community near which this pulp mill is located, and the 
community is upset.  Has this been addressed in an environmental impact 
statement that the Minister of the Environment has approved?  Of course 
not.  And yet he refuses to require that there be an environmental impact 
public review process that takes place. 
 
But let me turn now to another project -- and I'm only using these as 
examples to reinforce the proposal which I want to make to this House and 
to the government opposite.  There is a proposal of a fertilizer plant by 
Cargill, mostly funded or backed up in its funding by the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan.  Do you know, Mr. Speaker, that in this case the government 
opposite has not even required that an environmental impact statement be 
prepared, never mind the fact that it won't ask for a public hearing 
process to take place.  The government has arbitrarily decided that there 
would be no environmental impact review of any kind.  I don't understand 
that because this is a government that governs by the polls, and yet every 
poll that's been taken in Canada and Saskatchewan, any responsible person 
in public life and even schoolchildren today will tell you that the 
environmental risks should not be taken any more.  And yet this government 
opposite is prepared to take those risks. 
 
It talks about consensus.  There is a consensus about the environment.  The 
consensus is that the environment has to be protected if the future of life 
on earth is going to be assured.  There should not even be any question 
about an environmental impact review on such a project, no doubt about 
that. 
 
I want to give you just a few examples of why I say this, Mr. Speaker, and 
why this project should be subject to a full public review.  First of all, 
there's a matter of water supply.  It has been said through the press, as 
provided by the government opposite, that water usage from Buffalo Pound 
Lake will be about 350 tonnes per day -- tonnes per day -- and Saferco or 
Cargill and the government claimed that this volume is insignificant. 
 
But I question those numbers, Mr. Speaker because industry sources have 
indicated to me that those numbers are not in fact real.  Industry sources 



 

 

have told me that the actual volumes will be either in the order of 3,000 
tonnes per day, which is the minimum water usage if this plan uses all air 
cooling, or in the order of 15,000 tonnes per day if they use evaporative 
cooling.  In either case it's a very significant amount of water usage, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We know, those of us who live in Regina and in Moose Jaw and communities 
around this part of the province, that it is not uncommon for us to have to 
ration water during the summer, and yet these people and the government 
opposite and the Minister of Environment think that that's insignificant.  
They won't allow or require even for an environmental impact statement to 
be prepared so that we can see exactly what is going to be the result here.  
The plant will use large quantities of de-mineralized water. 
 

 The waste effluence from this "de-min" plant will contain high levels of 
dissolved solids and are unsuitable for irrigation.  Saferco could 
evaporate this stream or inject the effluent into deep wells. 

 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, that both methods have environmental impacts that 
should be reviewed in public, and yet the members opposite won't even 
require an environmental impact statement. 
 

 If the plant uses evaporative cooling, it must discharge the order of 
1,000 to 2,000 tonnes per day of cooling tower blowdown.  This effluent 
will contain small quantities of ammonia from time to time and relatively 
high levels of dissolved solids. 

 
Now the company has stated that the plant will not discharge to a 
watercourse -- I'll take them at their word -- so therefore one can only 
conclude that presumably it will be disposing of this effluent through 
injection into deep wells or through irrigation of adjacent farm lands, or 
some other such way, and these disposal methods could have significant 
impact on third parties. And that should be a subject of public review, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

 The plants will use a wide variety of chemicals and catalysts. 
 

This plant will use a wide variety of chemicals and catalysts.  The 
question is, are adequate plans in place to contain accidental leakages and 
to provide for responsible disposal of hazardous materials?  We don't know 
that because there has been no environmental impact statement and there is 
no requirement by this government for a public review.  Let me give you 
another example. 
 

 Ammonia and urea plants each produce process condensate streams containing 
significant quantities of ammonia, methyl amines, and urea. 

 
You have to ask the question: is Saferco using the best available 
technology to minimize or eliminate the impact of these contaminated 
streams? 
 
(2115) 
 



 

 

Don't you think that the public has a right to know?  I think the public 
has a right to know. The public thinks that the public has a right to know, 
but the government opposite refuses to make it available to them because 
there's no environmental impact statement and there is no requirement for 
an environmental public review process.  Where else in Canada do we see 
this kind of neglect and irresponsibility?  Let's look at our neighbours to 
the west, Alberta. 
 
In that province of Alberta the approvals for all industrial projects, 
including fertilizer projects, are subject to full public review before the 
energy resources conservation board, full public review.  Environmental 
questions are addressed, competitors' questions are addressed, economic 
feasibility is addressed, but in Saskatchewan under this government . . . 
similar to the Rafferty-Alameda, none of those are addressed.  The only 
thing that is addressed is the politics of this government. 
 
No wonder all that the Minister of the Environment could say in his remarks 
on the throne speech today was that there is a great deal that is going to 
be talked about the environment.  I say to the minister, talk isn't enough.  
Look at your record.  Look at the failure of your environmental record and 
do something about it before some of the damage that is done is such that 
it is too late. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the environmental impact assessment and review process in 
Saskatchewan is not working.  It's not working because the government 
stands in the way.  It's not working because the government interferes.  
It's not working because the government manipulates it to suit its own 
political objectives.  It's not working because environmental concerns have 
been secondary considerations.  And yet the environmental impact assessment 
and statement process should be the most effective tool in society's 
efforts to manage and maintain a healthy environment. 
 
And I say to the House and I say for the record, as I have said to the 
press and in other places, that the time has come for the establishment of 
an independent environmental protection commission with a broad mandate to 
protect and to enhance our environment.  The present process has no 
credibility and does not work. 
 
In Rafferty, in the Millar Western project, in the Cargill project the 
government is either the proponent solely or is in partnership with the 
proponent.  It requires the environmental impact statement, it is party to 
that statement, and it is party to that statement, and then it also sits 
down and has to decide whether that statement is adequate.  Now that 
clearly is a conflict of interest.  And so the Minister of Environment 
reviews his own EIS, or environmental impact statement, and decides whether 
it's adequate and whether it should go ahead.  I say, Mr. Speaker, that is 
a very serious conflict of interest, and you can only look at the 
experience, and the experience has shown that the public is not being very 
well served. 
 
This independent environmental commission would remove the politics out of 
decisions affecting the environment.  It could require that an 
environmental impact statement be prepared.  It could initiate one on its 



 

 

own.  And it, Mr. Speaker, would review any environmental impact statement 
and make a recommendation publicly to the minister and report it to the 
legislature so that the minister and the government would be held 
accountable. 
 
I think it ought to have some other broader mandate as well.  I think it 
would recommend standards of environmental quality and protection.  It 
would supervise baseline studies to measure the present extent of 
environmental degradation.  It would implement a system of effective 
environmental monitoring and identify areas where compensation or 
mitigation is required.  It would publish an annual report on the state and 
the future of our environment by identifying developments and situations 
that endanger our environment or people, and make recommendations for 
action. 
 
This is the kind of action, Mr. Speaker, that we need if we are going to 
assure that the interests of environmental protection are looked after in 
this province, no matter who the government is.  This is an issue that's 
too important to leave to the whims of certain politicians like the members 
opposite, who choose whenever they so please to either ignore environmental 
laws, or actually break those environmental laws to suit their own 
purposes. 
 
And that's why this kind of independent environmental protection commission 
is absolutely essential, and that's why this party, the New Democratic 
Party, is committed to implementing one after the next election when we 
hopefully are the government on the other side of the House. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the throne speech did not mention a single legislative 
initiative in the environment.  There was, last year, a promise of 
legislation that would complement the national legislation and Ontario's 
legislation to mitigate against the effects of CFCs to protect our ozone 
layer.  One year later, Mr. Speaker, we're still waiting for that 
legislation -- it was not introduced.  And yet there was no mention of it 
made in the throne speech and the Minister of the Environment didn't even 
refer to it when he spoke earlier today. 
 
Workers on the work site are usually the first to become aware of an 
environmental hazardous situation.  Unfortunately, in most cases they're 
put in a very difficult situation.  They're put in a situation where their 
jobs may be in jeopardy if they report this environmental hazardous 
situation.  Workers want to play a role in protecting the environment like 
the rest of the public, and they should be given an opportunity to play 
that role.  They shouldn't have to fear for their jobs.  They should be 
protected.  And that's why there needs to be legislation that will protect 
workers, and that's why we need to have, as is being proposed in other 
parts of Canada, whistle-blow legislation which will provide such 
protection.  One would have thought that the government might have looked 
at that and proposed it in the throne speech, but we didn't see anything 
about it. 
 
Now there's a lot of examples of these kinds which I would, if I had the 
time, would have wanted to address.  But I want to just point out some of 



 

 

the failures which I will be addressing in other occasions during this 
session.  I think we need to address the failure to remove PCBs 
(polychlorinated biphenyl) from populated areas, which this government has 
not yet completed even though it's been over two years in the process; the 
failure of the minister to initiate a public inquiry into the numerous 
spills of waters at northern uranium mines, which was called for by people 
in the north and by the mayors of the north; the failure of the government 
to introduce legislation to protect the earth's ozone layer, as promised in 
the last throne speech; the failure of the Minister of the Environment to 
take a stand against the 720-acre garbage landfill on the banks of the 
North Saskatchewan River in Edmonton which is threatening the water of the 
North Saskatchewan River which serves all kinds of communities in Alberta 
and Saskatchewan; the failure of the government to address the issue of 
sustainable agriculture -- not a word.  And the list could go on, but there 
will be other opportunities to talk about those, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I want to just now conclude by talking about one other failure of this 
government.  And I read for the members opposite from a statement that was 
made in the last year's budget in a booklet called Challenges and 
Opportunities Saskatchewan, Protecting Our Environment.  I quote: 
 

 In 1989-90, the Government will expand on its recycling activities by 
undertaking a "blue box" pilot project.  (And) this project will provide 
collection boxes so that Saskatchewan residents can deposit products such 
as newspapers, cans and bottles (and) recycling. 

 
Five pilot projects -- the minister, when he spoke to the Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association, reduced that to one or two.  But a year 
later, there still isn't any initiative that has been shown.  It's time 
that this government honoured its commitment to the environment by 
introducing and implementing a sensible waste management program in the 
province.  Simple restatements of old promises which have not been kept 
aren't any good any more. 
 
After all these long times of studies and comments, we need to get some 
conclusions that are drawn and some actions that are taken.  This 
government has been in power for eight years; that's been a lot of time.  
Twelve months ago it promised to do something; it still hasn't done it.  
And it's not as if the need isn't there.  The Department of the Environment 
officials have confirmed that upwards to 850,000 tonnes of waste are 
produced each year in Saskatchewan.  At most, only 2 per cent is recycled 
in this province, far below the national average of 10 per cent. 
 
Provincial governments in Ontario and British Columbia and Alberta are 
actively working to establish blue box recycling programs in their large 
urban centres, and maybe in rural Saskatchewan there has to be some 
variation of that.  By year end, Ontario expects that more than two-thirds 
of single family urban dwellings in that  
 Dprovince will be involved in the curb side recycling program.  The 
Alberta government is implementing a comprehensive recycling program in 
co-operation with communities and industry and within its own public 
service.  In British Columbia, Victoria area residents diverted 1,188 
tonnes of waste through their blue box program in the first two months of 



 

 

operation. 
 
In the little community of Chaplin in Saskatchewan, a school class is 
carrying out a collection system for bottles and cans and other things.  
But where is the government?  This government sits on its hands, it sits 
frozen with inactivity, and it refuses to take any action.  And so to 
assist them, I want to make some proposals here in my concluding remarks, 
and I want the minister to listen carefully because there are a number of 
immediate steps that the provincial government could be taking to catch up 
with other provinces and move forward in the entire waste management area. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, the government should establish a Saskatchewan 
recycling and waste reduction council serving as a co-ordinator bringing 
different groups together.  Its membership would include municipalities and 
industry and environmental and community organizations, and it's mandate 
would be to provide leadership in developing recylcing awareness, bring 
together communities, industry and concerned organizations, and assist in a 
wide variety of projects, including a province-wide curb side recycling 
program in urban centres and any modified rural operation that's necessary. 
 
Secondly, the government should establish an achievable waste reduction 
target, say by the year 2000, and a plan to accomplish that goal. 
 
Thirdly, the government should provide leadership by example in provincial 
government departments and agencies and facilities and institutions.  Over 
a year ago I wrote to the former minister of Environment proposing that at 
least in the legislative area they could provide a paper recycling project.  
He wrote back to me -- I won't read the correspondence, I'll do that in 
estimates -- that he was looking at it and that there would be some action. 
 
When that minister left, I wrote in December of 1989 to the new minister.  
And I said the same thing and he repeated the same thing, that the 
government is studying it.  Well they've been studying it for a long time 
and it's time they did something about it. 
 
Fourth, Mr. Speaker, the government should develop a provincial government 
procurement and contract compliance policy which favours purchase of 
materials with recycled content. 
 
And fifth, the government should provide research and promotion assistance 
for Saskatchewan non-profit organizations and businesses and municipalities 
to establish recycling projects in the province.  If it even spent a small 
fraction of the amount of money on this that it spends at the Cargill 
operation, we could create many, many more jobs through recycling and 
environment protection industries in this province.  And if we don't get on 
it very soon, it'll be done somewhere else, and we will once again only be 
supplying the raw product, which we have done for far too long in this 
province. 
 
Taking these first steps, Mr. Speaker, would provide leadership and give 
Saskatchewan people the opportunity to participate directly in the four R's 
of sensible waste management:  reduce, re-use, recycle, and recover.  It 
also must be emphasized that a comprehensive recycling program means more 



 

 

jobs for Saskatchewan people, more economic activity for Saskatchewan 
business. 
 
Throughout the country recycling programs are proving to be effective, and 
often 70 per cent of households are recycling household waste when given 
access to a curb-side recycling program.  Today more than 1 million 
Canadians are involved in some type of blue box recycling program.  I 
regret to say that Saskatchewan is falling far behind other jurisdictions 
because the government has taken no positive or concrete action to protect 
our environment for future generations. 
 
Saskatchewan people are ready.  They're ready to become actively involved 
in protecting our environment.  Municipalities are actively seeking 
solutions to waste disposal problems.  All that is required is that this 
government provide some leadership role. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that we're at a turning point in 
the human habitation of this earth.  No one questions that the environment 
is a complex, delicately balanced system which is being bombarded by 
pollutants at a very increasing rate.  If we don't act now to check the 
continued pollution of the earth and the destruction of our environment, we 
will eventually destroy the fitness of the planet as a place for human 
beings.  And for this to happen, we need commitment and we need political 
will from government.  We need a carefully thought out, comprehensive, 
sustainable development strategy which is not ignored or subverted whenever 
government, for its partisan political reasons, feels it should do so.  
Unfortunately, that is not what we have seen in Saskatchewan, and I hope 
that soon it can change, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(2130) 
 
The throne speech is an empty document.  It shows that government opposite 
is a tired government.  It shows that this government has run out of ideas.  
It is a throne speech prepared by a large cabinet, which is just collecting 
their pay and putting in time.  There's no leadership, from the Premier 
down.  There is such a lack of leadership that they're trying to cover up 
with some consensus committee of 100 people -- which will be hand-picked -- 
whose job it will be to try to protect this government. 
 
The only consensus, Mr. Speaker -- as I close I want to say this -- the 
only consensus needed at this time is the consensus of an election.  Let 
all of the people decide on the direction for Saskatchewan in the 1990s, 
not a hand-picked hundred.  Let the whole population decide.  Call an 
election so that the directions for the 1990s could be clearly set, and we 
could go on with building this province to the great province that we know 
it can be, rather than tearing it down, which has been the record of those 
members opposite since 1982, eight years ago when they were elected, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Petersen: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I appreciate the 
opportunity to participate in the debate on the throne speech.  I hope 



 

 

everyone's enjoyed the first four days of the new session.  We've had a 
very, very interesting four days.  I really don't feel that we've had much 
of a holiday or much of a break between, because from the time we left back 
in 1989 until now I had expected the opposition to live up to some of their 
promises, some of their commitments to work with the government, be 
non-partisan, work together for the betterment of the people in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I feel like we've only broken for a weekend and come 
back to the same rhetoric, the same drivel, the same philosophy, the same 
dogma that I heard in some of the longest most boring speeches that this 
House has ever had to endure in the previous session.  It's starting all 
over again.  That is their idea of recycling, Mr. Speaker, a perfect 
example of recycling.  Old ideas, old philosophies . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Old speeches. 
 
Hon. Mr. Petersen: --  Old speeches, as a matter of fact, one of my 
colleagues said.  And we probably have to go back and check it out in the 
Hansard, but I imagine they're right -- and old ideas, old ideas. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition, absolutely a man for the '60s, no question 
about it, but, Mr. Speaker, this is the '90s, and we see that local MLAs 
are calling on the government for projects to work with agriculture.  
They're calling for a balanced budget.  That's the headline of the Prince 
Albert Daily Herald, March 19, "Local MLAs want a balanced budget."  Well, 
Mr. Speaker, we've heard some talk about it in 1982; there was a balanced 
budget with a small surplus.  And it's easy to juggle things around when 
you ask your Crown corporations like SaskPower and SaskTel to go out and go 
into debt -- massively into debt -- and then declared dividends to the 
Consolidated Fund so that you can appear to balance your budget.  They 
balanced it on the backs of borrowed money through the Crown corporations. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, those local MLAs from Prince Albert want to go back to 
that type of a situation where they were cooking the books and seemingly 
having a balanced budget.  As a matter of fact, talking about old ideas and 
recycling, one of them, the NDP MLA for Prince Albert, said, and I quote if 
I may, "Kowalsky said the government must find some concrete means of 
helping farmers, perhaps through the re-implementing the land bank."  Well, 
Mr. Speaker, on March 19 the member for Prince Albert said those words, 
those very words, in 1990.  It says so right here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the land bank was an experiment.  I'll give them credit for 
trying a new idea.  I'll give them credit for trying an idea to see if it 
would work.  And there are possibly some benefits to helping 
intergenerational transfers of farms and businesses; but, Mr. Speaker, the 
members opposite couldn't help themselves.  They had to stick their little 
fingers in the pudding and stir it around and dabble in it and say, you're 
going to get a farm and the other four guys, no.  Sorry you can't get it 
because you don't vote the way we do, or we don't like you, or we decided 
this guy is going to get it. 
 
Big government making decisions for people once again.  And they want to go 



 

 

back to that because they love big government.  They love dabbling in 
people's lives.  They love playing around in agriculture without really 
doing anything, Mr. Speaker.  They love having government control. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker -- pardon me I have a bit of a cold -- one of the things 
that Saskatchewan has long enjoyed was a richness of its people, Mr. 
Speaker.  We're a very rich province.  We're not a poor province.  We've 
got a richness of people, a richness of resources, and we're rich in 
spirit, Mr. Speaker.  The spirit is strong and alive, Mr. Speaker.  We do 
not have people who give up easily.  We do not have people who quit.  We do 
not have people who roll over and play dead, Mr. Speaker.  We have people 
who try very, very hard in Saskatchewan. 
 
Just take a look at our farmers.  Just take a look at what they've gone up 
against.  The opposition talks about a 1,000 farmers a year leaving the 
farms since the Tories took over.  And you've heard that.  It was quoted 
tonight; they speak of it often, in tough times.  Well the truth is, Mr. 
Speaker, in what was considered boom times in this province, unprecedented 
world prices, unprecedented good weather conditions during the time of the 
'70s under the previous administration, the NDP, a thousand farmers a year 
left the farms.  From 1971 to 1982 we lost 11,000 farmers. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, in tough times we've lost a thousand farmers a year; in 
good times under the NDP we lost a thousand farmers a year.  Mr. Speaker, 
I'd say that because it has been tough times, obviously our administration 
has done considerably better in trying to hold people there.  If it's tough 
times and you're losing people, I can understand it.  But to lose a 
thousand a year in good times is unconscionable.  And land bank was their 
solution and the only solution. 
 
In 1981 and '82, Mr. Speaker, '79-80, '81-82, I paid as high as 21 and 22 
per cent interest on my farm on my loans.  Nobody talked to me about how 
wonderful the government of the day was treating me.  They told me, well 
I'm sorry, it's your own problem, I'm sorry.  Interest rates are out of the 
provincial jurisdiction.  I'm sorry, we can't do anything about it. 
 
But don't worry, we're going to bring in a wonderful constitution that will 
save you.  A wonderful constitution; we're going to cook it up in the back 
room, in the kitchen.  We're going to have this constitution, and you'll be 
able to go broke in some kind of constitutional utopia that the former 
leader of the opposition, the then premier, Mr. Blakeney, thought would 
save us all.  And a major, a major person in cooking that little recipe up 
in the kitchen was the now Leader of the Opposition.  It was fairly 
interesting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in good times we lost a thousand farmers a year in this 
province -- in good times.  Today the value of capital assets on farms has 
declined from 33 billion in 1982 to about 24, 25 billion today.  We've had 
a 30 per cent reduction in our asset value, in our net worth.  Farm debt 
has gone down slightly in the last three or four years, but it climbed to 6 
billion by '86; it's down to about five and a half billion right now.  But, 
Mr. Speaker, that has been done at some fairly high cost, some 
restructuring, some movement on the part of farmers, some movement on the 



 

 

part of banks. 
 
Last year, '89, farmers paid almost 500 million in interest, Mr. Speaker, 
much of it on loans that were caused by the high interest policies that 
were condoned by the members opposite '79, '80, and '81, because of 
consolidation of loans at that time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we're looking at tough times -- true -- but they're tough 
times caused, not by this government, Mr. Speaker, they're tough times 
because of world situation, world grain prices, and weather conditions.  
It's no excuse, Mr. Speaker, but we've been doing the best that we can. 
 
The opposition members tell us, you've done nothing for agriculture, you 
haven't consulted, you haven't talked with people, you haven't tried to 
help farmers.  Well, Mr. Speaker, the truth is that we have consulted, we 
have worked with farm groups, we have worked with farmers.  We talked about 
putting in programs in '84, '85, '86, starting to help farmers in response 
to requests from such groups as Sask Wheat Pool, the SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities), the National Farmers Union.  We 
provided low interest money, $25 an acre, 6 per cent.  The pool had asked 
us to supply it at 7; we went 1 per cent better and went 6, and we did 
that, Mr. Speaker.  We've responded, we've responded. 
 
And members opposite say, well what's a billion dollars into agriculture; 
you didn't do anything for farmers.  Well, Mr. Speaker, that program, in 
hindsight, worked reasonably well.  We've had some tough years since then, 
but it helped a great many farmers.  A great many more suffered the 
unfortunate experience of drought back to back, three, four, and five years 
in a row. 
 
We've worked on changing the crop insurance mechanism to assist farmers, to 
give them a better opportunity to be able to meet their cash costs, to be 
able to meet their commitments through a crop insurance plan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We've travelled the length and breadth of Canada, the North American 
continent, and indeed into Europe and other countries, Asian countries, 
trying to sell products that are produced in Saskatchewan, trying to find 
new markets for our products.  And, Mr. Speaker, it's not easy in a world 
out there, not easy out there in the world when you have got countries that 
join together like the European economic community has done and has put 
together one of the largest consortiums, if you would, ever on the face of 
this earth, and they are supplying their farmers with tax dollars from a 
huge population supporting them to the tune of 50 to 60 per cent of what I 
get for my product, Mr. Speaker.  That's tough to compete against.  And we 
call on the federal government to assist us in these times, and indeed they 
should. 
 
But what does the opposition do?  They try to play petty politics with it.  
They try to have silly little procedural games as to who's going to get a 
motion in before the other person in this Assembly on agriculture, Mr. 
Speaker, the basis of our existence in this province.  They play petty 
partisan political games. 
 



 

 

They get the press for one day.  We got some press; they get some press and 
then two days, for two days after an emergency debate on agriculture not 
one question from members opposite during question period -- not one 
question, not one question.  The associate minister would have been happy 
to take those questions.  I'm quite certain he would have been able to 
answer them to the satisfaction of the people in the province.  There would 
have been no problem.  Not a word from their ag critic.  Not a word from 
the leader about agriculture. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, one of the problems we have is that members opposite 
only want to play petty partisan politics.  It is not in their best 
interests to see this House operate in harmony.  It is not in their best 
political interest to see this House operate as it should.  They would much 
rather go out and have the rabble-rousers stir up the population.  They 
would much rather demonstrate, walk up and down and scream and yell, than 
sit down in this Assembly and sit down with this government and work out 
some common sense solutions. 
 
They are trying for the press.  They are trying for the publicity because 
they are a party that is floundering out there for policy -- floundering, 
Mr. Speaker.  They are trying desperately to convince people in 
Saskatchewan that they understand agriculture because agriculture is the 
mainstay of this province and they want to be the ones who are going to 
understand agriculture.  Just as, Mr. Speaker, they are the ones who are 
now talking about understanding the environment, and the "echo-system" as 
the member says -- it's pronounced "eecosystem," but he says "echo-system"; 
it's up to him I guess -- but they are the people who are long on rhetoric 
and short on action.  They condemn this government for instituting 
procedures to deal with programs and projects that are being built or being 
discussed that would help us diversify this province. They are the ones who 
are sitting there holding up job creation in this province.  What for?  
They claim it's because they are the friends of the environment, but it's 
really for partisan political reasons, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(2145) 
 
Those members opposite should look at their record.  They should take a 
look at famous quotes from history, famous quotes from history.  The famous 
quote from the previous member from Kelvington-Wadena when he was minister 
of environment who coined the phrase, "What's a PCB?"  He didn't even know 
what a PCB was, and he was the minister in charge of the environment, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I think I've touched a nerve over there.  I hear somebody chirping across 
the way.  I wonder who it is?  I think I've touched a nerve.  Let's talk 
about the environment once more.  When I've found a nerve I like to play 
with it a little bit over there because it shows they're alive anyhow.  It 
shows they're maybe trying to come up with some policies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let's talk about some concrete proposals.  Let's talk about 
some concrete proposals.  The only concrete proposals those members over 
there ever had was when they covered up a PCB spill with feet upon feet of 
cement.  They covered it up, concrete, Mr. Speaker.  That's what they call 



 

 

a concrete proposal.  We got a little PCB spill here; what are we going to 
do about it?  Well, let's put some cement on top of it.  Hey, now that's a 
concrete proposal.  I think that's fantastic. 
 
I wonder who the minister of the environment was at that time?  Maybe we'll 
go back and check the records a little later on, when I conclude my 
comments later tomorrow. 
 
Well, let's take a look at some other concrete proposals.  Let's go up to, 
oh, I don't know, let's take a look at Cluff Lake.  Uranium mining was 
allowed.  Can you imagine, Mr. Speaker, uranium mining and processing was 
allowed under their administration.  It . . . Well, some of my colleagues 
say it was encouraged.  I understand there was a little difference of 
opinion over there on their ranks.  One of their members would get up and 
say, you shouldn't have uranium production, you shouldn't have uranium 
processing.  But again he's against using coal to create electricity, so 
you shouldn't have the lights on; you shouldn't burn anything.  We should 
go back to a lot of things.  So long as he's warm and clothed and fed it's 
fine to say you shouldn't do all these things. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about the concrete proposals at Cluff 
Lake.  I want to talk about the waste disposal systems that members of the 
opposition, the then ministers of Environment allowed, and perhaps even 
encouraged.  Their solution to controlling or to handling waste material 
that the plant was unable to process at that time at Cluff Lake, was to 
build huge concrete tubs, concrete tubs.  They must have had a buy on 
cement or something, Mr. Speaker.  They put cement everywhere; they loved 
the stuff.  Huge concrete tubs in which this waste material was stored, and 
there it is sitting out on the open on a pad.  But you know, Mr. Speaker, 
concrete lasts a long time.  But it does, like everything else, eventually 
break down.  And, Mr. Speaker, those wastes started to seep out of those 
concrete tubs.  And guess what?  Guess what, Mr. Speaker?  Under our 
administration we came along and said, well, I guess that doesn't look so 
good.  We were forced to clean it up.  We were forced to have the plant 
upgrade to be able to handle that type of product, Mr. Speaker.  And the 
problem is no more. 
 
But under their administration, the so called friends of the environment, 
as they are now, the self-styled friends of the environment, those lovers 
of the ecosystem, allowed all kinds of things to happen, Mr. Speaker, that 
were not at all environment friendly.  As a matter of fact, it didn't even 
make sense. 
 
The member opposite in his comments, just before I picked up the Speech 
from the Throne, talked about chemical usage in agriculture.  Members today 
have spoke about having reduction in chemical usages.  Well, Mr. Speaker, 
under the administration of the NDP from '71-82, chemical usage in this 
province quadrupled -- quadrupled, Mr. Speaker.  Just think about it.  That 
party over there today says we should be reducing the use of chemicals, we 
should be reducing it.  Well what happened for their 11 years?  A thousand 
farmers a year went off the farm, quadrupling of use of chemicals in 
agriculture, Mr. Speaker.  It makes one wonder, you know, what happened to 
them on the road to Damascus or Regina or wherever it was or on the road to 



 

 

Winnipeg or wherever their last NDP leadership convention was held. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those chemicals are used carefully by farmers in this 
province, very carefully.  But, Mr. Speaker, under their administration 
they allowed the sale and storage of those chemicals in places like the 
local corner grocery store.  They allowed it, Mr. Speaker.  Can you imagine 
that; can you imagine that? 
 
I remember as a young person seeing pails of carbine sitting alongside bags 
of flour in the corner store, and they allowed it; they allowed that.  And 
today they say, oh my God, we've got to do something about this.  And they 
allowed it.  There was no legislation, no regulation.  Where were their 
thoughts at, Mr. Speaker?  What were they considering at that time? 
 
They didn't want to stir up the populace, perhaps.  They didn't want to 
create enemies; they didn't want to enforce regulations; they didn't want 
to protect people.  They were scared they might lose a vote.  Well they 
certainly have come up with some new ideas now.  The friends of the 
environment are going to clean up the entire world and save the universe.  
I can see it all now, Mr. Speaker, I can see it all now. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we've talked a little bit about agriculture, and I like 
to talk about agriculture because that's what most of the people in 
Saskatchewan depend on for a living in one way or another. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- That's all you do is talk about it.  How about doing 
something about it? 
 
Mr. Petersen: -- And a member opposite says, that's all you do is talk 
about agriculture.  Well let me tell you, my curly little chum, I can talk 
about agriculture because I am a farmer and I understand where it's at and 
my constituents are farmers.  My constituents . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Why is the member from the Regina North West on his feet? 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena was referring to one of the members on this side of the 
House as a curly-headed chum.  And I would like the Speaker to review his 
comments and determine whether that is a term which we will be using in 
this House, because if that's the term and the precedent we're going to be 
setting I'm sure there are other names that members will be calling each 
other.  Thank you. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- I wonder if in keeping with this if we could refer to 
the state of the growth of the hair on the member's head over there. 
 
The Speaker: -- Well over the past three sessions I've heard members refer 
to each other in worse terms than that; however, if it does offend a member 
perhaps they shouldn't refer to them as curly little chums. 
 
Hon. Mr. Petersen: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I thank you for that very kindly, 
and indeed I too have heard members called worse things in this Chamber.  
But as the night wears on here, after listening to comments from the 



 

 

members opposite one has to keep a sense of humour, and obviously when one 
has a profile like mine a sense of humour is essential. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to get back to the substance of my speech if I 
may here for a moment, unless there are any other asides that members 
opposite would care to inject.  I think, Mr. Speaker, that we've proved 
that both sides of the House late in the evening can have a sense of humour 
and, Mr. Speaker, I find that encouraging.  That is the first indication 
that I have had that members opposite actually view this forum as a place 
for some debate, a certain amount of fellowship, and I would like to see 
that spirit of co-operation and a little bit of fellowship carried on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Petersen: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about transportation for 
a while.  Now I could talk about agriculture for days and days and days, 
but I want to talk about transportation since that's now under a portfolio 
that I handle. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan, as I said in my opening remarks, has always had 
a lot of spirit, we've always done a lot of innovative things.  We've never 
been one to roll over and play dead just because it got a little tough out 
there. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it's our courage and our spirit that allows us to operate 
in less than optimum conditions in this province.  It's those innovations, 
Mr. Speaker, that have allowed us to stay here in Saskatchewan, 
innovations, Mr. Speaker, like joint venturing projects in the province.  
The oil upgrader here in Regina, the Co-op upgrader -- joint ventured 
between the province and the Co-op refinery, Mr. Speaker.  Other types of 
ventures in the province where we go to the private sector and joint 
venture projects like Saferco, the fertilizer processing plant.  Those 
types of things, Mr. Speaker, are definitely signs of innovation in this 
province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, another innovation that we've had in the recent past is 
setting up a short-line railroad in Saskatchewan, a short-line railroad.  
It's called Southern Rails Co-operative Ltd., and it's a producer-owned 
co-operative comprised of over 200 grain producers from around the Killdeer 
and the Perry areas in Saskatchewan.  We set up the appropriate legislation 
to put it in place. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan we not only have suffered low grain 
prices, drought, high interest rate, grasshoppers, and the NDP, we've also 
had rail line abandonment, Mr. Speaker -- rail line abandonment.  And it is 
crucial to this province that we retain a network of rail to move our 
product out, because what we grow . . . all that we grow is exported in one 
form or another. 
 
Now that particular rail line abandonment idea that happened a while back, 
is a cost-cutting measure by the railroad companies in this country, and 
it's allowed under federal statute.  They can apply to have railroads or 
sections of them abandoned.  And they can quote chapter and verse on why 



 

 

they should do it -- the cost savings, efficiencies. 
 
And I could go into rail line abandonment hearings in some detail, having 
fought 18 of them around the province, and I might add, having been 
successful at a couple of them.  We have a spur line into Kelvington in my 
riding, and another success is this short-line railroad.  The Killdeer sub, 
as it's called, was due to be abandoned.  And the farmers said, you know, 
we're going to have to haul our grain 40, 50, 60 miles, and it's going to 
be pretty hard on us, and it's going to be hard on the provincial highway 
system, and it's going to be hard on the grid road system, and the farm 
access road system, and isn't there something we can do to keep our 
railroad or have access to it. 
 
So we took a little bit of time to talk to some farmers and talk to some 
innovative people, and the idea of a road railer unit was born.  Now, Mr. 
Speaker, that's a converted Kenworth Truck or large highway tractor that's 
converted over to operate on rails as well as to operate on the roads.  The 
idea is, if you have a short-line railroad you can't really afford to have 
a million-dollar locomotive sitting out there, Mr. Speaker, but you can 
afford to have a unit that can be moved under its own power from one 
short-line railroad to another short-line railroad.  The problem is, 
oftentimes those two short-line railroads don't hook up VIA Rail, or on 
rail.  You have to do it on our highway system.  So you have to be able to 
have the rail driving wheels of this machine able to lift up and use road 
wheels to move from place to place. 
 
I could talk about that for a long time as well, but the short and sweet 
and simple of it is, it allows those farmers in those areas to move eight 
to 10 box cars from where they load them to where the railroad, the CN or 
CP, presently has service, Mr. Speaker.  Now those co-operatives, Mr. 
Speaker, are going to make money at this.  Local farmers setting up their 
own company in the face of seeming impossible odds, with a little bit of 
help from the provincial government and a little bit of help from railroads 
who said, well, we'll sell you the rail lines; we don't want them, but if 
you guys can use them maybe we'll sell them to you -- so they did.  Mr. 
Speaker, those farmers out there are hauling grain over these railroads 
today the same way they've done for quite some time, and are providing 
efficiencies of operation for themselves and for the people of 
Saskatchewan, and saving the taxpayers of Saskatchewan untold thousands of 
dollars because of less road wear and less road use.  Mr. Speaker, it's 
getting a little bit late on in the evening and I would at this time ask to 
adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10 p.m. 
 


