





























































Hansard: June 14, 1990


 

 

June 14/90 
 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it is again 
my honour today to rise in the Assembly and to table some 1,445 signatures 
from residents of Saskatoon.  This totals 10,480 signatures that I've 
presented of residents who are opposed to the removal of the liquor store 
from Market Mall in Saskatoon to the new location.  And, Mr. Speaker, that 
represents a resounding message of consensus from Saskatoon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great 
deal of pleasure to introduce to you and to other members of the House some 
48 grade 7 students from Wynyard.  They're accompanied by their school 
teacher, Mr. Bill Kizlyk.  Other persons accompanying the students are Nona 
Wasylenka, Diane Dalman, Sheila Thornton, Karen Doidge, Alan Brooks, and 
Rosanna Milsted. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be meeting with the group following question period.  
I'd ask members to join with me to extend a warm welcome to the students 
from Wynyard. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's a pleasure for me to 
welcome to the legislature 23 students, grade 7 and 8, from the Vanguard 
high school.  They are accompanied today by their teacher and bus driver: 
Mrs. Williamson; chaperons, Dennis Christopher, Martin Dykema, Marilyn 
Sawchenko, and Norma Rousseaux. 
 
And I want you to know that I would have liked to have visited with you 
today.  I have found out that I have to do estimates here after question 
period is over, so my friend, the member for Shaunavon, will look after you 
with pictures and things like that.  And I just want all of the Assembly to 
join with me in welcoming you here today. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 
introduce to you, and through you to other members of the Assembly, a group 
of students from the south-eastern part of my constituency, located in your 
gallery, and this is a group of grade 9 students from the Clavet composite 
high school, 39 of them, and they are accompanied by their teacher, Gail 
McVicar, Donna Massine, Joan Vanderloos; and the teacher aide, Jan MacEwan; 



 

 

and chaperons, Mrs. Miller, Robertson, Cummins, and Spencer; and along with 
their bus driver, Greg Johanson. 
 
I certainly hope that they have a good time here, that they find the 
proceedings informational and informative.  And I would ask all members to 
join with me in welcoming these students from Clavet. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- While I'm on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I would also like 
to introduce to you another group of 47 students, grades 4 and 5, from the 
Prairie View Elementary School in Dalmeny, Saskatchewan, and they are 
accompanied by their teachers, Mrs. Berge and Mr. Mervin Driedger.  I know 
Merv and I go back quite a few years and have been teaching in the same 
school in times past.  And their chaperons are Mrs. Schierling and Mrs. 
Altroge. 
 
And I might just indicate to you and to members in the Assembly, that there 
is a youngster here by the name of Gwen Katzman, that might arise some 
interest in members here.  And I see also that proud papa is sitting in the 
back behind the rail here to witness his daughter's presence in the 
Assembly today.  So I would also ask all members to welcome the students 
from Dalmeny at this time. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to join with the 
Minister of Social Services in welcoming the group from Clavet.  As you 
know, with the redistribution, Clavet will be in my now very large rural 
constituency.  And so I look forward to meeting the teachers and the 
students as time proceeds and looking very much forward to representing 
them after the next election. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Consensus Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my question today 
is for the Premier.  Mr. Premier, I think it's become clear to all 
Saskatchewan people that Consensus Saskatchewan is falling far short of the 
vehicle which was to attract this flood of new ideas on where this province 
will be in the next decade and the next century. 
 
Mr. Premier, so far it's held 60 meetings and is attracting an average of 
around 20 people -- in Saskatoon, 50; in Prince Albert, 12; in Moose Jaw, 
10.  Mr. Premier, I think you know what the problem is.  And that is that 
after eight long years of your government, the people of Saskatchewan know 
you aren't listening any more, so they don't bother to tell you anything.  
Isn't that the truth, Mr. Premier? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 



 

 

 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- Mr. Speaker, in reply to the member's comments and -- I 
would hope -- some concern, I think the process is a legitimate one, and in 
fact people attending the meetings have indicated.  To date we have a total 
of approximately 13 to 14 hundred people that have taken the time to come 
out and to in fact go through a process.  For large groups in dealing with 
very broad issues is very new to this province.  We've often done it in 
education or in health, but, I think given the broad nature of the 
province, that has not taken place before. 
 
We expect, Mr. Speaker, that we are going to be over the 2,000 by the time 
the meetings are completed.  And I would invite the member in fact to take 
part in one of them.  He will find that they are very open.  They have been 
very positive.  People have been very realistic, but they have also been 
very open to putting their vision out front as to where they see 
Saskatchewan going and the people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I'll again address my question to the 
Premier.  Mr. Premier, I think it's safe to say that everyone in this House 
and in this province feels that the members of Consensus Saskatchewan are 
sincere in attempting to do their job.  It's just that everyone knows that 
your government wasn't sincere in giving them the job in the first place. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- To quote Murray Mandryk from the Leader-Post when he 
was speaking about the 20 people that showed up in Fort Qu'Appelle, and I 
quote.  He says: 
 

 Meanwhile, the consensus reached at this meeting seemed to be that no one 
was going to listen . . . anyway. 

 
Mr. Premier, you've received a clear consensus -- 100,000 names on a 
petition opposing the dental plan and the changes to the prescription drug 
plan, but you didn't address those issues.  You had a clear consensus with 
respect to privatization -- a hundred thousand people opposed 
privatization.  How can you expect these people, Mr. Premier, to believe 
they're being listened to now when you wouldn't listen to them then. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- Mr. Speaker, I think there's no doubt that a fair 
number of people have raised the concern of: will they be taken seriously?  
They have also stated, Mr. Speaker -- and the member should be aware of 
this -- the degree of cynicism and the level of cynicism as it relates to 
politicians, and I speak of all politicians on both sides of the House, 
remains very high with the people, with the public, with the people of 
Saskatchewan.  I don't think that's unlike what is happening right across 
Canada. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, it is incumbent therefore upon politicians, if they 



 

 

care anything about the democratic system, in fact to be open to new ways 
within the decision-making process.  He will also be aware, Mr. Speaker, 
that people in going through the process at the end have stated very 
positively that they are surprised by the open discussion and they have 
been pleasantly surprised at the non-partisanship and the hands off from 
government perspective. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I'll address my question to the Deputy 
Premier.  Madam Deputy Premier, the cynicism has been created by 
politicians like you and your ilk and the leader of this country, Mr. 
Mulroney.  That's where the cynicism comes from. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Madam Deputy Premier, I want to give you an example of 
just how out of touch you are.  On Tuesday, you put out a news release 
through information services quoting the executive director of Consensus 
Saskatchewan, Marine Perran, as saying the meetings to date have been very 
successful with people from all across Saskatchewan taking the opportunity 
to express their views on the province's future.  The same day, Madam 
Deputy Premier, Carol Reiter, who chaired the Moose Jaw meeting said: "Is 
it just they don't care, or is it they feel it won't help?  I just don't 
know."  They don't know why they're not coming. 
 
Madam Deputy Premier, you people have grown so out of touch you don't even 
listen to people when they tell you you're out of touch.  I want to know if 
it isn't true that the people of Saskatchewan won't attend your meetings 
because they don't trust you and your government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like the hon. member to know that 
in fact the attendance of the meetings that are on presently are about 
where we expected them to be. 
 
Now having said that, Mr. Speaker, I will say to the member, they were 
extremely low numbers in the very beginning.  Now we estimated 25, 30 
should be the average, and right now we are not . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The attendance is not far off 
the projected figures when we looked at it. 
 
Now, you know, you can laugh.  You want to talk about the cynicism and the 
lack of credibility towards politicians.  It's incumbent on both, both you 
and me, and all the others.  Take a look at your front row; maybe suggest 
that to them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the . . . 
 



 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I'm going to interrupt once more.  Each 
member will have the opportunity to ask their question.  I see there are a 
good number very anxious to.  If they wait their turn and allow the 
minister to answer this one, they perhaps might have the opportunity for 
the next question. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- Briefly, Mr. Speaker, the attendance has been where it 
was estimated we would finally average out at.  I can only tell the member 
that.  For example, in some meetings there have been 80, 70, 60 people  
_- higher than what the average was to be expected.  And I've also said to 
him, we've had some very low turn-outs, very low.  And that is of a 
concern.  Now you can look at a lot of things.  You can look at timing, you 
can look at seeding time.  Maybe you can look at the process.  We will be 
doing that when all is said and done. 
 
But to date, I can assure the hon. member, for those people attending, they 
have been relatively positive with the outcome of the meetings and the 
process of the meeting while they were in it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I have another question to the Deputy 
Premier.  Madam Deputy Premier, you can't even organize your own members to 
come out to these meetings.  They don't even trust you any more. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Madam Minister, another member of Consensus 
Saskatchewan, Jean Salter has stated: "I think it has become an agreement 
between our members that if (the government) doesn't listen, we're going to 
do something about it." 
 
Madam Minister, even members of Consensus Saskatchewan don't trust your 
plans and they don't trust that your government will listen and they've set 
up a contingency plan. 
 
Madam Minister, when this group reports in the fall, what will you do?  
Will you adopt their full report?  Or will you take only those parts that 
agree with your philosophical beliefs and your preconceived notions?  Or 
will you use their recommendations as campaign promises and treat them with 
the same contempt that you have all of your other promises.  I want to know 
just what you'll do with their recommendations, Madam Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- Well I think the member from P.A.-Duck Lake has taken a 
lesson from the Leader of the Opposition and he wants it both ways.  First 
he says there's nothing great about the process, there's no new ideas and 
nothing, and then he says I want to see the report and what comes out of 
it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the report will be made public.  Any report coming out of 
Consensus Saskatchewan, I gave my commitment it would be made public.  It 



 

 

will be made public, Mr. Speaker.  I expect that there will be an interim 
report, perhaps the end of July, early into August.  And the government 
will respond accordingly at that time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Relocation of Saskatoon Liquor Store 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my question 
is to the Premier, and I want to direct this to the Premier because the 
Deputy Premier has not been responsive in this situation.  And the 
merchants of Market Mall in Saskatoon are watching and they want to hear 
from you, Mr. Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, Saskatchewan people don't need it, but I want to give you one 
more example of where you people don't listen.  I have presented in this 
House in good faith, 10,500 names of Saskatoon residents who are upset with 
your plans, sir, to move liquor stores from two malls to a new, 
yet-to-be-built mall. 
 
Now ironically, the minister responsible is also the minister who's 
responsible for Consensus Saskatchewan.  Ten thousand, five hundred names 
represents 10 times the number of names, the number of people who are 
participants at the Consensus Saskatchewan hearings -- the total number 
combined.  Now that is a clear consensus of opinion and you're ignoring it, 
Mr. Premier. 
 
Now my question is: given this issue and your Deputy Premier's pathetic 
response today, is it any wonder that Saskatchewan people have decided that 
you people never listen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- Mr. Speaker, as the petitions have been tabled in the 
House from the member from Saskatoon, I have in fact informed the Liquor 
Board Commission to make them aware that indeed these petitions were in the 
House. 
 
The member from Saskatoon Fairview is asking for some political 
intervention in the decisions made by the commission.  I am reluctant to do 
that, because for the first time in many, many, many years, Mr. Speaker, 
there has been no political decision made on where this liquor store is 
going to be. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the member from Saskatoon Fairview also knows that liquor 
board stores over the last 20 years have opened and closed depending on 
commercial development within Saskatoon, on residential development.  Mr. 
Speaker, all of that is there.  If the member would take the time to go 
over to the liquor board, as the member did from Saskatoon South, Mr. 
Urness was available for him to look at all the reasons why that they based 
their decision on, and I invite you to do that. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I will conclude with saying that I am not 



 

 

without empathy for the people that signed the petitions, including, Mr. 
Speaker, those on the petition who said it's about time this store was 
closed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Speaker, a new question to the minister, I guess if the 
Premier's not going to answer.  I want you to know, Madam Deputy Premier, 
that when the delegation of merchants met with Mr. Urness and some of your 
cabinet colleagues, they could not get the answers to their questions.  
They are not satisfied with the answers.  And that meeting offended them, 
and your letter to them further offended them.  That this is a political 
decision, that's the problem. 
 
Now this is more than a Saskatoon issue, Madam Minister.  This issue speaks 
to the way that you people do business in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- And let me tell you this: the winning bid did not even meet 
the tendering specs.  Now I know that you've never been too concerned about 
fair tendering, Madam Minister, but the specs clearly say that the new 
store is supposed to a free-standing building.  But the design which I have 
here clearly shows that it isn't, and the forms are in Saskatoon for 
another mall. 
 
So the specs are being violated, which is very serious.  And this developer 
takes a mall . . . takes an anchor from two malls, puts it into another 
to-be-developed mall.  Obviously the large walk-in traffic will move to the 
new location.  My question is: wouldn't you agree that your actions are 
giving the new owners of the new mall an unfair, competitive advantage? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- Mr. Speaker, this issue speaks to several things.  It 
speaks to changes taking place in Saskatoon, it speaks to changes, Mr. 
Speaker, that have taken place regarding alcohol consumption, a decline of 
17 per cent of alcohol consumption in this province over the past many, 
many years.  It speaks to the issue of changing life-styles that both young 
and older people are involved in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is an issue of the Liquor Board commission making a 
decision based on the various changes, and also regarding their financial 
situation.  That information indeed has been shared at least with the 
member from Saskatoon South who in fact took the time to go over and look 
at that. 
 
I would also say to the member, I am not aware of the person that received 
the award not following the specs.  I'm not aware of that point.  I am 
aware, Mr. Speaker, that through the Liquor Board commission, in fact all 
the points of criteria were met, including that this was the lowest bid, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 



 

 

Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Speaker, new question to the Deputy Premier.  Every 
time you people talk about economy and saving taxpayers money, taxes go up, 
Saskatchewan people pay, and the debt gets higher, Madam Minister.  That's 
your record. 
 
Well, Madam Minister, this is the third highest-by-volume store in all of 
Saskatchewan, so don't say it's not economically viable.  But the important 
point is 10,500 petitioners are upset that you refuse to listen.  You 
refuse to listen to the residents.  Ninety small-business operators are 
upset because they're struggling and you refuse to listen. 
 
Now you have a proven drawing card from two established malls and you place 
it into another mall that does not meet the specs and you should know that 
given all the publicity around this issue. 
 
My question to you is: be honest with the public of Saskatchewan.  Be 
honest with these 10,500 people.  Be fair to the business people of the 
Market Mall area.  And will you explain your actions to them?  And I want 
you to know . . . I want to ask you clearly: will you reverse that decision 
today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- Mr. Speaker, this location for the liquor board store 
in Saskatoon was chosen through a public proposal call, a public proposal 
call.  And I also want the member to know that was the first time in the 
history of the Liquor Board, the first time. 
 
Interesting to note when our friend from Riversdale was the deputy premier, 
we had about 51 liquor boards go up but no nursing homes.  Now I don't know 
what your difficulty is but I know what the difficulty with the liquor 
commission is, and they have declining revenues, Mr. Speaker, declining 
revenues with declining alcohol consumption. 
 
Someone over there, Mr. Speaker, is going to have to make some business 
decisions.  They have done that outside of any political interference and 
the rules have been followed.  The lowest bid, the best tender considering 
location was what was accepted, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Rafferty Dam Project 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I direct my 
question today to the Premier.  Mr. Premier, there is a consensus growing 
in this province, and that consensus is that your government has made a 
political fiasco out of the Rafferty-Alameda project. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Mr. Premier, even members of your own caucus and former 



 

 

cabinet ministers now say that you and your government should halt work on 
the Rafferty-Alameda project.  My question to you, Mr. Premier, is this:  
when the people of Saskatchewan, the courts of Canada, and even your own 
caucus and cabinet colleagues tell you that you are wrong, when will you, 
as Premier of this province -- who wants people to believe that you believe 
in consensus -- listen to the consensus and stop work on Rafferty-Alameda?  
When will you do that, Mr. Premier? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I think the time has come that the issue 
of the . . . Mr. Speaker, I think the time has come that the whole issue of 
the Rafferty-Alameda projects in southern Saskatchewan receive some fair 
analysis and some objective comments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the first opportunity . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I realize that there are many comments that 
could be made.  However, you'll have your opportunity to ask the questions.  
The ministers have the opportunity to answer.  Give them that opportunity. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, this is the first opportunity that I've 
had to respond to this issue since becoming Minister of the Environment.  
Mr. Speaker, I've done a great deal of study of this particular project.  
And, Mr. Speaker, this issue has been very confused.  There are a lot of 
uncertainties. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- And, Mr. Speaker, I would say confused purposely by 
the NDP and I want to set the record straight today.  And I ask for your 
attention, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the opposition would make the case that this particular 
project has not received enough study.  They would make the case, Mr. 
Speaker, that proper processes were not followed.  Mr. Speaker, I am here 
to tell you that after thorough review with myself and my departmental 
officials, I will tell you the process that was followed from a 
Saskatchewan prospective, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Were the rules followed to the letter of the law?  I say yes, they were.  
The opposition makes a great deal of talk about independent inquiries and 
public meetings.  The question is, did this go through the process?  Was 
there public meetings and were they fair?  Did the people have a chance to 
speak?  Yes they did, with a public inquiry, independent, with three 
well-known, good people from this province -- a lawyer, Mr. Speaker; a 
farmer, Mr. Speaker; and another individual well respected. 
 
These people went through the Saskatchewan law, the Saskatchewan process, 
and as far as Saskatchewan goes, Mr. Speaker, this project was deemed 
acceptable.  Now, Mr. Speaker, the NDP confused that . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 



 

 

 
Mr. Lyons: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm directing my questions to the Premier of 
this province.  And, Mr. Speaker, while I appreciate the passionate defence 
of the project by the Minister of the Environment, this goes to the heart 
of the personal as well as political credibility of the Premier of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Premier, you've heard the response of the Minister of the Environment.  
Your member from Turtleford, your former cabinet colleague has said 
publicly, I've always felt an environmental impact assessment should have 
been done for the project; I think we should follow our own rules. 
 
Mr. Premier, are you supporting the Environment minister who's saying, that 
minister is confused?  Are you accusing the member of Turtleford being 
confused?  Or are you purposely refusing to deal with this issue, sitting 
there, not answering the question because you and your own government have 
been caught . . . you have been caught in a confusing manoeuvre to ram this 
project down the throats of the people?  Is that the way out of it, Mr. 
Premier of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I just want to confirm, Mr. Speaker, that 
from a Saskatchewan perspective, from our assessment legislation initiated 
by members opposite, it was followed to the letter of the law complete with 
a public inquiry in the province of Saskatchewan.  And I will table these 
reports if the hon. members' memories are that short. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members are now confusing it with federal legislation, 
federal issues, at a time, Mr. Speaker, when all of that is changing, when 
there is uncertainty with respect to federal legislation.  Mr. Speaker, the 
people in Saskatchewan cannot do a federal environmental impact assessment.  
Mr. Speaker, the federal government by their own admission, recognizing the 
importance of the environment, recognizing the uncertainty of the 
legislation, said: province of Saskatchewan, we as the federal government 
made an error; we did not interpret these guide-lines appropriately and 
there will be further federal studies. 
 
For the hon. member however to suggest that there was one iota of 
impropriety when it comes to Saskatchewan environmental laws and 
legislation, that's wrong, Mr. Speaker.  That's wrong.  We did every study; 
followed to the letter of the law.  And it was the federal government 
admittedly on their own that said the federal law applies. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Mr. Speaker, I'll direct this question once again to the 
Premier of the province -- very short and very direct.  Mr. Premier, are 
you saying that the member from Turtleford, Colin Maxwell, is lying and 
that you're right?  What's your response?  Is that what you're saying . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Now the hon. member is aware that the rules 
do not allow members to say indirectly . . . to say indirectly or suggest 
indirectly what they do not allow the hon. member to say directly. 
 
Order, order.  Now hon. members know that this is the rule.  They know 
that.  There is no room for argument about it.  I'm bringing that to 
attention once more of the member for Regina Rosemont.  I would expect him 
not to use those tactics in the future. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to make it abundantly clear: there 
is provincial legislation and provincial studies that we do as a province 
and that we have done.  We can't do any more studies, Mr. Speaker; we can't 
go through that process any more.  We have followed that.  To be clear, 
provincial governments do provincial studies; federal governments do 
federal studies. 
 
The comments that the hon. member referred to are not at odds one iota from 
our position that we have always taken, Mr. Speaker, and that is the 
following position: the federal law, when it comes to environmental impact 
assessment, is unclear, uncertain.  That's why the federal government is 
initiating, probably this very day or in the next few days, brand-new 
federal legislation, because it was unclear.  It had never been interpreted 
before in the courts. 
 
A decision was made, Mr. Speaker, and we will stand by that decision.  And 
we will apply, Mr. Speaker, one test, one severe test of common sense, and 
common sense says, Mr. Speaker, we've done our homework and done it well as 
a province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 46 -- An Act to amend The Statute Law 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill to amend The 
Statute Law. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next 
sitting. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Media-MLA Ball Game 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, with leave, if 
I could make a statement to the House on an event what occurred last night. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's a pleasure for me to 
rise in the Assembly and report on an annual event which has occurred for 
the last 10 years between . . . it's the game between the MLAs and the 



 

 

media. 
 
The Speaker: -- Now ministers . . . or members rather, and while members 
might be exercised for whatever reason, but the hon. member for Thunder 
Creek is attempting to address the House and I believe we should give him 
that opportunity. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 
report to the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, that a ball team made up of all 
members of the Assembly -- all part of the Assembly -- played the media 
last night.  And I'd just like to run through the roster for the 
information of the Assembly. 
 
The hon. members from Moosomin, Saskatoon Eastview, Redberry, Regina 
Wascana, Thunder Creek, Wilkie, Prince Albert, Cut Knife-Lloydminster, 
Shaunavon, and Shellbrook-Torch River participated in the game.  It as 
always, Mr. Speaker, was another hard fought battle with the members of the 
Assembly eking out a 15 to 14 victory before a crowd which was less than 
full. 
 
The associate minister of economic development and diversification led the 
attack for the MLA team with a tape measure home run that is believed to 
have landed in a "different area."  The Minister of Energy and Mines, and I 
am proud to report, anchored the defence and on one occasion, leaped high 
into the air, to steal a single from the media causing one journalist to 
remark that was the furthest anything related to SEDCO had gotten off the 
ground in some time. 
 
Fine performances were also turned in by the Minister of the Family, and 
the members from Wilkie, Saskatoon Eastview and Prince Albert.  Leader-Post 
reporter Mark Wyatt helped the media rebound from a nine to two first 
inning deficit by hitting a two-run homer.  And more importantly, he 
contributed with a managerial decision to pull starting pitcher and CKRM 
reporter, Art Newton, who throws strikes, Mr. Speaker, about as well as he 
shops for ties. 
 
Unfortunately for the members, CKCK reporter Peter Main kept the game 
close.  They did have some terrible defensive problems with Chris Wattie, a 
little problem with no-stick-em-in-the-glove. 
 
As always, Mr. Speaker, the member from Shellbrook-Torch River who also 
serves as your deputy, umpired the game in a -- and this is the press's 
opinion -- brutally objective fashion, although I've heard others describe 
his performance simply as brutal.  But certainly, that wasn't the opinion 
of members. 
 
After the woeful start by the media, Mr. Speaker, they fought back and tied 
the game in the fifth inning and it remained that way until the bottom of 
the seventh inning when the member from Shaunavon, who also turned out to 
be the winning pitcher, hit a two-out single to score the winning run. 
 
And I'm pleased to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that the game also helped a good 
cause because both teams have promised to donate $5 to the Children's Wish 



 

 

Foundation for each run they allowed, and a cheque for $135 will be turned 
over to the charity in the next few days. 
 
The press have promised, Mr. Speaker, revenge.  And on behalf of government 
members on the team, we have promised that we'll all be sitting here next 
year in the Assembly to accept the challenge.  Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Agriculture and Food 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 1 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Would the minister introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to introduce to 
my colleagues in the legislature, Mr. Stuart Kramer, who is acting deputy 
minister of Agriculture; Mr. Henry Zilm, who's assistant deputy  
 Dminister of Agriculture; Mr. Wes Mazur, who is director of administrative 
services branch; and Mr. Norm Ballagh, who is president of the Agricultural 
Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan.  These and other officials will be 
present during the estimates to provide as much information as we can, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, I will be making a 
few remarks at the outset of this estimates before we get into detailed 
questioning of the minister.  I just want to lay out to the Assembly some 
of the facts and figures that are related to the agricultural crisis in 
Saskatchewan today. 
 
Now as you know, there are a thousand farm families that leave the land 
every year in Saskatchewan and are not replaced.  At the end of World War 
II there were about 125,000; now there are 60,000 and dropping by a 
thousand every year.  Between the census years of '81 and '86, the number 
of farm families in Saskatchewan had declined from 59,000 to 54,000; the 
number of corporate farms have increased.  Realized net farm income has 
been dropping and the farm debt now totals almost $6 billion, a third of 
that debt carried by all Canadian farmers.  Saskatchewan is indeed in a 
tough situation. 
 
In 1982 when this government took office, as I said, there was $3.9 billion 
of debt and now near 6 billion.  ACS (Agricultural Credit Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) and FCC (Farm Credit Corporation) hold about half that debt, 
Mr. Chairman, approximately $3 billion.  And these two public-sector farm 
lenders are the most difficult for all farmers to deal with.  The Premier 



 

 

and the ag credit corporation and the FCC have hauled more Saskatchewan 
farm families into court and stripped them of their land and assets and 
livelihood than all the other private-sector lenders, banks, and credit 
unions combined. 
 
Census data tells us that in 1981 the farm population in Saskatchewan was 
about 180,000, and by 1986 it had dropped to 161,000 -- a tragic drop in 
the population of rural Saskatchewan. 
 
(1445) 
 
And as a result of foreclosure actions and voluntary transfers, the 
agricultural lenders now hold somewhere between 850 and a million acres of 
Saskatchewan farm land.  The Farm Ownership Board says that 854,000 acres 
of farm land were held by lenders as of December 31, 1989.  And of that, 
the farm credit corporation has about 563,000 acres. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, of that total acreage that's held by banks, the FCC, 
they had 121,000 acres just three years ago -- the Farm Credit Corporation.  
I just want to do a little bit of a run-down for the Premier. 
 
In September 1988, Farm Credit Corporation portfolio in Saskatchewan had 
521 parcels of land; in September '89 they had 877 packages of land; 
288,000 acres in 1988; 478,000 in 1989 -- or the difference between 1,800 
quarters in 1988 and just about 3,000 quarters of land in 1989. 
 
And while they were acquiring land, they were also selling off land.  So 
you see, Mr. Chairman, this Farm Credit Corporation, along with the banks 
and other institutions, are not being stopped; in fact leading the way in 
driving farmers off the land. 
 
As I said, Mr. Chairman, even with the large volume of sales, Farm Credit 
Corporation had repossessed 563,000 acres as of March 31 -- over half a 
million acres taken out from under Saskatchewan farm families by the Tory 
government.  And the FCC and ACS are still doing more foreclosures, and the 
banks are doing their part as well. 
 
The banks are doing their part as well, Mr. Speaker, but I'll tell you, 
they're doing their part, and while they're doing their part, taking land 
out along with FCC, they're also making drastic contributions to the Tory 
party funds.  Over 10,000 notices of foreclosure have been sent out. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Does he have to read the speech? 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- If the member for Weyburn would care to listen he might 
respond to some of the tragic cases that we are seeing in Saskatchewan.  
And I understand, Mr. Chairman, why he is chirping from his seat because he 
doesn't like to hear some of these numbers. 
 
For eight years they've been saying that they're handling the farm 
situation so well.  And no, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Member, I do not like reading 
speeches, but these numbers are very important.  And if you would sit and 
listen to them, you maybe respond in a manner better than you have 



 

 

responded to date. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- I'll carry on, Mr. Chairman.  Over 10,000 notices of intent 
to foreclose land or seize machinery, crops and livestock have been served 
on Saskatchewan farmers by lending institutions.  That's Farm Debt Review 
Board figures of April, l989. 
 
And there are some of the percentages, Mr. Chairman, in some of the areas 
of Saskatchewan I'd like to quote to you.  This is the number of 
foreclosure notices compared to the number of farmers in the RMs affected.  
And there will be an argument probably from the opposition as to say: well 
the number of farmers aren't really true because there can be more than one 
notice sent per farmer.  Well I understand that.  The numbers are still 
alarming. 
 
Municipality of Surprise Valley, south-east of Bengough, 36 per cent; 
Grassy Creek, which is over by Shaunavon, 35 per cent; Fillmore, 34 per 
cent; Gull Lake, 46 per cent; Beechy, 49 per cent.  That's number of 
foreclosure notices sent out to farmers compared to the number of farmers 
in these municipalities. 
 
As I say, in Beechy about one in every two farmers sent a notice of 
foreclosure.  Togo, out in the Kamsack area, 48 per cent; Venn, up in my 
area, 53 per cent; Lakeside in the Quill Lake area, 51 per cent; Barrier 
Valley over by Archerwill, 45 per cent.  And it goes on and on, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
The worst one being Meadow Lake, where 71 per cent of the farmers were sent 
notices of foreclosure -- 71 per cent of the farmers, as it relates to 
foreclosure notices.  And that's an alarming number, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Now these farm families are taking . . . their lives are being taken away 
from their farms, and this government's standing there and doesn't do 
anything about it.  In fact ACS is toughening up its actions against farm 
families.  In 1988 ACS took 620 farmers into court.  In 1989, 1,142 more 
legal actions were started.  And remember, there were 2,500 files placed 
with the law firm in Regina instructed to take action last year.  Quite a 
record of achievement, I do say. 
 
The result is that over 10 per cent of Saskatchewan farmers have been 
involved, Mr. Speaker, in formal debt review process in the last five years 
-- 10 per cent of Saskatchewan farmers -- through either the provincial 
Farm Land Security Board or the federal Farm Debt Review Board. And there 
is no slowing of this action.  While Alberta and Manitoba experience 
reductions in the number of applications to the Farm Debt Review Board from 
'88 to '89, Saskatchewan increased by nearly 20 per cent. 
 
Bankruptcies in Saskatchewan, Mr. Chairman, totalled 152 during 1989 -- the 
highest figure since 1971.  As we all know, bankruptcies and farm . . . 
farms and bankruptcies is only an indicator of the plight that's out there 
because bankruptcies is not a common road farmers take when being forced 



 

 

off the land.  And the result of this in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
24 rural hotels were either closed or possessed in 1988. 
 
And now I want to tell you, Mr. Chairman, the bankruptcies have increased 
and they're jumping up in staggering figures.  In fact from 1987 to 1989 
they're nearly doubled.  In 1981 Saskatchewan had 19 farm bankruptcies.  In 
1989 there was 152. 
 
Interest expenses for Saskatchewan farmers, Mr. Chairman, in 1989 was $473 
million.  And the interest rate continues to climb in the Farm Credit 
Corporation.  The hardest hit group were those young farmers, the one-third 
of the farmers with the lowest equity levels and the group that carries 70 
per cent of the debt. 
 
I'm just reading this out, Mr. Chairman, just for the benefit of the 
Premier who thinks he's doing so well and doing all he can to help 
Saskatchewan farmers, a Premier who's had eight years to tackle the 
problem.  And instead of tackling the problem, Mr. Chairman, what he does 
is blame the rest of the world for the fact that Saskatchewan farmers are 
being devastated. 
 
Land values have been dropping.  In fact between 1984 and '89 the province 
of Saskatchewan experienced the largest farm land drop in all the prairie 
provinces.  During that time, farm land values declined by 38.4 per cent in 
Saskatchewan; Alberta, 28.8; in Manitoba, 24.8.  And the Canadian average 
was 29 per cent.  The steep decline of land values has had adverse effect 
upon many farmers' ability to borrow, particularly the small farmers with 
the significant debt.  Applications for government guarantees of operating 
loans through counselling and assistance for farmers are up 20 to 30 per 
cent. 
 
And it goes on and on, Mr. Speaker.  Land tenure.  Number of farms having 
total ownership declined from 3,135 in '81 to 2,900 . . . or 29,000 rather 
in 1986.  So you see that there was . . . 1981, the level of farm land 
ownership was 66.1 per cent, involving 43 million acres.  By 1986 it had 
declined to 61 per cent and 40.8 million acres. 
 
And the point here, Mr. Chairman, is, and Mr. Premier, that during those 
five years, approximately two and a half million acres of land changed 
hands from that of owned to rented status or, to put it in perspective, an 
amount equal to two and a half times what the land bank ever owned.  Just 
think about it.  When these people were hollering about land tenure and now 
land tenure is going the way they said it shouldn't go.  And what are they 
doing?  Absolutely nothing. 
 
Property taxes have increased, and I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, property 
taxes have increased far more dramatically than any of the other taxes, 
rural property taxes. 
 
This government set up many, many agencies, many agencies that they said 
were going to help farmers, and they have totally failed.  They have hacked 
and slashed the post office system, supported Ottawa in this attack on 
rural communities.  We have seen time after time issues like freight rates, 



 

 

issues like Canadian Wheat Board, issues like two-price wheat, issues like 
backing out of their commitment to long-term support programs. 
 
Every time the farmer turns around, this government and the federal 
government, Mr. Chairman, is taking more money away from the farmers.  And 
they stand up, as was announced today, and said, aren't we good guys; we're 
giving you $5.50 an acre -- when it was about half of what the farmers and 
farm groups were asking for. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I could go on and on, but I just want to say that there are 
many, many issues that I will be putting forward today for the Premier to 
answer.  He has destroyed the basis of Saskatchewan agriculture simply by 
sitting by, doing nothing, but rhetorically saying that he's the best 
Agriculture minister that ever came to this province.  But I think some of 
the facts, some of the facts speak for themselves, Mr. Chairman. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- He's never said that; I said that.  He's never said 
that. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Well all his colleagues say it's so. 
 
But I want to talk today, Mr. Chairman, about some of the cuts that have 
come forward, supported by this government, come out of Ottawa.  The Farm 
Credit Corporation is one of the areas that I'd like to cover, Mr. 
Chairman.  You will have seen: October 27, 1989, Farm Credit Corporation 
interest rates went up; December 28, 1989, they went up again; February 3, 
1990, they went up again. 
 
You know it's interesting, Mr. Chairman, you get the press releases coming 
out of the Farm Credit Corporation and it says: news, subject, from the 
Farm Credit Corporation, lending interest rates, March 23, 1990, the rates 
went up.  And here's another one, March 30 -- say that's only about six 
days apart, or seven days apart -- subject, from Farm Credit Corporation, 
interest rates, interest rates went up again.  April 12, 1990 -- not very 
long after that -- interest rates, Farm Credit Corporation interest rates 
went up again.  April 27, 1990, from the Farm Credit Corporation, subject, 
interest rates, interest rates went up again. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, I would just like to ask the Premier why, in light of 
all the facts and figures that are available and some of which that I have 
put forward today, why you would stand idly by in your negotiations or in 
your so-called close contact with Ottawa and allow the federal government 
and your friend, Brian Mulroney, to increase Farm Credit Corporation 
interest rates faster than the Bank of Canada rate?  Can you answer that, 
Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, farm families in the province of 
Saskatchewan have suffered from high interest rates for a long period of 
time.  They particularly suffered a great deal in the late '70s and early 
'80s when interest rates got as high as 21 or 22 per cent.  And that, 
coupled with land bank, really had a damaging effect in twofold. 
 
One is it raised the cost of servicing debt, on top of the land bank that 



 

 

drove up the price of land, and the price of land went up . . . I believe, 
Mr. Chairman, if you go back and look at it, the price of land more than 
doubled during the period of the . . . when the land bank was going and 
bidding, driving up the price. 
 
Now it is true that the price of land has settled down again.  We have 
always said it was support from the rural municipalities, from farm 
organizations, and others, that we should do whatever's possible to protect 
farmers against high interest rates.  We offered a major program in the 
face of the vacuum that was there in 1982.  When interest rates were 21 per 
cent, we stepped in and we said, for farmers it'll be 8 per cent. 
 
(1500) 
 
At the same time we said that we would do other things, as opposed to land 
bank, to help farmers own their land.  And we went into the market-place 
and put the provincial treasury between the banks and the farmer and 
protected the farmer against this devastation of high interest rates.  We 
did the same thing in every year since that, and I have substantial numbers 
to show that the province of Saskatchewan has taken high interest rates on 
when interest rates were very high and supported by the NDP.  And I say 
that, with the greatest respect, because they never did anything about 
them.  They must have at least thought they were all right because they 
didn't step in. 
 
We have always stepped in and defended the farmer.  As you know, today, 
only in Saskatchewan can you get zero per cent interest rates in the 
livestock industry -- zero.  Now I say that -- again with the greatest 
respect to any legislator across the country -- and I believe in the United 
States and perhaps in the world, I don't know any farmers that got zero per 
cent interest rates like you do here in Saskatchewan in the livestock 
industry. 
 
Now we have stepped in and said, for our farmers -- and we want to 
encourage the diversification, balance the grain and the livestock industry 
off -- we should encourage the use of that feed grain in value added, and 
encourage the grain industry to grow but put it into as much processing and 
manufacturing as possible. 
 
And so the hon. member asks about farm credit -- I don't run farm credit.  
But what I do run and have some responsibility for, I'll say that we'll 
make a significant difference. 
 
So we have put an interest rate relief package before the farmers of this 
province that is, I would think -- and we can compare it  -- the best in 
the country and certainly much better than was here in our jurisdiction 
prior to 1982. 
 
Let me add today, just for the hon. member's information in case he didn't 
catch the news release, we have announced a $277 million payment to farmers 
today.  It's going to all the farmers.  It's on the basis of cultivated 
acreage.  It will amount to $5.50 an acre and that will be $5 to $6,000 per 
farmer, on average, across the province of Saskatchewan. 



 

 

 
I want the hon. member to know that it is endorsed, Mr. Chairman, by the 
major farm organizations, and if he would allow me, I will just provide you 
with the names of the organizations because they've worked very hard with 
us in lobbying the federal government.  They've met twice with us now. They 
met with me yesterday and provided me with the advice. 
 
But this is endorsed -- this payment and the mechanism for the payment.  I 
mean we would all like more money.  But notwithstanding that, this was 
endorsed by the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, the Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities, the United Grain Growers, the National Farmers Union, 
the (Saskatchewan) Canola Growers Association, the flax growers 
association, the Western Canadian Wheat Growers Association and the 
Saskatchewan Pulse Crop Development Board. 
 
And on the method that we calculated this for 1989-90 crop year . . . that 
was the mechanism used in Alberta as well as in Manitoba; plus these farm 
organizations saw it as reasonable, and it's $277 million that will be out 
largely before the end of July. 
 
I point out to the hon. member that we have spent, along with the federal 
government now, literally billions of dollars.  And a good part of that is 
in at interest rate protection right down to zero, right down to zero. 
 
We first went in with the production loan program which was a billion 
dollars, and we locked it in at 6 per cent for three years -- tremendous 
impact on interest rate protection when interest rates were running 
anywhere from 10, 12, 15 per cent.  And in this case now we have a 
combination of programs.  And our seeding program is out there that will 
provide some cash benefit relief because of the high interest rates.  So I 
can list a large number of programs if the hon. member wants me to; I 
certainly will be more than happy to. 
 
But I just make the point: I haven't at any time endorsed high interest 
rates.  I don't believe in them.  I've done everything physically and 
financially possible to keep interest rates down for farmers and for home 
owners and for people in this province. 
 
And if you would allow me one more position here, the new instrument that 
this legislature just passed, the community development bonds, means that 
rural communities -- and farmers are rural communities -- towns, villages, 
smaller cities can now get access to processing, manufacturing, tourism, 
environmental projects to diversify their towns and villages at zero per 
cent interest rates, Mr. Chairman.  And no place else in North America will 
you find a financial instrument that allows rural people to get access to 
capital building and a guarantee so there's no risk, at zero per cent 
interest rate. 
 
Now the hon. member mentioned interest rates.  He at least has to 
acknowledge zero per cent for the livestock industry, zero per cent 
interest rates backed by the government so they don't have to pay any 
interest at all in community development projects.  And, Mr. Speaker, at 
the protection of interest rates for home owners, for farmers, for small 



 

 

business, a combination of things now that will be the best interest rate 
protection that you can find any place in North America, as far as I know. 
 
And if the hon. members has got better ideas of how that . . . or better 
comparisons, I would certainly encourage them to bring them forward if they 
have suggestions on how you might lower interest rates lower than zero, Mr. 
Chairman, lower than zero.  Because unequivocally, unequivocally, if you 
want to avoid the high interest rates, Mr. Chairman, then you must design 
new instruments to get in the way of that bank and get in the way of those 
international high interest rates.  And we have done both in terms of the 
livestock industry and Community Development Bonds so small business, 
farmers, communities, rural municipal organizations, community development 
organizations, rural development corporations, can all, Mr. Speaker, get 
access to an instrument that says their money is guaranteed.  They pay no 
interest, and they can develop and process the manufacturing in the 
province in Saskatchewan, particularly in rural areas where farmers live 
and dominate the community. 
 
So I have a long list of programs that I'm sure the hon. member will want 
me to go through.  I won't right now.  But from 1985 to 1989 plus the 1990 
estimate plus what we've just done will amount to a little over $7.6 
billion from the federal and provincial governments, and in the 
neighbourhood of 1.2 billion just looking at our own operations.  So I 
would be more than glad to go through the list for the hon. member. 
 
As he mentioned interest rates, we deal with interest rates in a 
substantive way, and compared to what was done before or interprovincially, 
Mr. Speaker, I think that we say that it's not perfect, but it's been a 
tremendous amount of money put up to back these operations and some new 
instruments, financial instruments that have not been used before that 
allow people to have access to capital without borrowing and without paying 
interest rates.  And that's very important, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Minister, let's get something straight here.  You and I 
have gone through this process for -- what is this? -- the third year now.  
Every time we come before this legislature, you tell the same garbage -- 
how wonderful you're doing by giving farmers money.  Well look around and 
open your eyes, Mr. Premier.  Do you not see the farmers leaving the land?  
Do you not tally up the foreclosure actions?  Do you not see the stress and 
the grief that you're putting these people through?  And you stand in your 
place and saying you gave them $7 billion.  Well, Mr. Minister, it's not 
working. 
 
And I want to just make a couple of comments.  The farm groups -- and we'll 
get to your $5.50 an acre program shortly -- the farm groups supporting it: 
what else are they supposed to do?  They're all telling you it was half of 
what you should have got, and you stand in your place saying, look how 
great I am; the farm groups support me.  Well what kind of an answer is 
that from a Premier who's watching farm families fall off the face of this 
land?  It's pretty hypocritical, I would say. 
 
And you talk about land bank and the old lines from 1982 where the land 
bank drove up the price of land.  Well, Mr. Minister, did they drive them 



 

 

up in Alberta? Did they drive them up in Manitoba?  Don't give me that 
argument.  I mean that was Tory rhetoric and it worked for a while, but 
farmers out there know the facts. 
 
So, Mr. Premier, let's get the record straight here.  I am going to go 
through several issues in these estimates, issues that relate directly to 
agriculture, to farmers having to pay more money out of their pockets.  And 
you can stand in your place if you want and tell them how much money you're 
giving them, but you have not addressed a debt restructuring problem, you 
have not addressed a farm income problem, and you dropped your land 
transfer program. 
 
So when it's all ended up, we're going to tally up and just see how much 
you have done for farmers in dollars and cents. 
 
The land values have dropped -- $18 billion worth in 1984 to 13 billion in 
1988.  They dropped 40 per cent in that period of time.  A farm valued at 
half a million dollars in 1984 is now only worth $350,000. 
 
Mr. Minister, the banks are taking back land.  In January 1987, as I said 
before, lending institutions had acquired title to 121,000 acres of land.  
And by February 1989 it had gone up to 628,000 acres.  The farm families 
leaving the land.  The packages.  Farm Credit Corporation -- 18,000 
quarters in 1988 they held, and 3,000 quarters in 1989 -- in one year 
almost doubling. 
 
And you say you're not responsible to the Farm Credit Corporation.  That's 
a nice song and dance for you to say that.  But then you turn around and 
say, look how great I am; I've got all this money out of Ottawa.  Well you 
can't have it both ways.  I mean either you do have influence over Ottawa 
or you don't.  So if you're taking credit for getting farm aid money out of 
Ottawa, then you've got to take some responsibility for Ottawa pushing up 
the interest rates.  And I say that you have made very little if any 
representation to Ottawa to keep Farm Credit Corporation interest rates 
down. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I ask you:  Farm Credit Corporation is acquiring land, as 
is your ACS.  Can you tell me precisely, Mr. Minister, what you have done, 
what representations you have made to Ottawa and table those, as to trying 
to convince them to drop the Farm Credit Corporation interest rates? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, we'll see if we can find some of the 
newspaper headlines when I met with both the federal Minister of 
Agriculture, the banking associations in Toronto and locally here, as well 
as the farm credit people in Ottawa.  And I personally met with the 
financial officials. I met with the chairman of the Bank of Canada, Mr. 
Crow, with respect to interest rates. 
 
I have led the discussion with respect to all the first ministers, let 
alone the Agriculture ministers, on an assault against interest rates.  And 
I'm sure that we can pull together a series of public headlines where I 
have taken the position and lobbied the federal government, lobbied the 
chairman of the Bank of Canada, lobbied the bankers, lobbied FCC -- 



 

 

locally, nationally, with respect to interest rates, Mr. Chairman. 
 
And we will certainly be prepared to go dig up the appropriate headlines 
where in fact we have made this.  And the media has attended a good number 
of them where we have said the interest rates are too high, where the 
bankers and farm credit and other people have reduced it. 
 
I've just been to the SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) not that long ago and said, would you please give us any 
indication of how you would like to see us operate ACS.  Consider yourself 
on the board of directors of the Agricultural Credit Corporation of 
Saskatchewan. Make your recommendations what we could be doing with respect 
to interest rates; restructuring, how we should do it. 
 
Certainly, Mr. Chairman, every single opportunity that we have had to lower 
interest rates, encourage federal government, the banks, the chairman of 
the Bank of Canada -- I mean you can't get it any higher than that when it 
comes to interest rates in this country.  I've met with, personally sat 
with the Finance minister, Mr. Mike Wilson, Mr. Crow, and myself for hours, 
representing farmers, representing Westerners, and representing the 
premiers, talking about interest rates and the dollar and the concerns that 
we have. 
 
So the hon. member I'm sure will know that there have been many, many 
sincere representations by me and by my ministers to help lower interest 
rates.  And in event that we were still unable to do anything with respect 
to lowering them, we stepped in, Mr. Chairman.  And that's the point I want 
to make to the hon. member.  The things that I'm in control of, we just 
said we'll exercise our power.  We have zero per cent interest rates for 
community development, we have zero per cent interest rates now for the 
livestock industry, and interest rate protection packages for farmers all 
across the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
We've had to put our treasury at stake.  And at the same time, I'll say to 
the hon. member, we're prepared and have got over $7 billion out of the 
federal government in cash to Saskatchewan alone that they can apply to any 
expense that they have.  Whether it's chemicals, whether it's interest 
rates, whether it's any particular input that they have, they can apply the 
$7 billion. 
 
And that's taken a fair amount of effort, granted, and he will, I'm sure, 
agree.  It's not enough.  Perhaps it's never enough.  But it's 7 billion 
more than they had before, and it's a considerable amount of money compared 
to the kind of money that other provinces and jurisdictions have received 
over the last five or six years. 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I realize that it's easy to get a 
newspaper headline saying that you're opposed to high interest rates.  In 
fact, when you met with Mr. Crow, you came back home and the interest rates 
went up. 
 



 

 

I don't understand how a good lobbyist would have that happen.  And, Mr. 
Minister, you realize that because of those Farm Credit Corporation hikes, 
that means, and if you listen, $35 million a year out of Saskatchewan 
farmers' pockets. 
 
And I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, one simple question.  You claim and 
have claimed for credit . . . taken credit for every payment that came out 
of Ottawa as far as a cash grant program.  You have taken credit.  And if 
their headlines also read, Premier Divine . . . or I'm sorry, the Premier . 
. . I apologize, Mr. Chairman, I shouldn't have . . . the Premier of 
Saskatchewan goes to Ottawa and gets so many million dollars for farmers.  
Okay. 
 
So let's assume that you did do that.  Okay.  I don't believe that you had 
a whole lot to do with it, but let's assume you did.  But if you take 
credit for that, then, Mr. Minister, can you explain to me how you square 
that with saying that you have absolutely no influence over the Farm Credit 
Corporation that is taking $35 million a year because of higher interest 
rates, out of Saskatchewan farmers' pockets? 
 
Just stand up and explain to me how on one hand you have total control over 
the federal government, claiming that you're getting the money out; and on 
the other hand, you say you have no influence when it comes to Farm Credit 
Corporation interest rates. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm going to go dig up these figures, if 
I can find them.  But I want to point out to the hon. member that from what 
I recall of my conversations with FCC, most of the bad loans in FCC in the 
province of Saskatchewan were taken out during the NDP administration from 
1978 to 1982.  And they got people caught in a situation where land values 
were going up very rapidly in 1978 to '82 -- very rapidly, stimulated by 
the land bank purchasing in the market.  Land values . . . and if you go 
back and check it, they went up very, very, very rapidly.  That government 
program in  
 Dthere, buying land on behalf of the government, forced the prices up. 
 
At the same time, Mr. Chairman, then the interest rates went way up to 21 
per cent, 22 per cent, and that's what caught most people.  And FCC records 
today will show you that the majority of the arrears in the Farm Credit 
Corporation of Saskatchewan occurred as a result of the farmers getting 
trapped from 1978 to 1982. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, when we came in -- and we certainly ran on it -- we said 
no more land bank speculation in the market-place driving up the price of 
land unfairly, the government competing against the lonely farmer.  No more 
of that.  And we will walk in with 8 per cent money for young farmers, not 
21 per cent, and we'll help them buy the land at reasonable prices. 
 
Now the hon. member says, well the price of land has come down a bit.  
Well, Mr. Speaker, if it'd just come back down to where it should have been 
without the land bank, we'd have far less foreclosures in the province of 
Saskatchewan -- far less, Mr. Speaker.  And the hon. member, he mentions 
Manitoba and Alberta.  Manitoba and Alberta have not had the land bank 



 

 

influence.  And there are farmers . . . we had land go from $150 an acre to 
$1,000 an acre in this province, and in good part because of the land bank.  
And the farmers know that. 
 
At the same time, it went up to 21 per cent interest rates and not a dime 
from that minister of Finance at that time who's sitting across there, 
represented the riding from Humboldt. 
 
Farmers today will tell you that government speculating in the land 
industry drove those prices up because you never knew when the land bank 
and the government were going to come out.  I believe Gordon MacMurchy was 
the minister of Agriculture, and he bragged about the government going in 
there and making money speculating in land.  He said we bought it at $150 
and it's up to $500; the interest rates are going up and look at the people 
under the pressure; we'll be able to buy more land.  He was all across the 
province of Saskatchewan.  And then what did he say?  And we won't need to 
diversify; this province can live on wheat alone, he said.  Well that'll 
ring in my ears as long as I live, Mr. Chairman. 
 
The fact that FCC's problem, in the majority today, initiated in 1978 to 
'82 -- and I believe the figures will verify that -- confirms the fact that 
if that side of the House when they were in power would have been 
reasonable for farmers, lowered the interest rates, put their treasury to 
the back of the rural communities -- we wouldn't have half the debt problem 
today, not half the foreclosures, not half the bankruptcies.  Farm credit 
would be better off; everybody better off; the credit unions would be 
better off.  And they know that. 
 
They know any time a government gets in there and speculates and farm lands 
against ordinary farmers, that you're going to hurt the farmer.  Now that's 
a fact. You can't deny it. It's history, and farm credit numbers verify it.  
And I'll just say to my hon. friend, in Alberta they just backed right out 
of the Farm Credit Corporation and they've replaced it with provincial 
programs. 
 
We've largely done the same.  And I will tell you, that if the farm credit 
is in trouble today, it's from 1978-82 and that responsibility in large 
part is because of the land bank and 21 per cent interest rates, both as a 
result of the NDP administration. 
 
Now that's history.  They might not want to talk about other jurisdictions 
but that's what had happened here in the province of Saskatchewan.  If the 
price of land is coming down now, well, it's coming down to a point where 
it should have been without the land banks speculating against farm 
families. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Minister, just to help you prove your point, I would 
appreciate you supplying me with those figures to prove your point.  Could 
you do that for me? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- I said to the hon. member, I will go retrieve and 
gather the information with respect to farm credits arrears, and from what 
I recall, most of the arrears are from that period -- the significant 



 

 

arrears -- and I'll get the information for the hon. member. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- So you're going to provide me with a list of those accounts 
that are in arrears today, that are as a result of what you say were high 
interest rates in the early '80s.  I appreciate that.  And when do you 
think you could provide me with those, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, I don't run farm credit here.  I will get 
the information from farm credit and I will ask them for it.  But their 
arrears and the information that they have will have to come from them and 
I will endeavour to get that information. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Well I'll be waiting with bated breath, Mr. Minister, 
because I don't believe that you could substantiate that. 
 
You know you can stand up here, and it doesn't bother me one bit when you 
run at the land bank or high interest rates in 1982, because I've been out 
in rural Saskatchewan a fair amount, not only living in rural Saskatchewan 
but visiting many areas of this province.  And you know it's funny, Mr. 
Minister, I don't hear those arguments any more.  Oh I heard them in the 
early '80s, from '82 maybe to '84, '85.  But I don't hear those arguments 
from farmers any more because that has passed. 
 
That is passed and they know what the problem is now.  The problem is now 
that you, your government and the federal government, are not able to 
manage a situation that is changing the face of rural Saskatchewan.  Now 
either you don't want to do it or you can't do it.  It doesn't matter. 
 
It's the fact the farmers are saying to me now . . . They're not talking 
about land bank driving up -- oh, you might hear the odd Tory hack saying 
it -- but that argument, I would count on one hand in the last six months 
how many times I've heard that argument.  And believe me, I've been at 
many, many meetings talking to many, many people.  So you can say it as 
many times as you want in this House, because it simply, in today's terms, 
is irrelevant. 
 
So let's get talking about relevant issues here, talking about Farm Credit 
Corporation interest rates.  Now, Mr. Minister, I want to talk . . . I got 
a little article here from the Western Producer of October 12, '89.  And 
the headline is: "Farmers (Bankers) want FCC's role changed", and I just 
want to, Mr. Chairman, quote from this article.  It says: 
 

 The Canadian bankers' lobby is urging the Conservative government to end 
Farm Credit Corporation's role as a direct farm lender. 

 
 They would like to see the crown corporation reduced to a support role for 

the banks, providing loan guarantees for risky borrowers and selling 
research and land appraisal services to private lenders. 

 
 Private lenders would service "commercial", low-risk farmers without fear 

of competition from the public sector lender. 
 
 The FCC would be confined to delivering government subsidy programs for 



 

 

marginal operators, beginning farmers and bank customers who become 
financially shaky before they can pay off their loans. 

 
And it goes on to say: 
 

 They told the government the 30-year-old FCC is no longer needed to serve 
the farm community as a front-line lender to commercially-viable farmers. 

 
And that's what the Canadian Bankers' Association is doing with regards to 
lobbying the federal government. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, it appears that their lobby is working very well, 
because Farm Credit Corporation just a year or so ago was given a new 
mandate and it was to act like a bank.  It was to act like a bank.  And 
that's why the Farm Credit Corporation interest rates are going up, because 
your influence in Ottawa is being overridden by the bank's influence. 
 
And maybe we should just take a look at one reason possibly why.  I have a 
list here of corporate donations to the federal Progressive Conservative 
Party, and if you flip through this list, Mr. Premier, you'll see that the 
Bank of Montreal, 1988, gave $80,000 to the Tories.  The Bank of Nova 
Scotia gave $80,000.  The Banque Nationale du Canada gave $45,000.  The 
Royal Bank gave just over $80,000 in one year to the Conservative Party.  I 
ask you, Mr. Minister, do you think that has any reflection on the fact 
that the Farm Credit Corporation interest rates are going up so 
drastically? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, I haven't got all the FCC numbers here 
but I've got some interesting information from agricultural statistics 1988 
that I want to leave with the hon. member because he questioned the 
correlation between the government speculating in farm land and whether it 
raised the prices. 
 
If we look at from 1949 to 1971, the price of land ranged from about $20 an 
acre to $59 an acre.  The land bank was introduced in 1972 if I recall, and 
land went from $60 an acre to $117 an acre within three years.  And most of 
the land bank's purchases in the province of Saskatchewan incurred between 
1978 and 1981-82, and land went up a hundred bucks an acre in four 
consecutive years from $198 an acre in '78 to $241 an acre in '79 to $332 
an acre in 1980 to $382 in '81 to $413 an acre by 1982.  That's when the 
land bank was on a roll.  We'd never ever in the history of Saskatchewan, 
going back as far as you want to find, saw anything parallel it.  In 1982 
after we brought in our program and said no more land bank speculation, no 
more land bank speculation, and lower interest rates the land started to 
drop, 413 to 405, 393, 332, 282 and by 1988 it was down to $259 an acre, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now if you want to track, Mr. Chairman, if you want to track the trouble 
that farmers got into, when you get land going up 100 bucks an acre and 
interest rates going from 14 per cent to 21 per cent, and you want to find 
out about a correlation of how you get farmers into trouble, Mr. Speaker, 
the correlation in the province of Saskatchewan between land bank 
speculation and prices and correspondingly farm trouble is very, very 



 

 

interesting to say the least, Mr. Chairman. 
 
I think, Mr. Chairman, I've got their attention when you start to go back 
and you look at the numbers when the land bank was initiated and really on 
a roll, you find in the province of Saskatchewan farmers were forced to pay 
$100 a year more every year in four consecutive years.  As a result of the 
land bank, Mr. Speaker, that's when farmers got into trouble.  We inherited 
that and that's why we put our shoulder to the wheel and made sure that we 
protected farmers against high interest rates. 
 
Now it's not easy to repair the damage that was caused by a big government 
coming in and speculating against farmers.  I mean, the people opposite 
worry about multinationals, how about the government in competing against 
farmers buying farm land?  Any time, Mr. Speaker, you take the government 
competing against ordinary farm families, Mr. Speaker, you're going to end 
up in trouble.  This documents it in spades.  In fact if you ran a 
correlation, you'd find the number one irritant and the number one cause of 
the concern in the province of Saskatchewan was a result of the land bank 
speculation plus high interest rates, 1978 to 1982, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Minister, I won't spend the entire time on this, but 
it's just interesting . . . just for a moment, could you tell us, and as I 
asked before, how the land prices in Alberta and Manitoba, which were going 
up equivalently as fast as Saskatchewan, how the land bank affected those 
land prices?  In light of your argument that the land bank was what drove 
it up, could you just explain, Mr. Minister, how that relates to the other 
provinces where land was going up equally as fast? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(1530) 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- I just want it on the record, Mr. Chairman, just so we 
know that these . . . the NDP record on land bank is obviously there -- and 
they are all now nodding their head.  They want to bring land bank back to 
the province of Saskatchewan.  They've acknowledged it.  They're standing 
up for it.  They're defending it here in the legislature, Mr. Speaker.  And 
if that's their farm policy, I'll take it.  If you want to have a farm 
policy . . . And I'll show every farmer in the province of Saskatchewan how 
the government raised the price of land and then forced them out with 21 
per cent interest rates so the government could buy more of it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Let the record show, the NDP support land bank, they want to defend it, and 
they'd bring it back in if they ever had an opportunity.  I'm glad they've 
made their position clear. 
 
I know what caused those problems in agriculture, and it was land bank.  If 
they want to initiate, fine; at least it's on the Table, Mr. Speaker, and 
the public knows, the gallery knows, and every farmer in the country will 
know the NDP plan.  The NDP plan, Mr. Speaker, is to bring land bank back 
to speculate against farm families, force them out of work.  Mr. Speaker, 
it couldn't be any clearer.  Thank you for the admission. 



 

 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- My only regret, Mr. Premier, is this couldn't be piped into 
every farm home in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Just to see how rational that you make arguments. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you still haven't answered my question.  Now do you deny 
that land prices were going up equally as fast in Alberta and Manitoba 
during those years that you mentioned? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, the opposition is always asking us to talk 
about Saskatchewan, and when you beat them on an argument, now they're 
running to Alberta, they're running to Alberta, and they're running to 
Manitoba. 
 
Mr. Chairman, they have never defended an agricultural policy in Alberta in 
their life and they never defended it in Manitoba.  In fact the Manitoba 
government, the NDP government in Manitoba lost because the rural members 
said no more NDP because the NDPers don't like farmers, they don't 
understand rural people. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, let me just point out, the hon. member is afraid to talk 
about Saskatchewan.  So what was it like in North Dakota?  How about New 
Zealand?  Do you want to talk about New Zealand?  We're talking about the 
province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  These figures that I have here are 
about Saskatchewan and the best correlation you'll ever see, as you've 
never seen land values jump in the history of this province like they did 
when land bank was introduced. 
 
And in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, it was statistically so significant that 
now he's got to run to Alberta to say, well can you find me numbers, Mr. 
Premier, in Ottawa?  Or can you find me numbers, how about in the 
Appalachian Mountains of the United States to see if there's some other 
thing they can compare it about. We got the comparisons here, land bank 
speaks for itself.  It hurt farmers here, it drove up the price of land, 
and with 21 per cent interest rates that they did nothing about, that's 
when most of the hurt was generated in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Well, Mr. Premier, it is obvious that your argument doesn't 
hold any water, because if you were willing to relate it to the 
neighbouring provinces here, you would just see that it absolutely had 
nothing to do with them, because they were going up equally as fast.  And 
besides, Mr. Minister, land bank held a million acres.  That's about 2 per 
cent of the total cultivated acres in Saskatchewan, and you're blaming the 
2 per cent on the whole fact that the land prices went up.  Well, Mr. 
Minister, it simply does not hold water. 
 
Mr. Premier, the Farm Credit Corporation should be a major instrument of 
lending in this province and in Canada.  One way they could do that, in 



 

 

years gone by up to date, if Farm Credit Corporation was serious, if you 
were serious about making representation to Farm Credit Corporation, they 
could be lending out money at 2 or 3 per cent below what they could 
purchase money for.  This is local farm policy, Mr. Premier.  You should be 
making representation to Ottawa to say that Farm Credit Corporation should 
be putting money out.  As a policy, they should be lending out money at 2 
or 3 per cent less than what they get it for. 
 
And I'll tell you, Mr. Premier, they would spend less money by doing that 
than they wrote off for the last couple of years in bad debts -- money that 
the Canadian taxpayer picked up and Saskatchewan taxpayers picked up.  The 
farmers would be able to keep their land and eventually purchase it from 
Farm Credit Corporation. 
 
If you had a design, if you were making good representation and lobbying 
well in Ottawa, you would be putting these arguments forward.  And the 
result would be that Saskatchewan farmers would be able to use Farm Credit 
Corporation as a prime lender.  It would get the monkey off your back from 
ACS as well. 
 
So, Mr. Premier, can you tell me, have you made representation to Ottawa, 
asking them to use Farm Credit Corporation as a prime lender at rates that 
are 2 to 3 per cent less than what they can borrow it for? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I don't know why the critic for 
Agriculture in the province of Saskatchewan wouldn't be talking about 
Saskatchewan policy and Saskatchewan instruments and Saskatchewan 
mechanisms and maybe some of the things that he might have to offer. 
 
He talks about other governments.  He talks about the federal government.  
I mean I obviously don't represent the federal government but I have 
lobbied.  I can bring all kinds of things forward here that will show that 
I've lobbied even the governor of the Bank of Canada and several others, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But he always avoids talking about Saskatchewan.  Let's talk about 
Saskatchewan and let's talk about the history of the land bank and land 
prices.  Let's talk about since land bank and land prices.  Let's talk 
about our interest rate packages versus his.  Let's talk about all the 
programs with respect to the kinds of things that he could do versus what 
we can do here. 
 
If he wants to speculate about his ability to have an impact on Chairman 
Crow, governor of the Bank of Canada, or about the federal Finance 
minister, if he thinks he's got some way to lever them, let's hear about 
those.  But if he doesn't, then let's talk about Saskatchewan policies and 
Saskatchewan programs. 
 
We've got $7 billion from the federal government into Saskatchewan for 
farmers in the last five years, and we've initiated our own programs.  So 
I'd be glad to go through all those with him.  I'll just say to the hon. 
member . . . I mean if he represents agriculture as a critic, why doesn't 
he speak about Saskatchewan agriculture? 



 

 

 
Mr. Upshall: -- Well, Mr. Premier, Mr. Minister, if you're trying to say 
that the effects of Farm Credit Corporation don't affect Saskatchewan 
agriculture, then I don't know where you've been. 
 
And it's awfully interesting, you don't want to talk about anything 
federally that relates to Saskatchewan agriculture when you know you're in 
a bind on it, but when it comes to talking about your so-called great 
efforts in Ottawa to get money out to Saskatchewan farmers, then you want 
to talk about it all the time. 
 
Well you can't have it both ways.  And I'm going to be talking about the 
federal government because you and the federal government are tied in hand 
in hand with the destruction of Saskatchewan agriculture.  The federal 
government has played a very important role.  And as I said, $35 million a 
year because the Farm Credit Corporation rates increased. 
 
And I'm going to talk about another federal program, Mr. Minister -- a 
program that you, as a result of your cheer-leading and your travelling 
around this country promoting free trade, relates directly to -- and that 
is the two-price wheat system. 
 
You will recall your support . . . I recall well your support for the free 
trade agreement -- you know, that great agreement that has resulted in some 
165,000 jobs lost in the manufacturing sector; great effect on the hog 
industry or the countervail that's been put on. 
 
I want to ask you, Mr. Minister: can you tell me how much money went to 
Canadian farmers as a result of the two-price wheat system in one year?  
Let's take the year, the last year it was in effect. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- We'll get that information for the hon. member, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
I will say at the same time that farmers in western Canada were 
increasingly having a concern about that program because it was on domestic 
sales.  And Ontario producers were producing most of the domestic market.  
And if it was, say, a couple of hundred million dollars a year, you would 
find increasingly the domestic market was being supplied by Ontario people 
because they weren't exporting at all, so they would get the benefit out of 
it. 
 
The second thing is that when you look at percentage of income associated 
with various kinds of payments, that you'd rather see it coming out of the 
taxpayer than you would the consumer -- particularly for low income people, 
Mr. Speaker, they need the benefit.  So just if you were a compassionate 
person, you would like to see the more wealthy subsidize and make those 
payments as opposed to low income people pay it for bread. 
 
And third, if you take even the last payment that we've just received in 
Saskatchewan, $270-some million, compared to the two-priced wheat, I mean, 
there's no comparison.  We are getting more money as a result of the lobby 
that we're doing now than we ever did as a result of the two-priced wheat 



 

 

which was largely moving towards Ontario producers because they were 
producing for the domestic market, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Well, Mr. Premier, I do have some of the figures come out 
of the federal minister's office.  And just for your benefit . . . I've 
heard that argument about eastern Canada that you've given and your 
colleagues have given so often.  It is totally, totally untrue and 
misleading. 
 
In the last two years that the two-price wheat system was in effect, Mr. 
Premier, there was a total of about $435 million as a result of approximate 
consumption of about 2 million tonnes of wheat.  The figures speak for 
themselves, showing that 87 per cent of that money came to western Canada.  
So don't give me this argument about eastern Canada getting all the 
benefit.  Of course they received some benefit.  But 87 per cent came to 
western Canada, and about another 87 per cent, or I should say 87 per cent 
of the 87 per cent that came to western Canada came to Saskatchewan. 
 
In fact the figure on the two-price wheat system for Saskatchewan, in one 
year it was a loss of about $127 million.  That's over half of what the 
federal pay-out was, in one year.  So don't give me that garbage about 
eastern Canada benefitting, therefore the two-price wheat system had to go.  
You know that is an untrue argument and you know that that was simply a 
sales pitch that you put forward to sell the free trade agreement. 
 
Mr. Minister . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . My figures . . . One 
member asked where I got my figures from.  Come from the federal minister's 
office.  Now, Mr. Premier . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Well why did you ask the question then? 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- I'd written a letter.  I asked the question because I just 
realize . . . This proves the point.  I mean the Premier of this province, 
the Minister of Agriculture, just gets up and says off the cuff that this 
two-price wheat program benefitted eastern Canada much more than it 
benefitted western Canada -- unsubstantiated, untrue -- when the facts 
speak for themselves. 
 
Now maybe you can answer this question, Mr. Premier.  Do you have any idea 
. . . Now let me back up a step.  The federal government said that they 
were going to . . . at first they said they were going to make an annual 
payment to compensate for the two-price wheat after the free trade 
agreement kicked in.  And then they said, well they were going to make a 
one-time, one-year payment. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you tell me how much money the federal government put in, 
in total, to the Canadian Wheat Board to compensate western Canada for the 
loss of the two-price system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, the argument that the Ontario producers 
were not increasingly receiving the benefit from domestic sales is not 
valid, because they were.  Our percentage of the total grain crop is very 
large and we were receiving less and less of the percentage from the 



 

 

two-price system, because in Ontario they were producing for the domestic 
market and they were increasing their amount coming to them as a result of 
the fact that they just sell into the domestic market and don't export.  So 
they were moving on a line that would allow them to take more and more and 
more of the two-price system as a result of the fact that they recognized 
the flaw in the two-price mechanism.  And they were moving that way. 
 
Secondly, the hon. member fails to recognize and he has never acknowledged 
the fact that the federal government has since 1985 contributed in the 
neighbourhood of $7 billion to Saskatchewan -- not million, not hundreds of 
millions, but $7 billion, which is a significant amount of money. 
 
(1545) 
 
So he asks if they ever contributed in the place of this, have they ever 
backed up.  Well, first of all, they back up the wheat board; and secondly, 
they've backed it up in terms of cash that they have spent here in the 
province of Saskatchewan, including today another $238 million -- not to 
anybody else, but to Saskatchewan alone. 
 
Now you didn't get that out of the two-price system -- not at all.  That 
was a direct result of farm organizations working with the Government of 
Saskatchewan, lobbying the federal government and saying, this is what we 
need because of some cheating in other places, particularly in the United 
States and in Europe, which you have never fought against, as a matter of 
fact.  I mean you just think that, well, the more cheating we all do, the 
better it would be. 
 
But frankly I'm of the other view.  I'd like to have your support and the 
support of this legislature saying we want a solution at the General 
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and the MTN (multilateral trade 
negotiations) that's going on now, and stand in your place and say, I think 
we should have a framework where we all stop cheating and get the price of 
wheat up. 
 
It'd be much more interesting, Mr. Chairman, if we could be arguing about 
the price of wheat rather than government subsidies.  I mean all the 
opposition can talk about is government subsidy, government subsidy, 
government subsidy.  How about the price of wheat?  Wouldn't you like to 
get the price of wheat up there 5 or $6 in the market, and then allow 
people to get their money from the market?  There isn't a farmer any place 
who wouldn't rather get it out of the market-place. 
 
And the NDP say, well we'll know how to fix the price of land; we'll 
initiate a land bank.  I believe that the Leader of the Opposition has said 
that he would reinitiate the land bank.  The members from P.A. have said 
that they would start the land bank. 
 
That's the new answer for the government to come in and grab up farm land 
and that will be the government's solution to the price of wheat.  The 
price of wheat should go up to 5 or $6 a bushel, then people could make a 
living.  And we wouldn't have to spend all the time in this legislature 
arguing about farm subsidies if we can get other people off of farm 



 

 

subsidies and stop the cheating.  The price of wheat could go up and 
farmers, I'll tell you, farmers in this province and probably across 
western Canada would rather get their living out of the market-place than 
they would the post office or the government in its hand-outs and other 
things. 
 
So all I can say is that in place, in place, okay, of government subsidies, 
if you can get the price of wheat up, and I could get your support and we 
could get the support of all of this legislature to have a solid 
representation in Geneva and in Brussels to stop the international 
cheating, then we would all be much better off -- better for the taxpayers, 
better for the farmers.  Everybody would feel better. 
 
Now if I can get your assurance that you would back this administration in 
that kind of an exercise and not just talk about, you know, government 
buying farm land and government subsidizing, then I would say, Mr. 
Chairman, we'd make a lot more progress here in the legislature and 
certainly for the farmers. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Well I was wondering if you had any thoughts on my 
question.  We have just determined that your rhetoric was not true -- 
misleading.  I asked a question about the fact that $127 million was lost 
to Saskatchewan farmers because of the loss of the two-price wheat system.  
I asked you how much money the federal government put in as they promised 
they were going to put some money in to the Canadian Wheat Board pooling 
system to compensate for the two-price wheat.  And I get some more rhetoric 
about trying . . . what you were trying to do instead of the two-price 
wheat system was a government subsidy. 
 
And I agree with you.  Farmers want to get paid for their product.  The 
two-price wheat system paid them for their product.  And what did you do?  
You did away with it.  You did away with it -- 120 . . . 87 per cent of the 
money came to western Canada.  About 54 per cent came to Saskatchewan -- 
$127 million. 
 
Well I wrote a letter to the federal minister just to ask him how much 
money he was putting into the Canadian Wheat Board for the two-price wheat 
system.  And do you know what he put in?  And I'm quoting: 
 

 All payments have been completed.  The total amount paid was about $87 
million, of which about $66 million was paid to the Canadian Wheat Board 
on behalf of wheat producers in the Canadian Wheat Board area. 

 
So that generous friend of yours in Ottawa put in $66 million in one year 
-- in one year -- to compensate for about $240 million annually coming to 
western Canada.  And you're satisfied with that?  Well I'll tell you, Mr. 
Premier, I'm not satisfied with that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- So I would just like you to explain to me how the fact that 
we have lost $240 million roughly to western Canada, $127 million of which 
came to Saskatchewan.  Can you explain to me how that system is better now 



 

 

than it was when we had the two-price system. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, let me start again for the hon. member.  
We just received a cheque here today for $238 million from the federal 
government to the province of Saskatchewan, to the farmers, and only people 
here -- not shared with anybody else.  Topped up by the provincial 
government, it's $277 million.  Now that's just one of several cheques that 
have been written to the province of Saskatchewan in the last few years.  
Now that comes from the taxpayer, not the poor. 
 
That leads to my second point.  When you charge Canadian consumers more 
than a product is worth in the general market, you are going to hit the low 
income people the hardest.  If you take it from the taxpayer -- if you pay 
income tax and you buy, then you tax from those that have money and you 
redistribute that.  And that's what you saw today. 
 
The federal government said, here's $238 million from those that pay tax, 
the wealthier, going out across to the province of Saskatchewan to the 
farmers. 
 
Now you go back and say, well, but I would rather charge more for the 
consumers in Canada for wheat; and all those low income that you're 
supposed to represent, that you have a heart for, you'd say, well, to the 
poor, you pay more for wheat and the rich guy down the road, you don't have 
to.  Now I don't think that's fair. 
 
Now if you start looking at these . . . and the hon. member mentions the 
tax reform, and isn't there a cheque going out to low income people?  Have 
you remembered that?  Now you start putting all of these things together, 
Mr. Speaker, I think it says something about the criticism opposite. 
 
First of all, I would rather they do whatever they could with me and with 
all members here to get the price of wheat up so we wouldn't have to be 
talking about government subsidies and programs, because the farmer would 
rather get it from the market. 
 
Secondly, to be perfectly fair, don't charge the poor.  Don't charge low 
income; don't charge people who are single parents; don't charge those who 
are perhaps less educated, less fortunate, or those that live in rural 
areas that don't have access to various kinds of things.  You would charge 
them more and I don't think that's a fair argument.  That's why I've always 
come back and said, tax if you must; then redistribute.  But don't tax the 
poor.  They're having a tough enough time as it is. 
 
Thirdly, the question that I run into, talking to wheat pool members and 
wheat growers and others, and it's a fair debate about the two-price system 
and others, is that their concern on this problem was the domestic market 
was increasingly going to be very attractive for Ontario people and their 
share was going up and our share was going this way. 
 
Now eventually that's going to lead to Ontario people producing as much as 
possible for the domestic market, capturing a higher percentage of the 
benefit than they deserve, while western Canadians who grow most of it but 



 

 

because we have to export, we don't get that benefit, and on top of it, the 
benefit's coming from the poor.  We said, put those two together and there 
must be a better way.  Let's design a long-run income program so we can 
take crop insurance and we can take prices and we can put the two together 
and forecast some income.  And that's what we're working on today with 
farmers and farm groups and governments right across the country.  Let's 
not tax the poor.  Let's design a mechanism that is long run and fair. 
 
In the interim, the federal government has come up with, again let me say, 
not a couple of hundred of million but $7 billion recently in the last few 
years, and just today another $238 million for the province of Saskatchewan 
alone.  Now that's a substantive amount of money, significant, 
historically, comparatively in history or interprovincially. 
 
And if you ask me, have they contributed?  Well my goodness, any 
fair-minded individual will tell you they have really, really contributed 
money, and not by taking from the poor but indeed by taxing those that have 
it and redistributing it here to the farmers when we've had some difficult 
times. 
 
So I can justify modifying this mechanism that was not fair, and the 
movement was going to Ontario when it should have been coming here.  And 
wheat producers that have looked at those trends would know that that was a 
dangerous trend. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Why is the member from Yorkton on his feet? 
 
Mr. McLaren: -- I request leave to introduce some students, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. McLaren: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  It's my pleasure today 
to introduce to you and to all members of the Assembly 36 grade 4 students 
from St. Elm School in Yorkton and they're in the Speaker's gallery.  And 
they're accompanied today by their teacher, Mrs. Jean Erickson and the 
principal of the school, Mr. E. Bialobzyski. 
 
 DWe welcome you to the Assembly today.  These folks are from my home town, 
the city of Yorkton, and we hope you enjoy your stay and your observation 
of the proceedings here in the legislature.  I'll meet with you a little 
later to have some pictures taken on the steps of the legislature and will 
provide you with some refreshments and answer any questions that you might 
have.  So we'll do that just a little later on.  So enjoy your stay, have a 
good trip home, and I hope you have a very enjoyable summer holiday as 
well.  I'd ask all members to please welcome these students from Yorkton. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 



 

 

Agriculture and Food 
Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 1 

 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, Mr. Minister, your argument 
doesn't hold much water.  I simply say one thing.  You say that the 
two-price wheat system was costing the poor of Canada, therefore taxing the 
poor.  Can you tell me, Mr. Minister, how much the price of bread has come 
down, how much the price of breakfast cereals have come down, since the 
removal of the two-price wheat? 
 
I do a little bit of shopping in my local grocery store and I haven't seen 
any decrease in the price of those commodities.  So where's the money 
going?  I mean the millers have got the difference between $7 a bushel that 
they were paying under the two-price wheat system and the $3.69 -- or 
whatever it is, in that ballpark -- now.  The poor have not benefitted. 
 
But I'll tell you, there is a difference of $280 million annually going 
somewhere -- $280 million that were going to producers of this country, as 
I said, 240 of that coming to western Canada.  And you're go on to some 
rhetoric about the taxing the poor.  Well I'll tell you the price of bread 
and breakfast cereals have not come down. 
 
And if you wanted a solution, I'll give you a solution.  I've given it to 
you before.  All you had to do was go down to Ottawa and recommend that 
they put all the domestic consumption into a national pool, sharing with 
the Ontario wheat board and the Canadian Wheat Board, so every farmer would 
be treated equally.  That's all they had to do and the farmers would have 
benefitted from it. 
 
But what we have now is a loss of $240 million to western Canada, 127 of 
that from Saskatchewan, gone -- the producers don't get it any more -- 
every year.  The people who consume those products are paying more, not 
less, and there's $280 million going into somebody's pocket.  And you 
allowed that to happen by negotiating a free trade deal that allowed the 
two-price wheat system in Canada to go. 
 
Well I don't think that's very acceptable, Mr. Premier.  And you can argue 
. . . give me all your rhetoric that you want, you know yourself that there 
is a substantial amount of money to the tune of $280 million that is lining 
the pockets of those companies.  And if you want to look at your little 
Tory contribution list, you will see that Nabisco foods, Nabisco Brands 
Ltd. put $102,000 into the Tory campaign.  I wonder if that had anything to 
do with the two-price wheat system going?  They put in $102,000.  Weston 
put in about $42,000. 
 
I know who's benefitting from it and I know who's hurting from it.  The 
consumers are hurting because the price of bread and cereals are still 
going up; the producers are hurting because they've lost that $280 million. 
 
So, Mr. Premier, I ask you: in those negotiations did you ever consider 
recommending to the federal government that they put the two-price wheat 



 

 

system into a national pool, thereby every farmer benefitting equal, wiping 
out your argument for Ontario -- which is a weak argument, mind you, but 
wiping out that argument -- putting it into a national pool so every farmer 
would benefit equally from that?  Did you ever consider that? 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the member opposite changes his 
mind every other day.  He now wants . . . he's figured out a new proposal 
that could have been implemented a few years ago.  I'll go back and remind 
him that he's best when he stands on his record on land bank and defends 
land bank as their answer to all of these problems.  And we heard here 
today, as well as the Leader of the Opposition and all of the rest of the 
NDP say, the land bank where the government can come in and speculate on 
land against farm families is the answer.  Now we've heard that over and 
over and over again, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Then he goes back and then he says, now if you don't rearrange this 
two-price wheat, as unfair as it was, then he starts picking on the 
companies.  Well why doesn't he go to the local Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and 
ask them about the margins in Robin's Donuts?  Or why doesn't he ask them 
about the bakeries that they have in the west coast where they're taking 
grain and they know how to mill and they know how to make their products. 
 
I mean if he wants to start picking on people, then pick on all those that 
are diversifying in the Saskatchewan economy.  I've given them full marks 
for diversification.  They're taking their grain and they're processing; 
they're taking barley and they're processing; they're taking feed grains 
and livestock and processing.  Now they're moving into a feedlot almost in 
your riding where you've got the Lanigan feedlot and where they've got a 
combination of Mohawk Oil and the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool putting together 
processing and manufacturing. 
 
Is he going to start picking on the margins now?  Is he going to say, well 
all these companies . . . I mean if you get him cornered what does he do?  
He goes back to picking on.  It's like he has to have a sustainable victim, 
always has to have somebody that he's got to pick on.  Now come on, lets . 
. . 
 
We're looking at higher priced wheat as the answer.  We'd like to see that.  
We're looking at all . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- You had it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- But if he says we had it, we had it from taking it from 
the poor; we're charging the poor more for food than they should pay.  And 
he says, well $280 million didn't bother the poor. 
 
Well somebody had to pay it.  Well I'll tell you who paid it.  It's those 
that are in the market-place.  And he says, well no, they didn't; it was 
all margins.  Right?  Isn't that what he's saying?  It's all margins.  And 
we've squeezed it out of the wheat pool and we've squeezed it out of 
somebody else.  Well now nobody's going to believe that.  I mean that's 



 

 

back to 1917, you know, rhetoric about well there's a margin there 
somewhere; we've got to squeeze it out. 
 
We deal internationally with companies and we deal internationally with 
countries.  And we're trying to trade all over the world.  We have to be 
fair.  We're going to lay out these arguments to people all over the place.  
I would just say to the hon. member, we're prepared to put up a lot of 
money to protect people against high interest rates.  We're prepared to 
make sure that the federal government can deliver cheques like it did 
today, Mr. Chairman, for $238 million. 
 
We're prepared to back farmers and defend them against high interest rates 
as we do here with Community Development Bonds and with zero per cent 
interest rates for the livestock industry and others.  And we'll continue 
to do that. 
 
Now all that the member opposite can go on is federal policies -- federal.  
Why doesn't he talk about Saskatchewan policies with respect to interest 
rate protection, Saskatchewan policies with respect to farm income 
programs, if he's serious about them.  I mean he's going to go on the 
federal government all of the time on FCC and the wheat board.  Fair 
enough, but that's federal.  This is not the House of Commons.  This is not 
the House of Commons; this is the provincial legislature. 
 
So if he wants to go into those things then, fine, we can go off on 
tangents.  If you want to get into specific points here, then we'll 
certainly be prepared to deal with them one at a time in terms of the 
provincial things that we have control over, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, I'm 
intrigued -- perhaps that's not the word quite that I have in mind -- about 
the Premier's proclamation that federal agricultural policies, or federal 
policies as they impact on agriculture in Saskatchewan, are somehow beyond 
the jurisdiction of this Assembly and his admonition to us that we should 
not talk about federal policies as they impact on agriculture, 
notwithstanding the fact, for example, that on free trade this Premier was 
the number one participant in the debate of the federal initiative on free 
trade and a number one advocate of free trade as it would impact on 
agriculture. 
 
So I don't think the double standard that the Premier tries to impose upon 
us is going to wash.  It won't wash in this legislature, that's for sure.  
He can continue to lecture us about this, but I can tell him that he may as 
well just sit back and enjoy it because we intend to keep asking questions 
that impact federally on agriculture provincially, just as he does, both 
positively and negatively, because he speaks to them.  He addresses them at 
federal-provincial conferences.  He speaks to them in this legislature.  He 
speaks to them outside in the country. And we intend to speak to them. 
 
And just on this point, Mr. Chairman, although I really want to get up to 
discuss the $277 million which was announced today, I want to illustrate 
why my intrigue has risen more today, listening to the Premier as a result 
of this discussion on the two-price system of wheat, and federal policies. 



 

 

 
The point that I want to make, Mr. Chairman, is that the Prime Minister of 
Canada and the Premier of this province tied the debate on the two-price 
system of wheat to the free trade debate.  It was alleged in the course of 
the free trade debate that the two-price system of wheat, in one form or 
another, was going to be done away with because it might offend whatever 
the negotiation parameters were between the Americans and the Canadians on 
free trade. 
 
And we were assured by the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan and the 
Prime Minister of Canada that if the two-price system for wheat was done 
away with in the context of the free trade deal, Canadian farmers, 
Saskatchewan farmers, putting it more specifically, need not worry; that it 
would be supplanted, the removal of that concept and principle, by some 
regular -- at least by implication that was the case -- ongoing commitments 
by the federal treasury to make up the difference.  That's what we were 
told. 
 
My colleague, the agricultural critic, the member from Humboldt, points out 
the fact that we were apparently not told the truth, because as the 
Minister of Agriculture Canada has pointed out in his correspondence to the 
opposition agricultural critic, the amount of money committed is about half 
. . . for one year. 
 
What the Premier is endeavouring to do is to disassociate now and hope that 
we forget, that the farmers forget, the linkages of the debate on two-price 
system in free trade, and the assurances made to the agriculture community, 
that we disassociate that debate now.  And what he seeks now to do is to 
argue a point of principle, namely that the principle of the two-price 
system for wheat is unfair, on his argument that somehow the poor pay more, 
notwithstanding the fact that the price of bread continues to go up, 
notwithstanding the fact that there is no tangible passing on, supposedly, 
to the poor, any of the savings which may take place. 
 
But leave that aside for the moment.  Leave aside for the moment, Mr. 
Chairman, and Mr. Premier, the issue of the two-price system of wheat being 
wrong in principle -- something with which we have grave reservations, 
obviously, with respect to your argument. 
 
My question to the Premier is: today you make an argument against the 
two-price system of wheat apparently based on principle.  Why was it that 
you and the Prime Minister of Canada and Mr. Mazankowski didn't make that 
argument on principle at the time of the free trade deal?  Why was it that 
at the time of the free trade deal, you and your federal Conservative 
counterparts in Ottawa linked free trade and the two-price system abolition 
hand in glove as part of an assurance to the farmers of the province of 
Saskatchewan that they wouldn't suffer any economic income as a result of 
free trade? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I don't know how many years in my 
estimates that I have reiterated the same argument -- perhaps the Leader of 
the Opposition wasn't in the House at that particular time, but we could 
dig up Hansard -- and my arguments have not changed in principle for years 



 

 

here, of the unfairness of charging consumers more than a competitive price 
is fairly obvious. 
 
It's relatively more unfair for the poor to pay an artificial high price 
than it is for the rich.  And my argument has always been, if you want to 
get money from the people, get it from those that have money and 
redistribute it.  And I think you would agree. 
 
Now the formula was biased in favour of Ontario farmers because it was for 
domestic grain that you had to pay the two-price wheat on, and they didn't 
export so they were increasing their production.  And the farmers here were 
saying, well you know we got the lion's share now, but the slope of this 
line is not going the right way.  It's a slippery slope.  While we're 
getting less of a percentage and they're getting more, we should find a 
better mechanism. 
 
Now the member from Humboldt says that he's figured out a better mechanism, 
fair enough.  But let me also point out, when he's looking at this 
mechanism, what was at stake as well is the kind of economic activity that 
we've seen organizations like the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool go into since the 
change in the trade agreement between the United States and Canada.  We see 
more processing and more manufacturing of food products because the local 
people aren't forced to pay a high . . . or an artificial higher price. 
 
Now if you want to make doughnuts, if you want to open bakeries, and if you 
want to sell your products to the Japanese or to Americans or to others, 
you want to have it on a competitive basis or you can't process and 
manufacture.  I'm sure the hon. member will agree, as you process and 
manufacture feed grains or flour or malt or barley into malt, you create 
jobs -- you create jobs in Biggar, you create jobs in Lanigan, you create 
jobs in Saskatoon, you create jobs in B.C. if that's where a bakery might 
be or wherever we're milling. 
 
So the argument was, from those that wanted to process the raw material, 
two things.  Don't charge . . . force us to pay an artificially high price 
when we compete internationally with the final product.  And secondly, if 
you do want more money for the farmers, don't get it out of the consumer in 
an unfair way; get it out of the taxpayer who can pay and take it from 
those who have some income.  In other words, when you tax people, the poor 
don't pay taxes and those do. 
 
So from a logical diversification of our Canadian economy and particularly 
in Saskatchewan we said, by all means make sure there's money there.  And I 
will go on to make the argument, there's more money than ever now coming 
from the federal government, far more than we had in two-price wheat.  I 
believe it's more fair, and at the same time it's encouraged all 
organizations -- I mention the wheat pool as one -- to diversify, to take 
our raw product, whether it's wheat, and make, you know, various kinds of 
bakery products or make doughnuts, or whether it's barley to make malt, or 
whether it's feed grains to make ethanol, or to put the feed grains through 
a feedlot to make beef.  All of those things are positive, and I think you 
would agree with that, that we need a mechanism internationally to be 
competitive for diversification; at the same time not hurt the farmer. 



 

 

 
So the argument has always been: let's see if we can find a better way to 
help the farmer through this and to tax, get the money from those that have 
it and not jeopardize our opportunity here for local co-operatives or local 
companies or business to expand in comparison to, you know, the guy just 
south of the border here who's going to be making doughnuts as well.  Now 
if he's buying at one price and we buy another, and he's got a different 
mechanism to help his farmer which comes from the taxpayer and we're taking 
it out of the consumer's hide, we both lose.  The poor lose and we don't 
get to process. 
 
So, you know, logically if you just take into . . . all I've ever argued 
for is -- and you know my case with respect to less tariffs -- is just more 
opportunity to make products, process, manufacture, barley and feed grains 
and wheat and beef, and create those jobs.  Because there's not many jobs 
just linked to wheat, compared to all the jobs that you can have if you 
make other things from wheat, and that's just logical.  So we want to 
process as much as possible, and we want the farmers to have as much money 
as possible. 
 
So you want both.  And that's always been my objective.  I mean we can 
argue or debate whether the feds have given us enough money, but it's been 
a lot.  Maybe we need a better mechanism, and Lord knows we're working on a 
better mechanism.  The ad hoc has been difficult, but it has worked.  We've 
got a lot of money in the ad hoc mechanism. 
 
And when we look at the long-run safety net program we're working on, 
people that you would know, I'm sure, involved in these committees, and 
they are trying to design the best crop insurance plus the best market 
insurance to generate an income insurance mechanism.  And I think that 
would help but not distort the possibility to process and manufacture here 
in Saskatchewan, where I really believe we can have a lot of very good 
opportunities. 
 
Now that's progress.  We have to change the way we do things, and that may 
be difficult.  But I'm sure, as we all recognize when we look at 
Saskatchewan and Canada and the rest of the world, I mean, the only thing 
we can count on for sure really, is probably the pace of change is 
increasing and we all have to deal with that.  Certainly the world markets 
are changing very rapidly and we're going to have to compete. 
 
 DSo it's not a question of helping farmers. We want to do it.  We want to 
remove the distortions as much as possible, make it as fair as possible, 
and then get on with the job. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, as I said, I wanted to enter into this 
discussion because I wanted to discuss $277 million today with respect to 
the announced program.  But before I do, I simply must make one quick 
response to the Premier with respect to the issue of the two-price system 
for wheat.  Of course the objective of diversification and adequate levels 
of income support for farmers, the producers, those are two objectives that 
everybody would agree with.  I don't think anybody disagrees. 
 



 

 

(1615) 
 
The point that I wish to make however, Mr. Chairman, is that the 
governments of Saskatchewan and Ottawa -- perhaps misled is too harsh a 
word to use, but that's the way I feel about it -- did so in the course of 
the free trade debate with respect to the removal of a form of assistance 
to the producers by giving their assurances to the producers in exchange 
for acceptance, they would have hoped, of the free trade deal.  They gave 
their assurances that there would be no diminution of this principle or 
this program which, as it turns out to be the case, is not true.  It turns 
out that they have been in fact penalized. 
 
And I would argue that not only have they been penalized, Mr. Chairman, but 
I would argue, given the approach of the federal government in Ottawa -- 
and I would say, incidentally, the provincial government in Regina as well 
-- there is little indication of a commitment to any form of long-term 
taxpayers funded and based income support programs for the province of 
Saskatchewan farmers, or for that matter farmers in Canada anywhere. 
 
I would say that over the last few years through a variety of actual 
program reductions and eliminations, we are seeing the reverse.  We are 
seeing a move away from a stable, predictable plan -- the one thing the 
two-price system for wheat was -- and into programs of ad hoc-ery which I 
say raise the legitimate question in the minds of many producers as to how 
long we can expect these to continue. 
 
I think the next step very likely is going to be that many of these ad hoc 
programs will also fade away, as is the case with respect to many of them 
as announced over the last few years.  And so we're having the situation 
take place that there may or may not be more processing of food products 
going on.  That, I think, we can either discuss here or under economic 
development estimates.  I don't wish to get into that debate for the 
moment. 
 
But we surely have a great big question mark hanging over the farmers of 
this country, this province, as to what exactly the elimination of 
two-price system means in the sense of taxpayer-based and funded new 
programs which are long term, predictable, based on some form of cost of 
production and cost of a fair return, because we see no evidence of it.  
And in fact I would argue with the federal government's green paper in 
agriculture, every indication that philosophically at the earliest 
opportunity that the Ottawa people can do so, they're going to simply move 
the heck right out of this field and allow the free market to decide and to 
rule all aspects of agriculture. 
 
And I must say that I think the Premier's, how should I describe it, less 
than vocal concern of this particular point of view lends some credence to 
the suggestion that many make that he too supports this approach. 
 
But may I just for the moment leave that debate.  If the Premier wants to 
come back to it, okay, we will.  But I want to come to the discussion now 
for the moment with respect to the $277 million farm-aid program.  And I 
have a few specific questions which I want to ask the Premier and perhaps 



 

 

he can clarify to the House what the situation is.  I'll put two questions 
here while on my feet.  I'm not sure the Premier can handle them at the 
same; they're too many answers. 
 
First of all, Mr. Premier, in making the announcement today, I did not see 
from the written press release -- I might have missed it or misunderstood 
-- any criteria for qualifications, namely, which farmers qualify and which 
do not.  Are there any farmers with respect to the $277 million who will 
not qualify for the $5.50 per acre program that has been announced?  If so, 
who are they? what are the criteria? 
 
And secondly, while the Premier is getting his information in that regard, 
is the pay-out based on 1989-90 crop year or is it based on 1990-91 crop 
year or is it -- although I don't know quite how this would be done, but as 
it's been represented to me by others who are unclear as to your press 
conference statements -- that there be some sort of a combination of both?  
Would you be good enough to explain for us what the situation is on those 
two matters? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Well dealing with the last questions first, Mr. 
Chairman, just for the hon. member, all the land in Saskatchewan, all 
cultivated acreage is included in this payment, and everybody that had a 
quota book as of August 1, 1989 is eligible.  We ran that formula by . . . 
All the farm organizations, had them in two days in a row.  As I said in my 
news conference, this particular basis was supported by the Saskatchewan 
Wheat Pool, the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, United 
Grain Growers, the National Farmers Union, the Saskatchewan Canola Growers 
Association, the flax growers association, the Western Canadian Wheat 
Growers Association and the Saskatchewan Pulse Crop Development Board, as 
well as both provinces on either side of us, Alberta and Manitoba based 
their payments on 1989-90.  So it is '89-90, it's $5.50 an acre, it 
includes every cultivated acre in the province of Saskatchewan, and it is 
all those that will be eligible or those that have the quota book in August 
1, 1989. 
 
I will say, if I might, on CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) radio 
today, a member of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool executive said the following 
and I quote: 
 

 Farmers are appreciative.  Governments have done what they feel they were 
able to do at a time when they are striving toward debt reduction.  
Perhaps it's the best farmers could hope for under these circumstances.  
We think the government has done the best it could under these difficult 
circumstances in putting this money forward, and by and large, farmers 
will be happy with it. 

 
There's been some discussion whether in fact they should have figured out a 
different way to do it.  About 97 per cent of all the farm land . . . It 
wouldn't make much difference at the margin, the 3 per cent.  There are 
some who might have preferred it in 1990-91, some would have preferred 
1989-90. 
 
I will say though the groups -- and I won't read them again -- almost every 



 

 

elevator organization in the SARM and others have endorsed the 1989, and we 
listen to them.  And I talked to some of your colleagues and not to box you 
in or anything but it's, I believe, the fairest thing that we could do. 
 
Just one point on the last bit of discussion.  If I could just come at it 
this way in terms of farm prices and two-price wheat.  As you probably 
know, when the price of wheat dropped, set by the federal government, I 
said that the feds should raise the price of wheat to $5 a bushel and go 
for it internationally, and say to the Canadian Wheat Board, you go sell it 
at that price and if the federal government has to back it up, then back it 
up. 
 
I have no problem with the wheat board going out there and if it can't have 
a sale, then we'll have an export enhancement program to make it happen. 
 
If I could, in The Western Producer, there was an article that summarized 
this.  And I want to make my point because it's important to know why I 
said that.  And if I could quote, Mr. Chairman, it said: 
 

 This year, led by the Saskatchewan Premier, western premiers have urged 
Ottawa to raise initial prices.  In Ottawa last week, the Premier told a 
press conference that a higher price would be more realistic because 
existing market prices have been distorted by subsidies. 

 
And then here was the response by the wheat board, Mr. Chairman.  I just 
want the hon. member to know this -- that the former chief grains 
bureaucrat for the federal government, Bill Miner, said that a proposal for 
board subsidies are dangerous and damaging.  And he quotes: 
 

 This is the view that we have fought over the years to dispel, that the 
Canadian Wheat Board operates with government money. 

 
Farmers have been saying for decades this is not the case.  And then, I 
quote here: 
 

 The Saskatchewan Wheat Pool president, Garf Stevenson, has adamantly 
opposed the idea that the Canadian Wheat Board prices be subsidized. 

 
Now he said such a move, and I go and quote: 
 

 . . . would only harm the board's critics and would limit the aid program 
to the two crops marketed by the board.  I don't think we should be 
meddling with the initial prices at all. 

 
Now I was prepared to raise the initial price of wheat to $5 a bushel so 
all the farmers could get their income from the market.  And I was prepared 
to do that.  Not take it from the consumer or from the poor, but just say, 
all right, Mr. Federal Government, you back up the farmer here.  Have the 
price and get out there and sell them.  If you can't, have an export 
enhancement program to back it up. 
 
The president of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool said, no, don't do that; don't 
monkey with the market-place.  The federal bureaucrats said, don't monkey 



 

 

with the market-place.  But the Premier of Saskatchewan, representing 50 
per cent of the farm land in the country, then said, what do you mean, 
monkey with the market-place?  United States and the western Europeans are 
monkeying with it all the time and they're driving the price down with 
government treasuries.  Why can't you let the farmer get his $5 a bushel 
out of the market and the federal government back it up?  But don't charge 
consumers here.  Charge the taxpayer. 
 
Well I have had the support of the premiers in western Canada, the 
ministers of Agriculture across the country saying, you know what, why 
don't you do that?  Back it up one way or another with a contingency fund 
but get out there and sell; show that the Europeans and those Americans 
that we're serious about defending farmers, and go back up the wheat board 
and do it. 
 
Well they didn't, but not because I didn't argue the other way.  So I'll 
say to the hon. member: I don't have a problem fighting fire with fire.  We 
want to take on U.S. export subsidies and unfairness, or Europeans?  I'm 
all for the federal government putting their treasury right up behind the 
Canadian Wheat Board.  In fact in theory and in principle, that's what they 
do anyway because they set the initial price and if they sell below that, 
the federal treasury's there. 
 
So I just said to them: well set it up there where it belongs and go where 
. . . you'll have an even increased incentive to go bargain and do a good 
job because you know the bill's going to be there, and the price, if you 
don't get the job done, so -- And I think farmers would much rather get 
their living from the market than they would the post office or from 
debates here in the legislature on the size of subsidies. 
 
So make no mistake.  I encourage governments to get out of this subsidy 
war.  But while we're in it, I think we have to arm ourselves and protect 
the farmer against these wars.  And I will do it through the Canadian Wheat 
Board or I'll do it through cash or I'll do it through any combinations.  
But I do have some theoretical problems in taxing the poor. 
 
And finally if I could just make the argument, I'll just . . . not to dwell 
on it, but the two-price system . . . and we've got some notes on it here.  
The result of the policies at the division of the benefit was not 
equitable.  On average, western producers receive $14.76 a ton and eastern 
producers receive $38.13 a ton.  Now that's over two and a half times the 
benefit.  Eastern producers of hard wheats receive most of the benefit, an 
equivalent of $100.94 per ton.   
 DProducers of the classes of wheat in eastern Canada do not receive the 
same benefit. 
 
Now we have found that that trend was increasingly unfair; that's why we 
backed away from it.  And I'd rather see money go to the farmers in a 
different fashion that doesn't encourage Ontario producers to take our 
markets.  And I think that's been well documented by farmers right across 
western Canada. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, I want to ask the Premier -- I think the 



 

 

answer is self-evident but I want to be absolutely clear on this -- is the 
answer simply that no one is disqualified from the $277 million if they 
hold a quota book, eligible cultivated acres based on the cultivated 
acreage proposal that you have; that there is nobody who's disqualified, 
say, to give you a specific example, who's in arrears to FCC or ACS? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Well I will just read from a paragraph from the 
release:  The cultivated acres will be those farmed by the applicant on 
August 1, 1989.  And that includes all the acres in the province of 
Saskatchewan  
_- no acres left out. 
 
If you have received some overpayments by the federal government, they will 
deduct payments.   Any applicant -- it doesn't impinge on eligibility -- 
but any applicant owing money to the federal government from overpayments 
under the special Canadian grains program or the Canadian crop drought 
program or the farm improvement loans program or the prairie grain 
stabilization program, the Prairie Grain Advance Payments Act or Advance 
Payments for Crops Act, will have this amount deducted from the payment.  
And that's just an accounting thing but not interfering with eligibility.  
The federal government requires this as a condition of providing the 
assistance. 
 
So every farmer that had a quota book, was farming the acres as of August 
1, 1989, is eligible.  And I think that every cultivated acre would be in 
the quota book.  So as far as I can tell, it covers every acre and who 
cultivated the acre and was responsible for the acre as of August 1, '89. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, again I just want to have this really 
clear for myself because -- perhaps it's me -- maybe the minister is able 
to put it in more simple terms.  I want to know with respect to the 
exemptions list which you have read -- that's my term, exemptions list . . 
. I understand eligibility.  You say everybody's eligible, but there'll be 
a deduction from the farmers who are eligible on the exemptions list which 
you have read.  I want to know whether that exemptions list today is the 
same as the 1988 drought program. 
 
And secondly, I want to know what happens specifically in the instance of 
the farmer today, under today's program, who is, say, behind in payments to 
ACS which default has resulted in a legal action.  It doesn't have to be 
legal action, but let's say in default where ACS is taking some remedial 
steps, or FCC.  That farmer is eligible; I understand that.  But is there a 
deduction for the amounts owing or for the claims that either FCC or ACS 
have? 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- That's a fair question, Mr. Chairman.  There are no 
deductions from FCC or ACS in this program.  All the farmers are eligible.  
The deductions are very similar to the drought program, that when people 
received money that if they had overpayments . . . this is where the 
taxpayer has paid too much to an individual and request it back.  And 
that's all it's about. 



 

 

 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thanks, Mr. Chairman.  Thanks, Mr. Minister.  I'll leave 
that for the moment.  My colleague may later on this afternoon or this 
evening pursue that if there are any further questions that need to be 
followed up. 
 
I still want to stick with the $277 million program announced today.  But 
this is one of the most endearing sides of the Premier's personality.  He 
has such a beguiling charm to ensnare us in the debate that he himself has 
prompted that I think I am ensnared.  And I want to discuss, just for the 
moment, the business of the two-price system for wheat before I return to 
the 277 million. 
 
We heard the Premier say a few moments ago that he has been a strong 
advocate for the abolition of the difference between domestic wheat and the 
export price for wheat for the arguments which he advances.  And I have in 
front of me -- perhaps the minister has an explanation for this -- a press 
release dated May 6, 1986, which as we all know was just a few months 
before the last provincial election campaign, one which the Premier was 
successful in. 
 
And the heading is from Agriculture, Saskatchewan Agriculture, and the 
heading on it is: "$11 per bushel for domestic wheat recommended". 
 

 Saskatchewan has asked the federal government to set the price of domestic 
wheat at $11 per bushel. 

 
And there's a big argument there, under the circumstances, as to how 
difficult it was, talks about equity and the like.  For further 
information, contact John Weir, office of the Minister of Agriculture, 
Regina. 
 
How does the minister square this statement, this position of the 
Government of Saskatchewan going into the provincial election in 1986 with 
his statements today, after the free trade deal has been implemented, his 
rationalization for doing away with the two-price system for wheat?  When 
did he have the change in approach? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, if you go back and look at the . . . when 
the Ontario people started to recognize that they were getting most of the 
benefit was about at the same time that we recognized that the formula was 
not working fairly for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Wheat production in the Canadian Wheat Board area increased 32 per cent 
over the period '76 to '86.  We get a hold of those numbers; we find from 
22 million tonnes to 30 million tonnes.  Eastern Canada increases 
production by 59 per cent over the same period from 7.77 million tonnes to 
1.2 million metric tons. 
 
The arguments were coming forward in 1986, Mr. Chairman, from the farm 
groups associated with the two-price policy that this rate of change was 
now going to benefit more and more of the farmers of Ontario because they 
were increasing two or three times the production of spring wheat or wheat 



 

 

that was eligible for this two-price mechanism as opposed to growing corn 
or things that were not under the Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
So there was an attraction there to get acreage out of the non-board grains 
into board grains.  And farmers across the province, wheat pool members, 
the UGG (United Grain Growers Limited) and Pioneer were saying we must do 
something about this because all of this benefit -- it wasn't all at that 
time -- but all of this benefit is going to start going to Ontario 
producers because they see a windfall gain. 
 
So it's about that time when we said look, we got to change this.  
Something has to modify it or else we're going to be receiving less and 
less of the percentage benefit, and therefore we're contributing and 
Ontario's gaining.  And I agreed with it.  I said look that's . . . we had 
better do something to change that formula.  Then the whole question I 
said, well if we're into a different mechanism let's look at redesigning 
the whole thing entirely. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I want to make a comment in response 
and then I want to move on back to the 277 million.  I think, Mr. Chairman, 
my comment is a fair comment.  On May 6, 1986 before the great free trade 
debate of 1988 and before the provincial election of 1986, this government, 
this Progressive Conservative government in Regina, in the run up to the 
provincial election of 1986, was committed to the principle of the 
two-price system for wheat. 
 
On a number of occasions -- the one that I have is dated May 6, 1986 -- 
they were advocating, not the abolition of the two-price system for wheat, 
they were not advocating its abolition because it was going to be placing 
an unfair burden on the poor or that it was funding it out of consumers or 
that we should be shifting to some form of taxpayer-based program, they 
were arguing that there should be an increase in the two-price system for 
wheat to $11 per bushel. 
 
They were arguing that, in the light of the financial hardships facing 
farmers, we must take total advantage of the opportunity to provide 
significant and much needed assistance to farmers.  I'm reading now from 
the quotation in the press release: 
 

 In addition, the Saskatchewan government recommended the difference 
between the domestic price and the export price be collected in a special 
account and (Mr. Chairman) paid annually to wheat producers. 

 
That was their position.  And they went on to applaud the Prime Minister of 
Canada for giving support to the farmers of Canada and to defend against 
unfair competition.  And they welcomed all of that, the same kind of words 
we hear today from the Premier.  But the point is that going into the 
provincial election of 1986 they were in principle firmly committed to 
two-price system for wheat.  And not only that, they wanted it increased to 
$11 per bushel for the domestic price. 
 
And after the 1986 provincial election and after the free trade debate of 
1988, they are now forced to come up with a different rationalization to 



 

 

justify the elimination of the two-price system of wheat, a different 
rationalization and a different result, the result being a hardship and a 
penalty to the wheat producers and the wheat farmers of the province of 
Saskatchewan and Canada in the face of a broken promise by Ottawa and 
Regina that the differences on two-price system for wheat would be made up.  
That is the situation. 
 
And the Premier this afternoon tried to pass it off as being a principle 
that he advocated and adhered to throughout.  He invited me to go and look 
to Hansard.  Well I didn't have to go to Hansard.  All we did was go to 
this 1986 release about the two-price system for wheat.  And I think that 
what it tells me is that the government's approach to agriculture is based 
on the political approach. 
 
Going into the '86 provincial campaign, it was to their advantage, they 
felt, to advocate the two-price system for wheat and an increase in the 
price.  Now they can't advocate that going into the next provincial 
election in 1990 or 1991, so the Premier is advancing some other principle 
to justify the elimination of the two-price system for wheat. 
 
I think this is a fundamental contradiction, if not change, in the postures 
taken by the government opposite.  And I think it's not only fundamental; 
it is dictated by political expediency, pure and simple.  He cannot 
advocate a two-price system for wheat now because we know it's done away 
with as a result of his advocacy of the free trade agreement. 
 
So now he's got to devise another argument which is against the two-price 
system for wheat -- another argument based on the arguments we've heard 
this afternoon, which I think are far from proven.  To me, Mr. Chairman, 
the credibility of the government with respect to this area is indeed very, 
very doubtful. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, I have a few other words I want to get into in another 
area and to preface some questions to the Premier, but before I do, may I 
surrender my seat and my place, my speaking place, for a moment to allow 
the Deputy Premier, the member from Swift Current, to introduce some 
guests. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Why is the member on her feet? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- I would like to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to the Leader of 
the Opposition. 
 
I have today a group of 40-some people out of the Speaker's gallery that 
are in to witness what is going on today and perhaps to get a little 
education.  Mr. Chairman, they are a group of 40 superannuated teachers 
from Swift Current, and have taken the time to go on tour of Regina today 



 

 

and to visit the Legislative Assembly. 
 
I want to wish them an educational time here and a safe journey home, and I 
would ask all members to please welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Agriculture and Food 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 1 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I would say to the 
Deputy Premier, it's not the teachers who are likely to learn very much; 
we're probably going to learn more from them if we had the chance, but none 
the less, we welcome them too. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, I want to leave the two-price system and what I consider 
to be a fundamental change in policies dictated by the commitment of this 
government to free trade -- that debate for the moment aside. 
 
I want to return to the $277 million announcement which was made today by 
the Premier.  And I want to take a few minutes and I want to give the 
Premier time to respond before 5 o'clock.  I'll try to give him fair time 
to respond, but I need to give a little background as a preface to the 
question. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I would argue that the initial leadership in the advocacy for 
payment of cash to the farmers of the province of Saskatchewan, and for 
that matter the agricultural community in Canada, came as a result of 
statements by the president of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, Mr. Garf 
Stevenson, on or about November 15, 1989. 
 
I'm not trying to be uncharitable about the Premier's role in this matter, 
but I do see on November 15, 1989 -- and I have a copy of the clipping here 
-- a headline which says: "Garf Stevenson says Saskatchewan farmers need 
federal dollars or they'll be broke by spring." 
 
And the first paragraph on this story, November 15, 1989, is as follows: 
 

 "Saskatchewan farmers need $500 million in federal government support 
before spring seeding or many will go broke," the president of the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool said Tuesday. 

 
Now that, in my mind, started off the very necessary advocacy for this cash 
on the dash for farmers in great difficulty. 
 
On or about November 22, a few days afterwards, the Premier attended the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, and in a headline again put out by a Department of 
Agriculture press statement, the headline says, "Devine calls for federal 



 

 

farm income assistance," and the press statement says the following: 
 

 The Premier's letter (referring to a letter to Mr. Mazankowski) notes the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool's annual meeting has called for $500 million in 
government assistance just to maintain farmers' income levels.  "The need 
for assistance is beyond doubt," Devine's letter concludes. 

 
Next, on February 26, 1990, another Agriculture . . . no, this comes from 
Executive Council press release.  The headline says, "Devine calls for 
federal aid to ease financial burden."  Reading from the press statement, 
Mr. Chairman, he goes on to say: 
 

 The Premier is calling for an immediate injection of $900 million with 
$500 million to be paid out prior to seeding. 

 
Note those words, Mr. Chairman -- $500 million to paid out prior to 
seeding. This is a statement from the Premier's office on February 26, 
1990. 
 
On February 27, next day after, following, in a Star-Phoenix story by Vern 
Greenshields, the following is said: 
 

 Devine in his itemized statement to the federal minister said because of 
poor harvest conditions last fall, Saskatchewan farmers were out $100 
million even after crop insurance payments.  As well, he said he wanted to 
see $500 million in farmers' pockets before spring seeding. 

 
From the story from Vern Greenshields. 
 
Next, Mr. Chairman, we had, as you will note chronologically, the 
television address on March 5, 1990.  And I have a copy of the transcript 
of the Premier's address to the people of the province of Saskatchewan on 
that date.  And the Premier's statement says in part as follows: 
 

 I told the Deputy Prime Minister, Saskatchewan people need half a billion 
dollars right now to get ready for spring seeding. 

 
And then later on in the TV address the Premier says: 
 

 I came back from Ottawa with a mutual agreement to work out the farm 
financial crisis. 

 
(1645) 
 
Then on March 19, 1990 this legislature opened up, and I have a copy, an 
official copy of the Speech from the Throne.  And I see on page 4, the 
government writes -- this is the government's words: 
 

 My government has received a commitment from the Government of Canada that 
financial assistance will be provided to farmers for spring seeding. 

 
I would stop from my chronology to say that at that point, if you're a 
farmer, you're beginning to think, given the statements of $500 million 



 

 

cash on the dash before spring seeding, that when there's a statement like 
this on March 19, 1990 in the Speech from the Throne and the word 
"commitment" is used, that things are looking up pretty good.  But, Mr. 
Speaker, nothing happened. 
 
Now we see the series of trips back and forth between Ottawa and Regina.  
And the next event that we see is a little bit of easing back from the 
commitment of $500 million.  Now it's negotiation time between Regina and 
Ottawa, but still it doesn't look all that bleak because on April 23, 1990 
the Premier, in a lengthy letter to all the Saskatchewan producers, writes, 
among other things: 
 

 The most important part of the resolution (referring to the resolution we 
passed in this House) is the call for an immediate payment of $500 million 
to Saskatchewan producers. 

 
An immediate payment -- $500 million.  So again I'm beginning to think, 
when I got a copy of this from some of my farmer friends, that it's now 
looking a little bit dark, but still the Premier is saying that he has 
called for the $500 million.  And while I'm a little bit worried that the 
commitment on March 19, now on April 23, 1990, doesn't look like much of a 
commitment, nevertheless all of us are still hoping that something is in 
the works which will fulfil the statements and the expectations raised by 
the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And then we have today's announcement of $277 million, today being June 14, 
1990.  The pay-outs, they say, they hope will be done by the end of July 
1990. 
 
So reviewing the situation, Mr. Chairman, here's what the farmers and what 
we have faced.  From November 1989 when Mr. Stevenson of the Wheat Pool 
started off the call for $500 million, we have had a series of official 
letters from our Premier to the federal people.  We've had a series of 
press statements by our Premier referring to the $500 million.  We've had 
an official document in the Legislative Assembly calling . . . not calling, 
saying that there is a commitment for financial assistance. 
 
As late as April 23, 1990 there is still an indication to the the producers 
of the province of Saskatchewan that that $500 million is coming.  They 
don't use those words, that's true, but they don't discourage it any.  They 
say, "The most important part . . ."  The most important part, Mr. Chairman 
-- get my words -- not a secondary part or tertiary part, but "The most 
important part of the resolution is an immediate payment of $500 million to 
Saskatchewan producers." 
 
And what do we get?  We don't get an immediate payment for spring seeding, 
as Mr. Stevenson and as the Premier promised, and we don't get the $500 
million.  And the reasonable and proper expectations and the reasonable and 
proper demands of the farmers of the province of Saskatchewan, I say, lie 
smashed. 
 
The Premier quotes Mr. Howe of the wheat pool.  I say that Mr. Howe's 
statement also went on to say that he was extremely disappointed at the 



 

 

level of the payment.  I say the wheat pool says that it's inadequate.  I 
say all the farm organizations, of course, are going to be grateful for 
whatever they can receive.  But they are disappointed that the $500 million 
called for by the president of the wheat pool, expected by the farmers of 
the province of Saskatchewan, banked upon by the farmers of the province of 
Saskatchewan, they cannot help but register a great sense of dismay and 
disappointment at both the delay and the amount of the money which was 
actually ultimately announced.  And it's not going to be until July, and 
knowing bureaucracies, may be even later before that $5.50 an acre lands on 
the desk of the producers. 
 
So I have two questions for the Premier, reduced to basically one.  What 
happened, what happened to your call, I would say your implied assurances 
that we would have $500 million, and immediately?  What happened?  What 
happened to that commitment on March 19?  Is the answer that Mr. 
Mazankowski simply was fooling with you and your government in all of these 
negotiations and there was no commitment, and he was telling you all along 
it was going to be cost shared, but you weren't telling us that publicly?  
Is that what happened? 
 
Or did you know all along that there was going to be no $500 million?  Is 
that what happened?  Or did he promise the $500 million but he broke his 
word by some subsequent negotiations, resulting in the $277 million?  What 
happened?  Why the delay?  Why $5.50? 
 
Of course farmers are grateful and thankful for that amount of money.  But 
we ought not to have been fooling with them this way.  We ought not to have 
been toying with them this way.  We ought to, as governments, if the money 
was going to be $277 million roughly, told them that this was the 
situation.  We ought not to have raised expectations only to have them 
smashed, which is what I say is the feeling out there today in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I think farmers looking at $5.50 an acre and taking a look at the input 
costs on fuel and fertilizer and credit operations and things of that 
nature will invariably conclude that this is simply not enough, that it's 
going to be gone.  It's going to be soaked up as fast as a good blotter 
will soak up red ink.  And maybe the $500 million would have done the same 
thing, but at least every indication from every responsible official in 
authority was $500 million cash immediately.  Now what happened?  What 
happened? 
 
I think the farmers of the province of Saskatchewan are owed a bit of an 
explanation.  And may I say before I take my chair, in order to try to give 
the Premier some time for rebuttal and explanation of this point, I'd like 
to know not only what happened and not only the farmers owed a bit of an 
explanation on this issue, I think that this speaks to the question of the 
ad hoc-ery of agricultural programs which have now become, it seems, like a 
staple of life for rural Saskatchewan and rural Canadian people. 
 
This is an example of the dangers of the ad hoc-ery.  When there are no 
guide-lines, no rules, no predictability, no stability, no concrete 
programs, then you get into these kinds of intergovernmental squabbles and 



 

 

negotiations where you're writing the rules on the back of an envelope, and 
at the end of the day expectations are not met and some other conclusions 
are in fact arrived at which can only lead to disappointment. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Chairman, what happened?  Why this terribly disappointing 
result?  And why this tortuous, convoluted process of trying to get the 
$500 million?  I'd like to know what the explanation of the government is 
in this regard. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- A couple of points, Mr. Chairman, with respect to the 
hon. member's question.  I have here a letter, April 24, 1990, from the 
Prairie Pools Incorporated.  It's signed by Alex Graham, chairman of the 
board, Prairie Pools, and he writes: 
 

 The need for immediate government assistance is beyond doubt.  In this 
respect we appreciate the initiative of the federal government, announced 
on March 30, 1990 to offer $500 million in income assistance to farmers. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, let me point out to the hon. member that when we pursued 
the amount of money that is available out of the federal government and 
they offered $500 million, all the provinces were informed at that 
particular time that we were to match the money. 
 
Let me point out to the hon. member that in the province of Saskatchewan we 
received about $400 million in crop insurance in 1989; another $58 million 
in multi-year crop assistance in 1990.  We have a total budget dealing with 
agricultural issues, of about $400 million. 
 
The federal government said, well your share of this $500 million will be 
$277 million, but you've got to come up with some sort of money to show 
that you can contribute.  We come up with another $39 million. 
 
So when you look at the money that is coming out from the provincial 
governments and the federal government you'd have to add up $400 million, 
plus $58 million, plus $400 million from ourselves, plus $277 million that 
was announced today, of which 39 is ours. 
 
Now you begin to see that you've got substantial amounts of money.  Now 
that's 4 and 4 and 3.  I mean, you're looking at between 800 million and a 
billion dollars.  Now the hon. members ask, well what happened?  You didn't 
get a billion dollars cash into the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
First of all, let me say that we put up another 400 to $500 million in 
terms of a program for spring seeding.  We've now got in place $277 million 
in cash, and we're not half-way through 1990.  We hope this is a very good 
year.  We hope that the crop is good and we hope the prices go up.  We're 
negotiating at GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade).  We've got 
very large payments out there in the combination of crop insurance and 
special payments and the federal payments and our own.  We're looking at in 
the neighbourhood of a billion dollars. 
 



 

 

And the hon. member says, well what happened?  You didn't get everything 
that you asked for with respect to the programs that were initiated.  I 
will say that the letters coming back in are saying, look, don't discount 
$500 million.  It's an awful lot of money.  Don't discount 59 million in 
additional crop insurance money.  And don't forget that there was $400 
million, approximately, in crop insurance that went in '89, plus the crop, 
plus we're looking at the situation where we now have topped that up with 
another $277 million.  So it's a substantive amount of taxpayers' money 
gone into the province of Saskatchewan in the crop year so far, '88-89. 
 
So I will say to the hon. member, I'm not so sure how many times that he 
has been to . . . well in bargaining or into Ottawa or others and say, well 
I would sure like if we would get a cheque for a billion dollars into 
Saskatchewan.  And he ends up with a combination of these programs, 
something a little short of that, and the year isn't even over, Mr. 
Speaker.  And we're hopeful.  We keep our fingers crossed that it rains, 
price of wheat comes up. 
 
I mean I think it's fair to say that farmers today being prepared to 
receive 5, $6,000 on average -- cash -- and I say to the people of 
Saskatchewan and people of Canada, 5 or $6,000 may not be a lot of money, 
but it's still 5 or $6,000.  You don't have to pay it back.  It's just cash 
on the line.  It's there, coming right on top of the market -- on top of 
crop insurance, on top of some other things. 
 
I think it's only fair to point out to the hon. member that it is a 
substantive amount of money.  It's been recognized by farm organizations 
that it is a considerable amount of money, most of it coming into 
Saskatchewan -- we get 53 per cent of it -- based on the unique hurt here, 
acknowledged by those that were in Ontario and Quebec who said frankly . . 
. and the ministers in both those provinces have been I think more than 
generous.  And the people of Saskatchewan should know that Ontario and 
Quebec have not put up a fuss about huge payments, literally billions of 
dollars coming out of the populated areas of this country into fairly 
sparse populated regions to receive this kind of benefit. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, I would just say that again, adding it up, close to a 
billion dollars in the 1989-90 crop year from governments is a fair amount 
of money.  And we have worked as hard as we could to lever it out of the 
federal government and out of the governments and the populations frankly, 
as I suppose you'd say B.C. and Ontario and Quebec. 
 
It may not be enough, and I would agree with the hon. member that we would 
like more.  But we would also like it out of the market-place.  So we'll do 
our best to get the price of wheat up; we'll do our best to get interest 
rates down; and we'll certainly do our best to squeeze the federal 
government for all the money that we can get out of them. 
 
To date it's been a little over $7 billion into the pockets of farmers here 
in Saskatchewan from the federal government alone since 1985.  It maybe 
should have been 8 billion, it maybe should have been 9, but it's 7 billion 
more than they got before, and we're going to be there for every dollar 
that we can get out of them in the future, Mr. Chairman. 



 

 

 
Mr. Chairman: -- Being near 5 o'clock the committee will recess until 7 
p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


