





























































Hansard: June 07, 1990


 

 

June 7/90 
 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it is my 
pleasure again today on behalf of my constituents to introduce another 
2,398 signatures.  The petition reads: 
 

 That the proposed relocation of the Saskatchewan liquor board store from 
its present location in the Market Mall to the new location on Eighth 
Street (in) Saskatoon is not in the public interest, and will prove to be 
an inconvenience for the residents of the area who have supported the 
store for many years. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this totals 9,035 that I have been able to present the 
legislature, and I'll present more next week. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 

Standing Committee on Communication 
 
Clerk Assistant: -- Mr. Speaker, as chairman of the Standing Committee on 
Communication, presents the fourth report of the said committee which is as 
follows: 
 

 The committee has considered the recommendations of the Public Documents 
Committee under The Archives Act, contained in retention disposal 
schedules comprising sessional paper number 120 of the fourth session of 
the 20th legislature as referred to the committee by the Assembly on March 
21, 1990. 

 
 Your committee has also considered the 1986-87 report of the Legislative 

Library as referred to the committee by the Assembly on March 21, 1990. 
 
 Your committee recommends to the Assembly that the recommendations of the 

Public Documents Committee on schedules nos. 295, 296, 297, 298, 299, 300, 
301, 302, 303, 304, 305, and 306 be accepted. 

 
 Your committee recommends that the Assembly adopt the 1986-87 report of 

the Saskatchewan Legislative Library. 
 

Hon. Mr. Gerich: -- Mr. Speaker, moved by myself and seconded by the member 
from Regina North East: 
 

 That the fourth report of the Standing Committee on Communication be now 
concurred in. 



 

 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Thanks you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on Monday, June 11 next, move first reading of an Act 
to amend The Occupational Health and Safety Act. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, this 
afternoon I would like to introduce to you and through you to all members 
of the legislature some very special guests with us this afternoon, Mr. 
Speaker, and they are located in your gallery. 
 
You may know, Mr. Speaker, that this morning I released some information 
about the new Environmental Youth Corps program, specifically about the 80 
college and university students who are working in 11 different agencies 
around the province this summer, undertaking various kinds of 
environmentally related projects. 
 
And this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, we have a small sampling of this group.  
Some of them who work in or near the Regina area have joined me at the news 
conference this morning.  I have invited them to the Assembly and, Mr. 
Speaker, these Environmental Youth Corps students are located in your 
gallery.  I believe that they are a very distinctive group.  You will take 
note of their T-shirts and their fluorescent orange ball caps which are 
right on the money for today's environment, and the logo "Green Keepers," I 
think is very appropriate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these students are undertaking very significant and important 
environmental-related projects around the province.  I believe that all 
Saskatchewan residents are extremely proud of these young people.  We're 
delighted that they have joined us here today.  And I would like you, Mr. 
Speaker, and all members to join with me to invite these students who are 
very distinctively located in your gallery, complete with T-shirts and 
their green caps, and they can maybe just put those caps on for a moment.  
All right! 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Yes, indeed they are very 
difficult to miss.  I love the hats. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure on behalf of my seat mate, Mr. Meiklejohn, 
the Minister of Education, to introduce some students from his area.  These 
are 48 students plus 5 adults, Mr. Speaker, in your gallery, St. George 
School in Saskatoon.  They are accompanied by two teachers, Cathy Reschny 
and Glenn Hunus, and three adults, chaperons Mrs. Witt, Mrs. Haluzan, and 
Mrs. Powrie. 
 
I will have the opportunity to meet with them at 2:30 for pictures and 



 

 

drinks and a little discussion, and I hope you had a nice jaunt down here 
today, and enjoy your tour while you're here.  I'll be talking to you 
later.  Please welcome these students from St. George School in Saskatoon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it's my 
pleasure to introduce to you, and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, 76 grade 6,7,and 8 students from Brunskill School in my 
constituency, Mr. Speaker.  They're accompanied by three of their teachers, 
Morris Sulatyski, Ingrid Benning, and Bryce Smith.  And, Mr. Speaker, 
they'll be taking a tour of the legislature following question period, and 
I'll then be meeting with them at 3 o'clock.  I'm sure all members of the 
Assembly will want to join me in welcoming these students and their 
teachers to the Assembly.  We wish them a very nice visit here, Mr. 
Speaker, and a safe trip home. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I want to join my 
colleague, the member from Saskatoon University, in welcoming the students 
from Brunskill elementary school in the city of Saskatoon.  Many of the 
students at Brunskill School come from the constituency of Saskatoon 
Nutana, so I want to welcome some of my constituents to the legislature. 
 
As well, I also want to welcome the teachers and chaperons.  I believe that 
Bryce Smith was a former schoolmate of mine from Walter Murray Collegiate 
in Saskatoon and I want to especially welcome him to the legislature this 
afternoon.  Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sauder: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  On behalf of our colleague on this 
side of the House, the member from Biggar, I'd like to take this 
opportunity to introduce to you and to the other members of this Assembly 
18 students from his constituency.  They're grade 4 and 5 students from the 
Perdue School from Perdue, Saskatchewan.  I believe they're up in the east 
gallery behind me here. 
 
They're accompanied today by their teacher, Pam Gordon.  And I don't know 
if it says something about the nature of these students, if they have that 
much energy or whatever, but they do have a full complement of chaperons as 
well: Marvin Kowalenko, Bruna Scharf, Pat Fischer, Fran Gorbenko, Lis 
Elian, Loretta Davies, and Valerie Anderson; and as well, their driver, Mr. 
Ron Cathcart. 
 
I look forward to meeting with them afterwards for pictures and 
refreshments and a discussion about the proceedings of the afternoon.  I 
trust they've had an informational and educational tour this afternoon, and 
I hope that they also find this session educational as they see democracy 
in action.  Please help me welcome them on behalf of our colleague. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 



 

 

 
Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure to 
introduce to you, Mr. Speaker, and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, 28 grades 9 and 12 students from Vanier Collegiate in Moose Jaw.  
They're seated in the east gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They're accompanied today by their instructor, Ruth Schneider, and chaperon 
Lynn Andreoni.  And I look forward to meeting with them following question 
period for pictures and refreshments and discussion of today's proceedings. 
 
If I may make just a couple of observations about Vanier Collegiate, Mr. 
Speaker, it was my pleasure and the pleasure of the member from Moose Jaw 
South to attend, a week and a half ago, the Vanier graduation, and my 
pleasure to bring greetings to that, to the grads. 
 
And I'd also like to bring to the attention of the members of the Assembly 
that Vanier Collegiate has started what I think is just a fine tradition.  
This year, for the second year in a row as part of the social studies 
program, about 25 of the grade 12 students at Vanier Collegiate, with the 
full co-operation and participation by the Canadian citizenship court, 
formally and officially engaged in a formal reaffirmation of their Canadian 
citizenship.  I compliment Vanier on that tradition and hope it's one that 
will continue for many years to come. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of the Assembly to join me in welcoming 
these students and their instructor and chaperon here today.  I hope the 
visit is pleasant, as well as the summer, for all of the students and for 
those who are graduating this year.  Join me in wishing them that in their 
careers they will frequently enjoy the just rewards of their labours. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Reduction in Saskatchewan's Credit Rating 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I have a 
question today, in the absence of the Premier, to the Deputy Premier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you will know, for the third time in three weeks and for 
the second time in a little less than two weeks, a major rating agency has 
once again downgraded Saskatchewan's credit worthiness.  This agency is one 
of the largest, if not the largest, from New York city.  It's called 
Standard and Poor's.  And it's lowered our rating, Mr. Speaker, from AA- to 
A, which means that we're now behind provinces like Manitoba and New 
Brunswick, which have A+, and barely above provinces like Newfoundland and 
Nova Scotia with an A-, which is, to put it mildly, a very serious 
condemnation of the state of fiscal affairs in Saskatchewan. 
 
My question therefore, Mr. Speaker, to the Deputy Premier is this: in the 
light of this third serious negative report card on the mismanagement and 
the fiscal incapacity of the government opposite to manage the affairs 
sensibly, in the light of this report, what specifically is your game plan 



 

 

to recover the confidence of the business and economic community in the 
face of these damaging reports? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- Mr. Speaker, it is indeed true that Standard and 
Moody's has brought in its report and it has gone from a AA- to A.  
However, Mr. Speaker, I would say to this Assembly that that in itself 
should be no surprise.  And the Hon. Leader of the Opposition knows that 
oftentimes the four agencies that Saskatchewan has often dealt with are 
fairly consistent, not only in their analysis, but in the figures that they 
bring in, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I can only tell the Assembly -- and for the benefit of the Leader of the 
Opposition who has asked and taken, I believe, as a deep concern, and so he 
should, the debt level in this province -- there's no simple answers to it, 
and he knows that too. 
 
But I would also say, in order to address that, that one has to look at the 
analysis that was done and understand very clearly the causes, how we got 
there, and where we go in the future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Having said that, I think it's very clear what Standard and Moody's has 
said, and I say that in all honesty to the Leader of the Opposition.  They 
have indicated, Mr. Speaker, that the economic weakness in this province is 
serious, for the most part due to the economic weakness in agriculture.  We 
know where we are with agriculture in terms of Canada.  That's our primary 
base. 
 
The second factor to that has to do with the natural resources and the 
roller-coaster that those have been on for several years now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They also indicate that: 
 

 The financial pressures of rising debt service come at a time of reduced 
tax-raising flexibility, less generous federal transfers, and a commitment 
to serving key program needs like education, health, and social services. 

 
Mr. Speaker, they also say, given the performance of the government, the 
efforts they've tried, the outlook for this province is indeed stable. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the Deputy Premier, 
and indeed, Mr. Speaker, I have here in front of me a copy of the rating of 
Standard and Poor's.  It's not Standard and Moody's as the Deputy Premier 
knows.  Standard and Poor's and Moody's are two different groups.  And 
frankly, Mr. Speaker, the Deputy Premier's statements are inaccurate 
because Standard and Poor's says very simply, quote, and I'm reading from 
the report: 
 

 The rating change reflects an increasing tax-supported debt burden and 
little progress in containing large budgetary deficits. 



 

 

 
"Little progress in containing large budgetary deficits."  That's exactly 
what the report says. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, basically New York doesn't believe what the minister has 
said.  New York says this government has had no progress . . . sorry, 
"little progress in containing large budgetary deficits."  My question 
therefore to the Deputy Premier is: in the view of this condemnation -- 
these are the words of Standard and Poor's, and not me -- in the view of 
this condemnation and this assessment, can we expect, Madam Minister, that 
misplaced spending priorities of this government, such as Cargill, which 
are likely to result in even a higher debt, are going to be reversed 
immediately by this government?  And furthermore, can we expect the 
government to announce immediately a well-thought-out, clear and concise 
economic game plan to restore investor confidence in the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- Mr. Speaker, when the agency did its analysis, they 
were aware of first of all the thrust on economic development and 
diversification; the need, Mr. Speaker, to take our raw resources and have 
the ability and the skills to in fact produce them at home as opposed to 
shipping jobs down the pipeline wherever they go -- south or east, Mr. 
Speaker.  They knew that.  They knew that. 
 
They also indicate in the analysis, if he and I are reading off of the same 
copy, that in fact this government indeed has made an effort to ensure that 
investment other than government investment is coming into its resources, 
Mr. Speaker.  That's a plus for the people of Saskatchewan; that indeed is 
recognized. 
 
To put, Mr. Speaker, a different interpretation on what the Leader of the 
Opposition -- and I will repeat it once again: this government has shown a 
commitment to serving key program needs in education, health and social 
services. 
 
Now we all know in this Assembly that that's where the majority of the 
expenditures go.  If the member wants to see less money into education and 
health, let him stand up in an honest way and say that instead of coming 
through the back door. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- I'm going to take this opportunity to ask hon. members to 
attempt to shorten their questions and responses -- order, order -- 
shortened questions and answers.  Now hon. members get excited; it applies 
to both sides. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'll try to be as short as I can, 
but as you'll appreciate, a background statement is required in the face of 
the importance of the question. 
 



 

 

And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, as a new question to the Deputy Premier, 
that when she says that one of the largest expenditures is in the areas 
that she's described, she overlooks to tell the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan that the third highest annual expenditure is servicing the 
interest charges on the debt that she and her government has created in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- And here is my preface to my question, Mr. Speaker.  She 
overlooks to tell the legislature that this Standard and Poor's report says 
that "expenditure overruns in fiscal 1990 (get these words, Mr. Speaker), 
expenditure overruns in fiscal 1990 reversed the trend in deficit 
reduction." 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the light of the statements which say that there has been a 
reversal of deficit reduction, in the light of the statements which say 
that there has been fiscal mismanagement, my question remains unanswered 
and will you please answer it?  What precisely is this government's game 
plan to restore investor confidence and to demonstrate to the people of 
Saskatchewan that this mountain of debt that you have created isn't going 
to crush us in future generations?  What's your game plan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- Mr. Speaker, our economy will continue to be dependent 
on the primary sector activities, that being our natural resources and 
agriculture.  Agriculture has had some difficult times.  Standard and 
Poor's recognize this.  Given the state of our agricultural situation in 
this province, it in fact along with our commitment to education and health 
and diversification, has led us to where we are today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the Leader of the Opposition does not like the commitment 
that has the large expenditure areas like education, health, and social 
services, then let him be honest, stand up and say so. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have said that those are priority areas for the well-being 
of our communities and our people.  Our other priority area is economic 
development and diversification, and we will continue with that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have a new question to the 
Deputy Premier, and I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the commitment of this 
side to education and health is as strong, I would say stronger than that 
of the government.  There's no doubt about that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- But I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, and tell the Deputy 
Premier that where we do not have a commitment is we do not have a 
commitment to the financing of GigaText and Weyerhaeuser and Pocklington 



 

 

and Cargill, all at big expenses and taxpayers.  That's the commitment we 
don't share with the government opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- And we don't have a commitment of funding all of the 
defeated and resigned PC ministers and fancy offices in Hong Kong and 
Minneapolis either, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Now, Mr. Speaker, my question to the Deputy Premier is 
this: in light of the fact that because of this profligate waste and 
mismanagement that I've identified, in light of the fact that this Standard 
and Poor's report says, quote, these are the exact words, "The debt burden 
is among the highest of the Canadian provinces." -- in the light of that 
fact, I say to the Deputy Premier, you owe it to the people of the province 
of Saskatchewan to give us more than political speeches.  We want a 
specific economic game plan to show us how you're going to get us out of 
this mess you created.  Or if you don't have a game plan, at least tell 
your Premier to have the courage of calling a general election so that 
somebody can do the job. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- You can't have it both ways.  Today you can't stand in 
this House and you can't talk about the debt of Saskatchewan and three 
hours later come in and talk about more expenditures.  You can't have it 
both ways.  And on that point you lose your credibility, that portion of it 
if you had any, my friend. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- Mr. Speaker, let me read the whole story.  One 
sentence.  He had the latter part of the sentence.  And I quote: 
 

 The mainstays of the provincial economy -- agriculture and mining -- have 
endured cyclical production declines and low commodity prices in recent 
years, producing a more volatile economic growth than in any other 
Canadian provinces. 

 
Mr. Speaker, we have had to deal with this.  We have had to cope with it, 
at the same time maintaining health, education, and trying to diversify 
from agriculture and the production of raw resources, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the Deputy Premier.  
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, as a preface, the Deputy Premier's answers 
fail to address the question that I put to her and to the government.  We 
can have it both ways.  We don't share your priorities for spending money 
for Cargills and for Weyerhaeusers. 
 



 

 

Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- You, Madam Deputy Premier, and the members of the front 
bench, if you'd change your priorities from privatization at losses of $442 
million and give away to the Cargills and put them into education and 
health, you would have programs and debt reduction, but you're not doing 
it.  And my question . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- And my question to you, Madam Deputy Premier, is this:  in 
view of the fact that the Canadian Bond Rating Service, in view of the fact 
that the Canadian Bond Rating Service -- this a fourth one, separate one -- 
has given the city of Regina AA+ rating, has given the city of Saskatoon 
AAA rating, that the cities of Regina and Saskatoon have a higher credit 
rating than the province of Saskatchewan, isn't that troublesome to you, if 
not embarrassing?  And if it's not troublesome and embarrassing, what in 
the world are you doing in charge of the front benches?  And how about 
getting the province's credit rating at least up to the standard of Regina 
and Saskatoon.  You owe that to the people and the future of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- I'll tell you what was owed to the people of this 
province a long, long time ago and that was the issue of diversification.  
How a province became so reliant on the primary base of that sector and 
sent it all out of the province for any kind of value-added job creation, 
revenues, building up communities, the building of towns and cities in 
Saskatchewan is beyond me, except when I look at socialism and the building 
of borders and keeping it all tucked within, Mr. Speaker.  That's what's 
beyond.  Mr. Speaker, the leader . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- There's only one way that the leader thinks he can have 
it both ways, Mr. Speaker, and what an interesting statement -- that he can 
have it both ways.  What are the alternatives with that?  Raise taxes?  
Stand up and say so.  Where? To whom? By how much?  No diversification, no 
support of agriculture and cut back on education and health.  That's how 
he's going to have it both ways, Mr. Speaker.  Now think about that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, this is depressing.  This is depressing and 
discouraging for the people of the province of Saskatchewan, this answer 
is.  And, Mr. Speaker, I have a new question for the Deputy Premier, which 
will be my last question in this area.  Mr. Speaker, I urge the Deputy 
Premier to try to raise the level of the answer somewhat. 
 
In the face of the fact that Standard and Poor's says, Mr. Speaker, that 
the tax supported debt -- the tax supported debt. I ask the Deputy Premier 
to pay note of this.  Standard and Poor's says the tax supported debt has 
increased to 49 per cent of the gross domestic product and the debt burden 



 

 

is among the highest of the Canadian provinces -- 49 per cent, Mr. Speaker, 
from nothing -- from nothing in five to six years. 
 
My question to the Deputy Premier is: is your answer simply to blame 
everything and everybody else?  You've been in government for eight years.  
Is that the best that the Deputy Premier and the government can do is to 
blame the fact that it hasn't rained, blame the NDP, blame the Liberals, 
blame everybody else?  Surely to goodness, you're in office and it is your 
responsibility.  And other governments have had these problems in the past, 
and we've managed and we haven't racked up this kind of a debt.  Surely you 
can do better than that.  Stand up and tell us the specific game plan, or 
resign and call an election and get somebody to do the job. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- He's right.  It's amongst the highest. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I ask hon. members to allow the Deputy 
Premier to continue.  Give her the opportunity. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- The Leader of the Opposition is right, that it's 
amongst the highest, among the highest.  What they will not recognize, for 
whatever reason, is that Saskatchewan's problems are among the highest.  
Now, Mr. Speaker, in order to address some of those problems, first of all 
the serious decline in the farm income, there has been substantial support 
given to the agriculture community.  It is a primary base of this economy, 
Mr. Speaker. It needs that support going through what it's going through.  
We will continue that. 
 
Now that's obviously going to put some added pressures on government for 
greater efficiencies to scrutinize how it's going to be doing things.  And, 
Mr. Speaker, we have made that commitment and in fact are doing that, but 
it's difficult.  And to say anything else is to be unrealistic and not 
honest about it.  It is difficult, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We will continue to support agriculture.  We will maintain that education 
and health support while at the same time, Mr. Speaker, we will continue to 
look at economic diversification, because if this province is ever going to 
get out of debt, it is going to be through diversification of its economy, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Agreement with Cargill 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a question to the minister 
responsible for the Crown Management Board. And in light of the fact that a 
number of bond rating companies have lowered Saskatchewan's credit rating, 
three within the last couple of weeks, can the minister inform the House 
whether or not it's the intention of this government to bring forward a 
Bill to this Assembly to be debated that would guarantee and give 
legislative authority to the 305 million loan guarantee for Cargill 
fertilizer for the plant they're building at Belle Plaine. 



 

 

 
In light of the debt and the problems that you people have incurred, are 
you intending to bring forward a Bill that would allow for that kind of a 
loan guarantee?  Can you tell us that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Speaker, with respect to the Saskatchewan 
Fertilizer Company and its project at Belle Plaine, Saskatchewan, it is 
common knowledge in this province that is a joint venture between the 
Government of Saskatchewan, 49 per cent; and Cargill Grain, 49 per cent or 
50 per cent; and 1 per cent in escrow.  That's common knowledge. 
 
And it is common knowledge that that Saskatchewan Fertilizer Company joint 
venture will have a loan guarantee.  There is no legal necessity for 
legislation.  We are already discussing the matter in the legislature 
today, so there is no need to pass a Bill that is not required.  As for 
discussing it in the legislature, that's what we are doing today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, a new question to the minister.  I guess 
maybe it shouldn't come as a surprise to the people of the province that 
this government would try to hide the details of the loan guarantee. 
 
But what I want to say, Mr. Minister, this is the first time that you've 
gone this far to hide the deal, and shows how out of touch you are with the 
people of the province. 
 
Back in 1985 when you were guaranteeing the loan for NewGrade, you brought 
a Bill into the Assembly that dealt with the loan guarantee.  And again in 
1986 when Weyerhaeuser was being given a sweetheart deal, you brought in a 
Bill. 
 
Isn't it true, Mr. Minister, the only reason you're not bringing a Bill 
before this Assembly to be debated is because this is even a worse example 
of a mismanagement than the Weyerhaeuser deal and that sweetheart deal?  
Why don't you bring the Bill forward so we can deal with it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, what we're down to here is that the 
NDP bought potash mines and they owned 100 per cent.  And their complaint 
is that in this case, in the Saskatchewan Fertilizer Company, we only own 
49 per cent.  And that is quite a clear difference in that we believe we 
have to do joint ventures but we do not believe that there should be total 
government ownership.  In this case, there's a partnership between the 
Government of Saskatchewan and a corporation that knows how to manufacture 
and market fertilizer. 
 
And so if we are criticized for only owning 49 per cent, I accept that 
criticism, Mr. Speaker.  But we will build a fertilizer plant in this 
province, something we have never had before, as we built the paper plant 



 

 

which we never had before; as former premier Thatcher built a pulp mill 
which we never had before, as he built potash mines as we never had before.  
And we will not buy holes in the ground but we will build on the ground 
plants that you can see -- plants that will produce. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Government Tendering Process 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Speaker, I direct my question to the minister responsible 
for the Crown investment corporation.  Mr. Minister, you will be aware that 
the Cargill fertilizer plant has let contract for steel buildings.  And a 
steel buildings' contract, Mr. Minister, was let to ATCO steel buildings of 
Calgary, Alberta. 
 
You will also be aware, Mr. Minister, that one of ATCO's main competitors 
is a firm in Moose Jaw, Saskatchewan called Fairford Steel Buildings; a 
Moose Jaw firm, Mr. Minister, that was not even invited -- not even invited 
-- to submit tender on the bid for steel buildings. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, we've heard about your fiscal management here today and 
we've heard about your priority for jobs.  And you have constantly 
attempted to justify the Cargill fertilizer plant for jobs in Saskatchewan, 
especially in Moose Jaw. 
 
And I ask you, Mr. Minister, I ask you: when a Moose Jaw, a long-standing 
Moose Jaw, Saskatchewan firm with a good reputation is not even permitted 
to submit tender for steel buildings, it's hard to imagine where the jobs 
for Moose Jaw are going to go.  And I ask you to justify, Mr. Minister, 
will you justify this policy, this practice of lack of fair tendering?  And 
how do you justify squeezing out a long-standing Moose Jaw, Saskatchewan 
firm when it comes to giving some action and employment to the people of 
the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Speaker, why doesn't the member from Moose Jaw 
just stand up and say cancel the whole project; we don't want the jobs in 
Moose Jaw; go have those jobs in the United States; have those jobs in 
Alberta; we don't want them in Moose Jaw.  What kind of a hypocritical 
behaviour is that?  You may want us to interfere with contracts due . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  There was considerable interruption, and I'm 
going to give the hon. minister an opportunity to close his remarks if he 
wants to.  I'm going to give him that opportunity. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- What I said, Mr. Speaker, was this: if the member from 
Moose Jaw wants to cancel this project he should stand up and say so. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Tomorrow is another opportunity.  Order.  
Question period is over. 



 

 

 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 
Bill No. 39 -- An Act respecting Summary Offences Procedure and Certain 
consequential amendments resulting from the enactment of this Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill respecting 
Summary Offences Procedure and certain consequential amendments resulting 
from the enactment of this Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next 
sitting. 
 

Bill No. 40 -- An Act to amend The Dangerous Goods Transportation Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Petersen: -- Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I am about to move 
first reading of a Bill to amend The Dangerous Goods Transportation Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next 
sitting. 
 
 D 

Bill No. 41 -- An Act to amend The Highway Traffic Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Petersen: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill to amend 
The Highway Traffic Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next 
sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Health 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 32 
 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.  Mr. Minister, you will 
recall last year we'd asked for a community clinic study to be tabled in 
the House and it was only after a number of requests that we finally 
received a copy of the community clinic study. 
 
And in that study, some of the major findings were that in both Prince 
Albert and Saskatoon, community clinic patients in effect used fewer 
medical services and they had fewer hospital days stay than the private 
practice patients.  The P.A. Community Clinic, for example, some of the 
statistics coming out of this particular report, had 23 per cent fewer 



 

 

in-patient days and 10 per cent fewer separations.  And their average 
length of stay was 15 per cent shorter.  And the Saskatoon community clinic 
patients had 31 per cent fewer in-patient days, 24 per cent fewer 
separations, and their average length of stay was 9 per cent shorter than 
that of private practice patients. 
 
(1445) 
 
The study showed that an analysis of the Saskatchewan prescription drug 
plan utilization revealed that the P.A. Community Clinic patients had 8 per 
cent fewer prescriptions, and Saskatoon community clinic patients had 21 
per cent fewer prescriptions than their private practice counterparts. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, I note that he's talking to his officials.  Mr. 
Minister, in the Murray commission report there is a recommendation that 
the four existing community clinics be legitimized in legislation.  There's 
a further recommendation that community health centres or medical centres 
should be encouraged and established across the province.  This 
recommendation is for a capitation system with physician-headed medical 
health centres, as opposed to community developed and community-controlled 
centres. 
 
Now I also want to point that the initial evidence coming out of the 
Ontario experiment, where they have experimented with community health 
centres that are community controlled and community developed and also with 
physician-headed health centres that operate on a capitation basis, that 
the community owned and developed health centres have a broader range of 
services.  In other words, the dollars saved go back into other programs. 
 
And I just want to make the point that the community-controlled, non-profit 
health centre has not been promoted in particular by the Murray report, 
other than to legitimize the four that are already there.  It appears to be 
recommending physician-headed health centres in spite of the fact it has 
talked about a consumer-controlled system.  And I think that's an important 
thing to note. 
 
In fact -- and I'm not sure that this was intended by the commission, but 
it could be a result of the some of the recommendations here -- the present 
community clinics, it appears, will have to be physician-headed under the 
recommendations of the Murray report.  In particular, I might just refer to 
that.  It says that the medical services centres would be headed by 
physicians and put under the control of physicians. 
 
Now my question to the minister is . . . there are a number of questions in 
this area.  First of all, is the minister intending to encourage this model 
of -- let's not get into, at this point, whether it should be community 
controlled or physician-headed -- but is the minister intending to 
encourage the development of community health centres or medical health 
centres, or name it what you like, across the province.  Because clearly 
the evidence from the community clinic study that was tabled shows that 
there is a cost saving with this service, and that the quality of services 
are every bit as good. 
 



 

 

The Murray commission also appears to be endorsing the general concept that 
there is a cost saving with this type of service.  So I'm wondering if the 
minister is going to be encouraging the development of this type of program 
across the province. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Chairman, the member has quite rightly portrayed 
the discussion that has gone on between the commission and its receiving of 
recommendations or briefs across the province -- and there were many of 
those and some were presented by the community clinics as they now exist in 
the province.  The short answer to your question is yes.  And I can just 
say that all of the provinces in Canada, and I can say to you that this has 
been a subject of discussion among Health ministers of Canada over the last 
several years in terms of the alternate systems -- the alternate payment 
systems, alternate delivery systems, all of that. 
 
As you will know, we have had the combination in Saskatchewan for a number 
of years, but the number of community clinics has remained . . . community 
clinics in the classic sense that we know them here now, has remained 
fairly static really for a good number of years. 
 
But the short answer, as I say, is that yes, we are willing to and will be 
willing over time, after looking carefully at the Murray commission 
recommendations and some of the debate that will surround those 
recommendations, we will be willing in this department to look at some of 
this -- how can I call it -- more pluralistic payment systems in the 
province. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Minister, the Murray commission report makes a 
distinction between community-controlled health centres and 
physician-headed health centres.  Is the minister aware that in Ontario the 
. . . I don't believe that there is a study that has formally been done on 
it, but the initial reaction from the Ontario experiment is that the 
community-controlled health centres have a broader range of services than 
the physician-headed health centres.  Is the minister aware of that study?  
And will the minister be emphasizing the community-controlled health 
centres in Saskatchewan as opposed to the physician-headed ones? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Yes I am aware of what has been happening in Ontario, 
what has been suggested in Ontario, as it relates to these community 
systems. 
 
That's what I was referring to really, one of the specifics I was referring 
to when I said that the ministers of Health in Canada have discussed this 
in recent years.  The Minister of Health in Ontario, the present minister, 
has been an advocate of some of these forums and has given us, I think, a 
rather brief report really to the other ministers. 
 
But as it relates to our province, we'll be open to discussion of these 
kinds of new systems and so on, as the time goes on. 
 
There's no question that that whole debate about the nature of the clinics 
and the nature of the delivery systems, that will be accelerated across the 
country, and Saskatchewan will be no exception to that. 



 

 

 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Minister, will you be reducing legislation to clarify 
and affirm the legal and funding status of the present community clinics in 
the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Just let me clarify.  Is your question based on the one 
recommendation in the commission report 4.3, I think it is, where it 
suggests that there would need to be legislation to set in place these 
alternate forms of delivery? 
 
There's no question, if we came to the stage of having various . . . these 
other forms in place, there would need to be a legislative framework for 
that.  But as far as right now saying that, yes, we have legislation, you 
know, contemplated for this session or next, we do not.  But we obviously 
know that as -- and in going back to my earlier answer to you -- as we 
accelerate this discussion of alternate delivery systems, there would need 
to be a legislative framework developed for those to take place. 
 
Now your question, I think, was specifically about: would we be putting in 
legislation to reaffirm the place in the system that we now have of the 
community clinics as we now know them?  There is no need for that.  I mean, 
their operation in the province is under a legislative framework now and 
there is no problem for them to operate as they're now constituted. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- As I read the Murray recommendation 4.1(b)(iii), they are 
recommending "the clarification and affirmation of the legal and funding 
status of the four existing community clinics." 
 
Because as I understand today, Mr. Minister, they receive their funding on 
a month-to-month basis and it becomes almost impossible for them to do real 
long-term planning, and that is one of the complaints that was raised to 
the commission.  They also suggested that there was a desire to clarify 
their legal and funding status through legislation. 
 
Now is the minister prepared to do that and abide by the Murray 
recommendation in this regard? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Well I'm aware of the concern that's been raised, but I 
want people to be clear that the community clinics now, while they receive 
their money and their payments on a monthly basis, they receive a budget, 
an annual budgetary amount which is no different that the format that's in 
place for hospitals and other third parties that receive money from the 
Department of Health.  So that's been the structure for a good long time 
and that hasn't changed recently. 
 
So that's why I say there's no need for a legislative framework if they 
were to deal with this delivery mechanism as it is now constituted.  But 
there's no question that if we get into the discussion about some of what 
is being contemplated in Ontario now and that other provinces are looking 
at and that as that accelerates, that whole discussion about various 
formats, various formats of delivery of health care, then there would be a 
legislative framework needed.  And I believe that's what the commission . . 
. I mean, my interpretation is that that's what the commission meant by 



 

 

that recommendation. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Now the commission recommendations, Mr. Minister, also seem 
to indicate that medical services centres, of which I would assume the 
community clinics would fall into that definition, should be headed by 
physicians.  Now you know that the present community clinics are headed by 
the community; they are owned by a community group and run by the 
community. 
 
Now I'm not sure that that is what was intended by the Murray commission.  
And I'm wondering whether the minister knows whether that is what was 
intended by the Murray commission; and if it was, whether he adopts that 
recommendation. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Well while the clinics, as they're now set up in the 
province, are owned by community groups, they each have a medical director.  
Right?  And that's one of the requirements, as I understand it, and they 
have a medical director and they carry on.  So I'm not sure if I understand 
what . . . 
 
Ms. Simard: -- They're managed by the community. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- And yes, they're managed by the community.  And the 
commission, I think, is really silent on that, although they talk about 
physician headed, and I'm not sure what that means.  Physician headed, 
whether it's . . . to me a medical director can be physician headed if they 
have a medical director.  I mean, physician headed doesn't necessarily mean 
that the physician must own the clinic, for example.  At least that's not 
what my interpretation would be, and I don't think that's what was intended 
although commissioners would have to say what they intended.  But I'm sure 
that it's . . . physician headed means if there's a medical director who is 
qualified, then that would be fine. 
 
(1500) 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Minister, then the point I wish to make is that although 
we do have to experiment with different models of payment for physicians 
and different models of delivery of health care services, we on this side 
of the House have a strong preference for community-developed, 
community-managed, community-controlled health care centres. 
 
Obviously there has to be a doctor on staff in an advisory capacity and 
otherwise, but there are the two models in Ontario, as I have pointed out, 
and one appears to be more effective than the other.  And the study that we 
have in Saskatchewan here clearly indicates that our community-controlled 
health care clinics have been very successful and have saved the province a 
lot of money with respect to the delivery of health care. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to get a bit into the topic of home care at this 
point.  Now in virtually every discussion that we have of long-term care, 
home care, Mr. Minister, is mentioned as a remarkable success and deserving 
of added support and expansion.  And the cost-effectiveness of home care, 
of the home care program, simply cannot be disputed, Mr. Minister. 



 

 

 
For example, in 1988 I think it cost approximately $460 per day to stay in 
University Hospital, and on average $228 per day in a community hospital.  
And the total government subsidy for one person in a special care home is 
in excess of $30,000 per year or around 2,500 per month.  And home care's 
average cost per client per year is around $1,600 or 2,200.  In other 
words, $4 to $6 per day.  So it becomes very clear when one takes a look at 
the cost of home care versus the cost of institutionalized care, Mr. 
Minister, that home care programs can save the province millions of dollars 
in health care expenditures, Mr. Minister -- millions of dollars.  And yet 
it is a very small part of the provincial budget. 
 
Now I noticed that the Murray commission has recognized the very valuable 
role that home care can play with respect to improving the quality of 
health care for older people, because older people want to stay in their 
homes.  Mr. Minister, when you're 85 years old or 80 years old, I'm sure 
you would much rather be at home with supportive friends, a supportive 
family, with professional people from the home care program coming out to 
help you, than you would then being in a little room six by nine, with 
about as many belongings as you can put into one small suitcase, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
I'm sure, Mr. Minister, that you would much rather be at home.  And I think 
that's the way every person in this Legislative Assembly would respond.  If 
I asked the people in this room to stand up and when I ask them whether 
they wanted to be in an institution or whether they preferred to remain at 
home, most people would stand up to remain at home as long as they possibly 
could.  And that's the reason for the home care program.  And the Murray 
commission has recognized that and we've raised this in this House many, 
many times. 
 
Now I note from a newspaper article, that the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg has also recognized the very valuable contribution 
that home care plays in our health care system.  And he has talked about it 
in an article from the Leader-Post, March 27, where the associate minister 
says that "institutionalization should be a last option . . ."  And that we 
should be moving to more "home-care options." 
 
So the associate minister has recognized that.  Well, I want to make a 
point in this regard, Mr. Chair.  The fact of the matter is, is the New 
Democratic Party recognized this prior to 1982.  And the members on the 
opposite side travelled throughout rural Saskatchewan saying, oh they're 
not building any more nursing homes, those New Democrats, they're bad 
people.  But what they weren't doing was saying that what the New 
Democratic government was going to do was put substantial emphasis into the 
home care program. 
 
Now eight years later, the PCs have finally recognized that home care is a 
real option to institutionalized care.  They finally recognize that, Mr. 
Chair.  And the Murray commission of course has recognized that.  We have 
talked about it numerous times in this legislature, Mr. Chair, numerous 
times. 
 



 

 

I might say although I'm very pleased to see the Murray commission's 
recommendations on home care, it is not something that we needed a $2 
million study on, because these comments have been made on the floor of 
this House numerous times and they've been made numerous times by the 
public. 
 
Now with respect to the recommendations of the Murray commission, expanding 
home care to a full range of services: nursing, home support, 
rehabilitation, physio, OT (occupational therapy), administration of 
medication, and health counselling -- these are very, very good proposals.  
It's proposing to take home care and make it into a highly integrated 
service with a number of different health care services available through 
the home care program, which is the direction we have been saying for at 
least the last two estimates since I have been Health critic, that we 
should be moving towards a primary health care base.  I've said that 
repeatedly in this House. 
 
We've talked about expanding those services out there.  I'm now in that 
fashion.  I'm now pleased to see those recommendations here.  And I want to 
know, is the minister going to do this now?  Is he going to take the 
necessary steps to improve on the primary health care, the delivery of 
primary health care in rural Saskatchewan and in urban Saskatchewan, 
through our home care program for example? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Chairman, for the most part, the hon. member's 
comments are valid and appreciated by those who work in the health care 
sector because they deal with the importance of the home care system and 
the importance of that system to redirect, to the extent that is possible 
and at the speed that is possible, the people from institutionalization.  
And as you quoted my colleague, the Associate Minister, as having stated 
clearly that an institutionalization, whether it be in a long-term care 
centre or in a hospital, is always the last resort and should be considered 
that by everyone.  And that's the philosophy of home care. 
 
But let's just . . . to talk about it here, now we're eight or nine years 
away from the time of the change of government and so on.  There's no 
question that home care has been advocated by our government, has been 
funded by our government, and continues to be.  Since 1981-82, and of 
various budgets that have come down through some very difficult times as 
you will know, in some of the other sectors, we've had 128, almost 129 per 
cent increase in what is spent on home care, over that decade. 
 
So there's no question the commitment's there.  We're pleased to hear that 
the emphasis that you place on it, as well as the critic.  In this year's 
budget estimates that we're dealing with right now, we have an increase in 
home care of 9.5 per cent.  In last year's budget we had an increase of 14 
per cent. 
 
Many people in the home care sector . . . and they have said that they are 
happy with the way in which the budget is going.  Obviously people in the 
home care sector would like to see it move a little more quickly and as 
I've characterized this in the House before, is a very large sort of ship 
that we have to turn around in the Health care system, very large and 



 

 

complex system as you know.  And as we try to get it turned around, it will 
be slow.  And it is going more slowly than some would like, but there is no 
question there is a definite movement on towards that turn. 
 
As it relates to the nursing home beds and so on, while we talk about home 
care, we cannot say just outright that there is no room in the system for 
institutionalization because there is, and I think you will agree with 
that. 
 
And so, I guess the only thing I would take issue with is the way in which 
you describe what happened when you introduced home care and had a 
moratorium for a number of years prior to the introduction of home care -- 
four years prior as a matter of fact -- four full years of saying there 
will be no nursing home beds built across the rural of this province 
because we've got this new system coming. 
 
And in the process . . . and the introduction of home care was not enough 
to be able to alleviate the tremendous problem that was out there and so we 
have increased home care as I've indicated here by more than a 128 per cent 
over this time of being in office.  We have also built a great number of 
nursing home beds, needed nursing home beds in various parts of rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Minister, home care has remained a very small portion of 
your budget, a very small portion, something like 2 per cent or less over 
the years -- '84, 1.8; '85, 1.7; '86, 1.8 -- a very, very small proportion.  
And to suggest that the home care people are pleased generally with what 
you're doing is not accurate, Mr. Minister.  It's not accurate. 
 
I have an article here with respect to March 30, 1990 where Saskatchewan 
home care received a "disappointing 9.5 per cent increase to a drop of 
three and a half per cent from last year's budget," says the assistant 
executive director of the Saskatoon home care branch, for example. 
 
And I want to refer the minister to a letter that I know he received on May 
1 of this year, of 1990, from an individual who has worked in the home care 
system through a number of years.  And this individual makes some very 
interesting points that I want to bring to the minister's attention and get 
his opinion on it. 
 
He says that he is a champion of home care and knowledgeable on the 
subject, and his first concern is, quote: "What is happening to the home 
care program?"  He says that he feels that it is becoming a rubber stamp 
for the continuing care bureaucracy. 
 
Now I understand, Mr. Minister, that this individual has not received a 
reply to this correspondence.  Now I don't know if that's accurate, but 
that's my understanding.  This letter's dated May 1. 
 
He indicates that in the beginning, in the beginning home care was a 
preventative service to fill the gap for people before they entered special 
care and to let them live independently at home.  Now that's in the 
beginning; that's when it was established under the New Democratic 



 

 

government. 
 
Now the focus is on heavier care to replace special care to facilitate 
earlier hospital discharge, and a gap is being created again.  He 
criticizes in this letter the audit process in the Department of Health 
through continuing care.  And he indicates that during audits, districts 
are being told they can no longer provide preventative service, such as 
routine once or twice monthly blood pressure monitoring.  Therefore, we are 
creating a gap in service and putting the pressure back onto the doctors.  
And it's causing doctors to become very upset at home care districts. 
 
He goes on to say that many districts, including ours, are facing financial 
difficulties.  And the funding that we received is based on needs from two 
years previously because of the budgeting process, which works within 
government itself.  He says they prepare the budgets on what they spent the 
last two years, not on what they need for that particular year. 
 
And he goes on to say that although in the last two years home care has 
received 7 per cent and 10 per cent increases in funding -- all this 
injection of funds -- all this injection of funds does is cover wage 
increases to staff and in some instances does not even do that.  It does 
not allow for any increase in service levels.  And with the popularity of 
home care, districts are having to turn potential clients away. 
 
He indicates that this year, as well as the past few years, we are 
receiving one-twelfth of the previous year's funding until The 
Appropriation Bill is passed.  And he goes on, and he expresses it quite at 
length some of his concerns with respect to audits and so. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, this letter, and I'm sure that you have read it, does 
not speak well for what is happing in the home care area.  It appears upon 
reading it that it is a letter written by an individual who feels that home 
care is under funded in the province, is grossly under funded, that it's 
being called to cut back on services, preventative health care services 
such as blood pressure monitoring, in order to meet the expenses.  Yes, 
there have been increases, but they haven't kept up with the demand that's 
out there, Mr. Minister.  Now the Murray commission report talks about 
expanding the mandate of home care, expanding the role of home care to go 
more into the preventative health care. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, we talked at length in this legislature in speeches and 
other estimates about the need for health promotion, about the need for 
preventative health.  The minister has a hundreds of thousands of dollars 
advertising campaign which is health promotion, and yet home care workers 
are telling us, as this gentleman has in his correspondence, that because 
of underfunding of the home care program they are having to cut back on 
preventative health services in some districts. 
 
(1515) 
 
Now this is totally inconsistent with what you're telling the people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister.  This is totally inconsistent.  And I want to 
know from the minister what his short-term and long-term plans are to 



 

 

remedy the difficulties that have been expressed by home care workers 
across the province and by this individual in this correspondence to him.  
What he is going to do to remedy these problems in the immediate future and 
to make home care a preventative program, and put his money where his 
rhetoric is, not into self-serving advertising, but into real preventative 
programs? 
 
Now what are you going to do in the immediate future, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- The short answer to what we're going to do in the 
immediate future is what we have been doing, because we've been increasing 
the funding for home care in each year.  And that's been well received by 
the home care sector. 
 
The quotes on March 30, just after the budget, from the president of the 
Saskatchewan Home Care Association on behalf of home care boards across 
Saskatchewan . . . and here is the quote: 
 

 . . . very pleased with the emphasis on home care.  The 9.5 per cent 
increase in the home care budget doesn't go all the way towards meeting 
the needs that exist, but it's a good start. 

 
That's the quotation.  That's basically what I said in my earlier remarks 
to you as a general statement: that the home care people were pleased with 
it.  There's another one from, I believe it's Thunder Creek home care; 
executive director of Thunder Creek home care is happy too. 
 

 I think it's really positive.  We are in need of more money.  We need to 
be able to provide more services to support the hospitals . . . (etc., 
etc.) We've been able to keep pace with rising costs, but with this 
increase we might be allowed to expand our programs. 

 
That's what they say in that district. 
 
Now let's just be very clear.  You're quick to stand and quote from a 
letter which is true, you got a copy of it; I noticed it in a letter that 
was sent to me.  The person that you're referring to is the chairman of a 
board of a home care district in the province, but was very, very careful 
to say -- and does in that same letter -- that he is not writing on the 
board or with the auspices of the board.  He says that he writing it as a 
personal letter.  So he has a personal axe to grind with whatever is going 
on in home care. 
 
And that's fine.  Every citizen has a legitimate right to do that but they 
should not be presented in a form like this, as someone who is writing 
other than in a personal way.  The board of that district did not write 
such a letter and no one speaking officially for that board said any such 
thing.  So that's important to point that out. 
 
I understand that there will be districts that will have individual 
pressures, and they do.  They have pressures . . . and there can be 
significant program dollars taken if there are severely handicapped in the 
region, those kinds of things where there's an extra strain on resources in 



 

 

a particular district.  We know that.  We try to respond to it on an 
individual basis to the extent that it's possible. 
 
But as a general statement and a general answer to your question about what 
are we planning to do in the immediate future, what we're planning to do is 
to continue to turn the system around and the attitudes within the larger 
health care system around.  And the wider public have come more and more to 
embracing the concept of home care.  And as we move more and more in that 
direction, there will be more funds available for it, and every year has 
proven just that.  There have been more funds and this year is no exception 
with a 9.5 per cent increase. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Well, Mr. Minister, obviously people are going to be pleased 
with an increase.  There's no question about that -- people will have a 
pleased reaction to an increase. 
 
The fact of the matter, however, is that the concerns that were expressed 
in this correspondence to you, Mr. Minister, are concerns that I've heard 
from many people working in the home care area across this province.  This 
isn't an isolated situation.  There have been cut-backs in the home care 
program.  Increases, but as a result of increasing costs, as well, there 
have been cut-backs to the services that are being provided. 
 
Now do you agree, Mr. Minister, that there are areas in this province that 
have had to reduce the services that they provide as a result of 
underfunding of home care? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- I've said to you that I know that there are significant 
pressures and some boards and some regions will have different pressures 
based on the circumstance within their own region.  That's true, I 
acknowledge that.  We have made every attempt to deal with them, and as 
they come forward with their specific concerns, we do what we can to deal 
with them. 
 
I acknowledge that home care boards across Saskatchewan have had to 
priorize the services that they give, and that means that those which are 
most important, those people most in need are receiving the services, and 
that's as it should be in a system like this. 
 
Sure there are pressures on the system.  There are pressures on the health 
system, not only on the home care portion of the health system, there are 
pressures on the wider health system, there are pressures on this health 
system all across Canada, but we feel that in this budget and the amount 
that is allocated in this budget for home care, we're proud of being able 
to present that kind of an amount, given the circumstance of the wider 
global budget. 
 
And I believe that it's, in that context, that this is a responsible 
increase.  And as I've quoted to you, people who are responsible for the 
home care system across the province have responded in just that way.  And 
they believe as well, that it's a responsible increase given the 
circumstances of the day. 
 



 

 

Mr. Koskie: -- Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask leave to introduce a group 
of students. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Mr. Chairman, through you and to other members of the House, 
it gives me a great deal of pleasure to introduce some 30 grade 5 and 6 
students seated in the Speaker's gallery from the Lake Lenore School. 
 
They are accompanied by their teacher Leona Wieler; my information is, 
Clarence Puetz, Mr. and Mrs. Strueby, Marlene Schafhauser, Lorianne Struck, 
Donna Nosbush, Reg Gerwing, and Kathleen Mueller.  I'll be meeting with the 
group following their presence here in the Speaker's gallery, for drinks 
and for questions.  I'd ask all members to join with me in extending a warm 
welcome to the students from Lake Lenore. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Health 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 32 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  Mr. Minister, is it then your 
government's policy as of today, to move from institutionalized care to a 
home care based type of service for elderly people or people in need of 
assistance? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- That's the direction that we're going.  I would say as 
a statement of policy, that would be it.  But it must be understood by 
everyone that it's not as simple as just saying well, as was done when a 
moratorium went on on nursing home beds, and say we're going to introduce 
home care to replace nursing home beds; because it isn't as simple as to 
say we're moving from institutional care to home care in one fell swoop.  
That does not work and it does not serve our citizens well. 
 
As a general statement of policy, it would be our policy to continue the 
trend toward more and more services, and more and more services which can 
be provided in the home setting would be the priority.  We would like to 
see that happen, we'd like to see that trend continue, and we will do 
everything that we can to continue the trend in funding to accommodate 
that. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Minister, with respect to your comments about a 
moratorium, what the policy was, was to expand home care -- was to expand 
home care, Mr. Minister.  The Murray commission report clearly points out 
that we have the highest number of institutionalized beds across the 
country, Mr. Minister -- the highest number of institutionalized beds 



 

 

across the country.  And the policy before 1982 was to move towards a home 
care program to help people to stay in their home. 
 
But this government never did anything to it and the Murray commission 
report has come out and said that this is the way we should have been 
moving in effect over the past few years, in spite of the fact we've raised 
that on numerous occasions here.  Now I see the minister -- I'm just 
looking for the particular section, but there's data in here to the effect 
that the number of beds across the province are extremely high in 
Saskatchewan compared to other jurisdictions. 
 
We were leading Canada with a home care program, Mr. Minister, which in 
effect, which in effect you put a moratorium on for the last eight years, 
on home cares.  It is only recently that you've started to realize that 
maybe this was a way that we could be saving money and providing a better 
quality service in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now with respect to the funding formula for home care, I notice that there 
have been concerns expressed, the fact that they get their funding on a 
monthly basis and the fact that they can't plan into the future.  Is there 
going to be, particularly if we're going to be expanding home care, which I 
believe we should be doing, into other services -- therapy services, 
counselling services, and so on -- Mr. Minister, will there be a change to 
the funding formula so that the home care districts can plan further into 
the future? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- A couple of comments.  Look, to the hon. member, we're 
in agreement on the nature of home care and the service that home care can 
provide in our health care system and to our citizens, primarily elderly 
citizens.  We're in agreement on that. 
 
But to stand and say in a partisan way that home care over the last while 
has been diminishing and all of that, you know, and say that home care was 
out on the leading edge in Canada, whenever, back whenever you want to 
refer back to -- the fact is home care right now and home  
 Dcare over all of these years since it's introduction, and it's been 
administered by two governments, yours and ours, through all of that time 
home care in Saskatchewan is out far away in front of every other similar 
system in any other place in Canada right now.  There's no question about 
that.  We still have people from other provinces of Canada coming here to 
look at our home care system. 
 
But to suggest that the home care system is the replacement, total 
replacement for nursing home beds which was what the moratorium did -- 
which is what the moratorium did -- which is what the moratorium did, Mr. 
Chairman, and that's the only reference that I made to that moratorium back 
in 1970s.  That's what it was about.  It was a replacement; said no, no 
more nursing home beds; we'll introduce home care.  And that's the whole 
problem.  And that's the problem with the nature in which the question was 
asked. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, home care is an excellent system.  Saskatchewan home care 
is an excellent system.  It's regarded highly by everyone across the 



 

 

country.  As the member has said and as I have agreed, there is always room 
for more money in home care.  There are pressures in home care; we have 
said yes, we recognize those pressures.  In this year we have increased the 
budget by nine and a half per cent. 
 
The statistics -- the demographic statistics as it relates to this province 
and the percentage of our people who are over 65, or whatever age you would 
like, over 75, we are among the highest in the country.  And that points to 
one thing -- that we will need both home care and long-term care facilities 
and programs into the foreseeable future here, and we have a commitment 
that those programs will be there for our people. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Minister, to suggest that we said by our comments that 
it's home care to the exclusion of institutionalized care is cheap politics 
on your part, Mr. Minister.  And it's not true, of course. 
 
And here's a man that stands up and his colleagues stand up and say that 
you shouldn't play politics with health care.  And we've witnessed some of 
the most disgusting politics in the last two minutes, because we never said 
that, and Hansard will bear me out, Mr. Minister. 
 
The fact of the matter is, is that the level 1 and 2 care in 
institutionalized care can often be dealt with in the home. And we 
recognized that prior to 1982, Mr. Minister. And it's taken you folks eight 
years to come to that decision.  And if there was any sort of a moratorium, 
it's been a moratorium on home care by your government, Mr. Minister. 
 
(1530) 
 
With respect to mental health, Mr. Minister, I wish to take you to mental 
health, because that is another area that has been dealt with at some 
length by the Murray commission -- some length by the Murray commission. 
And I must say that many of their recommendations with respect to mental 
health I find very favourable.  And we have raised a number of them in this 
legislature over the last two years.  We've made many of these 
recommendations ourselves to you. 
 
But it's important for us to take a look at the whole area of mental 
health. But before, Mr. Minister, I've just remembered that a colleague of 
mine had some questions in a particular area and he will not be able to be 
here later on this evening, so I'm going to sit down and ask him to direct 
those questions at this time, otherwise we'll run short of time. 
 
We will come to . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . yes, we'll come to 
mental after he has finished. Thank you, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, and I do have to leave for a meeting 
in Saskatoon, so I appreciate having the opportunity to ask my colleague a 
few questions here. 
 
Regarding the Saskatchewan Alcohol and Drug (Abuse) Commission, first of 
all, Mr. Deputy Minister, I guess, I would like to . . . associate 
minister, sorry. I would like to acknowledge some positive initiatives that 



 

 

the government has developed.  And I know the minister knows that I'm a 
fair person and I mean that sincerely.  You have put more money into SADAC 
(Saskatchewan Alcohol and Drug Abuse Commission) over the last three, four 
years, and that's acknowledged; I've done that. 
 
I have the pleasure of having a new Calder centre in my riding, which I 
appreciate. It's a very good program.  And I'm also aware of the 
Whitespruce program.  And as the critic for youth, again, I appreciate that 
some 150 or 60 young people have gone through that program and that's a 
very positive initiative.  It's not the only solution or it's not a 
complete solution for young people, and I know that you realize that. 
 
I also would like to compliment the department on the Recovery '90 
Conference: The Road to Wellness, that I had the pleasure of attending and 
I know that the associate minister was there and did a good job in his 
opening remarks.  I also had a good feeling about the competence and the 
quality of the executive director and the staff that I had the opportunity 
to meet with during that conference.  And so I came and it was a good 
learning experience for me as the critic and having spent a number of years 
in social work I certainly appreciated the quality of the workshops.  It 
was well done, and it was a good conference, so I want to give credit.  I 
will have a few comments that won't be as positive, but I want to give 
credit where credit is due. 
 
Certainly substance abuse, which I will include as alcohol and drugs, 
combined, is a major challenge for all of us and there are many reasons why 
we have an increasing problem, not only among young people, but among the 
population in general.  And I will mention some of these. 
 
And so I'm not pretending that the solutions are easy.  They're very 
complex, there are many interrelated factors that we are aware of.  
Certainly as communities it is our objective, and I know the minister spoke 
to this in Saskatoon a bit, it is our objective to have healthy situations 
for young people to live in.  It's our objective to have healthy 
communities, healthy families.  Healthy families means of course that 
family members have enough to eat, that their basic needs are being met; 
healthy families means that the family members are in a good emotional 
space and there's that kind of stability.  Healthy families means that the 
relationships are positive in families.  And I think healthy families means 
that the parent or the parents can feel that they're able to provide for 
their family and they're doing something productive in terms of useful work 
to the community. 
 
And so we all strive for healthy families.  We know that it's important 
that young people have healthy role models, and so that's an important part 
of healthy families.  And it's important, and I agree with the minister on 
this, that our communities are supportive to our families and that our 
government is supported through our communities.  So I'll acknowledge that 
that's our objective but the task is not always easy. 
 
And I want to say that I think it's very clear, certainly to anybody 
involved in the field and I'm sure the minister, that there is a 
relationship, there is a link between unemployment and poverty and a sense 



 

 

of isolation and lack of recreational and social opportunities, 
insufficient family supports in the community.  There's a relationship 
between all of those things -- school drop-out rates and what not and 
community and social problems.  There's a relationship between those 
problems and stress and alcohol and drug use.  I think that's been 
documented and I'm aware of two or three researchers who have done that.  
And the staff would know that better than I do. 
 
I want to refer for a minute to a study that was done by SADAC, a research 
report, a very fine study, released I guess, in February '89.   And I want 
to just refer to just a few highlights where Legal Offences in 
Saskatchewan: The Alcohol and Drug Connection, report highlights.  And it 
speaks -- it's a long report -- but it speaks to the social context that we 
live in and it stresses some points that I concur with and are the basis 
for one of my main points this afternoon, and I quote: 
 

 Substance abuse is frequently linked with other problems such as poverty, 
unemployment, and cultural estrangement.  Saskatchewan residents at 
greatest risk of coming into conflict with the law and being incarcerated 
for an alcohol and drug-related offence are those who are young, 
unemployed, poorly educated, male, and native. 

 
Now there are some very important messages here for public policy makers.  
I want to quote just one more section and then I'll get on with my 
comments.  Regional offence rates.  Says: 
 

 Legal offence rates in northern Saskatchewan are significantly higher than 
in other parts of the province. 

 
Well that makes sense, based on the previous statement.  There's higher 
unemployment, fewer family supports, fewer recreational, social 
opportunities, more desperation and this sort of thing.  So I continue 
quoting: 
 

 The alcohol and drug-related offence rate in northern Saskatchewan in the 
study was five times greater than in central Saskatchewan and six times 
greater than in the south of the province.  The high offence rate in the 
North is closely tied to the social and economic conditions which prevail 
in that region. 

 
Now that's no surprise to any of us.  I think the commission report, the 
Murray commission report in a sense I think agrees that the situation in 
the North is very desperate and there's certainly a link with drug and 
alcohol use in terms of the conditions in the North there.  So with those 
comments in mind, I would like to say that that was a very good study.  I 
concur with the observations. 
 
And I want to use that study to, as I said, reinforce my main point this 
afternoon -- that unless we address, through public policy, economic 
policies, employment policies, job creation policies, social support 
policies; unless we address the broader social, the broader macropolicies 
of government . . . of communities, unless we do that, that we're 
essentially going to be in a position of fighting fires, of treating 



 

 

symptoms and not the root causes.  And I see the minister shaking his head, 
so I appreciate that you agree with that. 
 
And the major criticism that I have of this government -- and I say this 
with all due respect -- the major criticism I have is that in as I look at 
the economic and financial and social policies of the government, I don't 
see a co-ordinated -- or better yet -- an integrated, holistic approach to 
policy development by the government. 
 
Now in questioning the Minister of the Family over the last few days, he 
has the mandate to play that important role.  I'm a little nervous that the 
Minister of the Family does not appreciate that reality as much as I would 
like to, but at least he has the mandate to play that role to make sure 
that the policies, the overall policies of government are integrated and 
that there's a holistic approach.  And I hope that the new minister, the 
new member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, will bring that perspective to the 
cabinet as well, and we'll see some results there. 
 
But certainly unless there's an integrated approach and unless the broader 
issues are dealt with, to address the issues that SADAC refers to in its 
study, the issues that the Murray commission refers to in its study 
regarding poverty and unemployment and so on, then not very much is going 
to change.  And it's going to be a very big challenge for SADAC to in fact 
respond to the continuing demands that are going to be confronting that 
agency and all of the people in the rehabilitation procedure. 
 
Now the Associate Minister of Health, as I said, at the recovery conference 
gave the opening address and did a very good job, Mr. Minister.  And I 
listened very carefully to your comments, and I just wanted to quote two or 
three sentences because I agree with them, but I see a bit of an 
inconsistency between your comments and the reality of some of your 
economic policies. 
 
You made the comment, and I hope this is quoted correctly, "Our goal as 
government is to create healthy bodies and healthy minds for Saskatchewan 
residents."  You made the comment that we must promote "healthy families 
and healthy communities."  I agree with that.  You made the comment that 
unless we work together . . . pardon me, that we will work together . . . 
or "we will make progress if we co-operate and work together and care for 
one another."  I totally agree with everything that you've said there, Mr. 
Minister.  You went on to talk about this government's commitment in the 
broadest possible sense to the health and well-being of all Saskatchewan 
residents and families.  Again I concur with that. 
 
The problem for me is that I . . . and quite frankly the problem for a few 
people I was sitting beside, and they weren't doubting your sincerity, but 
the problem was that those comments were a little bit less than credible 
given the government's record of having the highest poverty rate in all of 
Canada, having some 42,000 people unemployed, having over a 17 per cent 
unemployment rate for young people, having such a high drop-out rate of 
students from high school, an increase in 50 per cent over the last four or 
five years. 
 



 

 

And so while I agreed with your comments and I feel that you were very 
sincere -- I know you were -- the comments didn't fit with the realities of 
how this government has treated families over the last eight years.  And I 
realize that you can't be held responsible for all of that, that you're a 
new minister.  But certainly it's your government. 
 
The Minister of Health the other night -- and I hope that you've had a chat 
with him since then -- was denying the fact that there was hunger in rural 
Saskatchewan.  He said there's only hunger in Saskatchewan in the inner 
cities.  And he was accusing us of offending rural people because they let 
their children starve. 
 
Now the fact that food banks are in Lashburn and Biggar and Carlyle and 
Melfort indicates that there are hungry children in rural Saskatchewan, and 
so . . . I know that you are from rural Saskatchewan and I assume that 
you've corrected him, and that those kind of insensitive comments basically 
give a message to the public that the Minister of Health is really not 
concerned about . . . in the broadest sense, of overall health care.  And 
so that simply isn't true that hunger exists only in the inner cities. 
 
Now you're aware, I'm sure, as the minister, that alcohol and drugs are 
used often -- drugs by young people in the street who haven't got a place 
to live . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- . . . (inaudible) . . . and ask the question.  You're 
just reading. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Can I finish? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Yes, well just hurry it up.  We've got to get to a 
meeting at 7. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Okay.  Yes, thanks.  Okay, thanks.  I just have a couple 
more comments and then I'll make some questions. 
 
But you're well aware that young people in the street -- as the TV report 
said about the street kids in Prince Albert -- who don't have a place to 
go, who don't have meaningful people, meaningful adults who they can rely 
and trust, young people who have no employment or training options, are 
going to find some way to dull their pain. 
 
You're well aware that unemployed people who are feeling a lot of stress 
are going to find some way to dull their pain.  I'm not saying that's the 
only answer for substance abuse.  Obviously we all know that at all 
economic levels, income strata, there's alcohol and drug abuse.  But the 
sense of desperation often is used as a way to . . . drugs are used as a 
way to dull that pain. 
 
(1545) 
 
And the concern I have, of course, from the time that this 1986 study was 
done that was released, I guess, in 1989, the concern I have, that that 
SADAC report painted a picture that was fairly desperate for a lot of 



 

 

Saskatchewan people, and people getting in trouble with the law, and 
particularly in northern Saskatchewan, is that the situation has actually 
gotten worse over the last two or three years in this regard.  The 
uncertainty of employment, higher numbers are unemployed; the uncertainty 
regarding educational prospects for young people has certainly increased; 
the drop-out rate of young people out of high school has increased. 
 
The street youth, we're now in a situation where -- and the report didn't 
speak to this -- but we're now in a situation where we know that there are 
about 2,000 street kids so-called in Saskatoon; we know there are over 300 
street kids in Prince Albert; we know that there are street gangs in North 
Battleford; we know that there are some 1,500 street youth in Regina -- is 
that these are social problems that are really beginning to . . . that will 
take its toll if not addressed on a broader basis. 
 
Now I'll get very quickly to a couple of questions.  But these factors 
create a sense of low self-esteem.  They create a sense of hopelessness and 
a sense of helplessness and anxiety, and often force people to turn to some 
way to deal with that. 
 
Now what I would like to do . . . One of the concerns that I do have, and 
as you will know, Mr. Minister, I'm sure, that the Regina Board of 
Education, the Saskatchewan teachers trustees' association, and the United 
Church, in their submissions to the Directions (Future Directions for 
Health Care in Saskatchewan) report made it very clear that they were 
concerned about the decision of this government to . . . with regard to 
liquor advertising. 
 
When you lifted the ban on liquor advertising, I believe in 1985, those 
three organizations at least, and a number of others that don't come to 
mind right now, have asked you . . . have talked about the impact of 
allowing alcohol advertising on television where sports heroes are seen to 
be cool because they're drinking a particular kind of beer or whatever.  
And they're concerned about the kind of messages they convey to young 
people about you can't enjoy your social life unless you have a drink. 
 
And what I would like to know is, first of all, in regard to this question, 
have you done any studies that determine whether or not those ads have an 
impact on young people in terms of considering alcohol as a socially 
acceptable thing to do and encouraging that; and secondly, do you  
 Dagree with the United Church and the teachers' groups and others who 
agree that those . . . the trustees, that those ads are detrimental in 
terms of the message they convey?  Do you have any plans to in fact ban 
alcohol advertising from television? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd just like to thank my opposition 
critic for all the good comments about the work done by the people in the 
Alcohol and Drug Abuse Commission, and just say on my behalf that we really 
do appreciate their efforts and the efforts of the commission. 
 
I would like to speak briefly just to a few of the comments that were made 
earlier, because I do think that the opposition critic did address one of 
the key things that we really must speak to if we're going to make some 



 

 

progress in the field of drug and alcohol abuse. 
 
I think that we really do have to go back to basics.  I think we have to 
think about where we started and where we came from.  We have to go back to 
our families.  We have to go back to our communities.  And that's why I 
firmly believe that the direction that we are turning in the field of 
health care, away from health care as such -- numbers of beds and numbers 
of dollars, numbers of treatments and those sorts of things -- towards an 
emphasis on health and health promotion as the right direction. 
 
And there's probably no area that we could make a greater benefit to 
society if we could do that in the field of alcohol and drug abuse.  I 
think that fundamentally people are going to have to think about leading a 
life of value rather than thinking about a life that's full of valuables.  
So I agree whole-heartedly with my opposition critic on his suggestions 
about the directions that we should go. 
 
I would like to speak briefly to the comments made about hunger and just 
clarify my associate's comments.  And I guess what he really wanted to say 
and what he really was saying was that farm families do take very, very 
good care of their children.  And I don't think anybody on the opposite 
side would want to suggest that farm families who, according to the 
statistics that have been provided and were used as the basis for the 
64,000 figure that was mentioned, aren't taking care of their children.  At 
any rate I just wanted to clarify that, and that's the difference between 
rural and farm families and what my associate was referring to. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order, order.  All members will have an opportunity to 
rise and be recognized.  I'd ask them to allow the member from Assiniboia 
to make his comments in answer to the member for Saskatoon Eastview. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- At any rate I just wanted to clarify that.  My 
opposition critic also talked about the importance of jobs and a sense of 
worth.  And I'd just like to let my opposition critic know that job 
creation across the province has been a priority.  Northern Saskatchewan is 
also a concern that we have, and we've done some things to try to address 
those concerns. 
 
The member asked about liquor advertising and it's one of the things that I 
was concerned about, and I'm sure that a lot of us are from time to time.  
And I've tried to keep a watch on it. 
 
At any rate, as you're probably aware, the liquor commission has the 
policy, and their policy on liquor advertising restricts the hours on which 
liquor advertising can be played, and also states, as I understand it, that 
a component of that advertising has to go towards education. 
 
The member asked some specific questions about the effect of advertising on 
the population, and I'm concerned about that as my opposition critic is.  
But from the numbers that I've seen, liquor consumption has actually 
dropped and dropped quite a bit.  And I think that may be related to 
pricing and things like that.  I would hope that the educational component 
contributes to that. 



 

 

 
Over and above that, the member also mentioned and referred to the use of 
athletes and their role in possibly leading to increased alcohol abuse 
amongst youth.  And I know that they can be very positive role models and 
actually we've taken advantage of them.  They've asked if they could help 
and they've come to our assistance. 
 
You're probably aware of the group that toured the province, the 
Roughriders; they toured as Team Health.  They worked with us to help 
educate kids in a school system to talk about drug and alcohol abuse and to 
talk about smoking and those sorts of things.  At any rate we would like to 
use them in a positive sense and we have tried very hard to do that. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Minister, when you tried to clarify the Minister of 
Health's remarks from the other night, you did a worse job because you 
confused the public more.  What you said is that rural families feed their 
children, and what you caught yourself almost saying is that that's the 
difference between urban and rural families, is that urban families don't 
feed their children.  That's what you said.  That's what you said.  And 
that was clear to everybody in this House and I'm sure that was clear to 
everybody who was watching.  And now you're laughing about it, as if that's 
funny.  That isn't funny. 
 
And I want you to know that we're just as concerned over here about urban 
and rural children and families who are hungry. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- We're concerned about the health of urban and rural 
families, Mr. Minister.  Don't talk to me about job creation being a 
priority for your government and northern Saskatchewan being a priority for 
your government.  In eight years you've been in power, northern 
Saskatchewan is on a third-world status, Mr. Minister.  And you're sitting 
there laughing as if that is funny.  That's a very serious matter.  And 
you're the one that's charged to deal with it.  There's two ministers over 
there to deal with these problems, plus you've got a Minister of the 
Family. 
 
And so don't say that your . . . it's fine to say your priority is health 
care in the North.  But that doesn't create jobs.  Rhetoric doesn't create 
jobs and rhetoric doesn't put food in the tummy of children. 
 
Mr. Minister, you sound like George Bush and Brian Mulroney.  Perception is 
not reality.  Bush talked about his drug and alcohol program, $9 billion 
into drug and alcoholism through a public relations campaign while we got 
more people there who are homeless, more people that have no health 
coverage, and more people who are unemployed than they've ever had in the 
United States.  So don't give us the rhetoric. 
 
You also, I would suggest, misled the public a few minutes ago.  You didn't 
answer my question about liquor ads on TV.  You didn't answer the question.  
You said that liquor consumption has dropped.  I want to tell you, Mr. 
Minister, get your facts straight.  Among young people, liquor consumption 



 

 

has not dropped, so don't provide misleading statements in this House.  It 
has not dropped and that's who these ads are directed at and you know that.  
That's the market, and they're effective or the brewing companies wouldn't 
be spending millions of dollars and billions of dollars trying to direct 
those ads at young people.  So let's be open and honest with each other, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, this is something that I want you to take very seriously 
because you're the person that can do something about it, and Northerners 
are expecting you to do something about it.  You're the critic for SADAC.  
You're well aware that your government cut food subsidies to northern 
Saskatchewan.  You're well aware that the Directions report wants those 
subsidies re-established for basic items of food for northern residents.  
I'm asking you, Mr. Minister, will you drop the subsidy to alcohol in the 
North, that's going to the North, will you drop that subsidy and will you 
put that subsidy back on food, because the report here says that northern 
children are starving.  Will you do that, please. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Thank you very much.  Mr. Chairman, I'm not sure how 
much more clarification I can give the member opposite about the hunger 
issue.  But I think he should ask his colleague, the member from Saskatoon, 
about how he addressed the numbers issue and it's totally different than 
how my opposition critic at this time did. 
 
I know that he mentioned that a large part of the concern revolved around 
reservations and those sorts of things, and numbers that weren't included 
there. 
 
At any rate, I think we've probably spoke about it enough.  I come from 
rural Saskatchewan and the reason that I raised the issue was just to make 
it clear that, you know, a lot of farm families would be insulted if they 
interpreted those numbers, you know, the way in which some of them may 
have.  And so that's the reason that I raised it for you.  Net incomes, 
especially on farms, are a result of depreciation or capital cost 
allowances being used.  At any rate, it's just something that I wanted to 
mention to you because I know that you wouldn't want to do that. 
 
As far as liquor advertising, there's another thing I'd just like to 
clarify for you also and especially liquor consumption.  And the 
information that I have is that liquor consumption figures are very, very 
hard to identify who purchased and where the alcohol went to.  And so it's 
a very difficult area to firm up and identify. 
 
(1600) 
 
Also as far as liquor advertising goes, I'm sure the member is aware that 
with satellite technology these days, that the signals come in from all 
over.  And as much as we might like to have a policy that would exclude, 
you know, exclude advertising of certain sorts totally, the satellites 
allow that advertising to come in from across the borders, and it's 
something that we really couldn't control.  At any rate, I would hope that 



 

 

that would answer some of my opposition critic's questions. 
 
As far as the food subsidy goes, I'd like to just say that I'm not sure of 
all the details about the food subsidy as it existed earlier.  But it's my 
understanding that that subsidy only addressed concerns in about seven 
fly-in communities and really didn't address a much broader area, the one 
that you're trying to address or speak to. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I don't know where to start with that 
response.  You know, I just simply don't know where to start.  I'm not 
going to pursue the issue of hungry children, hungry families as it relates 
to poverty.  My hon. critic will pursue that more with the minister, 
because you have just confused the issue more and you have further 
offended, Mr. Minister, you have offended . . . you talk about who's 
offending families. 
 
You have offended urban families that they don't look after their kids.  We 
on this side of the House say that all families look after their children 
to the best of their ability within the means that they have available.  
And under your government the problem has been that families don't have the 
means available.  That's the problem. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- You've got $3.5 million for Childers and one-fifth of that 
to feed hungry children in the province of Saskatchewan this year.  So get 
your priorities straight, Mr. Minister.  The critic will pursue that more. 
 
Now regarding the first question I asked you on liquor advertising, you 
don't seem to even know the reason.  You're the minister responsible; 
you've got very competent officials, and you're telling me it's very 
difficult to determine whether or not alcohol consumption is up among young 
people.  It is up among young people.  Your own study says that.  Walk into 
any school, read the briefs that the educational people presented to you, 
talk to the people in Prince Albert who are dealing with street children, 
and you'll find . . . you'll know that.  And you should know that. 
 
And so what you're saying today is that you are not prepared to agree to 
take the liquor ads off TV.  You're not prepared to agree with the groups 
who say that that should be done, and you're saying that you can't control 
that because we got satellite dishes coming in from all over the place.  
The fact of the matter is you can control that.  You can control that 
through the cable system, and you can minimize it.  At the very least you 
can minimize it. 
 
But you're not committed to doing that because you get contributions from 
the brewing companies, and it's pay-off time, and that's why you took them 
off in the first place. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- And, Mr. Minister, the second question . . . So the message 
you're giving is you're not prepared to pull those ads, and you don't agree 



 

 

with the trustees and the school boards and the church groups who want 
those ads pulled.  And I will make sure that they're aware of that 
decision, Mr. Minister. 
 
The second question, you did not answer.  Your answer to the issue of 
whether or not you would pull food subsidies to the North, or put them back 
on, is that well, they were only going into seven communities.  The subsidy 
was only for seven fly-in communities. 
 
Well make it better.  Don't use that as a rationalization not to put it 
back into the North, a subsidy to the North.  And what I'm suggesting to 
you . . . what I'm hearing you say as well, then, is that you're going to 
continue to subsidize alcohol being transported into northern Saskatchewan.  
And you're not prepared to follow the Murray commission report, or you're 
not prepared to make a commitment today on the Murray commission report, 
and to respond to the dire poverty in the North by transferring that 
subsidy from alcohol to basic, basic food items, Mr. Minister.  That's what 
you have basically said today. 
 
And I don't think people in Saskatchewan generally will feel very good 
about that because families in Saskatchewan are concerned about families in 
the North as well.  We don't compartmentalize which families we're 
concerned about and which ones we're not on this side of the House, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
So that's the interpretation that the public of Saskatchewan can give to 
those first two questions. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, I would like, if you could send over to me within the 
next week, the money spent last year on treatment out-of-province to 
Billings, to Mandan, to Minot by the Government of Saskatchewan, by SADAC.  
If you could send that over to me, I would appreciate that, or to any other 
programs outside the province, a listing of those.  And I would like to 
know the amount of money that you've got budgeted to do that this year, if 
you've got any money budgeted. 
 
Secondly, the second question I would like to know, Mr. Minister, is in 
your '90-91 budget.  If I've looked at this correctly, you've got $1.036 
million less to work with this year than you had last year, and I know that 
some of that has been transferred to the Family Foundation.  And I would 
like to know again, in a listing from you, how much of that has been 
transferred to the Family Foundation and how much has been transferred to 
other areas or is there an actual cut in terms of overall government 
programs from that budget.  Where has that $1,000 gone to and you can send 
that to me, Mr. Minister. 
 
The last question that I would like to put on the record and I would like 
you to respond to me.  Normally I would pursue this with you in question 
period or in these estimates, but I would like you to send this to me 
because I do have a commitment that I have to go to.  The Directions report 
says on page 150, regarding alcohol and drug programs, and they give you 
credit for initiating some programs and putting some money into the field, 
then they say, I quote: 



 

 

 
 . . . unfortunately, major program changes (and additions) don't always 

directly respond to community needs and priorities. 
 

That's what the Directions report says about your alcohol and drug 
programs.  And I quote again: 
 

 . . . the issues of status, (that the) responsiveness to community needs 
and objectivity in decision-making need to be addressed. 

 
And what the report seems to be suggesting, I'm not sure what it . . . I 
can speculate on what they're suggesting.  They're suggesting that some of 
your programs and your priorities are not responsive to community needs and 
community priorities. 
 
Now that's from the Murray commission report, and I'm not making that 
allegation, but I would like you to respond to that. 
 
They're also saying that there needs to be more objectivity in decision 
making at the community level.  And the Murray commission doesn't explain 
why they're saying that, but to me those are concerns that, I mean, I have 
a couple of possible interpretations of why that would concern me. 
 
And I guess when I look at the other ways in which this government has 
developed policies, I hope that what the commission report is not saying is 
that you go your merry way regardless of what local communities want in 
terms of alcohol and drug programming. 
 
And when I look at the fact that you're not prepared to subsidize food to 
the North and you're not prepared to pull ads, even though groups want you 
to, that maybe you're not listening as well on some of the priorities and 
needs in the alcohol and drug area, as based on the community priorities -- 
the way the communities would want you to make those decisions. 
 
Now the Minister of Health is getting impatient when I'm asking these 
questions, but this is my forum and this is my opportunity.  So I would 
like you to respond to those questions if you would, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- I'll provide those written responses to you that you 
requested in the next couple of days. 
 
I would like to speak just briefly to the out-of-province or out-of-country 
treatment that the member referred to.  It's been a concern that we have 
had, because the numbers out of province have increased, and we are going 
to be addressing that concern shortly.  As the members opposite may be 
aware or may not be aware, out-of-province  
 Dtreatment hasn't had to have prior approval by hospital services, and we 
may have to move that direction in the near future to address the referral 
process and the out-of-province numbers. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  With respect to some of the 
comments made by the associate minister, Mr. Chair, I want to just 
reiterate the fact that New Democrats on this side of the House have not 



 

 

said that rural families don't look after their children.  That is 
something that the Minister of Health and others have attempted to say on 
the other side of the floor.  We have not said that. 
 
We then witnessed the associate deputy minister saying today that that's 
the difference between rural families and . . . He stopped himself short of 
saying urban families.  And that's indicative of how this government 
attempts to divide people in Saskatchewan, Mr. Chair.  They attempt to 
divide people and pit people against each other, workers against farmers, 
urban against rural, various interest groups in the province.  That's their 
tactic, Mr. Chair, to divide people and try to isolate people. 
 
And the associate minister, the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg was 
alluding in effect to that sort of tactic.  And we say that that is 
disgusting; it is completely unacceptable to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- And we're not going to tolerate it, Mr. Chair.  We're not 
going to tolerate it because as my colleague said, this side of the House 
is worried about families regardless of where they live.  Whether they live 
in Assiniboia or Gravelbourg, whether they live in Climax, whether they 
live in Langenburg or Meadow Lake, we're worried about them, Mr. Chair, as 
well as families living in Regina and Saskatoon, unlike the members 
opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Now with respect to mental health services, Mr. Chair, which 
I started into prior to my colleague asking some specific questions on 
SADAC, the point has been made to the Murray commission and to us by people 
from mental health, that people suffering from mental illness are forgotten 
constituents, Mr. Chair. 
 
In addition to living with the stigma of mental illness, many of them are 
not providing the basic . . . provided with the basic means to survive in 
our society.  And this is despite the fact that in 1983 the Mental Health 
Association in Saskatchewan released a report documenting neglect in this 
area and recommending, in 1983, a number of solutions. 
 
But instead we have seen conditions slowly erode in the province, 
particularly since this report came out, when we thought some action would 
be taken in this regard. 
 
We see insufficient services, for example.  A common complaint about the 
current mental health system is that when a crisis does occur, it is 
difficult to achieve any expedient and efficient response.  There is very 
little crisis intervention services that meet the needs of people, 
particularly in rural Saskatchewan, suffering from mental illness. 
 
We see gaps in services, for example. There are two essential services 
lacking in the current system:  long-term supervised care and crisis 
intervention.  We see a lack of continuity of care in the area of mental 



 

 

health.  Families are experiencing frustration and aggravation with a 
bewildering array of delivery systems and referral procedures which shift 
them from agency to agency. 
 
We also see a selective nature of admission into many programs which means 
that many people in desperate need simply don't qualify for them, Mr. 
Chair.  And the current situation too often excludes people for not fitting 
in rather than mental health systems striving to accommodate them. 
 
We see an inadequate number of trained staff in the province, and there's 
been widespread concern over major shortages in the whole range of mental 
health care personnel. And psychiatrists of course have been most notably 
mentioned, Mr. Chair.  But insufficient staff are found in other positions 
such as social workers, psychologists, psychiatric nurses, for example, Mr. 
Chair. 
 
(1615) 
 
There has been limited government funding for research initiatives in the 
mental health area.  And a number of recommendations have been made in this 
House by us, Mr. Chair, in the past, and also by the Murray commission. 
 
I want to refer briefly to an article, May 25, 1990, in the Leader-Post, 
the headline being "Sask. said lagging in providing services" and Eugene 
Niles, chairman of the newly created New Brunswick Mental Health Commission 
says that he was in Saskatchewan when you, meaning Saskatchewan, were the 
leader. And he was hearkening back of course, to the '60s. 
 
He indicates that he says, and I quote, "I was surprised that you have 
slipped that far down."  And he was here in Saskatchewan to talk about the 
New Brunswick Mental Health Commission which I understand is one of the 
things that the mental health commission in Saskatchewan has been asking 
this government to implement. It's something that is recommended in the 
Murray commission report. However the mental health association has a 
divergence with the Murray commission report inasmuch as they do not want 
to see mental health services being dealt with out of regional boards.  
They want to see a mental health commission centralized that looks after 
the administration of mental health care services through the province.  
But Mr. Niles was here for the purpose of talking about the New Brunswick 
experiment and he obviously feels that New Brunswick is on the leading edge 
in the area of mental health. 
 
Another article, May 28, 1990, "Saskatchewan no longer innovator in mental 
health, official says."  And I want to also reiterate and emphasize the 
fact that the Murray commission report has emphasized and indicated that 
the mental health area is an area of major public concern, Mr. Chair.  And 
that is something that we indicated in this legislature during estimates 
last year.  We dealt with the mental health care area.  We raised many of 
the problems.  We talked about it.  We were encouraging the minister to 
make mental health a priority. 
 
I think it's also important to note here at this spot, the Red Cross study 
that was released earlier this year when the House had just come into 



 

 

session.  And that Red Cross study points to the problems people are having 
-- the emotional and mental problems they are having throughout 
Saskatchewan, the farm stress it talked about.  It talked about racism in 
the province and sexism, and it was of course making the point that unless 
these things are dealt with, unless these things are dealt with, it has an 
effect on people's health.  Racism will have an effect on someone's health.  
The farm crisis will have an effect on someone's health.  And these are 
things that the Minister of Health and the Department of Health have to be 
concerned about. 
 
And the Red Cross study talked about those things and it talked about the 
stress people were feeling, the alienation they were feeling, the 
depression they were feeling throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
So we now have two major bodies in this province that have identified for 
the Minister of Health the dire straits mental health is in Saskatchewan, 
and the need, the urgent need -- the urgent need -- for immediate attention 
to the area of mental health.  I want to point out once again that we've 
raised that concern in this Assembly and we have proposed possible 
solutions. 
 
Now with respect to the recommendations for a mental health commission the 
Murray report talks about, it would have the function of monitoring mental 
health services, it would set standards and it would perform an educational 
function.  I want to point out once again that the mental health 
association in the provinces wishes to see the mental health commission 
having more power than that. 
 
What we need to do in this province is develop a mental health plan of 
action, and the Murray commission recognizes that.  It talks about 
community-based supported living, rehabilitation, community outreach, 
out-patient and acute patient in-patient care, and public education 
strategy.  It talks about creating community mental health workers or 
employing community mental health workers throughout this province. 
 
All these recommendations, very good recommendations I would say, Mr. 
Minister, and wholly supported by us.  I reserve the right, however, to 
consider further the recommendations by the mental health association that 
they have a centralized commission and hear further debate in that regard. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, in view of the fact that we have had . . . it is 
clearly, mental health is clearly a major public concern, Mr. Minister.  In 
view of that, in view of the fact that we have had two agencies, two 
agencies in this province speak out in that regard and say that there has 
to be some immediate action in the area of mental health, could the 
minister tell us what his immediate short-term plan is with respect to 
alleviating some of the problems that mentally ill people are suffering on 
a daily basis throughout this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Chairman, the mental health association that the 
hon. member quoted from has had many -- I think it's fair to say -- many 
recommendations over time, over the last several years.  They are an 
advocacy group that's been very active.  As the member knows they were very 



 

 

active and had -- I think it's fair to say -- a series of good 
presentations to the commission around the province.  And the Murray 
commission, as you will know, and as most members I think know, has made 
some specific recommendations relating to mental health. 
 
So let me say at the outset, this is the only area within the Murray 
commission, and in response to the Murray commission in the early stages . 
. . and just to put it into the context of what I've said, and what our 
position is in the department, on the Murray commission as it relates, 
there will need to be discussion going on and so on.  In mental health 
there's an acknowledgement and a quick acknowledgement from our department 
that it's an area that will need attention, and it will need attention in 
the here and now and through this year and so on.  So we're in agreement on 
that. 
 
It's important that as we go forward with this that we remember that there 
needs to be a balance between mental well-being and mental illness in terms 
of the way in which we approach this whole area.  And that balance is 
fundamental to all of this.  And very often some of the things that you 
will see in the press and various places as we deal with just some aspects 
of this or someone reacting to recommendations that have been made, some of 
those will be reactions that are based on the care of those who are 
mentally ill and it will not be discussing to the extent that they might, 
the mental well-being and the kind of community programs that we 
acknowledge we are in need of. 
 
Just to put it into what we have done in the present year, the present 
budget, the one that we're discussing here now has a $32.1 million budget 
for mental health services, and that's an increase of 6.5 per cent over 
last year.  Community services are provided in the province in 61 
communities by over 220 community staff, including 38 psychiatrists.  
That's just a little overview, and I don't want to dwell on this but I want 
this to be clearly in here and on the record. 
 
Community residential services, that is group homes, approved homes, and 
supervised apartments, have a combined capacity of 818 spaces.  
Non-government organizations providing mental health services to persons 
with long-term disabilities received increases to cover increases in 
salaries and in benefits and in operating costs for those people who work 
in this field.  An average of 333 patients were cared for in Saskatchewan's 
one long-term mental hospital . . . oh I'm sorry, the one long-term mental 
hospital and five branch-operated, acute care psychiatric centres.  There 
were 182 patients in the one hospital -- and obviously I'm referring there 
to the Sask Hospital in North Battleford -- and 151 patients cared for in 
the other five psychiatric centres. 
 
Collectively, these centres employ over 300 nursing staff; psychiatric 
wards in two Regina and two Saskatoon hospitals are managed by local 
hospital boards. 
 
Now here's a key point in this -- and I'm going to the point of some 
comparisons that you were using in your remarks as it relates to New 
Brunswick and some comments made by one who came from New Brunswick in here 



 

 

the other day -- approximately 50 per cent of Saskatchewan's mental health 
budget is spent on community services, one-half.  And that's the highest 
percentage in the country bar none.  There is no other province in the 
country that is close to having half of their expenditure in the community 
services side, which is the trend that frankly began here and it's a trend 
that's carried on.  And that enables us to maintain our citizens in their 
home communities to a larger extent than is the case in many other places. 
 
Now let me refer directly to the comments by a man by the name of Mr. Niles 
who came from New Brunswick just recently.  Now let's just put this into 
the context of what's happening in New Brunswick.  New Brunswick has 
recently appointed a commission -- I believe Mr. Niles works with that 
commission, may even be its director -- that commission and that format of 
a commission which would be, by comparison to our health system, would be a 
commission similar to the one that was just being discussed here by my 
colleague and your colleague over there, the Alcohol and Drug Abuse 
Commission.  More of an arm's-length commission is the format that New 
Brunswick has chosen to go.  But remember that in New Brunswick they're 
coming from a position now of having a very, very large percentage of their 
expenditures in this area are in institutions -- very, very far behind 
where we are.  And everyone in Saskatchewan should take some exception to 
the official from New Brunswick, at least the way in which it was reported, 
and I don't want to . . . it may well be that . . . because you and I will 
understand or all of us in this House will understand that everything is 
not always reported as accurately as you might like it to be. 
 
But at least according to the reports that we have, he was suggesting that 
this New Brunswick plan was some kind of a panacea.  The fact is that New 
Brunswick just wishes they had a system like ours is, even though there are 
many faults in our system, and we acknowledge that; faults being a lack of 
resourcing, and I admit that as well that there is a shortfall of 
resourcing into the infrastructure that we have in Saskatchewan now.  We 
know that.  We know that there will need to be more resources put into 
mental health services. 
 
So all of these . . . And then to answer your other question, your more 
direct question in terms of where will we be going.  And I have said, as 
I've said to you, I acknowledge early and I've said in a public way before 
-- and I know you're aware of that -- that we will be addressing this 
mental health area as early as anything that comes out of the Murray 
report. 
 
And the focus will be on the long-term mentally ill and services to them, 
on children and youth, and on distressed families.  And those are the three 
focus areas, and that's been identified I think by everyone concerned, and 
I think there's agreement by all concerned that those should be the focus 
areas.  And we will be developing programs in the near future based on 
those. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, with respect to the 
gentleman from New Brunswick and the centralized mental health commission, 
I simply want to say that that is something that's being proposed by the 
Saskatchewan group as well. 



 

 

 
I cannot comment today on whether or not I endorse that concept as opposed 
to what the Murray commission, for example, is recommending.  I certainly 
need to look into that particular item further. 
 
But I wanted to put on the record that the association is asking for 
something similar.  And I will certainly want to meet with them and hear 
their arguments with respect to the advantages of that system, and I would 
assume that the minister is doing that as well. 
 
(1630) 
 
With respect to 50 per cent of the mental health budget going on community 
services, I simply want to say that I am told repeatedly by health care 
professionals that it may be 50 per cent, Mr. Minister, but there isn't 
enough out there, and the support services, the supportive living services 
out in the community, have not been adequate to meet with the general 
policy of de-institutionalization. 
 
And I recognize, Mr. Minister, that this has been something that has been 
going on for some time.  However, I think that it's time for Saskatchewan 
to develop a real community-based mental health program that provides 
crisis intervention and respite care and direct care and family therapy and 
public education in the communities across this province, Mr. Minister. 
 
We've said it before in this House last year.  We're saying it again, Mr. 
Minister.  The Murray commission confirms that our concerns were accurate.  
The mental health association has spoken about these concerns repeatedly.  
Now is the time, Mr. Minister, for some real forward thinking and some real 
steps to be made in this area.  And we cannot urge you to move more quickly 
. . . I mean too quickly.  We cannot urge you to move too quickly. 
 
When one meets with people who have families who are suffering from mental 
illness, particularly young children, and hears about the crisis that they 
are suffering and what they go through when they are in a crisis situation, 
one realizes that we have to do something about this.  Otherwise we're 
virtually living in the Dark Ages, Mr. Minister.  Something has to be done 
to give these people access to services. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I understand that there is a subsequent report being 
done, a subsequent report being done in the whole area of mental health by 
the Murray commission.  I also understand it's been completed.  And I would 
like to know if we could have a copy of it, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- I'll just answer the last point first as  
 Dit relates to what you term a subsequent report coming forward, or what 
you perceived it. 
 
My information is that, in their deliberations, the Murray commission -- 
well in a whole series of areas and in mental health as well -- they set 
out little, you know, individual task forces that would go more in depth 
into some of the recommendations that they had from . . . or the briefs 
that they had.  And that was the report I'm sure you're referring to. 



 

 

 
So whatever they did in that sort of work was . . . culminated, really, in 
the report which they submitted to the public.  So those were just internal 
working documents, as I understand it.  That's one. 
 
As it relates to the endorsement or, you know, how I feel as minister or 
what the department's view is of this idea of a commission, as has been 
adopted by New Brunswick and as the mental health association, I think, is 
recommending here and the Murray commission is not recommending, I think 
the very fact that you've just said here that you're not sure if you 
endorse it now . . . I'm not either.  We will both be, I'm sure, meeting 
with the people and the stakeholders in this area. 
 
We have agreement from all of them that there will need to be a long -- or 
not long necessarily -- but there will need to be a collaborative approach 
taken to the focus areas that I outlined earlier: long-term mentally ill; 
children and youth in distressed families; and lastly -- and it's a point 
that I think you made as well, but it's important to emphasize to the wider 
society, to the wider public -- that one of the areas that will need 
ongoing and probably increased effort by all concerned will be the public 
education, the whole area of public education, so that the wider society 
understands clearly the trauma that these people who suffer from mental 
illness go through, and families go through and all of the rest of that.  
And there's definitely an important aspect here of public education, and 
that's something that should not be left aside as we go forward with some 
of these recommendations. 
 
So I appreciate the member's comments.  We are, I think, on the same 
wavelength in terms of that there is some urgency in this area. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Minister, with respect to the other report, the more 
formal report or the more detailed report with respect to mental health, I 
understand it isn't simply internal documents, that there is actually a 
report, Mr. Minister, and I would like a copy of that report. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Well apparently, as I've outlined it to you, this is 
what happened.  The Murray commission set out a task force of their own to 
go into this whole area and they submitted it to the Murray report, but 
there's no . . . we don't have that.  We don't have anything like that and 
the Murray commission has it in the work-up toward the final document that 
they released, which we all have.  And that's really all.  So we don't have 
it to provide to you and you could talk to Dr. Murray, I suppose. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I'm going to ask you to talk to Dr. 
Murray, because I understand it's a more detailed report, and I would like 
to have access to it so we can, for the $1.8 million that we paid to the 
taxpayers, have the benefit of this more detailed document.  And so, Mr. 
Minister, I'm going to ask you to talk to Dr. Murray to see whether or not 
the public can have access to the work that was paid for by the public. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- You know I would ask the member not to . . . the very 
complex document that is the Murray commission report, and everybody has 
acknowledged is a thorough document, and as I've said, the Murray 



 

 

commission in order to come up with this very complex document did a lot of 
internal work.  I mean I'm sure they've got a lot of internal paperwork 
that they've done on a whole series of areas, all of the areas that are 
addressed here -- the whole health system. 
 
So you know . . . and I don't have any strong feelings about it one way or 
the other whether . . . but I can tell you that we don't have the report 
and the Murray commission has said that what they have here are the 
recommendations and they are based on whatever task forces that they sent 
out to do work in the various areas, and that's really all I can tell you. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Minister, I have been advised that there is a more 
detailed report.  I don't know the substance in it, but I understand that 
it may provide for certain time lines and things that have to be done 
today, and so on.  And there are some people in the public who think that 
this report is being deliberately withheld because of the information 
that's in it.  And that's one of the reasons we want the report made 
public.  Because if there is information that is more crucial to the area 
of mental health and gives us some time lines and some further data with 
respect to what can be done, we want to see it done, Mr. Minister.  Perhaps 
I'm wrong, but I have been told there is another report and it is more 
detailed, and I would like the public to have access to that report. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- I'm aware of what you're characterizing as a report and 
I tried to explain to you what it was. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Can we get it? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- I don't have it.  We don't have it.  The Murray 
commission has not given it to the Department of Health or anyone else. 
 
But all I will say to you is that the consultation that you and I have 
talked about here earlier, that we will all have to do, and the 
stakeholders are in agreement with us, and that we will enter into, 
anything that would have been in that task force or anything that the 
Murray commission has recommended will be discussed in that context with 
those consultations.  There's no question about that.  And they're into it 
now. 
 
I don't even know who is on the task force or who was involved in it, but I 
can tell you that all that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, I 
don't. And the member over here from Sutherland says that.  You know, he's 
got a scowl on; he doesn't believe that's the case.  But the fact is that 
I've been forthright with you.  I just said this is all I know -- here's 
the report.  I know that this other task force did a more detailed work for 
Dr. Murray and his commission. 
 
That was the case in several areas of this wide report across the health 
care sector and that's what I would characterize as their working documents 
to come up to the conclusions which they reached and which they published. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Minister, will you ask Dr. Murray or Mr. Podiluk, who's 
ever in charge of the documents, to provide us with that preliminary report 



 

 

as you have described it, so that the public can have access to it?  Will 
you do that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Sure, I'll ask him. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Okay, Mr. Minister, will you tell him that we need it and we 
need it immediately and insist on the delivery of the document? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- I'll say that Louise wants -- I mean, sorry -- I'll say 
that the member from Regina Lakeview wants it right now. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Chair, or what is it?  Mr. Door, or . . . sorry.  Mr. 
Chair, with respect to the Neil Squire Foundation computer comfort program, 
Mr. Minister.  As I understand, this foundation computer comfort program 
has been discontinued.  Is that correct, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Just for clarification, Mr. Chairman, no one here is 
really aware of what the question . . . except to say that we believe it's 
a . . . I think I better just ask the member to clarify what the question 
was and a little more background for our people's edification here. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Chair, I have received a number of letters with respect 
to the Neil Squire Foundation comfort program which enables handicapped 
people to acquire computer skills.  And the point is made of course that 
this sort of skill development allows them to live a more productive, 
happier, healthier life, and that this program is currently operating at 
the University Hospital but is going to be cut back or eliminated, or words 
to that effect -- stopped late in March 1990, as one of the letters tells 
me, that that program will be stopped late in March 1990. 
 
And I'm asking whether or not this has in effect happened, and whether or 
not the minister has had an opportunity to look into the situation to see 
whether or not funding would be available for the program in order that 
handicapped people can of course acquire these skills and live a more 
productive life. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Could I ask that . . . if you give us a chance when we 
come back after supper at 7 when I have people that'll try to run this 
down.  And we're not sure if it's some combination of ourselves and 
Education, or if we're involved at all, or whatever.  But we'll try to run 
down whatever we can about this particular thing and we'll try to have an 
answer after supper tonight. 
 
(1645) 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Perhaps you could look into this 
then over the supper hour as well, and that is the fact that recreational 
summer camp programs for multiple handicapped people are in danger of being 
cut.  I don't know whether they actually have, but I have been advised back 
in May that they are in danger of being abolished, and that the one in 
Regina, for example, may not go ahead because the funding is dropping. 
 
Day respite services, for example, which make it possible for families to 



 

 

cope, families with handicapped children.  Apparently in Regina there's a 
need for 18 more respite spaces, but the government is only funding seven 
more when there's a need for eight.  And the point I wish to make is that 
these services, Mr. Minister, are all aimed at the quality of life for 
handicapped people and should be of concern to the Minister of Health, as 
I'm sure they are.  And there is concern that has been expressed to us that 
there have been cut-backs and underfunding, such that these programs are 
diminishing. 
 
So I'd like the minister to take a look into the situation and advise me as 
to the current status of these programs. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Was the minister going to respond to that, or do you . . . 
no? 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Just a few questions, 
Mr. Minister.  The second question that I want to ask you about will be 
under the prescription drug plan, Mr. Minister, so I'd just give you that 
warning. 
 
And the first question I want to touch on is regarding some of the 
statements the last time the estimates were up, and it's regarding 
tuberculosis in northern Saskatchewan.  As you have indicated, it has 
reached serious proportions.  I notice that you indicated that the 
communities that have cases that have been reported since January 1, you 
indicated there was 40.  Checking your figures that you've quoted yourself, 
it comes out to 50 new cases, as you indicated.  Just a figure of speech 
there, but whether it's 40 cases or 50 cases, it's quite serious. 
 
Mr. Minister, the questions that I have, that I wanted to ask you: are you 
or your department, are you considering, are you reconsidering going in 
with the old program that we had in Saskatchewan, and specifically in 
northern Saskatchewan where we have this outbreak, with the van that used 
to go around and every year they would go in and take X-rays of all the 
citizens. 
 
And I'm just wondering, Mr. Minister, if you are considering 
re-implementing this type of a program in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- I'm informed that there are specific instances of 
communities where that sort of a method -- what you and I would remember, 
the vans that used to come to our communities when we were younger than we 
are today -- and we are considering that in specific instances as we . . . 
 
And you will notice in the answer that I gave to your colleague from 
Cumberland the other night, as it relates to some of the communities in the 
North that have a higher incidence of TB (tuberculosis) and how we're 
directing more and more money into this, and we just, a week and a half ago 
about, we transferred another $210,000 into this very specific purpose. 
 
And just to clarify another point.  When you say that there were 40 new 
cases and I had quoted that in the record, and I'm glad you raised it 
because I'm informed here that when I was reading these numbers, I read the 



 

 

number 12 for the community of Cumberland and it should have said 2, which 
is, I'm sure, a positive bit of news for Cumberland.  But the other numbers 
that I read, beginning with Black Lake at 12, were correct. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Yes.  Well that's a quotation I was using out of Hansard.  
Even those figures at 40, that most certainly is serious.  And it seems to 
be that a lot of it is in the far North, up in the isolated areas.  It's 
not completely isolated there.  I see La Loche with five new cases. 
 
And you indicate that you put a number of new dollars into this.  But I 
think that, you know, you can put all the dollars you want in but you have 
to have a program that you're going to implement if you want to slow this 
down.  I'm just wondering if you have any plans to completely do that 
region of Saskatchewan known as the northern area. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- I made this point the other night and I want to make it 
again that, as it relates to the way, you know, the avenue and the 
Department of Health, that this problem is funded through, is through the 
lab and disease control services branch.  What we do and the reason that we 
put the extra money, and that extra money that I referred to earlier, that 
extra 210,000, plus the increase over last year, they go into an area where 
there has been, let's say, a cluster of new cases.  And then we send in a 
mobile clinic which is made up of a physician and a nurse, and they work in 
conjunction with the community health worker in that area who will then 
work with the individuals who have been identified as having tuberculosis 
to follow up, to be sure of their medicine, that they're taking their 
medicine on a regular basis, and that sort of thing. 
 
To give you an example of . . . and this is seen by professionals as the 
effective way to go at it.  Just go in when there's a cluster and really 
attack this disease in the location. 
 
The one community in northern Saskatchewan of Sandy Bay, two or three years 
ago was identified as one that had a high incidence of new cases.  We sent 
the mobile clinics in repeatedly, and now you'll see on the numbers that I 
quoted and that you were referring to earlier, that there's one new case 
there, which is in the context of what was going on there, is good.  That 
they've gone in and identified, and in the process I think educated a good 
number of people about this disease and the way in which the treatment must 
be carried on and so on. 
 
So that's the approach that we will take in various locations, and that 
will continue as those clusters of new cases are identified. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Okay.  Thank you very much, Mr. Minister.  It is not 
considered a contagious disease any more, is this right? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- I'm informed it's not categorized as a highly 
contagious disease.  It has a low level of contagion but it can be 
contagious, but not in a really high level. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Okay.  Mr. Minister, if that is the case then, it seems to 
me that we shouldn't be waiting to find these certain clusters in northern 



 

 

Saskatchewan, or any place in the province, to break out, because as you 
indicate, it is contagious and it would seem to me that we should go back 
to the program that we had prior to now, that we go in and make sure on a 
yearly basis we're checking out these cases so that they can be nipped in 
the bud. 
 
I want to now turn, Mr. Minister, to a question on a drug that is not under 
the prescription drug plan and that's Eldepryl, spelled E-l-d-e-p-r-y-l, 
and that is a new drug that is used for Parkinson's disease.  As I know 
you're aware, we do not have many cases of Parkinson's disease in northern 
Saskatchewan.  There's only one case that I am aware of and that individual 
now has to pay $220 a month for that prescription drug to fight the 
Parkinson's disease that he has now contracted.  And also there are other 
drugs that the individual or any individual that has Parkinson's disease 
has to take, over and above the drug that I have just indicated. 
 
And I'm just wondering, Mr. Minister, if you could indicate this afternoon 
if the Department of Health is going to cover the drug that I have just 
indicated -- Eldepryl. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- I'm informed that the particular drug that the member's 
referring to will be approved for exceptions of status and I'll explain 
that in a minute -- will be approved for exceptional drug status as of July 
1, so not long from now. 
 
Just so the member has it clear the way in which these particular drugs 
will receive approval by the professional drug formulary committee in the 
province -- all new drugs are reviewed by the Saskatchewan formulary 
committee.  The review provides Saskatchewan residents with assurance that 
all products covered by the drug plan meet high standards of quality, 
safety, and effectiveness. 
 
The committee is composed of doctors, pharmacists, pharmacologists and 
other health professionals who are practising in the province and it's been 
a long-standing process and it's just as new drugs come on to the scene and 
some will be their advocates -- advocates of particular drugs before they 
receive this approval.  And the formulary committee is very careful to be 
sure before they put them on to the formulary and say with their stamp of 
approval, to say this drug is the effective drug for the particular 
condition that they're prescribed for. 
 
But in the case of the drug that you refer to, it will be there for July 1 
under exception drug status and what that means is that a physician can 
apply for that exceptional drug status on behalf of a given patient. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Okay, thank you very much, Mr. Minister.  I now want to 
make a couple of remarks regarding the Murray commission, its report, just 
a few short remarks and then I want to close off with the food 
transportation subsidy.  And as you go through the recommendations -- and I 
know that this is just a report and I realize that -- but as you go through 
it, it's just page after page after page. 
 
All the recommendations are for all the services or the headquarters of all 



 

 

the services to be stationed in La Ronge.  One just has to go through the 
report and it's just . . . some pages there are three recommendations on 
one page that recommend that all the services or the headquarters of that 
service be stationed in La Ronge.  And I think that as I go through this 
report, I just have to shake my head and wonder where they got these 
recommendations from.  It would almost appear that they all came out of La 
Ronge or . . . That's the only thing that I could see. 
 
It also talks about a lot of local control of portions of the health care 
system in the North, but then if you go to page 192 then it states quite 
clearly that "A northern social policy secretariat with headquarters in La 
Ronge (be set up) . . ."  And it would just seem like the whole report was 
sort of geared towards some local autonomy, but then . . . 
 
I could finish at 7 o'clock, but I see there is a couple of minutes, and I 
just want to make a few comments, and in sensible way, to the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg who talked about the seven communities only -- and 
he used that phrase -- on the fresh food subsidy.  And I want to say to him 
that there was only seven isolated communities that were involved in that 
program, and it was specifically there because of the isolation.  I think 
this is what the problems that we've always faced as members, like the 
member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg who doesn't realize what northern 
Saskatchewan is about.  And it's the same as the individuals in Regina and 
southern Saskatchewan don't realize what it's like to live in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And when you made that comment, I just say to you, sir, that that is not a 
fair statement, because that program was implemented to cover only those 
seven small communities in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
(1700) 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- As it relates to the member's comments about the 
commission report and its suggestions that several things would be based in 
La Ronge, as soon as I read that portion, I knew what you would be thinking 
because it was the same as what I was thinking.  I'll be very frank with 
you on that.  It's a bit of the concept that we've seen for a good long 
time; that there's a belief that La Ronge is sort of the centre of the . . 
. or the capital of all of the North and so on and while we know that a 
good portion of the population, in fact, the major portion of the 
population is on what we call the west side. 
 
So I recognize that.  I know that you've acknowledged that this is just a 
report albeit a rather comprehensive one.   But for people who live in the 
North and who live on the west side, although in fairness to the 
commissioners, they did divide the North into three regions, which seemed 
to make some sense because finally someone's recognized the Athabasca 
basin, which I know you're familiar with, as a region unto itself.  I think 
that makes some sense and I think you agree with that. 
 
So just so we both acknowledge that it is just a report, there will need to 
be discussions go on, as it relates to those recommendations, with people 
in the North, just as there needs to be some debate go on all across the 



 

 

province on many of the recommendations.  So I'll give you the assurance 
that that discussion will go on. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- It being past 5 o'clock, this committee will recess until 
7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


