





























































Hansard: May 04, 1990


 

 

May 4/90 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, allow me again today to 
introduce to you, and through you, a group of students on behalf of the 
member from Rosthern who today is unable to be here due to the passing of 
his brother.  And we express our sympathy to both the member and his 
family. 
 
At the same time it is my pleasure to introduce a group of students from 
Osler School in Osler, Saskatchewan, 26 in number, grade 8 students in your 
gallery, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, they are accompanied by their teacher, 
Glen Osmond, chaperon Marilyn Tkachuk, and bus driver Don.  And I'll look 
forward to meeting with the students at 11 a.m. for pictures and a short 
discussion.  Would you join me in welcoming the students this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It gives me a great deal of pleasure 
to introduce to you and through you to members of the Legislative Assembly 
two guests seated in your gallery, sir.  They are the Saskatchewan chairman 
of the Amalgamated Transit Union, Helmut Sieh, and the Regina sub-local 
chairman, Gary Dawson.  I ask the two gentlemen to rise and I ask all 
members to acknowledge their presence and welcome them in the usual 
fashion. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too would like to introduce a 
visitor from Port Coquitlam, B.C., who used to work in Saskatchewan and is 
here visiting with relatives.  His daughter, Muriel Draaisma and his 
son-in-law, Chris Wattie, Mr. Speaker.  And the gentleman is Mr. Nicolas 
Draaisma from Port Coquitlam, B.C.  Would he rise please, and I'd ask all 
members of the Legislative Assembly to welcome him. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It gives me pleasure 
to introduce to you and through you to the Assembly, 35 students from the 
Holy Rosary School in Regina.  They are accompanied by their principal, 
Clarence Demchuk and a teacher, Dan LaBelle.  I hope the members enjoy the 
question period, and I will looked forward to meeting with you afterwards 
to discuss what you've seen. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce to you, and 



 

 

through you to all members of the Legislative Assembly, some 40 students 
seated in the gallery opposite.  These are grade 9 students, Mr. Speaker, 
roughly 20 from the Weyburn Junior High School in Weyburn and the other 20 
are visiting students from Quebec from L'E p√©cole Secondaire St. Raymond, 
Quebec. 
 
They're accompanied here today by their teachers.  From the school in 
Quebec, Yvon Belle Rive and Jean-Guy Marcotte.  And as well the teachers 
from Weyburn, Rick Wanner and Murray Sproule, and their bus driver Winston 
Bailey, I believe as well with them.  I hope that they enjoy their visit 
here today to the legislature, that they find it interesting and 
educational.  It will likely be entertaining.  I know they have a busy 
schedule that precludes me from having a chance to meet with them.  I as 
well hope they found their lost luggage, as I understand that it didn't 
make it yesterday.  And I see it looks like it has today. 
 
So would all members of the legislature please join with me, Mr. Speaker, 
in welcoming these 40 students and particularly our guests from Quebec, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Agreement with Cargill 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  My question today is to 
the Premier and the Minister of Agriculture.  Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan 
chamber of commerce in its meeting yesterday is quoted in the media today 
as saying that the government opposite here should not be funding such 
megaprojects as Cargill, but instead committing that money to aid the 
farmers of the province of Saskatchewan.  And, sir, as you know, we've been 
saying the same thing for months now, that megabucks for megaprojects like 
Cargill is wrong. 
 
My question to the Premier is this.  Mr. Premier, in view of the fact that 
the opposition, the people, and now the chamber of commerce urge you to get 
out of Cargill, would you please tell us whether or not you're going to 
follow that logical advice or continue to bulldoze ahead. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I have with me this morning the front page 
of the paper from Moose Jaw that says that the NDP MLAs give qualified 
support for the fertilizer plant, and the NDP are not here this morning . . 
. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- I raise this for the media, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP 
MLAs in Moose Jaw, support the Cargill fertilizer plant. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this has been going on on that side of the House on 



 

 

almost every issue that you can find in the history of Saskatchewan.  
They'll say one thing in Moose Jaw, they'll say something else outside of 
Moose Jaw.  The NDP support Rafferty in Estevan, but they're against it in 
Regina.  They support the fertilizer project, Mr. Speaker, and say so on 
behalf of their MLAs in Moose Jaw, but the leader stands up in here and 
says he's against it.  He passes a resolution in this House that says the 
federal government should pay $500 million, and then if you talk to the NFU 
(National Farmers Union), he says, no, the provincial government should 
pay. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they're on every side of the issue; one urban, one rural, 
inside and outside.  Mr. Speaker, our position has been consistent. We plan 
to build, process and manufacture, and defend the farmers, Mr. Speaker, in 
Moose Jaw, in Regina, in Estevan, in Saskatoon, rural and urban, all the 
time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, it would be nice if the Premier addressed the 
question, but I guess I'm going to have to give it another try, Mr. 
Speaker, so another try. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the Premier of the province of 
Saskatchewan.  I want the Premier to know that no one opposes 
diversification, no one opposes economic diversification and jobs. No, no 
one does.  Goodness knows, under your administration we need more of it 
with all the people leaving the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- And no one opposes the Cargill coming to the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- That's right, that's right.  Nobody opposes the Cargill 
coming . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The Minister of Finance should control his . 
. . or the Minister of Justice, I ask him to control his enthusiasm.  I'm 
sure the media can hear what's going on. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I was about to say that 
nobody opposes Cargill coming to the province of Saskatchewan.  But I want 
to tell the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan, if Cargill wants to 
come in to Saskatchewan, let them do it with their own money and not ours.  
That's our position. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Yes, just on that point.  Now, Mr. Speaker, my question to 
the Premier is this: how can the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan 
justify a commitment of $370 million for Cargill, nothing for the farmers 
and the small-business people from the province of Saskatchewan who need 
the assistance as much, if not more, given these difficult economic times?  



 

 

Why are you opening up the wallet for Cargill, the largest privately owned 
corporation in the world, and ignoring the Saskatchewan people of this 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, we have now witnessed in this legislature 
a massive retreat by the Leader of the New Democratic Party of 
Saskatchewan.  He's backed right off.  His NDP MLAs in Moose Jaw support 
the fertilizer project.  And the NDP MLAs in Moose Jaw know that we own 
half and the company owns half; the people of Saskatchewan own half.  And 
he knows it's an equity position, and he's backed off today, Mr. Speaker, 
as the result of the split in their caucus.  We are now going to be asking 
the NDP MLAs in Regina if they're for this project or against it, Mr. 
Speaker, and we're going to take it to them and ask them.  They're going to 
pick them off one at a time. 
 
He's retreated.  He wants Cargill coming in and he knows that it's 50 per 
cent equity, 50 per cent equity on the other side -- not a dime of subsidy, 
Mr. Speaker.  And it was something else to see him retreat today in public.  
Finally he's recognized processing and manufacturing for the province is a 
good idea, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the Premier's response, with the greatest of 
respect to the Premier, is laughable.  This has been the position of the 
NDP straight across the piece.  It's laughable. 
 
And my question to you, Mr. Premier, is this again.  I want you to answer 
to the Legislative Assembly and to the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
If you won't listen to us, if you won't listen to the farmers, if you won't 
listen to small-business people, if you won't listen to the wheat pool, all 
of whom oppose this sweetheart deal of Cargill -- if you won't listen to 
all of those people, for goodness sake, why won't you listen to the 
Saskatchewan chamber of commerce which itself, yesterday and today says, 
you should be using that money for farmers and small business.  Why don't 
you do that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member stands in his place 
retreating today, knowing that his members of the legislature support this 
project, the fertilizer project.  He also knows, Mr. Speaker, if you go 
into Prince Albert, the NDP MLAs support Weyerhaeuser.  But they state 
something else outside, Mr. Speaker. 
 
If you go to city council in Prince Albert and if you talk to the NDP MLAs, 
they support the paper mill.  But if you go outside, Mr. Speaker, they 
don't.  If you go to Moose Jaw, the Moose Jaw guys aren't there, they 
support the fertilizer plant.  And then when they raise it here, they say 



 

 

no.  Well, Mr. Speaker, they retreat in their own home towns; they retreat 
in Prince Albert; they retreat in Moose Jaw.  And they know what the truth 
is.  And then the leader stands here and questions every one of them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the same time, at the same time, everybody on that side of 
the House, including all the people that looked at the wheat pool or other 
project people, or those in the chamber of commerce have said, balance the 
budget, Mr. Premier.  Make sure that you increase economic activity.  Mr. 
Speaker, we will. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Premier, I have a new question to the Premier, and this 
is my last question on this topic for this morning.  Mr. Speaker, as you 
have heard -- as a preface to my question -- as you have heard here, the 
Premier has failed to answer the question that I direct about the 
Saskatchewan chamber of commerce, simply has failed to direct this, and he 
accuses us of changing our position. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have in front of me a photocopy of a Saskatoon Star-Phoenix 
newspaper story dated May 4, 1990 where the headline says -- I'm quoting 
from the headline -- "Schmidt promises new strategy."  The PC government is 
about to unveil, according to the story, "A totally new economic strategy."  
And the story says, "Asked what has changed within the province to force a 
new economic strategy, Schmidt replied, the Premier just thought of it a 
few months ago." 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- So it looks as though there is some flip-flopping going on 
all right, but it's not on this side; it's on that side. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Now my question, Mr Premier, to you is simply this: what 
new economic strategy did you just come up with a few months ago?  What 
flip-flop changes in economic strategy did you come up with?  And would you 
be kind enough to say, could we at least be mercifully told that one of the 
changes in economic strategy is that you're going to cut out these 
sweetheart deals with these large multinational corporations and support 
the farmers of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I'll just make the point.  The NDP MLAs in 
Moose Jaw . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, the NDP MLAs in Moose Jaw and Regina and 
in other parts of the province support the fertilizer project, and that's 
on the record now.  And the Leader of the Opposition, then, calls it a 
sweetheart and says that he's against it, but his own MLAs support it, Mr. 



 

 

Speaker, in both cities and across the province. 
 
Then he says, well now he's against community development bonds.  If he 
wants to ask the chamber of commerce if they support community development 
bonds because it means that you don't have to put up with high interest 
rates, you'll find universal support across the province of Saskatchewan 
for community development bonds, led by the chamber of commerce.  The 
president of the chamber of commerce in the province of Saskatchewan last 
night whole-heartedly endorsed us backing away from high interest rates and 
allowing communities to build and diversify using their money and the 
province backing them in guarantees. 
 
Third, I'll point out, Mr. Speaker, it was this administration that 
introduced bonds into this province: Power bonds, TeleBonds -- other kinds 
of investment, Mr. Speaker -- community development bonds.  And he said, 
well for Heaven's sake it's a new idea.  We've been doing it since 1982, 
Mr. Speaker, and the people have appreciated it.  They've put close to $2 
billion into offers in the province of Saskatchewan as a result of Power 
bonds, potash bonds, and other investment instruments that we've designed 
that they didn't have the courage to do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question for the Premier.  If 
this economic strategy is so good, why is it that your minister of economic 
strategy says there's going to be a brand-new one unveiled in a few days, 
if it's so good?  Tell me that. 
 
But my question to the Premier is simply this: in this Star-Phoenix story, 
the minister says in the story, he says: "The new strategy which the 
Premier would announce on an appointed date," as Schmidt said -- and 
apparently has been just thought up of a few months ago -- is about to be 
announced. 
 
Can you tell the House what date this new strategy is going to be announced 
and whether it unveils all of the old strategy, which is so successful, 
which you've been defending.  Would you be kind enough to tell us that. 
 
And also while you're on your feet, Mr. Premier, would you be also kind 
enough to say whether or not you endorse the minister of economic 
strategy's statement that says that those who don't believe in your old 
strategy, the statement that he says, "why don't the cynics just move to 
the Maritimes."  Do you endorse that statement, namely the cynics being the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, now the chamber of commerce, the farmers, and the 
small people.  Is that your solution, they should all move to the 
Maritimes?  Do you endorse that too? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, you know even Allan Blakeney is moving 
back to the province of Saskatchewan.  They're coming back, Mr. Speaker.  
You know and the province knows that the economic development strategy put 
together by our government in terms of processing and manufacturing, and 



 

 

now community development bonds, Mr. Speaker, is one of the most innovative 
strategies that this province has seen and is being endorsed by the chamber 
of commerce all over. 
 
Did you notice, Mr. Speaker, how quick he left Cargill?  Did you know how 
he left it alone?  He backed off Cargill because his NDP MLAs in Regina and 
Moose Jaw now support it. 
 
Then he moved on to bonds and it's supported by the chamber of commerce, 
Mr. Speaker.  And all over Saskatchewan, towns and villages and people are 
interested in and want to see community development bonds to protect their 
towns, to see growth and diversification.  And he laughs, Mr. Speaker.  
Well we'll see.  If the people support the community development bonds then 
the towns and the villages that he's abandoned, Mr. Speaker, will have a 
chance for the future.  That's why it's supported by the chamber of 
commerce, and we're proud to initiate it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Lottery Tax 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I have a question 
for the minister. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I believe that I'd like to ask the members 
to just calm down and allow question period to proceed.  Order.  I believe 
that that applies to everybody.  There's no point of anybody accusing 
another member of doing this or that.  All members just calm down and 
refrain and allow the member for Prince Albert to proceed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my question is to 
the Minister of Finance.  And it has to deal with last year's economic 
strategy regarding the lottery tax -- or perhaps it should go to the former 
minister, since he was the one that led the charge of the brigade of the 
lottery tax. 
 
Mr. Minister, you projected last year a revenue of $26.5 million from the 
lottery tax.  Would you confirm today whether you received -- was it $5 
million? -- how much money you received from it.  Was it $5 million? was it 
$10 million? just how much was it you received in income from the lottery 
tax before you were forced to realize that this really was not a money tree 
for you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- I may have to check this number for the hon. member, 
to be more precise, but it seems to me that the shortfall from our 
projected revenues on the lottery tax, which we obviously abandoned, I 
think the shortfall in revenue for '89-90 fiscal year was something in the 
order of $15 million. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Mr. Speaker, new question to the minister.  Mr. Minister, 
you tell me that you lost $15 million in projected revenue.  Clearly this 



 

 

tax failed as a revenue source.  It also failed the people in culture, 
sport, and recreation, because what it did is it did not live up to the 
projected income for them. 
 
Would you confirm, Mr. Minister, that the revenues to Sask Sport were 
decreased by 18 million last year which resulted in a 20 per cent decrease 
in revenue to 1,200 organizations in culture, sports, and recreation in the 
province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well once again I maybe can't be as precise as the 
minister in charge of Sask Sport could be, but if memory serves me right, 
once again I think for the '89-90 fiscal year, all of the group's funding 
was kept whole and that was because of some surplus that they had in the 
fund.  But I could check that for the hon. member. 
 
In so far as what the picture is most recently, I think the view is that 
there was a fair rebound in sales, and I think if you temper that with the 
fact that generally across western Canada with the economy being a little 
softer, sales didn't meet their predictions of a year ago even in places 
that didn't go for the tax.  So there's a number of factors that have to be 
looked at in doing a reasoned evaluation of where that fund is today. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Final question, Mr. Speaker, to the same minister.  Mr. 
Minister, we have a loss in revenue of $15 million to the treasury.  We 
have a loss to Sask Sport of $18 million.  That's a 20 per cent cut to 
1,200 organizations.  In addition to that they had to use up all of their 
reserves.  Mr. Minister, could you tell me, how much did you pay your PC 
polling firm to give you this good advice? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- As I pointed out, the hon. member is wrong in some of 
his assumptions, Mr. Speaker.  The funding for '89-90, as I understand it, 
was kept whole for all the groups.  Yes, the revenue from that source was 
less than we expected. That was dealt with in last year's budget.  And 
obviously this year, the thrust in this year's budget was outlined and 
tabled roughly a month ago, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we stand behind that thrust, Mr. Speaker, and that thrust, unlike the 
NDP who would vote against that budget, was no tax increases, Mr. Speaker, 
controlling internal government spending, and spending money on the 
important areas of health, education, and agriculture. And we stand behind 
that budget thrust, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Saskatchewan Commission on Directions in Health Care 
 
Ms. Smart: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the Minster of 
Health.  Mr. Minister, emphasizing the importance of home care is one of 
the positive aspects of the Murray commission report on Future Directions 
in health care.  The commission makes a number of recommendations that 
would strengthen our home care system. 
 
Mr. Minister, the opposition, the people involved in the delivery of home 



 

 

care services, and the seniors of this province have all asked you to give 
home care a higher priority, something you have so far refused to do.  Can 
you tell this House if you will now be adopting the recommendations in this 
report? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, as I said to the hon. member's colleague 
the other day, the critic for Health, as we deal with this report and as we 
look at it, rather than get into the very specific recommendations that may 
be adopted or whatever, that we should give some time for those 
organizations to say, you know to give their responses.  And as the member 
here from Saskatoon has noted, some of them have now been coming forward 
with their responses. 
 
I think it's important to note that the first response from the NDP 
opposition was very much a negative response; and now in recent days, as 
the associations are coming out and acknowledging that it's a very 
comprehensive report and that there are some positive things in the report, 
we now have the questions like the one here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, home care without question needs more emphasis.  Home care 
without question received more emphasis in this budget.  Home care this 
year, in this year's budget, received . . . the budget for home care is 
$30.405 million, almost a 10 per cent increase, 9.5 per cent increase over 
last year in some difficult times.  There is no question, though, that home 
care is one of those pressure areas and will continue to be as our ageing 
population dictates to a large degree health care spending into the future. 
 
The commission's recognized that.  I'm thankful that the members of the 
opposition have actually recognized the comprehensive nature of the 
commission's report. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: -- A new question, Mr. Speaker, to the minister.  Mr. Minister, 
the opposition has been talking about the positive value of home care for a 
long time, and you have refused to recognize that. 
 
The amount in your budget for home care did not impress those who deliver 
the service.  I remind you that Kathleen Morpurgo of the Saskatoon home 
care branch said that the budget gives home care even less flexibility than 
last year's budget and represents the same percentage of overall health 
care spending as last year's budget.  Dr. Robert Murray said the commission 
was disappointed that the budget did not put more money into home care. 
 
Mr. Minister, the message is clear.  Home care has been and is underfunded.  
You don't have to review this document for months, Mr. Minister, to take 
the steps necessary.  You just have to show the political will . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I'm going to have to interrupt the hon. 
member and ask her to get to the point of her remarks, the question. 
 



 

 

Ms. Smart: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is very clear.  Does the minister 
have the political will to implement these recommendations now?  Will you 
address the problem of the underfunding of home care? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- My response and the response of the government to the 
commission's report, allowing people to have a chance to put their 
thoughtful responses forward on individual aspects of the report and on the 
wider commission report -- no question, that's true. 
 
I hear the hon. member who it's noted is not asking the health questions as 
it relates to the commission report today, the Health critic -- I hear her 
chirping away over there. 
 
But the interesting point on this, Mr. Speaker, is two days ago the Health 
critic on the opposition side was up condemning the report out of hand.  
That's what happened; that's what she did. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, other members of the opposition will stand and say, 
oh here's a portion that's pretty positive.  We better change our position 
here.  Here's a point that's pretty positive -- adopt it now, and don't 
wait for five minutes.  Adopt it right now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the commission report is comprehensive, as I've said.  They've 
said some very positive things.  They have identified some areas that need 
some attention.  I have acknowledged here and elsewhere that home care is 
one of the areas with significant pressure, and we will be addressing home 
care as time goes on.  And the province of Saskatchewan demands that, and 
they will receive that because of our ageing population, as I've said. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to tell the minister -- this is a new 
question -- I want to tell the minister that I am asking these questions 
because I am the critic for seniors' issues, and it is the seniors of this 
province who are deeply concerned about your underfunding of health care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: -- Mr. Minister, when you people came to government in 1982, you 
chose to sit on a project which had been developed to increase home care 
services across this province, and eight years later you're still sitting 
on that project.  And all over Saskatchewan people are recognizing that 
home care is not getting the kind of attention it deserves from your 
government. 
 
When are you going to stop hiding from this issue and address the urgent 
need for home care services in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- The point should be very clear.  As I said in my former 



 

 

answer, Mr. Speaker, the first position was, scrap it; the next position 
is, maybe there's something we should be adopting here. 
 
Dr. Murray himself said, when he was leading up to the release of the 
report and after the release of the report, said, look at this 
comprehensive report in its entirety, and we owe the people of Saskatchewan 
that very careful look at the whole thing.  And when I say we owe the 
people of Saskatchewan, I mean all of us who are elected here in 
responsible positions, to act responsibly in looking at the whole report. 
 
I say to the hon. member who's asking the questions regarding home care 
once again, home care is a pressure area; there's no question.  Home care 
has received increased funding in this year's budget in anticipation of 
these kinds of things -- 9.5 per cent increase is no small matter. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

National Forest Week and Arbor Day 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I've provided a copy . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Now I'm going to . . . I think hon. members . . . Member 
for Regina Elphinstone.  Could we have the attention of the member for 
Regina Elphinstone.  Now let us once more, as a group, control ourselves as 
members should and allow the Minister of Parks and Renewable Resources to 
proceed.  I think that's only fair. 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- Thank you once again, Mr. Speaker.  I started to say 
that I've provided a copy to this statement to the members opposite before 
question period. 
 
It's a great honour to bring to the attention of the Assembly today that I 
have officially declared the week from May 6 to 12 as National Forest Week 
and Monday, May 7 as Arbor Day, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Together with the Saskatchewan and Canadian forestry associations, 
Saskatchewan Parks and Renewable Resources is acknowledging the special 
week and day to allow Saskatchewan residents the opportunity to recognize 
the importance of forests in their lives. 
 
Arbor Day began more that 100 years ago, Mr. Speaker, as a day for school 
children to clean up their school yards and plant trees.  The celebration 
of Arbor Day has grown over the years and the traditional tree planting has 
come to symbolize our connection with future generations and the need for 
conservation. 
 
To make this point to school children across the province, Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan Parks and Renewable Resources has sent out more than 30,000 
seedlings to students to be planted on Arbor Day.  Mr. Speaker, to plant a 



 

 

tree is to demonstrate our faith in the future and reflects our commitment 
to the next generation.  It's a promise that today's children will inherit 
viable forests and a healthy environment. 
 
Saskatchewan Parks and Renewable Resources started a five-year, 50 million 
reforestation plan in 1988.  I am pleased to report, Mr. Speaker, that we 
are ahead of schedule, and after only two years have already put 23 million 
trees into the ground. 
 
Another exciting initiative, which was just announced today by the minister 
responsible for SaskPower, is a greenhouse at the Shand power station.  The 
greenhouse will use waste heat and carbon dioxide from the plant to enhance 
the growth of as many as 2 million seedlings annually.  An announcement of 
this magnitude just prior to Forest Week and Arbor Day is truly exciting. 
 
The provincial Arbor Day ceremony will be hosted on the south lawn of the 
legislative grounds Monday afternoon starting at 2 p.m., and I would like 
to take this opportunity to invite my colleagues on both sides of the House 
to join in this celebration sometime during the afternoon. 
 
Saskatchewan forests should be revered, Mr. Speaker.  They are an important 
part of our province as they contribute to the environment, offer 
recreation, and provide hundreds of jobs for Saskatchewan residents.  Each 
member of the Legislative Assembly has been provided with a seedling, and I 
urge each and every one of them, Mr. Speaker, to plant the tree as a symbol 
of their commitment to the environment and healthy forests. 
 
During National Forest Week, and particularly Arbor Day, Mr. Speaker, I 
urge the hon. members and all Saskatchewan residents to join with Parks and 
Renewable Resources and the Saskatchewan Forestry Association in 
recognizing the importance of forests to the province.  Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I want to first of all 
thank the minister for sending me a copy of his statement, and I also want 
to thank the minister on behalf of myself and my colleagues over here for 
the seedling.  I believe it's a white spruce seedling.  I want to thank you 
on behalf of my colleagues for that also, Mr. Minister. 
 
And I also want to indicate that this most certainly is an important part 
of Saskatchewan's history, and that is Arbor Day and the planting of trees 
by the school students in this province, and also National Forest Week.  
It's a time to celebrate both of them. 
 
Arbor Day and National Forest Week are becoming more important now, Mr. 
Minister, with the realization that if we are going to have a green planet 
and maintain a green planet, we are going to have to replenish the forest 
in this province.  With that, Mr. Minister, on behalf of myself and my 
colleagues on this side, we want to support the statement that you have 
made this morning.  Thank you very much. 
 



 

 

Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 21 -- An Act to amend The Education Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I move first reading of a 
Bill to amend The Education Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next 
sitting. 
 
Bill No. 22 -- An Act to establish the Saskatchewan Communications Network 
Corporation 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I move first reading of a Bill 
to establish the Saskatchewan Communications Network Corporation. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next 
sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 9 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Housing Corporation Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure to rise to 
speak to this amending Bill, to section 46 of The Saskatchewan Housing 
Corporation Act.  This section of the Act which has been in place since the 
original Act of 1973 is now being used by the federal housing agency, 
Canada Mortgage and Housing, for purposes that it was not initially 
intended.  CMHC (Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation) have directed 
approved lenders with home owner mortgages insured under the National 
Housing Act to obtain personal judgements against borrowers in default in 
addition to foreclosing on the properties. 
 
Section 46 has been given as the enabling legislation to do this.  In 
November of 1989 a court decision regarding the first test case of section 
46 upheld CMHC's position, and supported a very broad interpretation of The 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation's Act by the lender.  Our justice 
officials have advised all lenders and CMHC that the province has launched 
an appeal on the decision on behalf of the home owners effected. 
 
Also, CMHC and lenders have been advised that the government is in the 
process of considering an amendment to section 46.  CMHC has responded to 
our actions by readvising lenders to suspend seeking judgements on 
home-owner loans until the appeal decision is rendered. 
 
Prior to the appeal decision, our government, Mr. Speaker, through this 
amendment is proceeding in a proactive fashion to ensure that no room is 



 

 

left for CMHC to continue on its present course. 
 
By narrowing the application of this section, those families and 
individuals having homes with NHA (National Housing Act) insured mortgages 
will once again be assured of being provided with the debtor protection 
legislation of this province.  In view of this, Mr. Speaker, I expect all 
members to support this amendment.  Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to speak to 
this Bill as the critic for the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation.  All 
members of this House are well acquainted with the economic crisis faced by 
Saskatchewan farmers.  What is frequently ignored, however, is the severe 
economic crunch that is also a daily fact of life for Saskatchewan families 
all across this province. 
 
We see this problem statistically and otherwise in the increasing number of 
business bankruptcies and foreclosure proceedings on businesses, farms, and 
homes.  Often, Mr. Speaker, these situations have arisen due to 
circumstances beyond the control of individual farmers, business people and 
families.  Over the years our province has experienced problems of this 
nature in the past, and the governments of the day have, from time to time, 
taken proactive measures to alleviate hardship, to protect individuals, and 
to protect, maintain, and enhance the economy of this province. 
 
One of these measures, Mr. Speaker, was the passage by the CCF 
(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) of The Limitation of Civil Rights 
Act.  And one of the unique aspect of this legislation has been to protect 
the rights of individuals and protect their financial position in the event 
of foreclosure actions by the banks or other financial institutions.  In 
this instance the relevant section is section 2 of The Limitation of Civil 
Rights Act.  In effect this section places a restriction on the right of 
the mortgagee of a home or other property such that they can only recover 
the unpaid balance through the resale of the mortgaged property.  In other 
words, Mr. Speaker, if the value of the unpaid mortgage is greater than the 
value of the property sold, the mortgagee must accept the loss and cannot 
sue the mortgager for the difference. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there were two exceptions to this.  The first exception was 
The Housing and Special-care Homes Act, and secondly, The Saskatchewan 
Housing (Corporation) Act.  In both of these instances, sections of those 
Acts exempted the protection of The Limitation of Civil Rights Act, because 
under both of these Acts the type of activity that was being undertaken, 
namely the construction of special-care homes, subsidized housing, etc., 
were not projects that would be applicable to the protection afforded under 
The Limitation of Civil Rights Act. 
 
(1045) 
 
This, Mr. Speaker, was the clear intent of these three pieces of 
legislation.  It was clear at the time these Acts were passed by this 
legislature and clear to the lending institutions of the province for 



 

 

years; for years, that is, until your friends, the PC Party in Ottawa, 
decided in the Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation that the home owners 
in Saskatchewan should be responsible, personally responsible, for covering 
the financial institutions' risk and personally responsible indirectly for 
the economic problems in this province. 
 
What happened then, Mr. Speaker, was that after foreclosure action had been 
taken against an individual, and the sale price of the property was less 
than the value of the outstanding mortgage, the CMHC initiated court action 
through various lending institutions to recover the full amount of the 
original mortgage. 
 
This action, Mr. Speaker, was initiated by the Tory friends of the members 
opposite.  And it was an act of capriciousness; it was an action akin to 
usury.  It was an attempt, Mr. Speaker, to squeeze blood from a stone. 
 
The first route they took was through The Housing and Special-care Homes 
Act, section 39, which read that: 
 

 Where a loan is made under the National Housing Act (Canada) or any former 
National Housing Act (Canada) and secured by a mortgage on land in 
Saskatchewan The Limitation of Civil Rights Act . . . shall have no 
application to the mortgage or to the rights and remedies of the mortgagee 
thereunder. 

 
Needless to say, Mr. Speaker, single-dwelling units are not special-care 
homes, and yet action was taken against individuals, based on that 
legislation and specifically section 39. 
 
To correct this injustice, that legislation was amended in August of 1982 
to deal with that issue by adding the words "in respect of a special-care 
home or housing project contemplated by this Act" after the word "loan" in 
section 39. 
 
Obviously, Mr. Speaker, the government opposite did not do a thorough 
review of the statutes when this amendment was presented to the House.  
Because section 46 of The Saskatchewan Housing (Corporation) Act* has, 
until this amendment is passed, almost identical wording to section 39 of 
the special care homes legislation I've already referred to. 
 
The CMHC, the capricious* CMHC under good Tory managers searched the 
statutes, because in the past months proceedings were initiated against 
individuals using section 46 of the Saskatchewan housing Act.  My 
colleagues on this side of House have told me of constituents who did in 
fact pay up.  They didn't know they were protected, or they were not in a 
position to contest the claim of the financial institutions in court. 
 
However, two such matters did go to the courts, and I'm sure the minister 
and officials are aware of those court decisions.  The first case, First 
City Trust* versus Kim and Cindy Bell*, appearing on their own behalf, 
found in favour of First City Trust*.  And that decision is now under 
appeal. 
 



 

 

The second case involved First City Trust* and Woodland Properties*.  In 
this instance, Woodland* argued that the spirit and intent of the 
Saskatchewan housing Act precludes single family dwellings and did not 
waive the rights of individuals under The Limitation of Civil Rights Act* 
in this instance.  The judge agreed, and in doing so argued that the 
decision in the First City Trust* versus the Bell case was in error. 
 
To correct this, we now have the legislation before us today.  I am however 
very disappointed, Mr. Speaker, that the government opposite did nothing to 
correct this misuse of section 46 of the Saskatchewan housing Act* until 
this time. 
 
They could have made representation to CMHC to stop this action; they did 
nothing.  They could have intervened in the courts on behalf of the 
plaintiffs*; they did nothing.  They could have amended this legislation 
last session, indeed in 1982-83 when section 39 of the special-care homes 
legislation* was amended, and they did nothing. 
 
They did nothing, Mr. Speaker, until they had to.  They did nothing to 
protect the interests of Saskatchewan families at a time when they needed 
an advocate.  At a time of economic disaster and crisis these people were 
ignored.  It's a shameful record, Mr. Speaker, and it is a well-known 
record.  And in the face of this, they did not even make this amendment 
retroactive to redress the injustices that have been pursued by their 
Ottawa buddies. 
 
The amendment before us, Mr. Speaker, does deal with the problem at hand.  
It will, we are satisfied, prevent this type of action by CMHC and other 
financial institutions in the future.  For that reason we will be 
supporting this Bill.  We do so, however, regretful of the nature of the 
failure of the members opposite to act more quickly on this matter and 
their failure to make this action retroactive.  I will have questions 
regarding this legislation in Committee of the Whole, Mr. Speaker, but I 
adjourn the debate today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Education 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 5 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, last night we didn't 
make as much progress as I had hoped we would, but I think it was 
worthwhile spending as much time as we did on SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute 
of Applied Science and Technology) and the new concept that you people 
implemented in 1987 on SIAST.  And I suppose we can debate it, as they say 
out on the farm, until the cows come home, and we'll continue to disagree.  



 

 

But I don't think there's any doubt at all in my mind and the minds of many 
people that that was a retrograde step and that we will be suffering from 
that decision that your government made for many, many years to come.  It 
will not, as the minister indicated last night, well, now that the kinks 
are out . . . I'll tell you, Mr. Minister, there are lots of kinks left in 
that decision that you made and the repercussions of that decision. 
 
And I do hope for the sake of education that we will be able to address 
that problem.  And if it's not your government, then certainly our 
government after the next election, we will address that problem.  And that 
does not mean that we will go back to what there was before because I do 
think, as the minister indicated last night, we did need some changes to 
address the problems of the 21st century. 
 
But having said that, those changes certainly can be made without the dire 
repercussions that happened because of the process that you people used 
with very little consideration given to what happened to the staff that 
were so drastically affected, and in many instances, Mr. Minister, as I 
indicated last night, I think where their future was shattered after having 
served this province and having served education for a good number of 
years.  And, that is something that I think is unforgivable of a government 
and of the former minister of Education and I certainly want to put that on 
the record. 
 
Mr. Minister, I did ask last night . . . I want to finish off on SIAST for 
today and then go into another area.  That doesn't mean we're finished with 
SIAST, but for today at least, I want to address another problem. 
 
Mr. Minister, I did ask last night something on the  
 Dcalendar, and I was hoping that maybe you would have an opportunity 
overnight to look at that and see if it's . . . It's not a major issue but 
it's an irritant, and I think to satisfy some of the people out there who 
drew that to my attention, I would appreciate very much if you could give 
me an answer this morning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the question was dealing with 
advertising that was being done in the calendar by the private vocational 
schools.  The production of the extension calendar is the continuation of a 
long-standing tradition in Saskatoon going back to the days of the 
community college. 
 
The calendar is part of the adult education brokerage function provided by 
Kelsey campus for the residents of Saskatoon and it provides a one-stop 
shopping service for adults interested in continuing their education.  It 
reduces duplication efforts on the part of different agencies and confusion 
adults frequently feel when attempting to identify programs to meet their 
needs. 
 
I would also point out that since this is advertising, there is money 
coming into Kelsey in that regard.  Private vocational schools advertise as 
well as place course description within the calendar.  They do so on a 
fee-for-service basis.  In putting the calendar together, Kelsey campus 
officials meet with private vocational school operators to discuss the 



 

 

program offerings that will be made available. 
 
This provides an opportunity to identify areas where duplication of program 
effort can be avoided or where a private vocational school should offer a 
program because it does not exist at Kelsey; for example, business and 
secretarial studies. 
 
The calendar provides a common meeting ground for all deliverers of adult 
education services in Saskatoon.  As such it provides an effective vehicle 
for communication amongst agencies, reduces duplication of efforts, and 
reduces confusion on the part of the adults hunting for programs. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I'm fully aware of the history 
of the calendar, and I have no objection to the production of the calendar.  
In fact it was a very useful tool in the high schools when I was in - 
_ as I indicated last night -- in a counselling situation.  We all looked 
forward to the calendar when it came out.  That was not my concern. 
 
My concern of course was that any private vocational schools that are 
advertised in the calendar, if they are contained in here, the danger is 
that people will accept that as being given the approval of the Department 
of Education.  And I would hope that in the future, and we may address that 
problem when you put in your stricter regulations, that problem may be then 
addressed. 
 
There is a problem, Mr. Minister, when the classes are advertised and then 
the students find out that, number one, the private vocational school that 
is offering that particular course is not providing qualified staff.  And I 
will point that out this morning in our discussions on estimates.  That was 
my concern last night.  I have no concern over the calendar being printed.  
In fact I think it's money worth spent. 
 
I hope that as we address the problems in private vocational schools 
through stricter regulations, that when classes are advertised for private 
vocational schools, the Department of Education will make certain that when 
students then register for those schools, although they don't have tacit 
approval, those programs by the Department of Education, I do hope that we 
look at those programs and say yes, they meet our standards and we wouldn't 
worry if students register into those classes.  Can I get that assurance 
from you that that will happen in the future? 
 
(1100) 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, to follow up on my previous answer 
with regard to the advertising, I would just point out to the member 
opposite that the dollars gained from the advertising that the private 
vocational schools do, more than offsets the cost of the calendar, so that 
of course is good for Kelsey. 
 
I would also point out that Kelsey also receives some 10 to $15,000 from 
private vocational schools for registration.  Again this is something done 
on a fee for service. 
 



 

 

Now I understand your concern about the programs, and obviously that's a 
concern that we have have had and the reason why we are going to address 
that in new regulations.  But I would point out as well that the programs 
are approved by the Department of Education, the staff have been approved 
by the Department of Education in the private vocational school. But what 
we have to ensure is that the quality is there, the quality of the program. 
 
So we feel quite comfortable, and I would feel quite optimistic that you 
will also feel more comfortable when you see the new regulations, that in 
fact we are going to address those problems and that when students see that 
there are courses being offered in the private vocational schools, that 
they can feel that they are going to have quality staff, there'll be 
quality programs that will in fact lead them to employment down the road. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Chairman, that's what frightens me, Mr. Minister.  If 
you would qualify your statement by saying look, in the future we are going 
to guarantee through stringent regulations that this will happen, if you 
say to me, Mr. Minister, that you have been doing this, then I have some 
real fears.  As I will point out later on this morning on private 
vocational schools, if your department has gone in and has examined the 
curriculum and has okayed the qualification of those staff members, and 
you're going to say you're going to continue to do that in the future but 
under more stricter regulations, then I have a very serious concern.  And I 
hope you didn't mean that, by saying that we're doing it. 
 
What you have been doing hasn't worked in many instances.  That is the 
problem. And what we need, what we need are stricter regulations. And 
hopefully we can address the problems that presently exist.  Mr. Minister, 
I don't want to get into that right now; I will address that problem very 
shortly.  I want to finish off with SIAST this morning before I get into 
private vocational schools. 
 
Again I want to reiterate, Mr. Minister, good, if you can make some money 
on advertising; that was not the problem that I was addressing.  I was 
addressing the problem of classes being advertised in this calendar, and my 
problem simply to you was make certain that when they advertise classes in 
here that they meet the standards, the academic standards that you expect 
not only of Kelsey, but also of private vocational schools.  That was the 
concern that I had, and I will leave it at that, Mr. Minister. 
 
I want to, Mr. Minister, ask you some, very quickly, a few questions on the 
board of directors of SIAST.  And these can be answered, I think, very 
quickly.  Can you tell me from your 1989 annual report of SIAST, how many 
of the board members that are on the inside cover are no longer -- I think 
that's the shorter route to go -- are no longer members of the board? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- There are four people there, Mr. Chairman, who are 
no longer on the board: John Cross, Elizabeth Crosthwaite, Eva Lee, and Ray 
Meyer. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, am I given to understand that Mr. Fisher is 
still part of the board? 
 



 

 

An Hon. Member: -- No, he isn't. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- I didn't think so. 
 
Mr. Chairman, would you tell me, Mr. Minister, what were the reasons for 
these people . . . there probably were a number of reasons.  I know Ms. 
Crosthwaite, Elizabeth Crosthwaite, because she's no longer with your 
department, that probably would be the reason why she is no longer on the 
board.  But can you tell me the reasons why John Cross or Ray Meyer or Mr. 
Fisher, why they are no longer on the board.  Were they asked to leave?  
And while you're also doing that, can you tell me, have these people been 
replaced?  And if they have, who are the new members of the board? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, John Cross was only on the board for 
the initial start-up period of it, and then a term was completed; he's 
moved on.  He's very busy within his own company of Philom Bios. 
 
Elizabeth Crosthwaite, as you know, is no longer with the department.  
Dennis Fisher resigned because of pressure of his work duties, as I 
understand it.  Eva Lee, as you know, is no longer with the organization.  
Ray Meyer as well resigned, is no longer with the organization. 
 
As far as the replacements, I can tell you that replaced on that board, 
Robert Wilson from Saskatoon, who was an employee at SIAST for many, many 
years, now with the corrections branch in adult education.  Second one is 
Ken Stevenson from Saskatoon, a lawyer.  It was felt that they wanted a 
legal person on the board, and Ken is the other replacement. 
 
We do have a couple of other changes that will be taking place with regard 
to students.  Ian Boire has resigned, I'm not sure whether he's completed 
his studies now or not in that position. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Ian? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Ian Boire, B-o-i-r-e.  He was from Wascana campus.  
I'm not sure if he's finished his course now, but he has resigned and 
another student will be coming on very shortly, and we'll be announcing 
those before very long. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, I want to ask a few questions about the 
administrative structure of SIAST.  Can you tell me . . . as I indicated 
last night, there were a number of changes made over the past two or three 
years.  In fact I believe about five dramatic changes were made in the 
administration.  And that was one of the problems that the administration 
had because they would just get going in one direction and then somebody 
would decide no, that's not the direction we want to go; we want to change 
it. 
 
Can you tell me, am I correct in saying that the present set-up is 
something of the following.  On the top, of course, we have the minister 
who ultimately has to accept responsibility.  Then we have the board 
directly underneath the minister.  Then the president and executive 
vice-president.  And under the executive vice-president we have three 



 

 

vice-presidents or vice-principals -- I'm not sure if you call them 
vice-presidents or vice-principals. 
 
Is that basically the set-up of SIAST administrative branch, or has that 
changed again? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, that's the make-up of the 
administration as I understand it.  However I would point out that the 
position of president is vacant at the present time.  I think that that 
search is going on fairly soon.  I would think they'll be advertising in 
this week's paper.  That was my understanding. 
 
Bryan Dunleavy is the acting president.  He is an executive vice-president.  
Harold Braun is the vice-president of finance and administration; and Wilf 
Hiebert is the vice-president of human resources.  Chris LaFontaine is the 
vice-president of native services division.  So there are those three 
vice-presidents.  Now there is another vice-president of programming, but 
that position is vacant at the present time.  That's the position that was 
held by Sharon Maher. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- So there are four vice-presidents. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Four vice-presidents; one position is vacant.  And 
Sharon resigned for health reasons, as you probably know. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Chairman, no, I did not know that.  I knew that she had 
left but I didn't know the reasons for it.  Mr. Minister, I did not get the 
fourth vice-president of . . . I've got the vice-president of program, 
human resources, and finance and administration.  Would you give me the 
fourth one again and the individual involved? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- The fourth position was Christopher LaFontaine.  He 
has the status of a vice-president at the native services division.  Now he 
is not in that position full time because he is also the head of the 
Gabriel Dumont Institute. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, would you mind telling me in the last . . . 
ever since its inception, how many people, different people have held the 
human resources vice-president's job, and who were they? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, there have been three people.  We 
don't have the name of the first one.  I think the member opposite can 
recognize that most of us are new with this.  We can get that for you.  
Then the second person was one Mike Roberts, and now Wilf Hiebert is in 
that position. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- All right, Mr. Minister, if you can provide the other name 
for me I would appreciate that.  Mr. Minister, I'm going to leave this area 
for now because I want to get into some other area this morning.  But 
certainly this will not be the end of the discussion of SIAST.  I believe 
in these estimates there are many other areas that I still want to cover. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to now turn to an area that has been of considerable 



 

 

concern to the opposition over the last three years.  Our concern was first 
expressed I believe by the member from Prince Albert back in 1987 to the 
then minister of Education, the Hon. Lorne Hepworth, and that was private 
vocational schools. 
 
And I want to say from the outset, and I know I will sound somewhat 
critical and it is intended to be critical, and that is that the pace at 
which you people have addressed the problem of private vocational schools 
has been simply, I guess to say it mildly, has been a terrible response, 
has been a neglect of duty, has been simply a neglect to protect the people 
out in urban and rural Saskatchewan. 
 
There are not only a few, Mr. Minister; there are simply hundreds of 
people, as I will indicate to you this morning, who have suffered because 
you people would not address that problem of private vocational schools. 
 
In 1982, as you know, I believe we had 18 private vocational schools with 
attendance of about 1,800.  Basically it was the Saskatoon Business College 
and Robertson that were providing . . . and there were some hairdressing 
schools who were giving cosmetology, but basically that was it. 
 
I have no objection, Mr. Minister, to the increase of private vocational 
schools if they meet certain regulations.  But I would like to indicate to 
you my preference however is that where possible and where feasible, 
programs that can be, should be offered in public institutions.  We did I 
think an excellent job in the past and Saskatchewan's had an excellent 
record.  And I think that what has happened since 1982 and since 1987 
particularly, has been nothing less than scandalous in this province, 
nothing less than scandalous. 
 
(1115) 
 
And not only did the students suffer, Mr. Minister, but the people of 
Saskatchewan paid very dearly for that.  It is not just a few millions of 
dollars that the people of Saskatchewan have paid.  I estimate, Mr. 
Minister, that, I think -- and I'll use the term, rather conservative, in 
my estimation -- that we probably have poured down the drain somewhere in 
the neighbourhood of $50 million to private vocational schools where 
courses simply did not meet the standards. 
 
The certificates that those students have received have been useless.  They 
have not been accepted by the industry out there.  And, Mr. Minister, the 
quality of the program that had been offered is to say the least, horrible, 
just simply unacceptable.  And you have done very little to try and address 
that problem. 
 
Mr. Minister, I did have a look, and I appreciate you giving to me the 
interim report of your committee on regulations.  I've gone through it.  
There are some good suggestions in it.  I'm going to make some other 
recommendations and I hope you take them in the light in which I will give 
them to you.  But I do want to say, Mr. Minister, that your committee, who 
I believe from the interim report have indicated that over the time that 
they have been appointed have had only six meetings -- have had only six 



 

 

meetings. 
 
I believe, Mr. Minister, that had you said to the committee, I want an 
interim report very quickly because we have a very serious problem out 
there.  They could have addressed that problem very quickly had they turned 
to Alberta or turned to Manitoba, who addressed this problem a few years 
ago. 
 
I have a copy of the regulations that have been put into effect in Alberta 
and I think they meet pretty well the bill that we on this side have said 
you should implement for private vocational schools.  So I think had you 
been concerned or had you addressed the problem, as we indicated you 
should, you could have put something into effect very quickly to protect 
those people out there.  But you refused to do so. 
 
I still hear you say, Mr. Minister, I still hear you say that many of the 
schools that provide private vocational courses are doing a good job.  I 
would like you to tell me this morning, other than the Saskatoon Business 
College which has a very good reputation, and the owner of that school is 
very concerned, very concerned about what is going on in the province, is 
very concerned about his reputation being damaged and his school's 
reputation being damaged by what has happened in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I would like you to tell me this morning what other schools, with very 
few reservations that you may have, that you would recommend to young 
people.  Would you recommend Robertson?  Would you recommend Universal?  
Would you recommend CompuCollege?  Would you have recommended a year ago 
Bridge City?  Would you recommend the security one on Broadway in 
Saskatoon?  Would you have recommended the Bible school that you had to 
close down?  Yet I hear you say, Mr. Minister, time and time again, that on 
the whole, private vocational schools are offering quality programs here in 
this province. 
 
And I want to know from you, Mr. Minister, now what are those colleges, 
those private vocational schools, which ones would you recommend to those 
students out there who don't know whether or not they offer quality 
education.  They have to take your word for it, and when you say that many 
of them are good, which ones would you recommend to them, Mr. Minister, 
since you are the minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the member opposite has raised 
a lot of different questions that I would like to respond to.  Now he 
commented about the fact that there were only 18 private vocational schools 
in 1982 and some 59 today.  And the reason for the increase of course is 
due to the changing times that we're in.  When we recognize, and he'll know 
this as a former guidance counsellor, where it suggested that within the 
next 10 years that many of the jobs that we see today are not going to be 
in existence, 10 years from now.  Some 50 per cent of the jobs at that time 
could be brand-new jobs. 
 
Now the problem that we have is: how are people going to become prepared 
for those jobs?  There's going to have to obviously be a lot of retraining 
that takes place.  And the role of private vocational schools today has 



 

 

changed.  It's changing all the time, as is the role of our SIAST campuses.  
We have to be ready to meet the change.  We have to be there to address the 
needs of adults who need this retraining, and you will find, I am sure, 
that in most cases that the private vocational schools can respond very 
quickly to changes in the market-place when we have demands for different 
types of services.  They can change and respond much faster than SIAST can.  
When SIAST has its programs in place, it might take several months before 
they can bring about a change in their curriculum. 
 
So for the most part, the private vocational schools are meeting that need.  
We also have to consider the fact that they offer, for the most part, 
short-term training, which can meet specific needs.  And you talk about 
concerns that are out there, I recognize and I know of concerns that have 
been raised.  And you want me to list off those that I would recommend, 
well it's not my policy or the policy of the department, certainly, to 
recommend any particular institution.  We don't recommend that to students. 
 
But let's keep in mind the fact that other than a few where we have had 
concerns raised, the balance of them, for the most part, are offering good 
programs, good programs.  I can tell you that Bridge City is one that was 
not meeting all of the conditions, and you know what happened to Bridge 
City.  We also know that there were concerns about CompuCollege and they 
are being addressed.  But at the same time any complaint or concern that is 
raised with the department is investigated. 
 
You want to have an idea of the number of concerns, and I would suggest to 
the member that you go and visit more of these private vocational schools, 
talk to more of the students, talk to employers that are employing them.  
And you made a comment here the other night too that I'll get to in a 
minute.  Go and talk to the employers that are hiring these people.  If 
these colleges are being approved by the department, and the programs are 
being approved, the certificates then are valid when they complete those 
courses. 
 
Now there can be any number of reasons why an employer doesn't always hire 
people that go out.  Just because they have a certificate in their hand 
doesn't mean they're going to get employed.  Goodness knows, again, from 
your background in education, and whether you've been involved in hiring 
teachers or not, but you can have many teachers that will come out and can 
have equivalent qualifications with regard to experience and university 
degrees or whatever, but there are some that you probably wouldn't hire 
ahead of others.  And the same thing can apply with people coming out of 
these private vocational schools.  So just having the certificate doesn't 
guarantee that they are necessarily going to get a job.  There are a lot of 
other things that you take into consideration. 
 
Now let's take a look then at the number of concerns, and you mentioned the 
other day about a group of students that had met with you.  Now I never 
heard from that group of students about a meeting . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well that is not accurate at all.  So the member from 
Saskatoon Centre sits back there chirping from her seat and saying things 
that are just not true at all. 
 



 

 

We have responded to all of the calls . . . concerns that have come in, and 
I am quite happy to meet with those students.  I told you when you brought 
this to my attention, I would be happy to meet with them, but I never heard 
from those students. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- I wrote you a letter. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well I haven't seen it. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Hand-delivered to your office. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- You did not have the students get in touch with me 
direct then about having a meeting with them.  So I would be quite happy to 
meet with them . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well you show me the 
copy of it. 
 
The second thing: I indicated to you that any concerns or complaints that 
are raised by students or by others are investigated by the department.  
And let me give you an idea of the type of complaint that we have had so 
far.  There have been in the last -- I'm not sure of a time on this; I 
would think over the last year, past program year -- types of complaints:  
school not registered -- there were three individual complaints that were 
received; misrepresentation - 
_ 21 individual, three group; credits, exams, marks, schedule, concerns 
that were raised by individuals -- there were 24 concerns raised there; 
unprofessional conduct -- five individual; fee payment, refunds -- 31 
individuals; quality of training -- 31 individual and three group. 
 
And I know that we've got some things there that certainly need to be 
addressed and they will be addressed in the new regulations that are coming 
out. 
 
But when you consider the number of students that are going to these 
private vocational schools, I would suggest to you that the number of 
complaints that we have had have been minimal.  But anyway, all of those 
complaints that have been received have been followed up on.  For 1988 we 
had 11 group complaints, 61 individual.  For 1989 we had six group and 115 
individual.  And eight comprehensive evaluations have been conducted, which 
included the complete review in different areas -- quality of instruction, 
health and safety, employment potential, curriculum, advertisement and the 
general student satisfaction. 
 
Four schools have had their registration restricted due to the results of a 
school evaluation and student complaints. 
 
So they are followed up by the department as quickly as possible.  Now you 
say well it takes a long period of time.  Well let me just tell you a 
little bit about a college like . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Three years. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: --  Well three years.  We're dealing with a pretty 
complex situation here and I don't think that if you look back on your own 



 

 

record that you would have developed some of these things any faster. 
 
There is a procedure then that is followed when a concern comes in and how 
complaints are addressed.  All concerns or complaints are to be considered 
serious and require documentation and some form of follow-up.  Now 
sometimes it's pretty difficult to track these students down.  They might 
put forward a complaint and then to try and follow up and get more 
information from them is sometimes very difficult. 
 
Concerns may be expressed to the department in many different forms, by 
telephone, by letter, in person, or a second person who passes it on, such 
as an MLA.  The department procedure is as follows.  Initial contact is 
made by the student at which time a request is made by the department to 
have all concerns documented and submitted.  You have to keep in mind here 
that there are certain procedures that have to be followed because of the 
legality of some of these issues. 
 
A follow-up is conducted if documentation is not received within one week, 
reasons determined.  Upon receipt of the documented concerns, the school 
principal is contacted verbally or in writing.  A written response is 
requested.  Upon receipt of the school's response, review and discussion of 
concerns with school officials is conducted during an on-site visit. 
 
And the fifth one, recommendations or solutions are determined, and parties 
involved are notified of their participation.  So that's the procedure that 
is followed whenever a complaint or concern is sent into the department by 
whatever means. 
 
So we are concerned about the students.  We are concerned about the 
problems that they sometimes encounter.  You're right, a good deal of money 
is going into these private vocational schools through student loans, some 
of which is Saskatchewan student loan money, and some comes from the 
federal student loan program. 
 
(1130) 
 
It's still meeting a need out there, and those people who are causing 
problems and are not following regulations, we are clamping down on them.  
And we have some pretty stringent procedures that are being followed right 
now with some of them in the province.  So we're trying to address the 
problem, and the new regulations I think will go a long ways to doing more 
in that regard. 
 
Mr. Muller: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd ask leave of the House to introduce some 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Muller: -- I'd like to introduce a group of students from Midale, from 
the Premier's seat.  They're grade 4 and 5 students; there's 24 of them.  
Their teacher is Anne Field, Beryl DeBruyne; chaperons and bus driver, 



 

 

Sandra Holman and Norma Rosengren. 
 
I would ask all members to welcome these students to the legislature in 
their normal fashion and I hope they enjoy their trip into Regina.  I hope 
they enjoyed their tour of the legislature and I hope they have a pleasant 
journey home.  I'll be meeting later with them, right after they leave the 
gallery. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Education 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 5 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Member from Saskatoon Sutherland . . . no, Saskatoon 
South.  You've changed seats on me, sir. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- It's much easier to . . . it doesn't take as long for the 
minister's response to come over here than it would over there.  It's 
taking long enough, so we're trying to save some time here. 
 
Mr. Minister, I do take very, very grave exception to your statement that I 
may have misled the House here in saying that you did not respond.  I spoke 
to you verbally; I take this very seriously.  I spoke to you verbally and I 
said that I would write you a letter, which I did that very day.  I went to 
my office; I wrote a letter.  I asked my secretary to take it to your 
office because I wanted you to be aware of it immediately.  I'd signed it; 
she delivered it to your office.  The letter that I wrote to you was on 
March 27, 1990 and it says the following: 
 

 Dear Mr. Meiklejohn:  On March 24 I met with about 17 students who are/had 
been attending a private vocational school.  They requested to meet with 
me because they were very concerned about the quality of education that 
they were receiving. 

 
 Some of these students had received a certificate from another private 

school.  When they went into the market place they found out the business 
industry gave very little value to these certificates (they had received). 

 
 According to the students, businesses know that the standard of education 

provided by many of the private schools is considerably inferior to that 
offered by public educational institutions. 

 
 The students suggested that the entrance requirements must be strengthened 

and improved.  They were very critical of the qualifications of the staff, 
and recommended that the staff should have degrees in the subject area 
that they teach. 

 
 The students were of the opinion that if the entrance requirements were 



 

 

improved, and the staff qualifications were raised, then the certificates 
issued by the schools would have more validity with the business industry. 

 
I thought it a pretty good recommendation.  I went on to say: 
 

 The students also were concerned about the student debt load that they 
have inherited.  With certificates that are virtually worthless and very 
few prospects of jobs, they are very pessimistic about their future. 

 
 The students have requested through me (and I want you to note that) . . . 

The students have requested through me to set up a meeting with you to 
discuss their future, their student loan obligations, and their concerns 
about private vocational schools. 

 
 The students would like to meet in Saskatoon at your earliest convenient 

time. 
 
 I would appreciate a quick response so that I can communicate your 

decision to the students. 
 

This is sincerely signed by myself and that was sent to you on March 27.  
Today, Mr. Minister, we have May 4.  I have not heard from your office.  
And, Mr. Minister, I am certain, and I will check again with my secretary 
who's been around for many years.  And she told me that that letter was 
delivered and she personally took it up to your office.  Now you said you 
did not receive it, and I am surprised at that.  I will ask her again on 
Monday whether or not that letter was delivered, and I'm sure it was, as I 
know Betty and Betty's been around a long time.  And when Betty says she 
does something, she does it. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Give me another copy. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- I certainly will.  But Mr. Minister, I take exception to the 
statement that you made that I don't deliver on my word, because I usually 
do and I don't . . . I take exception to that. 
 
Mr. Minister, I do want to say that you had indicated yes, that there have 
been a number of increases in private schools.  Mr. Minister, it has 
absolutely nothing to do with change.  You know, if you had taken any 
philosophy classes - 
_ and maybe you have -- Aristotle talked about change, and Aristotle by his 
theory of change proved that there was a first mover. 
 
You know, change has been around a long, long time.  And don't talk to me 
about, you know, you have to have these private vocational schools because 
of change.  That is nonsense.  What happened, Mr. Minister, is that your 
government went on the kick of privatization.  And you couldn't do it fast 
enough to get rid of these public courses or the courses that were offered 
in public institutions and to get them into the private schools.  You 
couldn't do it fast enough. 
 
Consequently you had no regulations in place; you didn't have the staff in 
place to supervise these schools.  And what has happened is that yes, you 



 

 

have poured down the drain millions and millions of dollars of public funds 
through student loans that you have made available. 
 
And not only, Mr. Minister, in the year 1988-89 did you give $25 million, 
by your own statement that you gave to me, you made $25 million of student 
loans available through Saskatchewan student loan and the Canada student 
loan, and many of these, many of these have gone to students who attended 
these questionable private schools where these questionable programs have 
been offered, who were issued certificates that were and are worthless. 
 
Mr. Minister, when the students tell me it's not . . . You said before, 
well the member opposite, surely in his education he may have hired some 
teachers.  Yes, I hired teachers.  What I did look at was the certificate. 
And if they had a certificate from the Department of Education in 
Saskatchewan, I knew what standards they had to meet to get that 
certificate. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, if that certificate had been offered by the Department 
of Education of Saskatchewan, and then I in my own mind said that's a 
worthless certificate, I wouldn't even look at it.  I wouldn't even let the 
individual into my office to hire the individual. 
 
And that's what's happening.  When students contact the business people out 
there and say I have a certificate from such-and-such a private school, 
they don't even get a chance to be interviewed because the businesses are 
saying that's a worthless certificate; we don't recognize it.  And that's 
the point that you were missing, that there are thousands of students out 
there who have certificates from these private schools but they can't even 
get into the door of the business.  Not only are there students in debt to 
the tune of 10, 15, or $16,000, but the public is out that money, as you 
will find out, or as we will find out when we're on that side, in two or 
three years hence when those loans are defaulted upon. 
 
There are a number of students out there who simply cannot pay back their 
student loans because the certificates that they have received simply 
aren't worth the paper they are written on.  So, Mr. Minister, that is the 
point that I was attempting to make, that they may as well not issue any 
certificate at all. 
 
Mr. Minister, I do want to get into another area.  But before I do so, I 
would like you to comment on that.  What should students do when business 
laughs at the certificate they have, when business simply don't recognize 
the certificate they have?  What should the student do?  No jobs, some of 
them now on minimum wage, as I will refer to a little later this morning, 
and you're hassling them now through collection agencies to pay those loans 
back.  Certificate is of absolutely no value to them at all. 
 
Many of the students, Mr. Minister, who have taken courses, yes, they have 
employment, but in an entirely different area, not related at all to the 
program that they took because that program didn't mean a thing.  The 
certificate is useless. 
 
What is your response to those students when business simply laugh at the 



 

 

certificate they have, they don't even want the certificate.  And secondly, 
Mr. Minister, would you reconsider, since you're the one who has been 
constantly saying, and again saying this morning, that there are many 
private vocational schools out there that are doing a good job. 
 
Would you tell the students at least, would you warn them, as the Minister 
of Education, which schools they should avoid and which schools are 
acceptable, because right now nobody knows, nobody knows whether its 
worthwhile.  I mean, they come to me and say, well should I take 
such-and-such a course in such-and-such a private vocational school? 
 
Many instances from my experience I say to them, no, don't.  Save your 
money, because the course that is being offered and the certificate that 
will be issued to you will be worthless.  I don't hesitate to tell them, 
because I'm not going to let those students be victimized, I'm not going to 
let those students be ripped-off by some of these fly-by-nighters who you 
endorse because you do license them. 
 
And I want ask you, Mr. Minister, to comment on some of those things that I 
have put forward this morning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the member is rambling a fair 
bit, and I think he likes to generalize.  I would ask the member opposite . 
. . and we hear a lot of chirping from the member from Saskatoon Centre 
talking about these bad schools, I would ask them to point out some of 
these colleges that have provided certificates to the students upon 
graduation that are not accepted by employers.  I'd like you to do that. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Bridge City. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well Bridge City's not in operation any more 
either. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- It was, and it issued many certificates. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Bridge City's not in operation any longer.  But you 
talk about, like there's a whole bunch of these that give out certificates 
that are not valid.  You give me examples of those because we don't have 
examples of those at all. 
 
Now let me tell you something else.  This is the member who's opposed to 
change; he's opposed to change quite clearly.  I mean, when he starts 
talking about Aristotle for example, I mean surely to goodness, times are 
changing a lot more rapidly today than they ever have been in the past, 
even when that government was in power. 
 
Let's look at something else, Mr. Chairman.  The member opposite talks 
about regulations and the need to do something, do something a lot quicker.  
Where do the regulations come from that we're in the process of amending 
right now?  Where do they come from?  Well I can tell you where they came 
from, Mr. Chairman.  They're the regulations that that party put in when 
they were in power back in the'70s.  Those are the same regulations that 
have been followed all through the years and will be now, up until this 



 

 

summer when we are making changes in them.  So you're the one that brought 
in the regulations. 
 
They were all right for you to use but they're not all right for us.  I 
mean it's part of this double standard that you use in here so often.  It's 
okay if the NDP did it but it's not good if the PCs are doing it today.  So 
those are the regulations that we are changing today, Mr. Chairman.  So 
let's just keep that in mind. 
 
But I look forward to getting a list from you as to some of the 
certificates that have been provided to students upon graduation that are 
not accepted by employers.  And you know as well that on the committee 
that's been looking at the regulations, that there are employers involved 
on that committee. 
 
You also know that in the past that we have consultation with certain 
industries, and I would give you an example on a change that's brought 
about.  The travel counsellor certificates, there were concerns in that 
particular area.  And as of September 1, new changes were put in, changes 
that are accepted by the industry as a result of consultations with the 
industry and also some changes to the curriculum that were done with the 
travel association. 
 
Now that type of communication I think is very, very important, and we have 
to ensure that that takes place in other areas as well, in the same way 
that there are advisory committees with regard to SIAST and some of the 
other post-secondary programs that we have in the province. 
 
(1145) 
 
Now I would also suggest to the member opposite, Mr. Chairman, that the 
quality of program is something that is addressed by the department.  It's 
the department that approves curriculum upon reviewing it.  The individual 
instructional staff of course have to be approved, student contracts, and 
facilities -- all of those things have to be approved.  And the same 
regulations are being followed up until now that were followed when the NDP 
were in power. 
 
So for the member to stand up and suggest that there are many, many of 
these certificates are worthless, is just not accurate at all unless he can 
show me otherwise. 
 
We know that there have been some problems within CompuCollege, and those 
problems are being addressed right now with the department officials.  Some 
changes have been suggested to them . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
No, they didn't.  They have been working on this since the first part of 
March, since the first part of March.  There have been a lot of good 
programs offered there and students that have come out of there that have 
gone on to some very, very good jobs, I could suggest. 
 
So it is something that we are going to address with our new regulations, 
and they will be out very shortly. 
 



 

 

When the member talks about student loans and money that's going to the 
private vocational schools, I would suggest that we don't put any direct 
funding into the private vocational schools.  And the member probably 
understands that; it's all through the form of student loans.  And when 
students qualify and if the department has approved the programs and the 
staff, and the student qualifies, is there any reason why those particular 
students should be denied the right to go on and continue their education? 
 
So there is a lot of money, I know, that's being spent by students at 
private vocational schools, but there are obviously needs that are being 
met, offerings that they feel they can benefit from.  Maybe they can't 
afford the time to go and take the longer courses that are being offered at 
SIAST or going to university.  So if there are concerns then that you have 
further, I think that we have to always be aware of that, and I welcome you 
passing them on. 
 
Again, I think a comment that I made earlier, and you made mention about 
hiring teachers and the certificate that they might have or the degree that 
they might have doesn't always guarantee them a job.  It doesn't always 
guarantee them what they want.  I mean we have other reasons sometimes why 
employers will not hire a student coming out with a certificate from a 
private vocational school.  There are other reasons.  It may have 
absolutely nothing to do with the certificate that they've got.  It could 
be to do with something else.  So you've got to keep all of those things in 
mind as well. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, or no, I'd better not.  Mr. Minister, I'm 
getting a little bit impatient with you deflecting some of the direct 
questions that I've asked of you.  I mean, you're not that nai p√Øve.  
You've been an educator.  You can't be that nai p√Øve.  Mr. Minister . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Then don't act the way you are right now, 
Mr. Minister.  I indicated to you very clearly it doesn't help the 
individual if the certificate is not recognized by the business out there.  
Why issue a certificate as worthless? 
 
I gave you examples.  Bridge City for example was in the . . . Mr. 
Minister, let me tell you how scandalous your inaction has been, your 
department -- and not you, because you weren't there.  But in 1986-87, by 
your own information that was sent over to me this morning, there was zero 
student loans given to Bridge City.  In 1987-88 and '88-89, I believe, you 
gave over a million dollars of student loans were okayed for Bridge City. 
 
You tell me one program offered by Bridge City that was accepted by the 
industry out there.  And yet you okayed student loans to the tune of over 
$1 million to Bridge City before you took any action.  And the only reason 
you took action was because we on this side were burning the other 
minister, the previous minister, and continued to, and he finally had to 
admit that Bridge City was not acceptable. 
 
Bridge City was licensed by your department.  The individual obviously went 
in and okayed the curriculum, and then had to go back and re-examine the 
curriculum because it wasn't acceptable.  You simply did not take any 
action. 



 

 

 
I'm asking you again, Mr. Minister: when are you going to start to take 
some action, now, to stop the rip-off of these private vocational schools 
on the students that are out there? And when are you going to tell them 
which schools are acceptable to you, and which programs that they can take 
without any fear of having unqualified staff and curriculum which is 
unacceptable?  Will you please tell us that now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well I know, Mr. Chairman, that the member opposite 
would like to take credit for the fact that any assessment or evaluation 
was being done at Bridge City was a result of his members raising it in the 
House, but I would point out to him that it was probably some six months 
prior to that that the investigation started.  The first complaint came in 
from Bridge City back in December of 1988, as a matter of fact, and I think 
you raised it, or someone raised it in June. 
 
There were steps that were being taken then at Bridge City to get a handle 
on what all of the problems were and you have to keep in mind that when 
you're dealing with a legally incorporated establishment such as Bridge 
City was, that there are certain steps that you have to go through in 
taking a look at all of the issues. 
 
So I believe it was around March 16 that they were given the word that they 
could not enrol any more students because of concerns that had been raised 
and things that had been uncovered in the investigation.  I think, as I 
recall it too, there was a very extensive audit done by a chartered 
accountant firm in Saskatoon which took a fair degree of time, and that 
information was necessary before the final steps could be taken. 
 
And I recognize that Bridge City was not following the rules and there were 
some things happening there that could not be allowed to continue.  They 
were not prepared to make the changes that we had requested, and it did 
become necessary then to shut them down last fall.  And I suggest that that 
is the case that would be the end result with any private vocational school 
that wasn't following the rules. 
 
Now one other thing though, I would point out to the member opposite, Mr. 
Chairman, is the fact that there was one program that I'm aware of in 
particular that was offered by Bridge City that I understand was quite 
successful, did provide students with something that was very worthwhile 
when they were finished, and that's the companion care program that they 
offered. 
 
And as I understand it, there were people that went out from that program 
and got jobs.  I couldn't tell you how many, but from the information I 
have, it was a popular course and it did lead somewhere, that they could go 
out and get jobs from that. 
 
Now the steps, as I say, were taken down.  It was found that it was not a 
financially viable organization.  There were concerns, I know, with student 
refunds and the courses that were being offered.  And the end result, as 
you know then, was shutting it down.  And that's something that I think 
that we have to ensure is going to be the case with the new regulations.  



 

 

They're going to be much stricter, as you can gather from the report, and 
you will have a chance to see the regulations before long. 
 
You talk about the amount of money that was put through student loans 
there, and it was a substantial amount.  But I'm sure that if you, when you 
see the new changes that are going to be taking place for August 1, you're 
going to find that probably we have the strictest rules that apply to 
student loans in the country, the ones that we have, in the country. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- You don't know what you're doing now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, that's what we're doing now.  We've got them 
all ready to go.  I mean there are no more student loans that we're 
concerned with at this time of the year, because students now are going to 
be gearing up for next year and looking at the moneys that they're going to 
need after the summer vacation.  So these will be in place for August 1, 
and they are going to be very, very tight and will be the tightest probably 
that you'll find any place in Canada. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, those regulations can't come any too soon for 
me, and they can't be any too strict for me either.  Because what we need 
to do, and you have a responsibility to see to it when you license a 
private school, that those private schools will provide the program that 
they advertise, that they will have qualified staff, and that their 
certificate when it is issued is recognized out there. 
 
And that's what I like about Saskatoon Business College (Ltd.).  He pays 
his staff the going rate of the STF (Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation), 
and he gets qualified staff.  You can't get qualified staff by paying them 
$10 or less an hour.  You're simply not going to get qualified staff. 
 
Mr. Minister, my concern is this -- and it has been drawn to your 
department's attention, not just now, but a year or year and one-half ago, 
or two years ago -- that in some instances . . . I mean, these students 
tell me that a student that takes the course in the morning, who they take 
classes with in the morning, teaches that class in the afternoon, can't in 
my opinion be a qualified staff person.  And they say this is happening 
right now. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Where? 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- I've talked to your department on it.  I've talked to your 
officials on it . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, CompuCollege.  
All right, if you want it, I'll give it to you.  Mr. Minister, there are 
many others also. 
 
Yes, the people over there laugh because they're not concerned about how 
students are being ripped off, but there are hundreds of them, hundreds of 
students who are being ripped off.  And I just don't like your cavalier 
attitude over there, that it's all right for those students to be ripped 
off and we do nothing.  We do nothing. 
 
I wish you people had met with those 17 students.  Seven or eight of those 



 

 

students were single parents who were in a program and they had debts now 
of $10,000, no jobs, certificate's useless.  And when I asked the minister 
to meet with them, he can't give me the time of day.  Mr. Minister, I am 
concerned about those students, and I don't know what those students are 
going to do. 
 
I'll give you another example and for your colleagues opposite.  A 
45-year-old woman, been on welfare, exactly what the minister of welfare 
said last year of social services, we want to get those people off of 
welfare.  She went to a private vocational school, no entrance requirement 
needed, she didn't have a high school education.  She went into a 
bookkeeping course; they took her in; they said if you need a loan, we'll 
help you get a loan.  She got a loan; she found out very early in the 
program that she couldn't do the program, and they simply told her keep on, 
no, no, you keep on, you'll catch on to what's going on. 
 
(1200) 
 
She finally stopped going and they phoned her and asked her to come back.  
And she came back; she got her total loan; she paid her tuition, and 
suddenly the interest seemed to fade.  They no longer had an interest in 
this student, but she was now stuck with her loan.  And this student, 
45-year-old woman who is on social assistance now is under psychiatric 
care.  Her car has been taken away from her because she can't make her 
payments.  She's got a part-time job at minimum wage, and she's being 
harassed to pay back her student loan.  How in blazes do you people expect 
her to pay back her student loan when she's working for minimum wage of 20 
hours a week.  It's simply not possible.  She didn't get her certificate 
because she didn't graduate. 
 
And I want to give you another example at that same private college.  A 
single parent, one of those single parents.  She was in the same program, 
bookkeeping.  She found out that she simply couldn't do it.  Again no 
prerequisites required; come on into the program. 
 
They helped her get a student loan and she got it.  I believe she got 
around 10 or $11,000 as a single parent.  And she quit the program and they 
again coaxed her back, this particular student.  She did come back.  She 
got a whole student loan; the tuitions were paid. 
 
She realized that she couldn't handle the program so she quit; 40 per cent 
of the time she attended.  They coaxed her back again, and they issued her 
a certificate.  They issued her a certificate.  And what happened?  The 
Department of Education forgave the loan.  She didn't complete the program.  
She tells me that she only attended 40 per cent of the time.  The 
certificate she has is useless.  Her loan is forgiven.  The people of the 
province have paid 10 or $11,000 of student loan. 
 
But the sad thing of it is that this single parent who tried to improve her 
life won't have another opportunity because she has used up her remission, 
and she has nothing now.  Now she can go back on welfare.  Now she's got to 
go back on welfare and she has nothing to . . . there is no future for her. 
 



 

 

And these aren't just one or two examples.  As I indicated to the minister, 
of the group of seven, I think it was 17 students that I met with, seven or 
eight of them were single-parent mothers.  And they said to me, look, the 
certificate we're going to get is not acceptable; what can we do?  Should 
we withdraw from the program now?  But they already had received their 
student loan; they had already paid their tuition.  I said no, continue, 
continue with the program, and we will talk to the minister and see whether 
or not we can do something about it.  This was March 27 . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . And the member from Lloydminster says, give the names.  
I have the names here.  But the minister can deal with them if he meets 
with the students.  The students will gladly meet with him and they will 
give him their names. 
 
So if the . . . The member from Lloydminster, it's too bad he's not the 
Minister of Education or the Minister of Energy and the Minister of 
Finance, because in this House he has all the answers from his seat.  He 
seems to have all the answers.  I say to the Minister of Education, look, 
I'm not here to paint a black, black picture, but it is serious . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Yes I know, but it is serious. 
 
I want to impress upon you because I don't seem to be able to get through 
to you.  I know you're going to go out there again and say to the media, 
well many of the private vocational schools are doing a pretty good job, 
and ignore what is happening in the field.  And if you're not ignoring it, 
you certainly don't seem to be doing anything.  So I'm asking you again, 
Mr. Minister: what are you going to do to address the problems of those 
students? 
 
Mr. Minister, I think a Janet Sander, if I remember it correctly, wrote a 
letter to you which you answered.  I think it was referring to Bridge City.  
I hope I have my facts correct in this; some time ago that I read the 
letter.  And she said to you: Mr. Minister, what do we do?  Bridge City has 
been closed.  These certificates that we have received as students are 
worthless.  We can't use them out there.  We have now these huge debts.  
What do we do? 
 
And I will paraphrase your letter, but I think basically you said: well, 
most students completed the courses and most students will be responsible 
for repaying those loans.  That, Mr. Minister, I believe was basically what 
you said. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, by closing down Bridge City, you admitted that many of 
the courses that they were offering were unacceptable; the qualification of 
the staff was unacceptable.  Otherwise you wouldn't have shut them down. 
 
I don't think that you can now lay the blame and the responsibility on 
those students.  You . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, but by 
saying that they have to repay the loans, you are putting the 
responsibility on them when it should be on your shoulders because you 
licensed them . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh I hear the member 
from Lloydminster saying, they chose the school. 
 
He licensed the school.  By licensing it, he tells the public out there 



 

 

that they have qualified staff, because he tells me that's what you do when 
the staff goes in.  They must have qualified staff.  You say that you okay 
their program.  You told me that this morning, that that's what has to 
happen, and then you license them. 
 
So you have to accept responsibility for those students who have incurred 
those debts.  And I want to know, Mr. Minister, what are you going to do to 
assist those students who simply can't afford to pay back those loans 
because of the programs that were offered in Bridge City were useless and 
the certificates they have isn't recognized out there. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, a few comments that I want to make 
and a follow-up to something I said earlier about Bridge City.  Just to 
point out that one of the programs, and I mentioned this earlier, about 
companion care.  Now you can't generalize in all cases.  You can't say that 
all private vocational schools are bad.  You can't say . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- I said Saskatoon Business College was a good college. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- There are many others too.  But you can't say that 
every program is bad either.  Now we know full well that when we talk about 
Bridge City as an example, they were not following the rules.  There were a 
lot of problems with Bridge City, but you can't say at the same time that 
every program there was not good and that the training that the students 
got was bad. 
 
And I'll give you that example again, the companion care program.  This was 
a course that was reviewed by the Saskatchewan Registered Nurses' 
Association and part of their approval process in here.  You had the people 
who were instructing that program had to be registered nurses.  Now how can 
you stand in your place and suggest that a course such as this was not a 
good course or that the staff were not fully qualified or that the 
certificate was worthless. 
 
Now if you've got other examples, and I'm sure you have, then I want you to 
give me some examples where there have been students who have finished some 
of these courses, have been given a certificate, that have gone out and an 
employer said that this certificate is worthless; I cannot hire you. 
 
There are always several factors that are taken into consideration when 
you're employing people, and it doesn't always apply to the piece of paper 
that they've got in their hand, and you know that. 
 
But let's not generalize, because here is an example I'm giving you of a 
program that was very worthwhile, that was given by quality people, and the 
certification that they got from that program was something that they could 
take out and get a job. 
 
Now you talk about the loans to single parents.  The changes that have been 
made in the student loan fund have been targeted at single parents.  And 
you can, I'm sure, raise, as you are, examples where students have got into 
some difficulty and maybe they haven't finished the courses or their 
courses haven't led them to a job and they end up then having to deal with 



 

 

a student loan and wondering how they're going to pay it back. 
 
But again consider the number of students that are on those loans.  I mean, 
you can always pick out a few isolated cases, no doubt about it.  But let's 
consider how many are being benefitted here. 
 
The free assistance that was given out in 1989-90 is projected to be $8.6 
million.  That was free assistance and it was targeted for single parents, 
the very group that you're concerned about -- a 264 per cent increase from 
what it was back in '85-86.  The number of students benefitting from that, 
over 1,800 students. 
 
Now there are always some cases . . . We can look at examples, Mr. 
Chairman, of students that are going to SIAST or are going to university, 
that for one reason or another run into difficulty and cannot always pay . 
. . they have difficulty paying their loans back, they have difficulty 
paying their loans back.  But here is a clear example of how we are 
attempting to help single parents. 
 
Now you talk about CompuCollege, and you suggest that the department is 
slow to act on some of the concerns that are raised.  Well let me point out 
. . . the member has given me his letter and I thank you for that and I'll 
follow up on that.  This was written on March 27.  Well the investigation 
that was being conducted at CompuCollege went back into probably late 
January and February, went back into that.  And those same students, the 
same students that you talk about here, would have been addressed by 
officials from the Department of Education in February, because the 
officials from the department met with all of the staff at CompuCollege.  
They also went into every class at CompuCollege and talked to the students 
and got ideas as to what some of their concerns were. 
 
Now let me tell you some of the changes then that are taking place at 
CompuCollege as a result of that particular investigation.  And this is as 
of March 12, which was back prior to your letter having been written. 
 
Number one, with regard to mature admissions, an appropriate admissions 
test be acquired.  Until a test and procedure is approved, no mature 
admissions are to be enrolled. 
 
Secondly, a student contract.  This was an issue then that was raised by 
students and by the staff -- student contract.  A student contract shall be 
developed and approved to include the components as listed on the student 
contract check-list. 
 
Thirdly, student admission.  Upon completing the process of enrolling 
students, you are required to present to the department for review the 
following documentation:  a contract of each perspective student, a course 
schedule indicating start and end date of each course, instructor for each 
course, verification of academic standing, schedule of courses within a 
program. 
 
Four, program approvals.  Within the next three months a program review 
will be conducted on all programs offered.  And I think that we have to 



 

 

consider that when an institution is licensed and programs are approved, 
there has to be follow-up to ensure that there haven't been changes within 
those colleges, that new programs haven't come on stream that the 
department may not be aware of.  So it is essential that there be a program 
review, because those programs have to be approved by the department.  And 
as a matter of fact there's been a freeze on all new programs since 
sometime last summer.  So there have been no new programs at any of these 
colleges since that time. 
 
Number five, instructor approvals.  Instructors shall instruct only those 
courses for which they have been approved by the department. 
 
Number six, instructor orientation and work-load.  Adequate orientation for 
new instructors and new assignments are to be developed.  Instruction time 
should not exceed six hours per day for any staff.  The above will be 
reviewed by April 30, 1990.  And that's just been completed. 
 
The seventh one, student council.  Revitalize the student council as a 
mechanism to address student concerns to the principal and counsellors.  
Fear of recrimination needs to be addressed. 
 
And number eight, job placement statistics.  You are requested to refrain 
from using all advertisements which describe the job placement workshop 
until sufficient evidence is provided to justify claims that the job 
placement officers have knowledge of the job market and assist graduates in 
finding and setting up job interviews; that the role playing will help 
graduates get a job now and that the job search program is one of the most 
intensive anywhere in North America. 
 
I request that you review the operation's audit results and directives and 
prepare a written response outlining your proposed course of action by 
March 23. 
 
Now I think, Mr. Chairman, we see that this is an example of the routine 
review that is done by the officials when concerns are raised, whether it's 
by students or by instructors, because we do treat all of these concerns or 
complaints very, very seriously.  We understand the amount of money that is 
being spent by students in these colleges, and we understand as well the 
reason why they're taking the courses is to better themselves so that they 
can go out and get a job in the work place.  So we do take all of these 
concerns very, very seriously and a very intensive review has been done.  
And I can assure you that if CompuCollege does not abide by the changes 
that are being suggested by the department officials that more serious 
measures will have to be taken. 
 
And we fully intend to enforce the regulations, the new  
 Dregulations that are going to be coming in.  And I can assure you that if 
the private vocational schools are not following the regulations and that 
there are constant problems, that in some cases it will result in licences 
being cancelled and the programs being shut down. 
 
(1215) 
 



 

 

Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, I want to let you know, just in case you 
weren't aware, that I contacted your office many, many times before March 
27 regarding private vocational schools.  This was a written letter that 
you had received from me because of the students that I had met with from 
CompuCollege.  I don't want you to leave the implication that was the first 
time that your department or that your officials -- and they will verify 
this -- that I have been in contact with them on a number of occasions and 
so have my colleagues on this side of the House.  So I am pleased to hear 
that you have cracked down on CompuCollege. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, would you be able to tell me whether or not you have had 
similar complaints about unqualified staff and substandard programs being 
offered by Robertson Career College, and if so, what have you done to 
address those problems? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, with regard to Robertson business 
school . . . or college, I believe, a review was done last spring, spring 
of 1989. Enrolment was limited.  There were suggestions made as to things 
that had to change.  And the school complied with those suggestions and are 
still operating, but they are being monitored in the same way now that 
others are being monitored where a review has been conducted.  So I would 
hope that things . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Both here and in Saskatoon? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Both in Saskatoon and Regina. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, I met with a young student yesterday who was 
attending Robertson Career College.  I will send the information over to 
you; I hope that you will keep it confidential.  But I will send it over to 
you and . . . The story that is told by this individual, if one 
one-hundredth of what he says is true, then I think some action ought to be 
taken. 
 
I know that it relates to more a specific incident, but to me it was . . . 
I don't know the student.  He simply requested a meeting with me and the 
first time I met him was yesterday morning.  But I will send the 
information over to you, and I think, as I say, if there's any credence at 
all in what the individual says, I think it warrants a further 
investigation here in Regina. 
 
Mr. Minister, I do want to go back just . . . I have too many cases that I 
could go through.  I may take some time next week if I feel up to it, I may 
go through a number of cases for you next week again on other colleges.  
But I do want to refer back to Bridge City because you said something that 
sort of left a question in my mind . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, 
no, it wasn't that bad. 
 
Mr. Minister, you said that the companion course was a good course, and I 
don't know whether it was or wasn't.  Would you tell me now if that was a 
good course, what made you decide to shut down Bridge City?  If it wasn't 
lack of quality of staff, if it wasn't program, then what was it in Bridge 
City that forced you to shut down Bridge City? 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, I give you two main reasons why 
Bridge City was shut down.  It was to do with the overall operation of it, 
and secondly, to do with the financial viability of it.  There were 
concerns there with regard to the amount of money that had been put into 
the business, how much was required to maintain security for the students.  
The main concern I guess we had was for the students. 
 
As I've indicated, there was one program there anyway that was good; there 
may have been others.  I don't know how many they did offer, but I would 
suggest it was basically to do with the overall operation.  There were 
suggestions that were made by the department that they were not willing to 
abide by, one of which was the number of mature admissions.  I think that 
their mature admissions were up to somewhere in the neighbourhood of 90 per 
cent. 
 
The new regulation will limit private vocational schools to 20 per cent of 
mature admissions.  But some real concerns too, after the audit that was 
done by the accounting firm, that financial viability was just not there. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, Bridge City operated like a factory.  Once you 
got into their office, or once you got into their building, you very seldom 
left unless you were signed up for a program.  There is no doubt about 
that. 
 
And what bothers me is that it took so long.  How could Bridge City go from 
just $2,200-and-some, one loan -- or is it two loans? -- one loan made to 
Bridge City in 1987-88, to go to over a million dollars in student loans 
the following year when the . . . I don't know, maybe we in the opposition 
only hear the complaints; maybe you people don't hear complaints.  I would 
have thought that all the noises that were coming out of Saskatoon on 
Bridge City would have been ringing in the ears of the department officials 
and yourselves, and you would have said, hey, look, we better get in there.  
We better slow down the applications of students who are applying from 
Bridge City because there is no doubt at all that Bridge City spent a lot 
of their time in convincing students to take these programs and made 
absolutely certain that they received student loans. 
 
Because they would . . . one of the first things that was done is the 
counsellor or so-called counsellor sat down with the student and worked out 
a student loan.  Don't worry about your . . . no, no, don't worry, we'll 
get you a student loan. And in most instances they did. 
 
I'd really like to know what was the success rate of Bridge City in 
obtaining student loans for the number of applications that were made to 
the department, and I'd bet it would be very, very high.  I bet it was 
extremely high. 
 
And I want to ask one further question.  I want to know that, Mr. Minister, 
and secondly, I want to know, who were the owners of Bridge City? And have 
those same owners again applied to re-open a private school? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- The main operator of Bridge City was one Dorothy 



 

 

Prior.  And there has been an inquiry with regard to trying to get into 
operation again, but we made the decision some months ago that we were not 
going to have any more new colleges being allowed to go into operation.  
Now anybody of course is free to make application, but we have a freeze on 
new programs and new colleges at the present time. 
 
There will not be any new ones now under the old regulations.  We're 
talking about the new scene now for private vocational schools, the new 
regulations will come in, and any colleges that come in there will have to 
abide by those new regulations. 
 
And I would also suggest that one of the ways in which we are trying to 
address the concerns that you are raising is we're concentrating mainly on 
the cities when what we've been talking about here this morning and some of 
which we talked about before. 
 
But I think too that we recognize that not all of the students that are 
coming into these private vocational schools are necessarily residents of 
Saskatoon or Regina.  Some of them are coming in from rural areas.  So I 
would hope that the thrust that we are making this year in regional 
colleges in expanding the services and the courses that they can offer, 
will help to take care of some of the problem that we've got. 
 
Now recognizing as well that we are looking at increasing or expanding the 
number of first- and second-year university courses, but at the same time 
there are a lot of other programs that are offered through the regional 
colleges -- the adult basic ed. programs and literacy programs -- to help 
some of these students in their own local areas.  So that should, I think, 
go a long way to alleviating some of the problem where we do at least have 
those students who are coming in from rural areas.  We're really looking 
forward to that.  With the new regulations I think that we are going to get 
the situation under control, and we're addressing all of these problems. 
 
It takes time, too, when you've got a large number of students in some of 
these colleges.  Just when you have a complaint that's raised, you can't 
just walk in and shut them down until an investigation is carried out . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . I know, but I'm saying this in defence of 
sometimes the time it takes for the officials to conduct their 
investigation.  We've tightened up things a lot, I think, in the last while 
and maybe particularly in the last six months we made a lot of changes.  
I'd like to take credit for that in the same way you like to take credit 
for things you raise. 
 
(1230) 
 
But anyway, we've got to work together on it, and I'm going to be counting 
on you as well to help monitor the situation.  If you have . . . Whether 
it's constituents or others that are raising concerns with you -- and as 
you say, sometimes they may feel more comfortable raising them with you 
than coming to the minister -- we would certainly welcome that.  And if we 
work together on it, I think then we'll get the vocational schools to the 
point where we all feel that they should be and that students aren't going 
to be taken advantage of.  And the taxpayers' money isn't going to be going 



 

 

down the drain, as you say, that it'll all be money that's well spent. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, I'm very pleased to hear you say those words, 
but I can assure you, Mr. Minister, I'll come down on you like a ton of 
bricks if you don't . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . if you don't.  And 
I have confidence in him that he will.  And there have been some changes 
made, and I make no bones about it.  I think some of those changes are due 
to the new minister.  And I indicated to him last night that I think he 
does understand education, but I think he is moving a little too slowly for 
me, and in the meantime many of the students are suffering. 
 
I know he's addressing some of those problems, but because it is a crisis 
out there with a number of students, we need to urge your department and 
urge you to move faster than what you have.  I'd like to have seen those 
regulations in effect last fall, and I still, for the love of me, can't 
understand why they could not have been implemented much, much earlier so 
that we could have stopped some of the rip-off that is being taken place. 
 
Mr. Minister, I did ask you and maybe the officials are still looking at 
it, I want to know the success rate of Bridge City.  In their loan 
applications that were made, how many were okayed?  And how many applied; 
how many were okayed?  What was the percentage? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- It's pretty difficult to provide that information 
to the member, Mr. Chairman, because we don't track the applications.  We 
know how many loans would have gone to each of the colleges, but we 
couldn't tell you how many people had applied to give you that kind of 
breakdown. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, if you had said you don't have them for 
individual schools, I may have been able to, but I do have from you the 
overall.  I have that in a letter, I believe, on January 11.  Let me read 
it to you. 
 
My question was . . . or I haven't got my question . . . your answer to my 
question:  the percentage of loan applications approved for private 
vocational school students over the last three years is 95.9 per cent in 
1986-87, 93.1 per cent in 1987-88, and 96.2 per cent in 1988-89.  So you 
have them overall.  Do you not have them for particular schools?  If you 
don't have, I can understand that, but I don't know how you could get the 
totals if you don't have them for individual schools. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, the information I have is that we 
don't track the actual number of loans per school, or the applicants, but 
we do have the aggregate.  We would know how many that there are, but we 
don't track the actual applications on a school-by-school basis. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, I can accept that.  I do want to, Mr. 
Minister, before I forget, I said earlier that there was a letter sent to a 
Janet Sander.  A letter was not sent to a Janet Sander; there was a letter 
sent by Rita Archer to Diane Gauthier, referring to Bridge City.  And just 
so that there isn't a misunderstanding.  I do have a letter here from Janet 
Sander, but it's on another matter.  But this letter was sent by Rita 



 

 

Archer to Equal Justice For All, I believe it is, Diane Gauthier. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to turn now to another private vocational school and 
that is the Academy of Security Education. I believe you are quite familiar 
with that one, and that exits on 1808B Broadway Avenue.  This, Mr. 
Minister, I am told is run by an individual named Brad Morin, M-o-r-i-n.  
And I am told, Mr. Minister, that the background of Mr. Morin is very 
familiar to the department over there.  I'm told the officials know about 
his background, but his background is somewhat questionable. 
 
And I was wondering, first of all, if that is known to the department 
officials, why would the individual, number one, be licensed to run a 
security school.  And number two, Mr. Minister, I don't know if you're 
familiar with the story that was written by an individual who had very 
grave concerns about this particular school.  And what he did was . . . 
it's the story: It's not the money it's the principle of the thing. 
 
What the individual did, Mr. Minister, to see whether or not all the 
accusations he heard about the school were true, he made himself as 
unpresentable as he possibly could.  He doused himself a little bit with 
alcohol and let his beard grow and spoke in broken English and presented 
himself to the school.  The advertising, Mr. Minister, says that the 
requirements will be of a high nature, and if you read the advertisements 
you would be very impressed by the course that possibly would be offered.  
And the standards would be very high. 
 
Mr. Minister, when the individual went to register, there were no questions 
asked about his background.  There was no questions asked as to what his 
qualifications were, whether he had academic qualifications.  He did 
indicate that he may have some difficulty in filling out the application 
form for a student loan.  He was very quickly helped to fill out his 
student loan.  And he managed to escape however before he registered. 
 
The point that I what to make is that this particular school is not abiding 
by the rules and regulations that you people are asking of them.  And I can 
verify this.  A native student came in to see me just about a month ago and 
this native student had a criminal record.  He was accepted by this 
particular school.  My understanding is that someone with a criminal record 
cannot be bonded unless a period of time elapses.  He was accepted.  But 
this individual, Mr. Minister, a loan was approved by your department.  The 
individual did not have sufficient money to complete the course; all he had 
was the loan.  The loan wasn't sufficient, and he dropped out of the 
course.  The point being, Mr. Minister, that this particular school 
apparently does no checking on entrance requirements and anyone can enter. 
 
I was wondering whether some of these complaints had been drawn to your 
attention.  If they have, what has your department done?  Has it 
investigated this particular school?  What actually are you recommending to 
Mr. Morin in order that he meets the standards that are laid down by your 
department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, it's unfortunate that some 
situations like this maybe arise, but at the same time I guess that we have 



 

 

to ask the question that, should we exclude students from any schools if 
they have a criminal record? 
 
I guess that it's the responsibility of the school to notify the students 
though, if they're going into a security-type position, that their job 
opportunities may well be limited because of the fact that some companies 
have to . . . they do require bonding; some don't.  But in those cases 
where bonding is required, some of these students then could be limited in 
their opportunities. 
 
Some of the questions raised by the member opposite will be addressed in 
the new regulations, particularly as we look at the restrictions on mature 
admissions. 
 
And with regard to the school that you're mentioning here, the Academy of 
Security Education I believe it was, this school has been investigated.  
There is no detailed review that's taken place because there really have 
not been a lot of concerns raised by the students that are attending that 
particular establishment. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, I thought you would be extremely concerned 
that when someone would bring something like this to your attention, 
because let me read part of the advertisement to you from the security . . 
. can't make it out, the writing here.  The school is the security 
education school, anyway, on Broadway. 
 
And here is what they say for requirements of admission.  Applicants must 
have a grade 10 or equivalent, must be 18 years of age or over, and they 
must be bondable.  Mr. Minister, they must be bondable and be able to be 
licensed. That's the advertisement.  Now I think your department should 
know that.  I mean obviously one of the requirements is they must send this 
in to you.  So they have this information. 
 
But let me go on, Mr. Minister, and that's what concerns me.  The course 
will run approximately 17 weeks; the classes will be for four hours each 
day with a break during that time.  The entire course will be broken down 
into eight modules, each lasting two or three weeks.  Examinations will be 
given, and by the way, no examinations were given to these students -- at 
least that's what they tell me.  And an average of all tests plus marks for 
good attendance constitutes the final mark.  Now I can appreciate good 
attendance, Mr. Minister; certainly those are required. 
 
I want to turn your attention, however, to the goals that were set down, 
and I don't want to read them all because they're fairly lengthy.  But it 
says, to help portray the three attributes that the school is trying to 
represent:  ability, integrity, and discipline.  Requirements of admission 
will be very rigid. 
 
The individual I told you about, no requirements for admission were asked 
for.  They didn't know what his qualifications were. 
 
Students will be required to be bonded and licensed during the course, and 
a very strict student code of ethics will be adhered to.  Academic 



 

 

requirements will also be very high so that students will have no trouble 
with their writing ability as well as the basic community skills. 
 
(1245) 
 
This native student, Mr. Minister, this native student told me when he 
spoke to me, he said there was just no way that he could handle that 
particular course, yet he received a loan from you people and he was 
accepted by the school.  A grade 10 education or equivalent -- this person 
didn't have a grade 10.  Now he could, I suppose, get on the maturity 
criteria and get in in that way. 
 
Mr. Minister, that is bad enough, but let me . . . Mr. Minister, I want to 
read to you . . . It's almost, well it's to the point where it's somewhat 
of a joke, but here is a particular individual writing about his 
experience, and this person wrote about these kids: 
 

 Bill, a kid from the wrong side of the tracks, had a brush with the law a 
few years ago, or a few years back, and did a few months in the provincial 
correctional centre.  The only positive aspect of the stay was that he 
began the process of completing his grade 12 with the view to qualifying 
for a post-secondary training course.  After finishing, he applied for and 
was accepted to the private investigation security guard program sponsored 
by a small private training academy which advertised a course on TV. 

 
 Like Joan, Bill applied for and received student financial assistance for 

the program.  After his 39-week course, Bill and his buddies from the 
correctional centre found out that they didn't qualify for PI (private 
investigation) or security work because they have criminal records and 
weren't bondable.  Bill thought to himself that it was a shame that the 
government loaned all that money training them for nothing.  Some of his 
friends joked that many components of the course, including the alarm 
system lectures, would make it "a hell of a lot easier to knock over 
houses." 

 
Mr. Minister, the point I think that this individual wanted to make was 
something has to be done with . . . I think the point is made without going 
on any further. 
 
And what I wanted from you, Mr. Minister, is . . . these aren't the only 
cases that I have; I have a number of other cases.  But the point that I 
wanted to make was, has this been drawn to your attention?  Are your 
officials investigating this particular school to make sure that they live 
up to the advertisements that they put out, and live up to the requirements 
that you have set down so far, recognizing that we don't have strict 
regulations in place at the time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, we recognize that the member has put 
forward in some cases, not maybe a fictitious case but an artificial one, 
but recognized the seriousness of what he's saying.  And what we will do, 
we will assure that someone follows up on that next week and checks into 
it. 
 



 

 

As far as the ad is concerned that was put out, sounds like a good place to 
go, that you can . . . you know, pretty high standards and all the rest of 
it.  But we obviously have to assure that they are following their own 
guide-lines.  So we will follow up on that next week.  We'll have someone 
out there to investigate it. 
 
And again I'd point out that I think when you see the new regulations, 
maybe -- I hope our expectations aren't too high for the new regulations, 
but they will in fact address some of the concerns that you have raised.  
But we will certainly follow up on that because this is serious. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I don't want to leave the impression 
that these were artificial cases.  These are actual cases.  These are . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . No, both of them.  Both of them were actual 
cases.  But I thought it was very serious.  I mean if they advertise this, 
I mean that's how people get taken in, because it sounds very good on TV; 
it looks very good in the paper. 
 
And when they find out that the program isn't what the advertisements say, 
they get ripped off.  And that's why I'm saying I think you and your 
officials have a lot of responsibility to see to it that when people 
advertise like that, then we got to make absolutely certain that they meet 
those standards because otherwise people like the ones I have mentioned 
will get ripped off. 
 
Mr. Minister, we just have a few minutes left today.  But I do want to turn 
now to those regulations that you have been talking about and we . . . 
Don't worry, that's not all the time I'm going to spend on those new 
regulations.  I will go into those in much more detail next week and as you 
see, I've only gone through I think three files out of 15.  So we got a 
long ways to go yet. 
 
I've got a number of issues in post-secondary education that I want to 
address and some of them are the regional colleges and how you're going to 
deal with those; the universities; and that's a big part of your portfolio. 
 
Mr. Minister, I've gone through the interim report, and I want to thank you 
for submitting those to me.  What I am concerned about, Mr. Minister, is 
that it took all this time for those individuals to write that report.  I'm 
not critical of the individuals.  I don't know the individuals.  In fact I 
don't even know who's on it. 
 
But that report, Mr. Minister, could have been written -- I don't think I'm 
exaggerating -- it could have been written in one week's time, easily.  
They had six meetings.  They had six meetings.  I don't know where they 
went in those six meetings or what they did.  One of the things that I 
would have done if I'd have been on that committee, I'd have said to 
myself, all right, where are we at right now with those regulations. 
 
And what have some of the other provinces done in updating their 
regulations in private vocational schools? 
 
One we could have gone through is the province of Alberta.  And Alberta, I 



 

 

think, lays out their regulations very nicely.  I'm not saying that we 
should adopt all of the regulations that Alberta has, but certainly some of 
them sound to me like exactly what we have recommended some time ago. 
 
Mr. Minister, for a long time now, we on this side of the House have asked 
you and your department and your predecessor to come up with some strict 
regulations as they pertain to private vocational schools.  I can't lay my 
hands on it . . . oh yes I can, right here. 
 
In 1987, December 8, 1987, that's about two and a half years ago, the then 
critic of post-secondary education, as I indicated, the member from Prince 
Albert, wrote to Mr. Hepworth concerned about the lack of regulations, 
stringent regulations for private vocational schools. 
 
And he stated the following, Mr. Minister.  He said: 
 

 There are several recurring concerns which the students want addressed.  
(That's back in 1987; and he said):  One of them is competency of 
instructors.  Number two, course standards.  Courses are not recognized by 
industries.  (Back in 1987.)  Number three, clear statements and 
consistent applications of school rules.  Number four, inaccessibility of 
equipment in certain courses.  Number five, counselling sessions at 
beginning are more of a sales job than a counselling session. 

 
And we've heard that over and over and over.  And if you get into some of . 
. . if you get through the door, if they can get you through the door, 
their next pitch to you is, get them signed up.  That was the job of the 
staff.  And in fact, Mr. Minister, in one of the schools, in one of the 
schools, it is said that the staff were given a commission, were giving a 
commission to their staff for getting students registered in their schools. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have, I believe, said on a number of occasions -- and I 
don't know whether I've written to you on it or not but you and I have 
certainly spoken about it -- and I have said a number of times, in the new 
regulations I want at least five things addressed.  I want at least five 
things addressed, and I hope that you will do that. 
 
Number one, I want some stringent entrance requirements set down by the 
Department of Education that all private schools must abide by and that 
when somebody applies they know exactly, if a grade 12 is required, a grade 
12 is required.  Except for the mature adults. I recognize that; we have to 
make exceptions there. 
 
Number two, I want qualified instructors, and I would like to see, in most 
instances, at least top-notch experience in the field, and a journeyman 
certificate if we can.  And those who are teaching math and English, that 
they have a teaching certificate would be required. 
 
Number three, that program or course standards are approved by the 
Department of Education.  In other words, you go through the courses, and 
if there are alterations made to the courses, they have to resubmit them to 
the department so that we know and students know that when they apply to 
this school, that it is okayed by the Department of Education. 



 

 

 
Number four, I want certification recognized and accepted by the industry 
out there.  Now we can't have 100 per cent assurance of that; of course 
not.  But at least let's contact those people out there who will be 
employing these graduates, and make sure that the program that we lay down 
and the course of studies that we lay down are accepted by the industry and 
therefore the graduates will be, and their certificates will be recognized 
by the industry.  I think that has to be done. 
 
And number five, I would like to see at least you people giving some 
indication to the people who apply for student loans and people who apply 
to those schools, that there's reasonable opportunity to get employment. 
 
I think it would be advisable by your department, when someone applies for 
a student loan who's going into a particular course, and if their 
opportunity for employment is almost nil, that you would indicate that to 
the individual.  Not to say that the individual wouldn't get a student loan 
if they qualify, but at least they would know and at least you would put 
down the guide-lines for them. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder whether you could respond to those.  I know I 
haven't given you enough time, but there's three minutes left. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well just a short comment, Mr. Chairman.  The 
member opposite talks about the time that it took to bring about these new 
regulations, and of course it's the policy of this government to use 
consultation, and that of course is what has been the case here. 
 
This has been going on for about a year where the committee followed . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well, but you're just talking about the 
meetings that the committee had.  Keep in mind that the committee had to 
conduct a lot of interviews, do a lot of research with regard to all of the 
schools that were in operation, but they also reviewed all of the 
legislation that you have in the provinces across Canada, and a lot of the 
Alberta situation is going to be in our regulations. 
 
Okay.  So I mean when you say that it could have taken a week to write the 
report, granted, but the consultation took much longer than that.  And we 
can talk more about that on Monday. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 1 p.m. 
 


