





























































Hansard: May 25, 1990


 

 

May 25/90 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice that I shall on 
Tuesday next, move: 
 

 That this Assembly condemns the Government of Canada for its high interest 
rate policy and the resulting continual, steady, four-year rise in 
interest rates, which have caused great hardship for Saskatchewan farmers, 
small businesses, and consumers. 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure to 
introduce to you, and through you to the rest of the members assembled, 
members of Denzil School.  They're grade 4 and 5 and 12.  They're sitting 
in your gallery, Mr. Speaker.  There's 27 in all. 
 
And I appreciate being able to rise in my place to introduce people from my 
side of the province because it's a long trip, and I appreciate the work 
that went into getting them down here.  I will be meeting them for pictures 
and some refreshments later, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The teachers accompanying the students are Marlene Dewald and Delmer 
Friesen; chaperons include Maggie Lessmeister, Elsie Leibel, Denise 
Wandler, Art Sieben, and Marie Heffner, Mr. Speaker.  I would ask the 
Assembly to help me welcome this group to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: -- It's my pleasure to introduce to you, and through you 
to members of the Assembly, a group of 25 grade 6 students from the Hartley 
Clark Elementary School in Spiritwood as seated in the west gallery, Mr. 
Speaker.  They're accompanied by an old friend of mine and colleague, Gil 
Goodfellow, their teacher, and chaperons Audrey Magnus and Floreen Dietz.  
I'll be meeting with you at 10:30 following question period for 
refreshments and photographs.  Please enjoy the proceedings and we wish you 
a very safe trip home to Spiritwood. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my privilege today to 
introduce to you and to all members 55 students from the Palliser Campus in 
SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Science and Technology) in Moose Jaw.  Mr. 
Speaker, they are seated in your gallery and in the east gallery.  I would 



 

 

like to welcome -- these are adult students -- I would like to welcome them 
and their instructors who are here with them. 
 
And I'm particularly glad to welcome this group of students, because among 
them is the woman that I was smart enough to marry, Mr. Speaker.  And, Mr. 
Speaker, I would want to wish success to all of these students as they 
continue in their course of studies and to welcome them here and to wish 
them a very happy visit to Regina, and invite all members to do the same. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, it's a pleasure for me today to introduce 
in your gallery the ambassador to Canada from Austria, His Excellency Kurt 
Herndl.  I want to just indicate to the Assembly that he has been in the 
foreign service in the United Nations since 1962 when he joined the 
Austrian foreign service, and I think he has lent an extensive service to 
his country and to the entire world.  I will just . . . I'm not fluent in 
German, but I will just say this. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in German.) 
 
Welcome the Excellency from Austria. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to join 
with my colleague from Morse in welcoming the ambassador from Austria here 
to the Assembly, wishing him a good stay in the province.  Also with him, 
Mr. Tony Merchant, a former member and colleague to the Assembly.  I want 
to I guess remind members as well that Tony's mother was also a member of 
this Assembly, I think from 1964 to '67.  I want to welcome all of the 
people and wish them a good stay here in the province. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLaren: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's an extreme pleasure again 
today for me to introduce to you, and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, another group of students that have come to Saskatchewan from 
outside our borders.  And we would like to welcome to the Assembly today a 
grade 6 class of 13 students from Shoal Lake School from Shoal Lake, 
Manitoba. 
 
They are seated in the west gallery, Mr. Speaker, and they are accompanied 
today by their teacher, Miss Louise Kingdon; their bus driver, Mr. Dave 
Stewart; chaperons, Miss Mary Lane and Mrs. Sharon Menties. 
 
It's always a pleasure to have students come from outside our boundaries 
and we would like to commend the teachers for bringing their classes here 
to see the democratic process in operation.  And we would like to wish you 
a very good stay here in Regina and at the Assembly, and have a safe trip 
home and have a good summer holiday.  I would ask all members to please 
welcome these students. 
 



 

 

Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Studies on Economic Impact of Cargill Plant 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  My question today in the 
absence of the Premier is to the Deputy Premier.  And, Mr. Speaker, I have 
in front of me a copy of today's Regina Leader-Post and therein is a major 
story on page A5 quoting a leading United States fertilizer consulting 
firm, Blue, Johnson and Associates as saying that the Cargill fertilizer 
project, which the government opposite, of course, is boostering and 
pushing very much at Belle Plaine -- and I might add largely financed at 
financial expense of the taxpayers of Saskatchewan -- according to Blue, 
Johnson is going to lose money in each of its first 10 years of operation, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to the Deputy Premier is this.  In light of this 
serious research study carried out by a responsible group of consultants, 
will you today produce for the legislature a detailed study that your 
government has which will refute the allegations of Blue, Johnson, and will 
assure the taxpayers of Saskatchewan that we're not going to get stuck with 
yet another white elephant. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Certainly, Mr. Speaker, we don't accept the reports 
of the reports of a study.  What the hon. member hasn't pointed out is the 
study was commissioned by the U.S. competition to Saferco, Mr. Speaker.  
Does it surprise anyone that the competition to what's going to be the 
state of the art fertilizer plant, the Saskatchewan fertilizer plant built 
for Saskatchewan farmers . . . We have more farmers in the whole country, 
Mr. Speaker, than anywhere else, Mr. Speaker.  They use $300 million in 
fertilizer a year. Mr. Speaker, this is a good project for Saskatchewan 
farmers, Saskatchewan farm communities, and the province of Saskatchewan's 
taxpayers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question. I guess it's to the 
Minister of Finance, who has undertaken the responsibility of answering 
this morning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this study by Blue, Johnson and Associates of the United 
States says that an American competitor recently in the United States paid 
substantially less money for an American fertilizer plant . . . or leased 
another fertilizer company with twice the output of Saferco. 
 
If true, that means that the taxpayers of the province of Saskatchewan are 
committing the farmers' money, the taxpayers' money, to what could be a 
very serious additional drain to the resources of the province of 
Saskatchewan, already over-drained, thanks to the mismanagement of the 
people opposite. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Finance is as follows.  If you 



 

 

say that Blue, Johnson is not a reliable study -- and I'll ask a question 
too about that in a moment -- if you dispute Blue, Johnson, why then don't 
you put your government studies on the Table?  Why don't you put your 
government's on the Table?  What could be the reason for holding back on 
your studies to refute Blue, Johnson other than perhaps the fact that Blue, 
Johnson's analysis might be just right? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well some in the opposition, Mr. Speaker, might 
suggest I'm not the brightest politician in the world . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- And I won't even debate that one, Mr. Speaker.  But I 
will not -- I will not -- be ever . . . be accused of being irresponsible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to table the business plan for the Saskatchewan fertilizer 
company would play right into the hands of the U.S. competitors who they 
are standing behind, Mr. Speaker.  That's what they would like to do.  They 
are defending the U.S. competitors.  They are going to go behind the U.S. 
competitors, Mr. Speaker, as opposed to the Saskatchewan farmers.  They 
want to stand behind, the NDP want to stand behind and help and support the 
U.S. competition, not stand behind Saskatchewan farmers, not stand behind 
the Saskatchewan fertilizer plant, not stand behind diversification of the 
Saskatchewan economy, not stand behind Saskatchewan taxpayers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question for the Minister of 
Finance.  And I want to tell the Minister of Finance that if his idea is 
standing behind the Saskatchewan taxpayers, a deficit of $14 billion thanks 
to this government opposite, I don't want to have anything to do with his 
defence of the Saskatchewan taxpayer, nothing whatsoever. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, this is a very serious and important matter.  
Blue, Johnson is a company that has been used by the gentlemen and the 
ladies of the government opposite.  It's been used by the department of 
economic development; it's been used by the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan.  Blue, Johnson and Associates is a firm used to advise this 
government on economic projects. 
 
How is it, Mr. Speaker -- my question to the Minister of Finance -- that 
they can reject Blue, Johnson when it meets their convenience to do so, 
namely to support a boondoggle like Cargill, and yet accept Blue, Johnson 
in circumstances when it suits their cause to do it?  How do you explain 
that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, is anyone really surprised that the 



 

 

report commissioned by the opposition, the U.S. opposition . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I'm afraid there are members on both sides 
of the House who wish to usurp the time of the minister for answering the 
question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, is anybody really surprised that a 
report commissioned by the U.S. fertilizer competition would try and cast 
aspersions and doubts on the economic viability of the Saskatchewan 
fertilizer plant?  Is anybody that naive, Mr. Speaker, in this legislature, 
other than the NDP who continue to be against Saskatchewan farmers, against 
economic diversification of this province, against jobs and opportunities 
for our young people, against help and jobs for people in communities like 
Belle Plaine and Pense and Moose Jaw.  And why don't the members from Moose 
Jaw come clean and tell the public where they really stand on this issue? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I tell you if this matter wasn't so 
serious it would really be a joke, the Minister of Finance's answer, 
because we've got a report here by a responsible American consulting firm 
that you people have engaged at various times, that says this plant is 
going to lose money for each of 10 years. 
 
I don't think it's good enough for the Minister of Finance to get up in 
this House and simply give us rhetoric in response.  It is the 
responsibility of the Minister of Finance to table the studies which he 
says the government has to refute Blue, Johnson. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, therefore to the Minister of Finance is simple.  
If you've got the studies which say that Blue, Johnson is wrong, if you've 
got the studies that say that this isn't going to be a boondoggle, if 
you've got the studies which say that it isn't going to add to our debt, I 
want you to table them today.  Will you table them today so that we can get 
to the facts? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, it would be highly unusual and totally 
irresponsible to show the competition your numbers, Mr. Speaker.  That 
would be irresponsible in terms of my duties to the taxpayers of this 
province.  I will not do that, Mr. Speaker.  That's been past practice, 
whether it's this administration or that administration, Mr. Speaker, and 
that's as it should be in deals like this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the Minister of 
Finance and I guess at this stage in the game, after eight long years-plus 
of this government, we're used to the fact that the government refuses to 
be open with the public of Saskatchewan and is stonewalling and hiding 
behind these kinds of answers that the minister has given us.  Mr. Speaker 
. . . 



 

 

 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  This same newspaper report upon 
which I'm basing my questions, and I know that the former minister of 
Finance thinks he can answer better than the Minister of Finance.  I doubt 
that given the fact that he was so far off on his deficit expectations of 
1986. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- But nevertheless, Mr. Speaker, if I may get the question 
out. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Now this is the second time I've had to call 
the hon. members to order and I simply ask them to allow the Leader of the 
Opposition to put the question. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  Now I'm not sure who the hon. member over on this 
side is.  Somebody in one of the . . . near the back rows, but I ask you, I 
ask you, whoever you are, to allow the Leader of the Opposition to put the 
question.  Now this is the third time I've had to ask. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I can 
realize why the Minister of Finance and the government opposite does not 
want these questions asked.  But I want to tell you that I am going to ask 
these questions until we get an answer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Leader-Post says that this study by Blue, Johnson says the 
following, quote: 
 

 The cost of servicing a $305-million debt will exceed cash flow (Get this, 
Mr. Speaker.) in each of Cargill's first ten years, the study says). 

 
Now that means that we've got a financial major boondoggle on our hands if 
that's true.  You, sir, Mr. Minister of Finance, have an obligation to 
refute that by a study.  I ask you again for the fourth or the fifth time: 
table the study which refutes the report of Blue, Johnson.  Assure the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan that you're not leading us down the 
path of even yet more debt.  How about doing that today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, what we do know, on the basis for 
Saskatchewan, the Saskatchewan government entertaining this joint venture, 
what we do know is this: number one, we were able to attract a major, 
global, agri-food partner who was prepared to invest, and invest heavily, 
in this joint venture Saskatchewan fertilizer plant.  What they know and 
what we know and what the hon. opposition members will refuse to 
acknowledge is that we have 60 to 70,000 farmers here in Saskatchewan.  
We're placed very, very nicely in the middle of a very, very large 



 

 

market-place that exceeds by far the 50 million acres of arable land that 
we have.  That's point number one. 
 
Point number two, Mr. Speaker: we know that under the administration of 
this government we've been able to develop one of our very, very precious 
and valuable resources -- natural gas -- which is a major component of 
fertilizer.  We do know, Mr. Speaker, that the numbers show that over time, 
urea fertilizer as opposed to anhydrous ammonia, quite frankly, that uptake 
and that market is increasing, Mr. Speaker.  We do know that we have a 
government on this side, a party on this side, that's interested in 
economic diversification, building our communities, jobs for our young 
people, Mr. Speaker.  That combination led to the Saskatchewan fertilizer 
plant, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I guess I would just echo what Peter Hayward, a spokesperson for the 
Saskatchewan fertilizer plant said, relative to the Blue, Johnson study: 
how could they come up with their numbers when they don't even know what 
model they were working under or what scenario they were using, Mr. 
Speaker.  It's a study done by the U.S. competition.  Does it surprise us, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
We're going to stand behind Saskatchewan farmers, Saskatchewan young 
people, and economic diversification in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question for the Minister of 
Finance.  The Minister of Finance says that out of this project, according 
to Blue, Johnson, somehow we're going to do the following: we're going to 
have a fertilizer plant which is going to lose money for each of the first 
10 years, up to the extent of possibly $132 million.  On top of the loss, 
it's going to provide cheaper fertilizer somehow for the province's 
farmers, as the minister opposite promises. 
 
Who does he think these farming people are that they can be so easily duped 
in the face of this kind of an economic study?  They know the situation 
better and they know that Cargill's not going to give anything away for 
nothing.  Cargill is going to take them for every cent they can take them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Now look, we've got a debt of $14 billion, and I say, sir, 
that it's incumbent upon you to table those studies. 
 
My question, which can be answered by a simple yes or no: are you going to 
table those studies, yes or no?  And if the answer is no, then I want you 
to tell me why we cannot conclude -- why the farmers should not conclude -- 
that you're not tabling them because your studies confirm what Blue, 
Johnson says, namely, you're subsidizing Cargill at our expense and at our 
risk? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, I can only repeat what Peter Hayward 
said when he noted that Blue, Johnson and Associates aren't familiar with 
the actual market factor Saferco used in its own assessment.  And I quote, 
Mr. Speaker, if indeed the Leader-Post quote is accurate: "I don't know how 
you could come up with numbers such as that without knowing the scenario 
inside the model we've created." 
 
Mr. Speaker, maybe the headline in this paper should have read, maybe the 
responsible headline in this paper should have read: U.S. competition 
afraid of the Saskatchewan fertilizer plant.  Because that's the bottom 
line, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The NDP don't stand behind the farmers.  The U.S. competition doesn't like 
it.  We do, and the Saskatchewan farmers do too, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question for the Minister of 
Finance.  Mr. Speaker, in this newspaper report it says that Blue, Johnson 
also has, among its list of clients, Cargill.  Blue, Johnson also has 
Cargill as its client. 
 
And my question to the Minister of Finance is this.  We've been trying to 
figure out why it is that the Government of Saskatchewan entered into a 
deal where it subsidizes Cargill.  Is it because Cargill knows itself that 
the economics of this Belle Plaine project are no good and they're into it 
because the province of Saskatchewan has sunk all of the taxpayers' money 
to ensure a profit for Cargill at our expense?  Is that why they're into 
it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- That is wrong, Mr. Speaker.  I can only use one word 
to describe that -- wrong.  Mr. Speaker, this project . . . why are we 
doing this project?  I can only reiterate again, Mr. Speaker, we have 
several tens of thousands of farmers in this province.  We have a natural 
gas resource, Mr. Speaker.  We have 50 million acres of arable farm land in 
this province.  Our farmers use $300 million plus a year of fertilizer, Mr. 
Speaker.  We want to diversify this economy.  We want the communities of 
Pense and Belle Plaine and Moose Jaw and Regina to prosper, to grow, to 
have jobs for their young people, Mr. Speaker, to have a way of life, to 
have some breadth and depth in our economy. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the real question that the Leader of the Opposition 
should ask himself and stare into his soul, Mr. Speaker, is why -- given 
all of that, because none of those factors has changed, Mr. Speaker, the 
arable acres, the numbers of farmers, the use of fertilizer, those were all 
factors in this province 10 years ago.  The real question, Mr. Speaker, in 
this debate is why was there no fertilizer plant built under the NDP years, 
Mr. Speaker?  Why no plant? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Why, Mr. Speaker?  Because they didn't believe in 
decreasing farmers input costs.  What did they do with their double . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance is not going to get 
off that lightly with the farmers in the province of Saskatchewan.  If this 
deal is so good, if this deal is so economically viable, why in the world 
is the province of Saskatchewan underwriting the richest privately held 
corporation in the world?  Why isn't Saferco, why isn't Cargill looking 
after this expense by itself?  Tell us why are we underwriting them to the 
extent of $132 million plus? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, there is no subsidy here.  This is a 
straightforward commercial agreement.  This is a joint venture, Mr. 
Speaker.  We were able to link hands, we are able to join hands with a . . 
. I know this hurts the NDP opposition, Mr. Speaker.  This hurts the 
opposition.  They can't stand that we've joined hands with this vertically 
integrated multinational company to bring a fertilizer plant, a 
Saskatchewan fertilizer plant, here for Saskatchewan farmers, Saskatchewan 
people, and Saskatchewan communities, Mr. Speaker.  This is going to be a 
good deal for the people of Saskatchewan and the farmers of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, we have had yet another new definition of what 
a joint venture is, thanks to the PCs.  A joint venture, thanks to the PCs 
in this province of Saskatchewan, means this:  we the taxpayers put up all 
the money; the American corporations take all the profit and all the 
benefits back home. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- That's a joint venture.  That is a joint venture and Blue, 
Johnson says it.  And in the absence of any studies to deny it, I make that 
allegation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to the ministers opposite.  It's ironical that 
today when the Premier is announcing a program of community development 
bonds -- something which is long overdue to develop to help local 
communities -- he is now squaring, he is now squaring that circle with an 
expenditure of $370 million for Cargill and United States multinationals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to the Minister of Finance is:  how in the world 
can the government talk out of both sides of its mouth, pump the money to 
the multinational corporations, and pretend it's doing something for the 
local communities of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, I think there's a clear trend 
establishing here.  The NDP opposition slowly but surely have come around 
and seen the light on Weyerhaeuser.  They've come around and seen the light 
on the benefits of Saskoil and gas, Mr. Speaker.  They now acknowledge the 
promise and opportunity afforded Saskatchewan people by the community bond 
program, Mr. Speaker.  And I predict they will too see the light and come 
around and support the Saskatchewan fertilizer plant, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Right now, though, we are faced with a situation where I think I'd like to 
correct the headline in the paper one more time.  And it should read: the 
U.S. competition and the NDP afraid of a Saskatchewan fertilizer plant, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the government opposite tries to argue that 
this is a good financial deal.  I say, Mr. Speaker, that if it's a good 
financial deal, the document should be tabled. 
 
There have been questions about the environment; nothing tabled.  There 
have been questions about the marketing fees; nothing tabled.  Now there's 
this condemning report by Blue, Johnson which says we're going to lose 
money each of 10 years because of this government's mismanagement opposite. 
 
He says we're against the fertilizer plant; I say we're against the 
sweetheart deal by Cargill and for Cargill that this government opposite 
knows is the case. 
 
I say to the Minister of Finance, the question is this.  Yes, the question 
is this.  Minister of Finance, you table the reports.  You show us the 
documentation.  Don't give us the PC rhetoric.  Show us the reports that 
rebut Blue, Johnson.  Prove it.  Give us the evidence. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member probably enjoys the 
theatre associated with the politics of this issue.  But if we stand back 
and try and look at our jobs in a reasoned and responsible fashion, the 
response that I would give about tabling the business plan for the 
Saskatchewan fertilizer company is the same response that that member, Mr. 
Speaker, gave to this legislature when he was minister responsible for then 
what was coming to be the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, not tabling 
the documents because of the commercial nature of the deal, Mr. Speaker. 
 
He knows in his heart, he knows as a lawyer, Mr. Speaker, he knows as an 
hon. member of this legislature that that is in fact the responsible 
practice, Mr. Speaker.  And if it isn't, why did he say one thing 10 years 
ago when he was minister responsible for the potash corporation, and now 
today, ask for something different? 
 
Is this not really a question of the hon. member's credibility and that 
he's really interested in politics, not the economics, Mr. Speaker?  Isn't 
that the reality? 



 

 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the Minister of 
Finance.  And I want to tell the Minister of Finance, he refers 10 years 
ago . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance wants to know why it's 
different now.  I'll tell him why it's different now.  Because we didn't 
have 10 years ago . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- I think we're crossing the bounds of courtesy.  The hon. 
member hardly rises and he's being hollered down.  Allow him to put the 
question. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, thank you very much.  But I know now why 
they're afraid of me asking these questions.  They're afraid of me and the 
farmers asking these questions because they have absolutely no answers.  
They know that their silence is a condemnation of this deal. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- My question, Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Finance is 
simply this: in light of the fact that the entire question period has been 
used by your stonewalling, by your cover-up, yes, by your refusal to give 
any kinds of reports, isn't it a fact that the reason that you're not 
tabling your internal studies is because Blue, Johnson is dead right, this 
is a give-away to Cargill at the taxpayers' expense.  We've got a white 
elephant on our hands.  Isn't that the reason why you're hiding behind the 
tabling of those reports? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, I can only reiterate why we're doing 
this project.  We have the resource; we have the farmers; we believe in 
economic diversification; we believe in our communities; we believe in our 
young people.  We want our young people to have good jobs, Mr. Speaker, so 
we can maintain that standard of living. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we try and put this debate back in some reasoned context.  
It's absolutely normal practice not to divulge deals at the commercial . . 
. the relevant facts and details of commercial deals, Mr. Speaker.  It was 
the case when he was a minister and had a similar responsibility. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the other thing that amazes me here is on alternate weeks 
they condemn Richardson Greenshields and somehow they have no credibility 
in doing valuations, and yet today if it suits his purpose he'll pick an 
example, especially if it backs up the U.S. competition, Mr. Speaker.  
That's who they're behind.  They don't support the Saskatchewan farmers, 
Mr. Speaker.  We do. 
 



 

 

Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 
Bill No. 28 -- An Act respecting Investments by Saskatchewan Residents in 
Support of Community Diversification and Environmental Protection 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I believe it's the Deputy Premier who is 
introducing a Bill.  Now perhaps the hon. members might allow her to do 
that.  There has been a lot of noise in question period and it's Friday 
morning and perhaps an interesting morning for discussion, but the Deputy 
Premier is trying to introduce a Bill.  Allow her to do it. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I move first reading of a Bill 
respecting Investments by Saskatchewan Residents in Support of Community 
Diversification and Environmental Protection. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next 
sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Saskatchewan Research Council 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 35 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Would the minister introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  It's a pleasure for me this 
morning to have with me three of my officials from Saskatchewan Research 
Council.  On my immediate right I have Jim Hutch, the president; on my left 
I have George MacKay, vice-president of finance-administration; and 
immediately behind me I have Ron McGrath, the comptroller. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Mr. Minister, I'm wondering 
if you could begin this morning by telling me what you see, as minister, as 
the role of the Saskatchewan Research Council being. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Well, I think, Mr. Chairman, that over a great number 
of years the Saskatchewan Research Council has provided a very useful 
service to Saskatchewan businesses and firms and educational institutions, 
and that's taking applied science and technology and making it fit a 
particular situation.  And that can go from the area of agriculture with 
some of the things that they've done with multiplication of species, with 
gene splitting, that type of thing, which is very front end -- and the 



 

 

member from Athabasca will understand the ramifications for the forestry 
industry, if you could develop different types of seedlings -- right 
through to the petroleum lab over here in Regina which has been a very 
integral part of the development of the western sedimentary basin as far as 
heavy oil and some of the other applications, horizontal drilling. 
 
So you can see, it's applied research and technology on the forefront, on 
the leading edge, and working with Saskatchewan and other Canadians to put 
that applied science to its best use.  And I think the moves that you've 
seen in the last few years particularly have allowed Saskatchewan Research 
Council to hone those talents, direct their energies into specific areas.  
And the forestry one that they're doing right now is a very exciting 
endeavour. 
 
The very idea that we can walk into a northern Saskatchewan forest, pick 
what we believe is the most exemplary tree there, and simply by taking a 
cutting off of that tree, reproduce that tree over and over and over again 
with all of its good characteristics, is very exciting stuff.  And I'm 
proud to say it. 
 
I can read the mission statement of the Saskatchewan Research Council if 
that's what the member would like, but I don't believe that's what he 
wishes, and I'll return to my seat, Mr. Chairman. 
 
 DMr. Koenker: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I would have wished for your vision 
of the role of the Saskatchewan Research Council.  You gave me a recitation 
of the work that the research council has done.  Maybe we could sharpen the 
focus a little bit.  What are your personal priorities for the Saskatchewan 
Research Council in the future -- your personal priorities as minister 
responsible for the research council? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I think my goals as minister of 
Saskatchewan Research Council are to work with the people there in 
furthering the endeavours that have already been started under other 
ministers, to take some of the new initiatives that come along as minister 
and carry them to the cabinet table and certainly to my caucus, to the 
whole realm of government -- to further those endeavours.  It's, I believe, 
a team relationship that I as minister need to work with all of the wide 
areas, and we go from PAMI (Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute) on 
one side, like I said, clear through to the oil industry on the other. 
 
My goals will be to continue the operations of research council.  They've 
been able to secure much of their funding in the last few years from the 
private sector, very business orientated, and I would like to continue that 
excellent relationship that they have with the business community, the 
mining community all across this province in taking technology and applied 
research and benefitting our people. 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- What do you see, Mr. Minister, as the particular strength 
of the Saskatchewan Research Council? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- I think that the real strength of the research council 
is being able to take a particular piece of technology and adapt it so that 



 

 

it's a reality for anyone in this province to use.  And I'm going to give 
you a list of some of the areas that I think that are exciting to the 
people in a particular area: the slurry pipeline facility in Saskatoon; the 
bovine blood lab, which used to be in Ottawa and now is in Saskatoon; 
groundwater resource analysis, groundwater to small towns and villages and 
farmers in this province is one of the mainstays of life; radio chemical 
analysis; MiniTube Air Samplers, so that people in the work place will be 
aware of problems of air quality; creep cell testing applied in the potash 
mines; kochia technology, kochia is probably one of the most possibly 
exciting plants in Saskatchewan today, but could also be one of the worst 
weeds that's ever come into western Canada because of its resistance to 
chemicals.  And then of course the whole area that PAMI does with farm 
machinery testing where they are able to work with almost every major 
manufacturer of farm machinery in North America.  Indeed some of the 
European people now with the East bloc changing, are actually bringing 
their stuff to PAMI to make sure that it is ready for those field 
conditions that we apply to them here. 
 
So it's a whole range of areas, and it's just taking that technology and 
applying it so that you and I have it available to us. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order.  The Chair would ask for leave to introduce some 
students. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Muller: -- It gives me a great deal of pleasure today certainly to 
introduce 40 students and their teacher, Mr. Colin Neudorf, from 
Shellbrook, which is my home town.  It lies in some of the most fertile 
farm land in central Saskatchewan, north of the North Saskatchewan River, 
just south of the Prince Albert National Park.  And I always like to add 
that it is the most beautiful part of Saskatchewan.  I'm certainly looking 
forward to being home again this afternoon and evening and for the weekend; 
I always love it up there. 
 
I hope you students and young people have enjoyed your trip to Regina.  I 
hope your tour will be educational.  And I will be meeting with you at 
11:35 in room 218 for refreshments and questions. 
 
I would ask all members to welcome these students and wish them a safe trip 
home.  Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(1045) 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Saskatchewan Research Council 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 35 
 



 

 

Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Mr. Minister, you've talked 
again about individual projects, pieces of research that the council is 
involved in.  You've touched on some of its strategic strengths, but you 
really haven't talked about them in a strategic sense.  That's what I'm 
getting at.  What would you see as some of the weaknesses of the 
Saskatchewan Research Council in a strategic sense at the present time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- I think, Mr. Chairman, the member is perhaps phrasing 
his question wrong.  I don't really believe that the Saskatchewan Research 
Council has weaknesses.  I believe that we have areas that we should 
endeavour to be better in, and I don't believe anyone ever has all the 
answers.  You can never, in an organization like this, be everything to all 
people at all times. 
 
I think that we have to watch, we have to be vigilant that as new 
technologies come along that we have the ability to grasp hold of them and 
at least give it an analysis in the early phase and see if it's worth 
spending time or money on.  I think we need to perhaps clarify some of the 
things that we've looked at in the international area.  Saskatchewan 
Research Council have worked with some third-world countries and I think 
it's important that we clearly define where we're going in that area of 
assistance.  And some of that's been done through CIDA (Canadian 
International Development Agency) in the past.  I think that's the area 
that we have to clarify in our minds. 
 
I think we have to take a good hard look at our marketing capabilities, and 
have we been too shotgunnish perhaps, with some of that.  Do we need more 
focus in the marketing area. 
 
I think we have to at all times give our staff the latitude within the work 
place to think of new ideas, to have that time to brainstorm, if you will.  
And it's important that that self-development aspect of the Saskatchewan 
Research Council always be talked about and enhanced. 
 
And it's also very important as new industries come on the horizon in 
Saskatchewan particularly, that we have the ability to identify where those 
companies -- those in the area of diamonds comes to mind -- where will that 
be 10 years from now vis-a-vis things like the environmental side, the 
health and safety of the worker in a diamond mine, and some of the things 
that would go along with that whole process. 
 
Much the same has happened with the potash industry when it came to 
Saskatchewan, and the research council had the ability to look down the 
road at some of the problems that may occur in potash mines, and it covered 
that whole gamut right from worker safety through to applying new 
technologies.  And I don't think that's any different today than it was 
then under previous governments. 
 
So certainly those are some of the areas that I would see us looking into 
the future in strengthening our ability to react. 
 



 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- Mr. Minister, how many staff are presently at the 
Saskatchewan Research Council? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- I believe it's 220, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- How does that compare to last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- I'm sorry, Mr. Chairman, it was 220 last year; it's 
currently 230 this year.  And that can vary depending on the season, by 
five, six, seven, that type of thing. 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- And how many of the staff are administrative in nature as 
compared to those who are technical in nature? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Approximately 49, 50, somewhere in there. 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Forty-nine or 50 would be administrative in nature as 
opposed to technical in nature?  I see you nodding your head, okay. 
 
Mr. Minister, how many staff have left the employment of the Saskatchewan 
Research Council in the last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, I don't have the exact numbers.  What I 
have is percentages of yearly turn around.  I can give the member the last 
four years, for instance, and endeavour to get him a specific number if he 
so wishes. 
 
I'll just run through the last four years.  In 1987 we had a 9.28 per cent 
turn around.  In 1988 we has 11.92 per cent turn around.  In 1989 we had 
11.57 per cent turn around, and so far, 1990, we've had 4.59 per cent turn 
around in staff. 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Mr. Minister, how many staff with a master's degree or a 
Ph.D. degree have left in the last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- I believe in the last year there would be four people 
that would have that type of qualification and up. 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Those four would have had their Ph.D.? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- I believe that three out of the four. 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- How many people are on staff that presently hold a Ph.D.? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- I believe, Mr. Chairman, it's approximately 25, and 
that could vary either way by one or two or something like that.  If the 
member wishes, I can get that exact. 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Yes, I'd appreciate knowing exactly how many people are 
presently on staff with their Ph.D.  Can you supply that?  Could you also 
supply who they are?  You don't have to do it at the present time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Is it all right if we send it across to you in 



 

 

writing? 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Sure.  Is this a concern to you, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the Saskatchewan Research Council 
likes to keep qualified people at all times.  In the case of the four 
individuals that the member is talking about, I'm not concerned because in 
their cases, two of them have gone to the federal hydrology lab, which is 
right next door, and maintain a working relationship, basically doing the 
same area only they're working with federal money.  One is working with the 
province of Saskatchewan on soil conservation in another capacity and is 
using his ability and research background to further that area which is . . 
. the province is still benefitting.  And the other one went to a private 
consulting firm but still keeps lab facilities with the research council 
and still works on an ongoing basis. 
 
So in all four cases the people are doing the same thing they did before 
for somebody else, still within the province, still carrying on the 
relationship, and I believe that's good.  And qualified people are always 
going to want to expand their horizons and move on to different areas of 
their specialty.  And in this case they're all doing that and still here 
working with us. 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- It's not accurate, Mr. Minister, to say that these people 
are working with us, meaning the research council.  They've left the 
employment of the research council.  Certainly they're in the province, and 
that's to their credit that they have that kind of commitment.  I'm 
wondering, can you give me the names of the people who have left, these 
four people that we're talking about, and which program they were involved 
in in the research council? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- I can provide that to the member in writing, in 
confidence.  I don't believe that we should talk about those four people's 
names in the legislature, but I'll certainly provide that to him. 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Well, Mr. Minister, can you tell me how many of the people 
were in the aquatic biology program?  You've mentioned two hydrologists who 
are now at the National Hydrology Institute on the University of 
Saskatchewan campus.  How many others came from the aquatic biology 
program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- I believe out of the four individuals that we're 
talking about there was one that came from that particular program. 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- And where did the other individuals come from? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Okay, we had one in terrestrial ecology, which is soil 
conservation, to most people here.  We had the one, as you mentioned, that 
was in the aquatic area, and two in hydrology area. 
 
(1100) 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Have these people been replaced, Mr. Minister? 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Well in all areas my officials tell me that we've got 
young people that were, shall we say, tutored under those areas, and we 
feel quite confident in their abilities to assume roles.  In the case of 
the hydrology stuff, for instance, there would be no sense repeating it 
because it was a contractual relationship and that work had already been 
done.  But there are people there that are quite capable of moving into 
similar areas and continuing on with similar type work, and that goes for 
the other two areas as well.  There are people that are quite capable of 
handling it. 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Am I to take it from your equivocation that these people 
have not been replaced, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- I think, Mr. Chairman, the member doesn't quite 
understand how this organization works.  It's not the same as some other 
areas of government where you have strict levels of promotional structure 
and what not.  The Saskatchewan Research Council has the ability to ebb and 
flow, if you will, as contractual work comes in or particular projects.  
And they have people in all of these areas, as I said, that are quite 
competent to handle the same type of work that the four individuals we are 
talking about perform. 
 
If a contract, for instance, for hydrology comes along, the people are 
there to step in and do it.  And I would just invite the member to go visit 
the research council and go through the various departments and the 
structures there and see for himself how these things are done. 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Mr. Minister, have these people been replaced? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Well as I tried to explain to the member opposite, you 
don't necessarily put somebody there if there's nothing for them to do.  In 
the case of the terrestrial ecology section, we have a person there that's 
in effect -- if he wants to call it replaced it -- replaced the individuals 
there and carrying on some of the same work. 
 
In the case of the hydrology area, we've got one person there instead of 
two now, because that's the amount of work that's there.  If there's more 
work comes along, you move someone into that area. 
 
In the case of the aquatic side of it, no, we probably won't put anyone in 
there because the work isn't there to do right now.  There are people 
competent to handle that area in existence, but that particular numbers 
that were associated with aquatic work -- no, we haven't put anyone in 
there because there are others there doing the existing work and there's no 
need. 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- We'll leave this for a moment, Mr. Minister, but only for a 
moment, okay? 
 
I'd like to talk now about the work that is being done at SRC (Saskatchewan 
Research Council), and I'm wondering if you can tell me your projections 
for contractual work for this coming year. 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- We're projecting about $10 million in contractual work 
this year, and that would be broken down on a percentage basis: 58 per cent 
industry, 23 per cent province, and 19 per cent federal. 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Can you give me numbers, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- The approximate -- industry would be about 5,000,800; 
province, 2.3; federal, 1.9 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- And how do those numbers compare to last year, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- It would be about a half a million dollar rise from 
last year. 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Could you give me the figures, the corresponding figures 
for last year, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Let's see -- industry would be about 52 per cent; 
province would be about the same; and federal would be a drop of -- it was 
2.3 last year, and it's 1.9 this year. 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- So you're looking for a reasonable increase, I think it's 
fair to say, in your contractual work with the industrial sector, is that 
correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Yes, you'd be looking at an increase in your 
industrial sector, of about 400,000. 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- And you have a decrease in your federal contractual work 
that, just quickly here, works out to about 17 per cent decrease, a 
decrease, I take it, of $400,000.  Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- This is '88-89 compared to '89-90, the decrease on the 
federal side would be very close to $400,000. 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- And how does that come about, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- It would primarily be the unsolicited proposal fund 
that was put out by supply and services over the years, and that one has 
been cut back. 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- And why has that been cut back, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- You'd have to ask the federal minister that. 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Well certainly you have some knowledge of that as minister 
responsible for the Saskatchewan Research Council.  It isn't as if those 
federal contracts don't affect the work of the research council.  Why has 
the federal government cut back on those?  Is that the only area where the 
federal government has cut back? 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, as everyone in Canada knows, there has 
been cut-backs by the federal government.  They certainly don't just affect 
the Saskatchewan Research Council.  The Alberta Research Council, the 
Ontario research council, I mean everyone has been affected by these 
changes in federal funding.  And it's one of the reasons, I think, that we 
have been very aggressive in the private contractual areas, because of 
these cut-backs that have been well-known. 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- I note . . . That seems fair and reasonable, that if there 
are cut-backs in the federal area, if you want to keep afloat you have to 
look at contracts from other sources.  And I note that you've just 
indicated that the provincial contracting is basically at the same level -- 
2.3 million -- the same level as it was last year. 
 
And therein I think you'd find a situation where you're forced to put all 
of your eggs . . . or a good half of your eggs, of necessity, in the 
private sector basket.  And I think that, on the basis of the discussion 
that we've had just a few moments ago about the staffing at the Research 
Council, putting those eggs in that industrial basket is counting chickens 
before they hatch. 
 
Because industry buys credibility.  And the private sector, if and when 
it's going to come to the Saskatchewan Research Council, is going to come 
there to do contractual work on the basis of the expertise and the 
credibility and the experience that particular research staff have at the 
research council.  But earlier this morning you've taken a rather casual 
attitude toward the loss of some key staff at the council, and I'm 
wondering if this does not concern you that losing some key staff is not 
going to impede your ability or cripple your ability to secure the kinds of 
increase, an increase of almost a million dollars, approaching a million 
dollars in contractual research work with the industrial sector this year.  
Is that not a concern? 
 
(1115) 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, once again I think the member opposite 
is being a little unfair.  There's no cavalier attitude at all.  I have a 
very strong board of directors of the Saskatchewan Research Council.  
They're well respected from across this province, involved in many areas of 
endeavour.  I have a great deal of faith in the officials that I have 
seated with me here today, and that the work that needs doing will get done 
by the Saskatchewan Research Council. They are constantly obtaining new 
contracts. As I mentioned, the diamond area which is totally unknown to 
Canada is already involved with Saskatchewan Research Council. 
 
Now that's on the front end of some very exciting things, and the work will 
get done.  And there is nothing cavalier at all about my attitude or the 
attitude of my board of directors or my senior management.  And I don't 
think I want to talk about my people in that way. 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Mr. Minister, I never said cavalier, I said casual.  I said 
that you have a rather casual attitude to the situation. 
 



 

 

Mr. Minister, I'm wondering if you can . . . I think we're going to be 
coming back to this issue again.  I'm wondering if you can tell me, as 
minister, what you view as the . . . how you see the relation of the 
Saskatchewan government to the Saskatchewan Research Council.  Can you 
sketch that relationship for us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Well the Saskatchewan government is the owner of the 
Saskatchewan Research Council and provides an ongoing grant year by year to 
that particular institution which has been very consistent over the last 
number of years. 
 
I believe that the space that the Saskatchewan Research Council works out 
of is as good and conducive a work place as you're going to get anywhere in 
this province certainly, and certainly compares with similar facilities in 
other provinces.  Having been through it a number of times and as they add 
on to it, I'm impressed every time I go there, with the work place and 
certainly our goal is to continue to monitor what is going on in the way of 
activity in our province and be aware, be in on the leading edge of the 
technological and applied sciences that need to be applied in this 
province.  And that's the role of the Saskatchewan government and the 
research council. 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- If that's the case, Mr. Minister, why is the Government of 
Saskatchewan cutting back its grants to the research council? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- I don't believe, Mr. Chairman, there is a cut-back.  
There's a 2 per cent increase, there's two B budgets drop off, and there's 
money comes on from Environment, 500-and-some thousand dollars.  Figures 
add up to 2 per cent increase to me. 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- What numbers drop off, Mr. Minister?  Can you explain that 
to us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Now the two B budget items were the fermentation area 
for 300,000 and the other one is CAD/CAM (computer aided drafting/computer 
aided mapping) at 100,000.  And the fermentation area is under review, and 
there is a chance that some of that may be  
 Dback on again.  And of course the environmental stuff is now on for five 
fifty. 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Why is the fermentation work under review?  You say there's 
a chance it may be back on.  What's going on there?  Either it's valuable 
work or you're going to be cutting it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Well industry -- and you realize that that whole area 
is fairly new in this province and there's been announcements lately -- the 
industry may at this time be not ready to go on with the process more, and 
there's no sense applying research in the fermentation area unless you've 
got people ready to apply it to something.  So it would be the needs of 
industry out there that'll basically determine how the fermentation area 
works. 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Well I thought we just established earlier that one of the 



 

 

strengths of the research council, in fact one of its main purposes was the 
application and transfer of technology to the private sector.  And we're 
looking for private sector contracts to increase this year by some 
$700,000, and yet here we have an instance of $300,000 worth of provincial 
money for fermentation work that apparently is no longer viewed as 
necessary because that's not where the private sector is at. 
 
At the same time we have your Premier talking about the need for economic 
diversification and renaming the Department of Agriculture the Department 
of Food and Agriculture.  Now how does this kind of cut-back from 
provincial funding for fermentation work fit into that larger goal of your 
government, its own self-professed goal of diversifying the agricultural 
economy, with agricultural processing?  And there are manifold 
opportunities in fermentation work that Saskatchewan people could 
capitalize on.  Why is the Government of Saskatchewan pulling back $300,000 
from fermentation work? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Well I think, Mr. Chairman, the way you should 
categorize it more would be SRC is in the business of technology pull 
rather than technology push.  Obviously there was some work that was done 
on fermentation. 
 
Industry is using various aspects of work done by many people, and I'll 
give an example.  If the new Lanigan operation where Sask Wheat Pool is 
involved with Mohawk and they're involved with the feed lot and they're 
involved with a bunch of people in the community, find in their process 
that there is a problem with fermentation that they didn't expect because 
of the type of grain they're using or whatever, there is then a need for 
someone to take a look at that.  And that would be a prime example where 
Saskatchewan Research Council would say yes, we think we should look at 
that.  And they would come to government and ask for funding to further 
that fermentation area. 
 
If you go out and just do fermentation work and there's nobody there to 
take it up for whatever reason, you haven't really spent your money all 
that wisely.  The work they did was obviously felt to be all that was 
needed to do at that particular time to satisfy the needs.  And there's no 
sense doing something that no one's going to latch on to. 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- And yet, Mr. Minister, you alluded just two or three 
responses earlier that this work may not, in fact, be cut.  Is that the 
case? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, in the case of fermentation, which we're 
talking about here, for instance, there is a major study going on I'm told, 
which includes Saskatchewan, in the area of fermentation and the 
interaction of alcohol with fossil fuels in the market-place and that type 
of thing.  And I believe that was initiated by the old department of 
science and technology and that that report will be down at the end of 
July, early August, something like that. 
 
And it will clearly indicate at that time probably if there are needs and 
wants in the fermentation industry in its relationship to gasoline and that 



 

 

type of thing.  Can these things be accessed out of Alberta better than 
Saskatchewan?  That type of information will be in that report.  And at 
that time the research council can make some value judgements, but also the 
industry will make some value judgements and see if there's anything in the 
area of fermentation that they believe can be furthered.  And that's a 
fairly straightforward process that goes on all the time. 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Mr. Minister, I think what we see is the Government of 
Saskatchewan making value judgements about science and technology in this 
province, eliminating the department of science and technology and cutting 
back the Saskatchewan Research Council.  Can you explain why the CAD/CAM 
funding has been cut by the Government of Saskatchewan at the Saskatchewan 
Research Council? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- CAD/CAM is a classic area of the type of thing SRC 
does.  They started way back in '77 and did this particular item for 
industry, moved it now into the industrial area, and it's a mature 
technology, okay?  The next stage, if you will, is this computer integrated 
manufacturing process, where kind of the machine is integrated totally with 
the computer and has access to other kinds of computers and that type of 
thing. 
 
So the CAD/CAM thing, it was always stated from the very beginning that 
once it was processed and integrated with the industrial community that it 
would be a mature product and then we would get on to newer and better 
things.  And I think that process has been ongoing for a long time. 
 
(1130) 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- It is easy for you to suggest that CAD/CAM has been 
integrated into the industrial community or the business community across 
the province.  I think the reality is another thing.  I question why the 
government is pulling back from this kind of work, eliminated the centre 
for advanced technology at Kelsey a number of years ago in its budgetary 
restraint.  I think that the real answer, Mr. Minister, is that because of 
the horrendous deficit that this province is carrying, you simply don't 
have the ability to do what you might do and probably should be doing with 
respect to science and technology at the Saskatchewan Research Council. 
 
And you talk about the ebb and flow of work at the research council as 
contractual work comes along.  And I say to you that work is less and less 
likely to come along as you begin paring the meat from the bone of the 
research council.  And it's all well and good to rely on the industrial 
sector to make up the deficit from your cut-backs at the council, but what 
we see happening, Mr. Minister, as a result of these kinds of cut-backs is 
key research people leaving the research council's employment -- yes, going 
elsewhere in the province.  But that's not to the credit of the research 
council.  That's at the peril, I would suggest, of the research council 
continuing to snag contracts from the industrial sector. 
 
And I suspect, Mr. Minister, and I think it needs to be said that what your 
government has in hand or in mind, maybe more appropriately, is the idea of 
possibly privatizing the research council.  And I want to know if you have 



 

 

any plans to privatize the Saskatchewan Research Council at the present 
time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, the answer to that is no.  I get a 
little bit annoyed at times when these suggestions are made -- and we're 
talking straight politics here -- because I have before me a chart, the ebb 
and flow of contractual work at the research council, which I'd be happy to 
send across to the member. 
 
And this goes right back to 1977 during the years of an NDP administration, 
and it's a constant up and down like this.  The levels are basically the 
same.  There isn't hardly any difference at all.  At the end of the day 
there is a little more contractual work, but I mean the peaks and valleys 
are exactly the same through 15 years, and there is no difference. 
 
And as far as turn-around of people, as I said to the member before, over 
the last four years I gave the numbers of turn-around; and there's a 
constant coming and going of people as they apply their research, as they 
get involved in a contractual situation, and then they move on. 
 
And people do not go to the Saskatchewan Research Council, by and large, to 
spend their entire life there because the world is moving very rapidly 
today.  They perform a particular project.  They're involved with an 
industry in a certain area, and then they move on to other things.  And 
that's necessary for the research council to stay fresh and vigorous and to 
be prepared to step into new areas as they come along. 
 
If the member wishes to see this ebb and flow of work, I'd be happy to send 
it across to him. 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Yes, I'd like to see that, Mr. Minister, and would 
appreciate that information.  Can you tell me what percentage of the 
contractual work from the provincial government comes from the ADF 
(Agriculture Development Fund)? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, that breakdown specifically of ADF's 
stuff I'd have to provide to the member in writing.  I can't dig it out of 
the various lines right now.  ADF stuff ebbs and flows like everything 
else.  Some years you have demonstration projects which are fairly 
expensive, and then in another year you won't have a demonstration project.  
But we'll endeavour to dig all the ADF stuff out and provide it to the 
member. 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- I'd appreciate that, Mr. Minister.  And if you can outline 
what particular projects that involves, I'd appreciate that as well. 
 
I'd just like to touch base briefly on the grants and aid made by the 
research council to the Saskatchewan universities for research.  Can you 
give the figures for that for this coming year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, the program the hon. member's talking 
about was in a phase-down situation.  It was decided four or five years ago 
to gradually bring that down to zero, and I believe the '88-89 year was the 



 

 

last year that there was those grants made. 
 
And the decision was made a number of years ago that for the money spent it 
was felt it was probably best to do it with our own people, and that we 
were getting better value for our dollar spending those moneys internally 
than we were with the other program.  And as I say, it was phased out over 
a number of years, so it's no big surprise to anyone. 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Exactly, Mr. Minister.  It's no big surprise to anyone that 
a program like that is being phased out, just like the students in 
industry, graduates in industry program was eliminated by your government 
back in the '87-88 budgetary year. 
 
And what we see here again, Mr. Minister, only confirms what I'm saying, 
that because of your government's fiscal mismanagement and the kind of 
deficit we're carrying, where we're now paying 1.3 or $1.4 million a day 
just to pay the interest on the provincial debt, you can't scare up a 
hundred thousand dollars for grants and aids to the university.  And 
because of that you can't scare up from your provincial budget $1.8 million 
for the students in industry, graduates in industry program, a program 
incidentally that your predecessor spoke highly of but couldn't deliver on 
precisely because of the budgetary cut-backs.  And I say this is all part 
of the trajectory that we've seen in the last three or four years, 
inexorably to diminish the scientific and technological work that's being 
done in this province.  And it's happening because you have no 
alternatives, given your fiscal mismanagement. 
 
Mr. Minister, I'd like to know if the research council is doing any work on 
the greenhouse effect.  I know that there's all sorts of work going on at 
the council surrounding different dimensions of the greenhouse effect, but 
I'm wondering if there are any contractual arrangements with the Government 
of Saskatchewan at the present time for study into the greenhouse effect. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- I think there's two things I'd like to comment on.  
The member opposite talked about the research council's relationship with 
education in the province, and I would just like to mention a few things to 
show that the research council is very involved in education, and then I'll 
comment on his greenhouse question. 
 
This is all things current that SRC are participating in: in the University 
of Regina's engineering co-operative program, they're sponsoring a 
Saskatchewan high school student in the Shad Valley program run by the 
Canadian Centre for Creative Technology; SRC through IRAP (industrial 
research assistance program) supports the placement of 73 highly skilled 
students in qualified Saskatchewan companies; SRC in co-operation with 
SCATH, Saskatoon Catholic school board, established partnership in 
education program 1986; and they've introduced Saskatchewan's first 
developer-funded archaeology program.  So a number of areas where SRC is 
involved with the educational field. 
 
As far as the greenhouse effects study, that is in a proposal stage right 
now and hopefully those proposals will be ready to select from some time by 
this fall. 



 

 

 
Mr. Koenker: -- The proposals for the greenhouse study effect comes from 
whom, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- We're scoping that request at the request of the 
Department of Environment, so it's SRC that would be doing it. 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- And I'm correct in understanding that you said it's hoped 
that this study will be . . . the arrangements for this study will be in 
place some time this fall? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- It ultimately will be dependent on the Department of 
Environment and their officials and their expectations.  SRC, like I said, 
is scoping a proposal for them and are ready to do the work and it will be 
up to them to decide the specific areas within the proposal that they wish 
to advance. 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Mr. Minister, I don't blame you for this one, but I 
certainly blame your colleagues.  Because I have right here the challenges 
and opportunities document that accompanied last year's provincial budget 
in March of 1989 where your government goes to the expense of putting 
together an additional propaganda document that has never before been seen 
accompanying a provincial budget in the history of this province, a 
challenges and opportunities document. 
 
And on page E8 of that document, you crowed or your government crowed -- 
I'm not saying that you did -- but your government crowed about the 
greenhouse effect study that was going to be undertaken.  And I quote: 
 

 In 1989-90, the government will undertake a research study on the impact 
of the greenhouse effect on Saskatchewan to develop a plan of action to 
mitigate any negative affects. 

 
And what we have as a result of correspondence a year later dated March 5 
from the Minister of Environment's office here in Saskatchewan is a letter 
to myself saying that: 
 

 After extensive consultation with other departments and the Saskatchewan 
Research Council, terms of reference were produced and a proposal 
requested.  I expect that the study will be undertaken in the very near 
future. 

 
And that's not what the challenges and opportunities document said a year 
earlier.  It said that during that calendar year, a year ago, the study 
would be undertaken.  And what we have again from your government is a 
failure to act on commitments that it makes publicly and back-pedalling. 
 
And I urge you to push the Department of the Environment and the 
Environment minister, who is your colleague, to undertake this study with 
dispatch, because I happen to believe that the Saskatchewan Research 
Council has excellent resources to contribute to such a study here in 
Saskatchewan.  And the time is long overdue for that study to take place.  
In fact I know that the research council has excellent people to do that 



 

 

kind of study.  What we don't have is a commitment fiscally from your 
government to allow that kind of research to take place.  And that's what 
we're talking about. 
 
And I'm worried that as you drag your heels on this one, as you pull back 
from other commitments, what we're going to see is more people leaving the 
employment of the research council and a gradual erosion of what has been a 
fine institution serving the people of Saskatchewan, a council that has 
dedicated staff, able staff, but a government that doesn't respect them or 
help to enable them.  And that's my concern, Mr. Minister. 
 
(1145) 
 
I have just a few more brief concerns.  And I'm wondering if you can tell 
me how it is that payments to the Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation miraculously drop from 2.8 million to 2.1 million this 
budgetary year, when a year ago that's where you started, and last year you 
went up to 2.8 and now you're back down to 2.1.  Now how can that be with 
the property management corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- I'm told, Mr. Chairman, that SPMC (Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation) are charging us less for the same space.  
We've got as much square footage as we had before, and I think questions as 
far as SPMC would better be directed to the minister of SPMC and to why 
they've been able to reduce these rates.  When it costs us less for our 
rental space, correspondingly we get less in our grant for rental space. 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Well, Mr. Minister, that's just not good enough, and I'm 
not going to belabour the point.  But what we see right here is clear 
evidence of the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation being nothing 
more than a political slush fund.  That at the convenience of your 
government, you can jack up the payments to the property management 
corporation and skim gravy off the budget of the research council last 
year, for political purposes, to build a political slush fund, and this 
year you can decrease it by $732,000 in one fell swoop.  And that's nothing 
more than almost a million dollars going into a political slush fund for 
your government's political purposes. 
 
And it doesn't make any sense to the Saskatchewan Research Council or to 
the people of Saskatchewan for that kind of fiddle-faddling with the 
numbers to go on. 
 
I'd just like to ask a couple of brief questions, Mr. Minister.  Has the 
remote sensing program changed appreciably this past year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Yes, my officials inform me it has changed.  They are 
now moved into a spatial technologies group which at the moment is 
undertaking a major proposal to the federal government for funding.  So 
it's expanding its horizons and its technological capabilities. 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Has the internal budgetary allocation for the remote 
sensing program been increased, Mr. Minister? 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- My information is that the funding is about the same 
as it was last year, but they've been able to add some technical expertise 
to the team that they didn't have before.  If the member wants a specific 
figure for this coming year, I'll endeavour to get that to him. 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- I'd be very interested, Mr. Member, if you could give me 
more than figures.  Just give me as much information as you can about some 
of the trajectories for the remote sensing program.  It's an area of real 
interest and real opportunity, and it'd be helpful to know about some of 
the good things that are going on. 
 
I'd like to conclude, Mr. Minister, by thanking you for your responses 
today.  I found it very helpful to have this kind of information that 
you've provided.  I was glad to hear you say that you have no plans to 
privatize the research council, and if that in fact is true, I commend you 
for it. 
 
I would like to conclude by saying that I fear you're slowly strangling the 
capabilities of the research council, because it isn't a priority with your 
government.  I'm concerned about the attrition of staff at the council, 
especially some key staff, and the erosion of credibility that follows on 
the heels of that precisely at a time when you're looking to secure 
increased contractual work from the industrial sector. 
 
Just one final comment, almost a plea.  If you really want to do something 
that's right and something that will be very well received, consider 
reinstituting something akin to the students in industry/graduates in 
industry program.  There's an incredible vacuum in the province of 
Saskatchewan for young people with technical skills.  In terms of finding 
employment the majority of them are leaving the province.  I know that at 
the College of Engineering at the U of S there's real concern among the 
faculty there over the number of Saskatchewan young people who are 
graduating from engineering and leaving the province. 
 
And here you have with the Saskatchewan Research Council for really a very 
modest amount of money, the opportunity to do something wonderful not just 
for young students who have seen opportunities for youth grants cut by 
seven and a half million dollars over the last three years and have seen 
the students in industry/graduates in industry program cut -- here you have 
an opportunity to do something wonderful not only for young people, not 
only for the research council itself, and not only for small business 
across Saskatchewan, especially in rural Saskatchewan, but you have the 
opportunity to do something wonderful for Saskatchewan people and for 
Saskatchewan taxpayers. 
 
And I say that kind of investment in money would be a very wonderful 
investment as opposed to some of the other investments that your government 
has been prepared to make in projects like Cargill.  Here you will see 
dividends, clear and clean, for Saskatchewan people.  And no one will 
question, no one will question you as minister if you make those kinds of 
commitments to young people and to industry in Saskatchewan.  They will 
applaud you. 
 



 

 

And so I conclude by pleading with you, as minister responsible, to 
consider the reinstitution of a students in industry/graduates in industry 
type program, if for no other reason than for the sake of your own good 
name and your own reputation. 
 
Finally, I'd like to applaud the staff of the research council and their 
work.  I wish you and them all good things in the year ahead and hope that 
some of your own energies, your own best energies can be applied with the 
people at the research council to work wonderful things for the province of 
Saskatchewan.  Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 35 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Economic Diversification and Investment Fund 

Vote 66 
Saskatchewan Research Council 

 
Item 11 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Minister, I'm wondering 
if you can just give a bit of a breakdown on the numbers given here at some 
later date.  I don't expect them now. 
 
Item 11 agreed to. 
 
(1200) 

Supplementary Estimates 1990 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Saskatchewan Research Council 
Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 35 

 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 35 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- That includes the estimates for research council.  I would 
like to thank the officials and the minister. 
 
 DHon. Mr. Swenson: -- I'd like to take this opportunity to thank my 
officials for coming in today, coming down from Saskatoon, and providing me 
with the information.  And I'd also like to thank my critic for his 
questions, some excellent ones there.  And I will endeavour to make sure 
that the written responses that we agreed to are promptly delivered to the 
critic.  Thank you. 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- I too would like to thank the minister's officials for 
their time today and particularly to thank both the minister and the 
officials that these estimates were not held yesterday as originally 



 

 

planned.  My wife convocated from the University of Saskatchewan yesterday 
afternoon, and it would've been very difficult for me to have missed that 
and to have been here.  Thank you very much. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Energy and Mines 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 23 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order, order. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, thank you very much.  Mr. 
Chairman, I have a couple of questions which I wish to direct to the 
minister respecting potash and potash production.  And I will try to, in 
the interest of time, summarize the questions that I want to put to you.  
And I would hope that with your phalanx of officials there you'll be able 
to provide me with the answers relatively quickly and we can get on with 
the business of this particular aspect of your estimates. 
 
What I'd like to know is what the production in the world, according to 
your department's estimates, of potash there was in the years working back 
1989, '88, '87, '86, '85.  You can go all the way back to 1980 if you want, 
if it's a readily available chart.  But as far as I'm concerned we can skip 
and go right to 1980 -- for the years '80, '85, '86, '87, '88, '89.  And to 
speed this up, of that world production figure, what share of the 
production was attributed to Saskatchewan producers, during those same 
periods, of course? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, I've got figures here back to 1980, if 
the member wishes.  What I have is world consumption, Saskatchewan 
production, that'd be in K D22O tonnes, metric tons.  Is that what the 
member wishes? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Not consumption but production, world production. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- That I would have to . . . I don't have right now.  
All I've got is what was consumed. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Give us what you have. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Okay, demand?  1985 would have been 28.5 million 
tonnes K D22O -- I'll do this line first and then go to the other one; '86 
was 27.3; '87 was 33; '88 was 31; '89, 31; and 1990 will be 31.3. 
 
At the same time I'll go to Saskatchewan production, starting once again in 
1985, would be 6 million 378, 6 million 312, 7 million 022, 7 million 106, 
6 million 253, and 6 million 3. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Now, Mr. Minister, I asked -- I think I did; if I didn't 
I'll ask now -- whether your department has percentages of production, the 
percentage of the Saskatchewan production as a percentage of the figures 
that you have. 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- What I have, Mr. Chairman, is an operating rate based 
on sales.  I don't know if that's close to what the member wants but I'll 
give him those numbers.  In '85 it would have been 75 per cent; in '86, 67 
per cent; in '87, 71 per cent; in '88, 80 per cent; in '89, 69 per cent; 
and in '90 that would be 66 per cent. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- I would ask your officials just to do a percentage of 
Saskatchewan production of the total world production calculation while I 
ask the next question -- and that is if you would care to tell me what the 
average price per tonne for potash has been in the corresponding years that 
I've talked about: '89, '88, '87, '86, '85 to 1980. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, for the member's previous question . . . 
and I'd like him to clarify that one he just gave me again.  The previous 
question was Saskatchewan percentage of the world, I believe.  And my 
officials have given me some numbers here -- in '85 that'd be 22.5; '86, 
22.1; '87, 21.3; '88, 23.8; '89, 21.6. 
 
And did the member wish an average price per K D22O tonne for each of those 
years? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Yes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Here they go -- 1985 would be 97.45; '86 would be 
87.47; '87 would be 95.53; '88 would be 137.20; and '89 would be 142. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Now, Mr. Chairman, I have another question which perhaps 
the minister also has handily available, and that is what the share of 
production is attributed to the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan during 
those years. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm informed that it's been standard 
policy in the potash business all along that only the total provincial 
numbers have been given and never have the individual company numbers been 
given.  And if PCS (Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan) wished to release 
that information, that's up to PCS, as it is with anyone else. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, can the minister advise whether or not The 
Potash Resources Act, 1987 has been proclaimed, and if it has, if the board 
pursuant to that Act has been established? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- No, it has not. 
 
(1215) 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Can the minister tell me why? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, I believe the reason the Act hasn't been 
proclaimed is that there is a different environment out there today than 
there was at the time that the Act was introduced into the legislature.  
And constantly one monitors these things and watches the U.S. market-place, 
the offshore markets, and makes policy decisions based on those 



 

 

requirements of the day. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Is it the intention of the minister or the government to 
recommend repeal of The Potash Resources Act, 1987 in the light of the fact 
that it has not been implemented? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- I don't believe, Mr. Chairman, there'd be any current 
intentions to do that. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- So we have a situation of a Bill which was introduced 
hurriedly by the deputy premier, your predecessor, in the fall session of 
1987 under the aegis of a major crisis, which has never been proclaimed -- 
is not the law, has had no impact -- remains unproclaimed, is not going to 
be changed, and we are given no good reason as to why this state of affairs 
persists. 
 
What is the reason for leaving it on the books as it were, especially in 
light of the fact that it's not going to be proclaimed and not going to be 
repealed?  Wasn't this really an exercise in public relations back in 1987?  
That's basically what it amounts to today in the light of these figures. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- I think, Mr. Chairman, the reasons at the time for 
that particular piece of legislation were very valid, because they aimed 
directly at many areas in Saskatchewan that we feel strongly about.  And 
we're talking about the jobs that are associated with mining of potash, the 
major investment by many people in this particular industry, the portion of 
provincial revenue which is derived from potash royalties and the 
contribution that that makes to the infrastructure in our province, and I 
think the fact that this particular piece of legislation has had the 
blessing of this legislature. 
 
It is there and could speedily be used if conditions drop back to the same 
condition that they were in 1987.  Obviously at that time there was a great 
deal of stress in the potash industry, and the ability for some of those 
people to work out their problems without this legislation was welcome 
news; and to see the prices firm up, the protection of the jobs, and the 
royalty revenue back to the province.  So I think it's useful to have this 
particular piece of legislation at the disposal of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- So the minister views the Bill as kind of a sword of 
Damocles, as I understand it.  It would be there to be used as an 
appropriate government of the day should decide it should be used, and that 
is your position.  Is that correct, with respect to this Bill?  Kind of a 
sword of Damocles, to be used in the eventuality that the economic 
situation of potash with respect to production or price needs its hurried 
implementation.  That's your position still today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- As I said before, Mr. Chairman, the fondest wish of 
government at the time was that industry would be able to work out some of 
their problems, and we're glad to see that those problems have been 
resolved.  It was prudent at the time to have this particular piece of 
legislation to accomplish all of the things that I mentioned.  I think that 



 

 

the fact that this particular legislature passed that piece of legislation 
and it is available, it is prudent. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Well I note, Mr. Chairman, the minister's words that this 
legislation, having been passed by the House, is a prudent piece of 
legislation, and I note his statement that this government would not be 
reluctant to use it.  But, Mr. Chairman, I think some other observations 
need to be made about this whole exercise.  The observations that need to 
be made are as follows. 
 
First of all, Saskatchewan's percentage of production of the world at large 
has not increased since 1987.  It's decreased roughly from 23 per cent 
according to the department's own figures, to about 20 per cent from 1987 
to 1990, which is a significant drop.  It's about a 15 per cent drop in 
relative terms.  That means that we have curtailed production here while 
production in the world elsewhere rises, and somebody else produces and 
sells. 
 
And of course the results are reflective.  We have the lay-offs at Cory, 
the shut-down at Cory.  We have the attacks on the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan including its privatization.  We have the lay-offs.  We have a 
diminished return to the treasury of the province of Saskatchewan -- that 
quite might not be true, the last statement that I make because of the 
somewhat higher prices in which case return, if it's price sensitive would 
be reflected in absolute terms.  But in any measured proper comparison 
there is a reduction of revenue to the treasury. 
 
We have a Bill which has not been proclaimed.  We have a Bill that the 
government doesn't know what to do about.  We have an unresolved American 
situation.  Nothing has happened there to change the circumstances in 1990 
as opposed to 1987.   And in effect, we have the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan acting as the shield for the American industry, or the 
industry at large.  That's essentially what the potash resources board has 
done. 
 
And my colleague points out as well that the revenues to the treasury, 
estimated in 1991 to be 66.1 million, are down from an actual of 96 million 
in '89, which is a 50 per cent drop and is nowhere near the estimate of 
1990.  So there is a reduction in the revenue to the treasury of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, I think the facts indicate that this government has horribly 
mismanaged the potash industry -- horribly.  It has horribly mismanaged it 
with the human tragedy and suffering that has befallen the affected 
workers.  It has mismanaged it because it has no game plan as to what to do 
with this potash resources board legislation of 1987 for the future -- 
stuck: can't repeal it and can't implement it; lost revenues, which all of 
course add to the huge debt which of course has been the reason for the 
reduction in the credit rating in the province of Saskatchewan, lost their 
capacity to diversify and to stimulate growth. 
 
And the only beneficiaries are potash producers outside the province of 
Saskatchewan.  I think, Mr. Chairman, that the words of 1987 of the now 



 

 

Deputy Premier and at that time the minister of mineral resources, will go 
down in the annals of this government's history when it is written, as 
being the most hollow and inaccurate rationale for the introduction of a 
hastily drafted and hastily thought out piece of legislation probably 
anywhere in recent history in the House, with tremendous damage to 
communities and to people involved.  And that the statistics show. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Chairman, and I say to the minister and I say to the 
government opposite, that your mismanagement which has become a hallmark of 
the government's administration, whether it's the financial department or 
whatever else, Crown corporation involvement or joint venturing, your 
mismanagement here is monumental -- monumental.  There is nothing less that 
can be used by way of a description to the gross mismanagement of this 
industry by this particular position. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I think that the only 
mismanagement that has ever occurred in the potash business in this 
province occurred when the former NDP government went to New York and 
borrowed a whole bunch of American dollars to pay American companies to 
take out of this province. 
 
And as the Finance minister said the other day, it's obvious at the end of 
the day that the taxpayer of this province got nailed for about $440 
million by the NDP government.  We offered this particular company to the 
public at $18; the public widely accepted the offering.  The 200 million 
was taken up.  And if it had been so badly mismanaged, Mr. Chairman, why 
was there an extra $230 million on the table by Saskatchewan people to pick 
up a share at $18 when we know the market today, the market today is at 
$14.50.  Now obviously the market has the ability to determine what 
something is valued at, and today that value is significantly less -- 430 
millions of dollars within our province were offered up for shares in the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
Certainly not mismanagement by this government, Mr. Chairman, because this 
government has taken steps over time, through that particular piece of 
legislation, to protect the interests of Saskatchewan people.  And as I 
said, the only mismanagement that has occurred was when the decision was 
made on a philosophical, ideological plane to go to New York and borrow 
American dollars at American interest rates to give to American companies 
to take out of our province.  And that is the only mismanagement that ever 
occurred in potash. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, the minister's defence is, to put it mildly, 
not only inaccurate but really quite thin, quite hollow.  The minister 
knows full well the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan from 1976 to 1982 
returned profits, acceptable profits, under the terms of reference that are 
required.  And the minister knows full well that the sale of the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan cost the people, thanks to your sale, more than 
it put for us to get into the potash industry in the first instance.  You, 
by one simple stroke of the pen, lost $441 million according to the Crown 
Management Board statistics on the sale of the potash corporation, which is 
more than was paid for the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan in the first 
instance -- not counting for profits, not counting for dividends, not 



 

 

counting for royalties which are paid.  Those are the facts. 
 
(1230) 
 
But I want to slide off the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan a moment 
because I'm going to get the estimate here under consideration.  The 
estimate here under consideration is the management of the resource as a 
whole under the Department of Energy, and whether or not you people have 
done what is correct to stimulate potash development in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I am saying to you that your response of 1987, the potash resources 
board, was a sham, a damaging sham.  It has resulted in reduced 
Saskatchewan production as a percentage of the world production.  It has 
nothing for the price.  It remains there, as I said, like a Damocles sword 
over the industry.  It has resulted in lay-offs as we contract in order to 
allow other segments of the world's potash industry to expand. 
 
Those are the facts, even by your own figures as you've given them to me.  
And that's your administration after eight years.  And on top of that, you 
sell off the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan at a loss larger than the 
amount of money that the people invested in getting into it in 1976. 
 
This is, Mr. Minister, gross incompetence.  I mean we have a debt of $14 
billion.  This is gross incompetence.  And I guess the thing that troubles 
me the most about it is that I don't hear from you -- moving from the past 
to the future -- I don't hear from you what the game plan is. 
 
I asked you what your intentions about this Bill are.  And your intentions 
are just to keep it there.  Is that the sum and the total of the strategy 
of the Department of Energy with respect to making sure that Saskatchewan's 
market share of production is maintained to acceptable world levels.  Is 
that the sum and short of it?  Keep that undeclared, unproclaimed Bill 
there -- is that the strategy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, I would just like to reiterate for the 
hon. member what I did before in regards to The Potash Resources Act.  The 
Potash Resources Act was introduced in this legislature to protect jobs of 
Saskatchewan people, to protect investment of Saskatchewan people, to make 
sure that provincial revenue and the infrastructure that is associated with 
those revenues remains sound.  And we are prepared at any time to implement 
that particular piece of legislation in order to provide that protection. 
 
And if, for any moment, anyone watching this particular session of the 
legislature believes the Hon. Leader of the Opposition when he compares 
1975 dollars with 1989 dollars . . . because the dollars that were derived 
by the sale of the potash corporation which were applied to the debt of the 
province of Saskatchewan were 1989 dollars.  And I would suggest to the 
Leader of the Opposition that the dollars that they borrowed in New York in 
1975-76, if they were put in 1989 dollars, would probably be in the  
 Drange of a billion and a half.  And that obviously is a far cry, that is 
a far cry from the evaluation that he puts on the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan. 



 

 

 
So we stand ready, Mr. Chairman, as a department and as a government to do 
those things to provide that protection that is necessary to the potash 
business in this province. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- To provide that protection -- how do you tell that to the 
400 Cory potash miners?  Tell them that.  How do you explain that one?  
What happened to those jobs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I think it's totally unrelated to 
what the hon. member's been talking about.  Cory is harsh economic reality 
and it's considerably less costly to operate three mines instead of four.  
And the lower costs improve the competitive position of PCS in as far as 
the company's long-term economic viability.  We fully expect the management 
of PCS to operate the company so that it is both competitive and 
profitable. 
 
I suppose if ultimately the management structure that you have in place 
with a mining operation can't perform those tasks, you ultimately put at 
risk the entire employment slate of that particular company and that goes 
right from the CEO (chief executive officer) down to the person that 
services the machines.  So you expect management to perform those tasks in 
the best interest of the company. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Well you see, Mr. Chairman, it's those kinds of answers 
which I think have gotten this government into so much problem with the 
credibility of the public of the province of Saskatchewan.  You tell me on 
the one hand that the potash resources board 1987 Act is designed to 
protect jobs.  Of course when it comes to the 200 Cory workers who lose 
their jobs -- and I say the Act has not worked as proof positive, those 
loss of jobs -- you then come back to me and say, well it's the harsh 
economic reality of life.  You doggone right it's the harsh economic 
reality of life.  The harsh economic reality of those 200 workers and their 
families in Saskatchewan as a result of that Bill and policy who have lost 
their jobs and have had to move out while the people down there in New 
Mexico or in Israel or other parts of the potash producing worlds of the 
country, even in New Brunswick, continue to work.  That is your policy.  
That is the result.  And that you simply and cavalierly dismiss as some 
sort of harsh economic realities of life. 
 
What imposed this imperative on you to introduce this kind of legislation?  
What imposed upon you the imperative that our families should be suffering 
here at home?  You haven't even proclaimed the Bill.  Why should we be 
losing market share?  What's the rationale for that?  You're supposed to be 
standing up for Saskatchewan interests, not New Mexico or Israel.  And you 
tell me the harsh realities, economic realities.  You doggone right there 
are harsh realities.  You people don't know what those harsh realities are 
for the working men and women of the province of Saskatchewan, and moreover 
you don't care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- And I want to close off by saying: not only do you not know 



 

 

and don't care, you don't even know where the next stratagem should take 
you as a department, with respect to potash.  You don't know what its 
future is.  What is its future for the province of Saskatchewan in the 
1990s? 
 
Tell me in the context of the potash resources board.  You couldn't do it.  
And it might not be applied is what you say.  You don't know what the 
future is.  You have no vision about it and no commitment about it, none 
whatsoever.  As long as you can set it up, privatize it, and let the 
private boys come in and develop it and ship it out of here as fast as it 
can be shipped out -- that is the game plan.  That's about as far as it 
goes, or about as far as Nancy McLean's latest opinion poll tells you to 
go. 
 
I tell you, Mr. Minister, that is -- I'm levelling -- a harsh condemnation 
on your government.  I don't necessarily blame you personally.  You're a 
brand new minister to this operation and you're saddled with this approach 
that the Deputy Premier had here before the House.  I don't even think you 
understood as a back-bencher -- and I don't mean this in a demeaning way -- 
why it was done.  So I don't blame you on a personal basis, but you're now 
the government's spokesperson who is defending this policy. 
 
And I'm making two points this morning: that this Bill didn't work and the 
statistics show it; and the second point that I make is you are bankrupt of 
a game plan as to how to use resource of potash for future economic 
development.  And if you weren't, you would have told me specifically, not 
only with the Bill, but in other terms what directions you have.  And you 
have none.  You have not been able to tell me. 
 
You're going to sit and watch and monitor the situation.  Sit and monitor 
the situation while -- to use your words -- the harsh economic realities 
play their way to the families of the province of Saskatchewan.  Sir, you 
should be ashamed, you should be ashamed of that result by your government 
in this area.  That's all I can say. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, the harsh realities for working men and 
women in this province were very evident under the NDP.  The NDP government 
of the day believed that the government should be the one that controlled 
the market-place, that the government should be actively involved in that 
international market-place.  And the harsh reality for working men and 
women was that those mines would keep producing, say, at election time or 
when some other particular agenda of the government was at stake, and the 
stockpiles would grow and the ability to market those stockpiles in the 
market-place weren't there. 
 
And the member knows full well that that was the case; that there was 
inventories that laid around for years and years and years because the 
government of the day had a particular political agenda to fulfil. 
 
This government doesn't believe that should be the case, that the 
market-place out there, the ability to move potash in the various areas 



 

 

that Saskatchewan potash go, should be in that realm; that government, as 
was advocated by the NDP, should not be taking over that market-place; and 
that those mines be run on a realistic, business-like manner, because that 
will be the best way to get return to the taxpayer of this province -- not 
by running mines at half capacity, not stockpiling product that will never 
enter the market-place for years and years and years, simply because you 
had some kind of political agenda.  And that is a harsh reality that was 
the case under the previous administration. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I'd like to take 
you back to the pit, in particular the gravel pit that we've talked about 
over a couple of different occasions now, and I would like to go back to a 
response that you made earlier when I asked you for correspondence between 
the individual who received the gravel pit and the department and the 
correspondence that went from the department back to the individual.  And 
you responded to me at that time that you could not release that 
correspondence because of client-lawyer confidentiality relationship. 
 
Upon checking this out with a solicitor, Mr. Minister, I would ask you to 
reflect on the answer you gave me.  The confidentiality of the relationship 
between a lawyer and the client means that the lawyer cannot release 
information in particular to the client.  That does not mean that the 
recipient to the correspondence or the client himself are barred from 
releasing that information.  And so I'd ask you again today, Mr. Minister, 
to release any correspondence that came from Mr. Wagman or on behalf of Mr. 
Wagman, to the department and any correspondence from the department back 
to Mr. Wagman or to someone on behalf of Mr. Wagman.  And would you please 
release that now, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, I just sent across the copy of the lease 
I believe that the hon. member wanted as concerns Mr. Wagman.  As far as 
anything else though, it has always been the policy of this department and 
will continue to be -- and that's under many administrations -- that those 
particular items of correspondence between legal counsel and the various 
parties have never been released publicly by us, and I don't believe it's 
proper that we should.  And if the hon. member wishes to have access to 
those particular pieces of information, he should talk to the parties 
concerned.  Our department has had a standard procedure in place as far as 
quarrying leases for 30-some years.  I believe the last time that the 
regulations were amended was 1957, and this particular procedure and 
practice, as I pointed out to the member yesterday, have been in place 
since 1957. 
 
(1245) 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I think in this situation, where 
there's a cloud of suspicion hanging over . . . And I'm not referring to 
your department in particular because there's two other departments, at 
least they're involved in this and possibly another member of the 
legislature.  So I'm not levelling any accusation on your department. 
 
But I would think that to lift this cloud of uncertainty about the turning 
over of the gravel pit to an individual that was with the Department of 



 

 

Highways, that you should want to release the information to remove any 
doubt about the legitimacy of the transfer of the quarry lease from 
Department of Highways to a private individual who now has a contract to 
supply the Millar Western mill at Meadow Lake and make himself a few 
dollars off of an uncertain deal that was struck with the provincial 
government. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, on reflection, don't you think you could possibly release 
that correspondence that I've requested? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, the member opposite has alluded to some 
type of conspiracy theory going on here, and as I've said to the member in 
Crown corporations, he may have his favourite conspiracy theory about a lot 
of things, and this is only one of many that that particular member has.  
My suggestion would be maybe to go into writing books rather than talking 
about it in the legislature. 
 
But what I can do for the member, without breaching any of that 
confidentiality, Mr. Chairman, is that I can provide a summary of events, 
if you will, that document when various people wrote in and responses and 
the numbers of the gravel pits and when the RM asked for lease 
cancellations and all those things, if the member would care to have that. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Yes, if you could send that over, I'd appreciate it.  And 
I'm not going to dwell any longer on getting that correspondence from you.  
I would think that you would want to have given that correspondence in 
detail, Mr. Minister, but if you don't want to, we'll leave it at that. 
 
And don't concoct any motives on my part about trying to create 
conspiracies.  It's not I who called in the RCMP to investigate GigaText.  
It is not I who called in the RCMP to investigate the STC (Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company) bus scandal.  It is not I who called in the RCMP to 
investigate Supercart.  It is not I who called in the RCMP to investigate 
High R Door.  And I mean the list goes on.  If I had it written out, I 
could likely utilize the rest of the time to 1 o'clock talking about 
investigations that have been done on things that have been conducted by 
your government. 
 
So don't place those motives on me, Mr. Minister.  I am only talking about 
facts that happened, and in this case we're asking questions about 
uncertainty in a transaction that took place where a gravel pit moved from 
the Department of Highways to a private individual who ahead of time had a 
deal cooked up because they met back in October with the Department of 
Highways to request the gravel.  All of a sudden they release their quarry 
lease from the Department of Highways and you end up giving it to the 
private individual who met with the Department of Highways in October.  
That does sound like a very suspicious deal, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, I notice in the quarry lease, although I haven't had a great 
deal of time to examine it, point number 19, the removal of more than 100 
cubic yards per year of raw material from the lease area in any one year by 
any person other than the lessee is prohibited unless the lessee has 
obtained prior consent of the minister. 



 

 

 
And I would ask you, Mr. Minister, have in fact the . . . has the 
individual who now has the quarry lease, have they requested of you 
permission for others to remove gravel from that particular gravel pit? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Yes they have. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Who then now has access to more than a hundred -- what is 
it -- a hundred cubic yards of raw material per year?  Who exactly is it 
who has that permission, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- My officials inform me that there are two parties who 
would fall under that.  They are the RM of Meadow Lake and Millar Western 
Industries. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- How much gravel is allowed then under your permission?  How 
much was requested for the RM of Meadow Lake, and how much was requested 
for Millar Western, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- The RM has a five-year agreement to a maximum of 
200,000 yards.  And for the remainder of the calendar year, the RM are 
licensed or have an agreement to take out 20,000 yards.  And the Millar 
Western Industries one is a cumulative one for 100,000 cubic yards till 
July 31, '92. 
 
And I'm sorry I don't have a breakdown for the rest of this calendar year.  
That would be a two, little better than two years on that cumulative one; 
the RM have a five-year cumulative one. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Minister, how much is Millar Western paying for the 
gravel and how much is the Rural Municipality of Meadow Lake paying for the 
gravel? And in addition to that, Mr. Minister, could you tell me who pays 
the royalties on the gravel and how much are the royalties? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- The leaseholder pays the royalties to the department.  
What the leaseholder charges the RM or Millar Western or anybody else who 
comes in there for gravel is up to them.  That's something they work out I 
guess. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- How much is the royalty that the leaseholder is paying for 
the gravel, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- The standard province-wide lease, Mr. Chairman, is 15 
cents a cubic yard, and that's the same everywhere. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Minister, is there a limited amount that the 
leaseholder can take out of that particular gravel pit?  Like it was 
estimated that there is I believe 240,000 cubic yards or cubic metres of 
gravel in the pit.  That's what Highways is saying.  That's the proven 
amount of the pit taken to a depth of about 12 feet, I believe.  But if you 
take it to the depth, some estimates are that the gravel goes down there as 
deep as 40 feet, so there's more like a million yards of possible reserves 
of gravel as opposed to the 240,000 cubic yards that have been proven. 



 

 

 
And I'm wondering whether the leaseholder can deplete that pit absolutely, 
or in the terms of the lease, is there an amount that he can take that he's 
limited to? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- No, I believe the leaseholder on any pit, as with the 
ones we've talked about with the RM, has the ability to deplete the 
resource in that particular lease out to its end, at whatever level that 
might be. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Minister, beyond the 15 cents a cubic metre royalty to 
the provincial government, did the provincial government receive any money 
for the lease itself?  Is there a lease fee?  And in addition to that, was 
there a certain amount that was paid for the gravel that's in the pit or is 
the 15 cents per cubic yard royalty the entire amount that the provincial 
government will get? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Well what you have, the government gets a lease 
application fee, they get their royalty of 15 cents a cubic yard, and they 
have an annual licence fee that's on a per acre, or annual rental fee on a 
per acre basis associated with any quarrying lease. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Well I would appreciate you telling me what those amounts 
are in this particular lease.  You don't have to . . . well if you have 
that right now, I'd appreciate it if you'd give it to me. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- I'm told the standard lease application is $50 and the 
rental is $1 an acre per year. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- That's a very good deal, Mr. Minister, when the person who 
tends to hold that, who had never been in this type of business before, can 
stand to make a couple of million dollars off the gravel pit.  Very good 
economics for the individual and I congratulate him on his astute business 
acumen, but the provincial government seems to me to be way out on the limb 
on this one, Mr. Minister. 
 
Also, viewing the fact that the main request for the gravel, when they 
started lobbying the provincial government to get the quarry lease and get 
Highways to release it, the main one they're supplying is Millar Western, 
of which the provincial government has an equity position. 
 
I don't know why you would give that gravel away.  Instead I would think 
that the point could have been made that part of your equity into the 
Millar Western mill at Meadow Lake should have been in the form of gravel 
rather than giving the gravel away, letting a private individual make a 
handsome profit off of it with no investment, virtually no investment in 
it, and then the provincial government having to put up all cash to get 
their equity position in the Millar Western mill. 
 
I want to leave that topic now, Mr. Minister.  We only have a few moments 
left today.  I would want to ask you this question, Mr. Minister.  I'd like 
to know what your relationship is between the Department of Energy and 
Mines and the United States military, and what information is shared 



 

 

between the Department of Energy and Mines and the United States military. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, could the member be more specific?  
Nobody here knows anything about U.S. military. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Well I'm told, Mr. Minister -- and I just want your 
confirmation -- it could be inaccurate but I have, I think, a fairly good 
handle on the situation, that the department of Energy and Mines supplies 
some detailed information to the United States of America.  It may not go 
directly from you to the United States military, but there is information 
that goes from your department to the United States of America, to the 
government in the United States of America. 
 
And if you say that's inaccurate, we'll pursue this more at another time.  
But I am quite confident that there is information, either from a mining 
nature or a topographical nature, that is shared from your department to 
the United States of America, which eventually, I believe, ends up with 
Unites States military for their purposes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, my officials aren't aware of any 
non-public information that would go to any American agency. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Being near 1 o'clock, the committee will rise and report 
progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 1:01 p.m. 
 


