





























































Hansard: May 10, 1990


 

 

May 10/90 
EVENING SITTING 

 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Education 
Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 5 

 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, when last we met, 
discussing the estimates for post-secondary education, I think we had 
finished to some extent the discussion on SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of 
Applied Science and Technology).  And I want to review just very briefly 
what I felt were some of the points that I wanted to make in the estimates, 
particularly in SIAST and in private vocational schools, but I'm going to 
do it very briefly. 
 
Mr. Minister, as far as SIAST is concerned there are a number of questions 
that I could ask about SIAST and certainly the corporate body.  I know you 
have the information about the exorbitant expenditures of SIAST and the 
waste of the money by the corporate body.  We will pursue this at some 
other time, not this evening, but I do want to some time discuss with you, 
Mr. Minister, the waste of public funds by the corporate body.  And that is 
a fact, and I know you are aware of it. 
 
Just simply, the movement from Wascana to Saskatchewan Place, and now to 
Innovation Place in Saskatoon, has cost the taxpayer close to a million 
dollars.  And the resignation of the president and the resignation of some 
of the other individuals, severance pay, certainly travel expenses -- 
they've been very large, very large.  And as I say, some time I do want to 
take the opportunity to discuss those things with you, but I don't want to 
spend the rest of the evening on that. 
 
I do want to, Mr. Minister, finish off on private vocational schools, just 
ask you a few questions on that area, and then I want to go on to some 
other areas. 
 
Mr. Minister, as far as private vocational schools are concerned, I want to 
ask you . . . First of all, Mr. Minister, I want to thank you for agreeing 
to the meeting with those students next Monday.  It's unfortunate, Mr. 
Minister, and I'm not laying any blame here, I want you to know that, it's 
unfortunate you can only meet at 10 o'clock in the morning because many of 
those students will be at class.  Some of them are going to be out of class 
in order to meet with you, but I still expect that there will be a fair 
number of students there. 
 
They think it's important, they think it's important to meet with you, and 
in my letter, Mr. Minister, I had indicated a number of questions that they 
want to have answered from you.  I hope that you will look at that letter 
and be prepared to answer some of their questions. 
 



 

 

I do want to, Mr. Minister, on their behalf, now put the question to you, 
and that is: what are you going to do for those students -- and they're 
going to ask you this question as they asked it to me, and I'm not the 
minister.  I said that the minister will have to answer it for you.  What 
are you going to do for those students who honestly believe that they have 
been victimized where they thought they were getting a program and a 
certificate which would lead them to employment?  They find, for example, 
Mr. Minister, I'm sure that they will tell you this: that in many instances 
that staff were not qualified; the program as advertised was not the 
program that they got, and the certificate finally that was issued was a 
certificate that isn't really accepted. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, you did ask me the other day, who is it out there that 
is saying that those certificates are worthless.  One of them, as I 
indicated to you, were the businesses out there, but there are two other 
groups.  Unemployment insurance of Canada have indicated to some students 
that the certificates are, from their opinion --  will not open the doors 
for them for employment.  And secondly, Canada Manpower -- Canada Manpower 
has serious difficulties with some of the certificates. 
 
And so my question to you, Mr. Minister, is simply this.  What are you 
going to do . . . what will be your answer to those students who will say, 
Mr. Minister, we feel we've been victimized, we now owe thousands of 
dollars.  Are you prepared to forgive those loans because we were 
victimized because you did not institute stricter regulations and did not 
police those private vocational schools the way you should have? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, let me say at the outset that I 
am looking forward to meeting with the students.  I don't know what 
happened.  I just wanted to comment on the letter that you indicated that 
you'd had your secretary deliver to my office.  No one in my office 
received that letter.  So whether she got lost on the way or not, I don't 
know, but I'm just indicating to you the reason for the delay.  But I am 
looking forward to meeting with them. 
 
When you talk about the concerns that they have and concerns with regard to 
student loans, I would point out that the programs and the staff are all 
approved by the department.  They're all approved by the department.  
You've indicated that in some cases, the certificates are not accepted by 
business.  Now I will want to discuss that with the students because I 
think we'll probably have to look at each one individually. 
 
I think for you to suggest that the courses that they took weren't 
necessarily valid in that they couldn't get any jobs with them, now you and 
I both know that there are often several reasons for people not being able 
to get jobs.  And it has absolutely nothing to do with the certificate 
they've got in their hand.  So . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . well, 
you can say that it is, but I want to meet with the students and find out 
exactly what the case is, because we have many students that go through 
these vocational schools, private vocational schools that are getting 
certificates; they are going out and getting jobs and not everyone 
certainly gets a job.  And I'm sure that you often talk about Saskatoon 
Business College which has a very solid reputation. 



 

 

 
An Hon. Member: -- I said so. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- I know you did.  But at the same time I point out 
to you that there are probably students from Saskatoon Business College 
that sometimes, even though they've got that certificate which is very 
valid, cannot get jobs. 
 
So I am saying this to you, Mr. Chairman, to point that the fact that the 
student does not always get a job doesn't necessarily mean it's the 
certification that they've got from the course that they've taken.  There 
could be many other factors, and those are the things that I want to talk 
to with the students. 
 
Now with regard to the student loans, these students have taken out the 
loans, they've gone through, taken the courses.  They understand the rules 
when they apply for these loans.  You know as well that there are cases 
where a lot of these loans are forgiven.  So I'm going to have to take a 
look at this certainly in more detail.  I appreciate your raising it, but I 
don't think we can always just generalize that every student situation is 
the same. 
 
So after I've met with them, then maybe you and I can discuss it a little 
bit further.  But you know as well there are changes in regulations; there 
are changes in the student loan program that are coming.  But after I've 
met with them then you and I could discuss it further at that time. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I expect more from you.  I 
expect more from you, and please, please listen to what I say.  If the 
certificate is not accepted by the industry for certain programs, if that 
certificate, Mr. Minister, is not accepted by the industry out there -- and 
there are programs offered by CompuCollege, there are programs offered by, 
for example, Bridge City.  I want to give you an example.  And your letter 
to those students of Bridge City, you said, well you completed the course 
therefore you have to pay your loan back. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you yourself knew.  You closed it down because they were 
not following your regulations.  And in many instances, Mr. Minister, if 
you have approved, if your department has approved those staff with the 
lack of qualification that they have, then it's even more serious.  It's 
even more serious, and you should accept even more blame.  You should 
accept even more blame for those students now receiving certificates that 
aren't acceptable out there. 
 
I think you have an obligation to those students.  They entered these 
programs because they felt you had licensed the school; therefore the 
program must be good; therefore the staff must be qualified.  And I've 
indicated to you, in some instances the staff were not qualified.  The 
program wasn't what it was advertised to be, and the students were 
victimized. 
 
All I'm saying to you, Mr. Minister, I think you should have a little more 
sympathy for those students who were victimized by those private vocational 



 

 

schools.  And I would hope that on Monday you would have a sympathetic ear 
for these students because I tell you again, Mr. Minister, some of those 
students that you will meet with are single parents.  Yes, they'll complete 
the program they're in, some of them will, others won't.  But even if they 
complete it . . . the students told me: I know I'm going to end up with a 
certificate that's worthless, and secondly, I have given up my opportunity 
for forgiveness of another loan in a worthwhile program.  That's where they 
find themselves. 
 
But I've gone over and over it, Mr. Minister, and obviously you and I are 
going to disagree.  I would just hope that you would see that your 
department has to accept some of that blame.  They did not take action when 
they should have.  Why did it take so long to shut down Bridge City?  
Goodness, we go in the records into the House here . . . How many times did 
we talk to the former minister about Bridge City?  And no action was taken 
and many students were victimized.  Sure you finally shut it down, but many 
of the students had already gone through their program and have now huge 
debts that they can't afford to pay back, and they're being hounded. 
 
I just had another phone call at supper-time from a person who was 
victimized, another person who was victimized.  And she's simply saying to 
me, look I can't pay it back.  They haven't got the jobs and there's no way 
of them paying it back. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I'm going to leave that particular area.  I want to ask 
you one other question.  Mr. Minister, in your new regulations that you 
were going to put forward, first of all my question to you is: can you tell 
me -- I've indicated to you last time the four or five things that I think 
must be in.  Can you assure me tonight that those four or five items that I 
have put before you, for example, stringent entrance requirements; 
qualified instructors, and I would prefer if they had a degree in the area 
that they teach or at least have a long-term training and service in that 
area; that the program or course of study, it must be approved by the 
department; and that certification would be recognized and accepted by the 
business people out there; and lastly, that before you will okay student 
loans or a program, that there's at least some opportunity for employment 
out there, reasonable opportunity.  That's one of the questions I want to 
ask. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Minister, can you assure me that if some private vocational 
school breaks your regulations by either false advertising, not having a 
qualified staff, will you make sure that there is an appeal board set up 
for students, so that the private vocational school will be held 
accountable for the total tuition fees that have been paid by the students.  
Will you make sure that mechanism is in place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, firstly let me check with the 
hon. member.  I understood that the students that I'm meeting with were 
from CompuCollege. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- No, they're from a number of colleges. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Okay.  Well you talk about Bridge City College.  



 

 

The fact of the matter is, when you talk about some of them and whether or 
not they were in the companion care program, I don't know.  That's why I'm 
going to have to meet with them and find out what programs they were in, 
which colleges they were from, and what their individual concerns were.  
Because we can't generalize on some of these programs. 
 
(1915) 
 
Now you were getting after Bridge City and the programs that they were 
offering, but at the same time, we talked about the fact that the companion 
care program was done by registered nurses.  The program had been endorsed 
by the registered nurses' association and the certificates that they were 
getting . . . I'm sure the program was certainly a bona fide program.  They 
had qualified staff and I would think that the certificate that they were 
getting in those cases was very valid.  So just don't generalize. 
 
There are some programs, I'm sure, that students get into that there aren't 
always as many opportunities when they're finished as in others.  But as I 
indicated to you, I will get more information from the students.  Obviously 
I'm not prepared to buy all of the arguments that you're putting forward.  
And I will listen to the students.  And I appreciate you raising that with 
me. 
 
Secondly, I point out as well that each student that signs up to take a 
program from a private vocational school signs a contract with that 
particular private vocational school for a particular course.  And if there 
are complaints or concerns that are raised at any time to us, there is a 
follow-up.  And if it's found that there are problems where the contract is 
not being met, then the students are entitled to refunds, and this has been 
standard practice. 
 
So we will have to ensure that these students have followed up on any right 
of due process that they have as to whether or not were more refunds that 
they should have been receiving or whether there were some remissions on 
student loans that they should have received that they didn't.  But we 
can't do that until we have all of the detail. 
 
Now with regard to the new regulations, I thought I went through all of 
this with you last day, so I don't know why we're wasting time with it 
again.  You asked me those same questions . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- No I did not.  Never mentioned appeal board. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, prior to the appeal board.  But you asked me 
those same five questions, I think again . . . (inaudible interjection) . . 
. The answers are in Hansard from when you asked last day, so I would just 
like to save you some time.  I indicated to you that all of those concerns 
that you had raised were in the new regulations.  All of those concerns.  
Now, what we're just checking on here right now is with regard to the 
process. 
 
Let me give you some of these again then.  Requirements of private 
vocational schools.  In every private vocational school the following is 



 

 

required: every instructor is qualified by experience or training or both 
by being at least 21 years of age and possess a Canadian university 
bachelor degree in a subject directly related to the subject to be taught, 
or an equivalent degree from a university other than a Canadian university 
with 12 months occupational experience in the subject to be taught.  So 
we're tightening up, I think, a lot on the restrictions with regard to 
qualifications that they have to have -- be a graduate of a recognized 
educational institution in a subject directly related to the subject to be 
taught and have one year occupational experience in the subject or vocation 
to be taught. 
 
Now, I'm sure that in some cases, they're not all going to need a degree, 
it's going to depend on the course that they're going to be teaching; be a 
graduate of a private vocational school registered under this Act and have 
one year actual occupational experience in the vocation to be taught -- 
have three years actual occupational experience in the subject to be 
taught.  These are all things that will apply, notwithstanding section 
13(1), the deputy Minister of Education may approve the employment of any 
instructor at a school who in the opinion of the minister or representative 
is proficient in the subject or vocation to be taught. 
 
Now I can see that being the same that would apply as you know in days in 
the school systems where you might have had someone with an ARCT (Associate 
of the Royal Conservatory of Music of Toronto) degree for example in music 
was, along with the other university courses that they had been taking, 
might have been given a professional B certificate which entitled them to 
teach certain courses or at certain grade levels.  So we can see some of 
the things happening here the same. 
 
So there are going to be a lot of restrictions with regard to who can 
teach.  The length of programs will also have to be clearly stated, the 
number of programs and specific location, and the number of students who 
may be enrolled in the program under one instructor or in a given school, 
so there is going to be some tightening up in that area. 
 
The only one that I am wanting to get for you here and that's the right of 
due process and I would assume that that is going to be part of the new 
Act.  If there are concerns that students are raising, that there is going 
to be a process that will be followed, so you may want to go on with 
another question and we can see if we got some more specifics for you on 
that. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, I don't want to correct you, but last day I 
broached this subject on the requirements at 5 minutes to 1.  I remember 
you indicating to me, hurry up because you wanted to speak to it, and you 
took one minute on it and we adjourned.  We did not go through this.  I 
don't want to spend very much more time on it, Mr. Minister, because I have 
a lot of other things that I want to cover.  I just want to let you know 
that we did not go through this last day. 
 
Mr. Minister, the due process or appeal mechanism, if you can get that for 
me some time this evening I would appreciate that.  It doesn't have to be 
an ironclad agreement.  I want to know where you personally stand on it.  



 

 

Do you think that that's a good idea that the students should have an 
appeal mechanism in order that they can say, hey look we've got to have 
some way or somebody to appeal to? 
 
And it can be a three-person board.  It can be somebody from the private 
vocational schools, someone from your department, and maybe somebody from 
the public.  And let the students have a . . . and these people can meet 
three or four times a year or whatever, when there are sufficient number of 
cases that they can handle.  It doesn't have to be a long drawn-out affair.  
But I simply wanted your opinion on whether or not there should be some due 
process for the students to be able to appeal to. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, I want to leave that area because I have other things 
that I do want to cover this evening, unless you're prepared to make a 
statement on that now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well I certainly agree with what you're saying 
about an appeal process and there will be an appeal process, and that will 
be to the Department of Education where a concern is raised.  It could be 
raised I would assume by a student, or in some cases it might be raised by 
an instructor in a particular college.  So there will be an appeal process 
in place. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- I just wanted to make comment.  Mr. Minister, I hope it 
isn't just to the department because sometimes they have some reason to 
defend the position that they have taken previous.  So I hope that there's 
some other mechanism that they can appeal to. 
 
I don't want to spend any more time on that, Mr. Minister.  I do want to 
turn to provincial libraries, and that I believe does come under your 
jurisdiction also, Mr. Minister.  And I know you have also received the 
letters that I am privy to from the various people from various sectors of 
the province as far as funding for all provincial libraries is concerned. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I'm not here to debate whether or not your funding is at 
a level it was when we were the government and whether you're doing better 
or worse than what we are.  I'm not here to argue that.  What I am here to 
. . . is I guess on behalf of the provincial libraries, to say to you that 
we can't continue, we simply can't continue to do the level of funding for 
provincial libraries that we have.  And I think you will agree with me that 
the grants to provincial libraries since 1986 have gone up less than half a 
per cent.  They went up from 5,568,440 to 5,590,900 in this year's budget.  
And that of course you know was a severe cut-back in 1987 when their budget 
was cut by about 10 per cent. 
 
Mr. Minister, what I want to impress upon you is this -- and I want to 
discuss this in connection with distance education -- you have said that we 
have to find different modes of providing post-secondary education, 
particularly university education, to people in rural Saskatchewan.  I 
don't necessarily disagree with that.  But I don't think on the one hand 
you can say that you want to have distance education out there, and then 
not make available to those students the kind of resources they need in 
order to get a good education.  It's not sufficient to just have it done by 



 

 

television. 
 
And here again as I indicated I think to you some time ago, I think it was 
in question period, your cut-back on SCAN (Saskatchewan Communications 
Advanced Network) -- now SCAN is not a bad mode to use in distance 
education if that's the direction that we're going to go.  And in fact, Mr. 
Minister, if you look at your report on SCAN -- it's not yours but it's the 
minister responsible for Sask Telephones -- he states in here, Mr. 
Minister, very clearly, that SCAN is going to be the main mechanism that 
they are going to be using for distance education.  And I believe that it 
replaced STELLA (Saskatchewan Tele-Learning Association) that was in 
existence before.  You're going to use that as your main mode of providing 
education in rural Saskatchewan, and yet you cut it back by one and a half 
million dollars this year. 
 
How are we going to provide this education in rural Saskatchewan if we cut 
back, not only in the libraries that they need out there . . . And the 
regional libraries -- from the letters that I have received, and I'll read 
from some of those this evening -- have clearly indicated they're going to 
have to cut back on the hours that they are open.  They're saying they have 
half the volumes that they should have, according to the Canadian library 
standards.  They can't hire qualified staff because the salaries that they 
are paying simply won't attract the kind of staff that they think they need 
in order to run their libraries. 
 
Mr. Minister, if we are going to go in that direction, to say to the 
universities, hey look, we're going to take off your hands the first and 
second year students, to a large extent, from rural Saskatchewan, then I 
think you have to convince your government to provide more funding for 
libraries, which have not received adequate funding.  I think you will 
agree with me on that.  And secondly, I think you're going to have to have 
another look at SCAN and how you are funding it.  Mr. Minister, I would 
appreciate a comment from you on what I have said so far. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- With regard to libraries, firstly let's separate 
out, possibly, the different libraries.  I fully realize the importance of 
the regional libraries and the public libraries, as such, within 
communities -- wherever -- whether it's in urban or whether it's in rural 
areas, and the importance of them.  And I think particularly when the 
economic situation is such as it is that there's a much higher utilization 
than there would be when the economic times are good because in many cases 
that's the entertainment that people will have, is what they get from their 
libraries. 
 
On the other hand, when you take a look at what's happened with our grants 
and compare, and I'll get to the other type of libraries as well, I know 
that we need to put much more money into our libraries, and we look forward 
to doing that as soon as we have a little bit better economy going for us.  
But I think in all fairness, when you look at what our situation is in 
Saskatchewan, I think we can take consolation from the fact that our per 
capita operating grants in Saskatchewan are still considerably higher than 
any other province in western Canada. 
 



 

 

When you look at Saskatchewan, $5.54 per capita being spent on public 
libraries; Alberta, $4.91; Manitoba, $3.03; and British Columbia at 2.50 -- 
now I think that we're doing pretty well under the circumstances. I know 
I've met with the library boards and groups from around the province.  I 
think I met with all of the different groups.  We've had some very good 
discussions.  I certainly realize the tremendous service that they're 
providing, and that they are doing the best that they can, and that their 
resources are stretched to the limit. 
 
And we've been very fortunate too with the number of volunteers that we've 
had.  We've been very fortunate with the support that we've had from the 
rural municipalities and the urban municipalities because they support 
these libraries as well as they can too. 
 
So we're going to have to look at doing more, certainly, as more money 
becomes available. 
 
Now with regard to the other type of library that you talk about, and 
that's in conjunction with the regional colleges, and what libraries would 
be needed to facilitate the students that are taking more first and second 
year university courses.  I think that with the increases that we've made 
to the regional colleges this year . . . and I don't disagree with what 
you're saying.  If we're going to have more university courses out there 
we've got to have more resources for them.  I would think that the regional 
colleges then should now, with the additional funds that they're going to 
have this year, be able to provide more of those resources that the 
students are going to need. 
 
And I look to the time when we can have a greater utilization, a greater 
sharing I suppose too, in that some of the materials that we would utilize 
for some of these courses could be also used more in our high schools for 
some areas.  So I think we have to look at those opportunities as well, but 
I don't disagree with you that we do have to ensure that those resources 
are there.  And I would suggest that the regional colleges are aware of 
that and will be addressing that as they develop more and more of their 
programs.  So with the new money I would expect them to be putting some of 
that money into more resources in providing these classes. 
 
(1930) 
 
Now when you get to the SCN, the old SCAN as it was, this is not the end 
all as far as the distance education; this is only part of the delivery of 
services to rural Saskatchewan.  We're going to find that there are still 
many of these courses that are going to be taught by people going out into 
the field.  And even though there are some cuts, let's keep in mind that 
there are a lot of these sites out there that are already in operation.  So 
it's maybe a matter of slowing down the number of sites slightly to help 
take care of some of this, but it's not the end all.  It's only going to be 
part of the delivery of services to, whether it's northern Saskatchewan up 
in Athabasca, or whether it's in rural areas, or wherever the case might 
be. 
 
We do have as well another $100,000 for distance education, the 



 

 

universities, provision of some of these services.  So they're all going to 
be utilizing it. 
 
If you consider again that the two universities were able to provide a toll 
free telephone service, an extra librarian to locate the resources 
required, and pay for the cost of handling the books and materials which 
were shipped to the various regional colleges around the province -- they 
did all of that with $100,000.  So the services were increased 
substantially, and we see that as being very, very beneficial to rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Let's also consider the correspondence courses that are being offered in 
rural Saskatchewan, and that's all tied in with the distance education.  So 
I think that we're developing a pretty good system.  We recognize there 
have to be more resource materials in the regional colleges, and they are 
going to have to identify the needs there and then respond to that need. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, I would not want it to be understood that I 
agree with you on distance education, that that's where our emphasis ought 
to be.  I do not.  But I don't want to get into that right now.  I will 
make a longer statement on that and more discussion of that a little later.  
I want to concentrate on libraries right now. 
 
Mr. Minister, I guess maybe I don't quite understand how you see the 
regional colleges.  Are you saying to me that the regional colleges are not 
going to use the regional libraries as much as possible?  I hope I didn't 
misunderstand you.  To me that's setting up a whole another system that we 
don't need.  The point that I wanted to make was: if you're going to 
provide education out there, then I think you have to provide more funding 
to the regional libraries so that they can provide the resources for those 
students who are taking the post-secondary education out there.  I don't 
want you to take from what I've said that I think now you ought to set up 
separate resource centres in the regional colleges.  I hope wherever 
possible they can combine them so we can save the dollars.  But I do want 
to, Mr. Minister, I do want to say to you that in 1987-88 the former 
minister made a big point of, by the way, a big point of SCAN.  He thought 
that was the . . . well I suppose cat's miaow to distance education.  
Obviously you don't quite agree with him on his emphasis and that's quite 
all right.  I would expect that you are probably more correct than he would 
have been in education. 
 
Mr. Minister, he did talk about automation.  And I think I have to agree 
with him on automation, that if we're going to provide an efficient system, 
then I think the libraries have to be a lot more automated.  I want to know 
how are we getting along in automating the library system in Saskatchewan. 
 
And secondly, Mr. Minister, this is not quite with automation, but is there 
a . . . have we given any thought at all to a Saskatchewan library card 
that can be used by people throughout Saskatchewan.  All they have to do is 
use this plastic card and put it into their machine and they could use it 
throughout Saskatchewan.  So have you given any thought to that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well let me clarify with you about the regional 



 

 

colleges and the need for resources.  And I indicated that they will have 
to identify the need because of the courses that they're using.  But they 
will be carrying on with the same idea of using the regional libraries but 
they will have to identify what the needs are going to be.  So no, we're 
not going to be setting up an additional system. 
 
The SCN (Saskatchewan Communications Network), of course, as I said, is 
only part of the delivery of distance education.  It's going to get it into 
a lot of areas that may not be accessible through the regional colleges.  
So I think we've got to work together on all of these different things. 
 
When you talk about technology then in the libraries, we do have the two, 
Chinook and Wheatland, that use computers within their headquarters and 
have for some time.  Other regional libraries use Envoy or fax to 
communicate with each other and with the provincial library. 
 
And we've talked quite a bit about this with them.  I know that all of them 
are anxious to get more computerization into their systems, and we've asked 
them to provide a plan as to how we can phase this in and how we can look 
at it, whether it's a long-range project.  Obviously we can't do it all in 
the one year, but I think that we want them to come up with a plan as to 
how this can be brought about.  So we have to keep moving in that direction 
because it does cut down a lot on the efficiencies and can make their 
libraries just that much better. 
 
With regard to the library card that you're talking about, this would have 
to be a decision by the library boards because they each run their own 
operations.  So whether or not they wanted to go to a common card of some 
kind, they would have to get together on that and make those decisions 
themselves.  We won't be making that decision for them. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, I hope I didn't leave that impression.  What I 
wanted to know from you: has there been some discussion?  Obviously if 
they're going to go in that direction, there has to be a discussion with 
you and your officials on how they're going to implement it.  Is there 
going to be some finances involved in making sure that this can take place?  
Mr. Minister, all I want to do to draw it to your attention, and I'm not 
going to pursue that in any detail. 
 
Mr. Minister, I know you probably have read the 1989 report, that brief 
that was submitted to you as the minister.  I don't think you were the 
minister at the time but you may have -- this was February 1989.  No, you 
weren't the minister at the time, but I'm sure you must have read it.  And 
I just want to draw to your attention on page 3: 
 

 Funding is the top priority for all libraries.  Financial support for 
libraries in 1986 was reduced. 

 
 The reduction in 1987 of library grants by approximately $700,000 

presented library boards with the necessity of making difficult decisions 
regarding the level of service to be provided to patrons. 

 
 As library boards prepare their 1988 budgets, the "bottom line" which was 



 

 

advocated in June is reiterated.  S.L.T.A. (Saskatchewan Library Trustees' 
Association) asks that the government restores all grants to the 1986 
level! 

 
That was in their 1989 brief.  Mr. Minister, I want to draw to your 
attention to the brief in 1990.  And on page 3 in 1990, there is a 
resolution that has been carried unanimously, and in it they say: 
 

 WHEREAS the Saskatchewan Library Trustees' Association represents trustees 
from all libraries across Saskatchewan; and 

 
 WHEREAS the public library systems in Saskatchewan are currently being 

funded by the Province at a level lower than the Provincial Grants 
provided in 1984; (Mr. Minister, this is 1990.  The grants are lower than 
in 1984) and 

 
 WHEREAS a substantial increase in library grants is crucial if libraries 

are to maintain their vital role in providing essential information and 
services to the public. 

 
 THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED that the Saskatchewan Library Trustees' 

Association vigorously lobby the Provincial Government for increased 
grants for libraries. 

 
Obviously, Mr. Minister, they weren't successful.  They weren't very 
successful or else you didn't hear them. 
 
In one of their briefs, I'm not sure whether it was '89 or '90 or some 
correspondence that I received, they referred to funding that at one time 
was at 60 per cent -- provincial funding at 60 per cent -- today it's at 42 
per cent.  And, Mr. Minister, we can't continue to go in that direction if 
we expect a first-class library system out there to help the students, 
those that you say will get their post-secondary education through distance 
education.  We can't do both. 
 
I wonder if the Chairman here could ask the Minister of Consumer and 
Corporate Affairs to stay out of this unless he wants to get on his feet.  
Mr. Chairman, I will refer also, a little later, where they have a 
resolution asking the present Minister of Education to stop the Minister of 
Consumer and Corporate Affairs from passing a resolution which would hinder 
them.  I will bring that to his attention a little later. 
 
Mr. Minister, what they are saying and what I am saying on their behalf is 
that if you want to go in that direction, then you've got to back it up 
with some financial resources.  They need it in order to have a first-class 
library system.  And, Mr. Minister, on page 4 they go on to say that "the 
Saskatchewan Library Trustees' Association urge the provincial government 
to make a firm financial commitment to library automation."  On page 5, Mr. 
Minister, in their 1990 brief, they go on to say the following: 
 

 WHEREAS the Goods and Services Tax proposed by the Federal Government 
would result in consumers and libraries paying a nine per cent tax on the 
price of books, magazines and other materials; and 



 

 

 
 WHEREAS this tax would impose a financial hardship on public libraries 

which are providing an important educational and recreational service. 
 
 THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED that this Annual Meeting of the Saskatchewan 

Library Trustees' Association urges the Government of Canada and the 
Honourable Michael E. Wilson, Minister of Finance, to eliminate the Goods 
and Services Tax on books, magazines and other reading materials. 

 
I'm not certain, Mr. Minister; I've not followed the GST (goods and 
services tax) that closely.  Has the minister, the federal minister, 
exempted these items from the GST tax, and what presentations did you make 
to him?  So there are several questions that I want you to answer for me. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, certainly we understand the 
concerns that the libraries have in the province.  And as I indicated, 
we've had several meetings with them and they have pointed out the fact 
quite clearly that they all need more money.  But I think at the same time 
they understand why there isn't more money available at the present time 
with the economic situation such as it is.  And we're going to have to live 
with that.  We have to live with that. 
 
People out in rural Saskatchewan and a lot of the people that are on these 
boards, they know better than most of us, you and I living in the city. 
They know a lot better than we do about what the economic situation is out 
there, and they understand that when it comes down to the priorities and 
where money is going to be spent, whether it's going to go into health care 
or into schools or whatever, that they're going to have to get by with 
their 2 per cent increase this year.  But it isn't that we don't believe in 
libraries, we do, but it's just that we can't give them any more for the 
current year. 
 
(1945) 
 
Now you have to keep in mind, too that there are a lot of services that are 
provided through the department; the operating grants aren't the only 
assistance that they get.  We've got a lot of people that are involved in 
the department that are assisting those libraries.  Just to give you an 
idea as to some of the things they help out with.  They co-ordinate, in the 
department the officials co-ordinate all the loans between library systems, 
and that's some 70,000 titles each year.  They answer reference questions 
which cannot be handled within a regional, city, or northern library; 
that's some 6,000 reference questions they would have each year.  They loan 
blocks of materials, non-English language, talking books on cassette, and 
large print books to libraries, some 150,000 annually.  Catalogue new 
books, etc., bought by regional and northern libraries, that's another 
40,000 annually.  And they maintain union catalogues of books and 
periodicals owned by public, government, and special libraries in the 
province.  So the operating grant that they get isn't the only assistance 
that they get from the government.  They get a lot of support from the 
officials within the Department of Education. 
 
Now your last question with regard to the GST, keep in mind that I 



 

 

understand about 50 per cent of their operating expenses are salaries, so 
they would not be affected.  But in so far as materials are concerned, we 
understand that there is the option now would be for a 50 per cent rebate, 
but I think some of that is still being negotiated. 
 
So right now, we can't say for sure if that is going to be the case, but 
that's the information to date.  But negotiations are still going on so 
there could, in fact, be an increase in the cost of the materials that they 
would be putting in because of the GST.  So we certainly want to . . . 
We're opposed to that and we would want to see this exempt and that's why 
negotiations are going to continue.  But at this point, who can say how 
successful we're going to be. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Now, Mr. Minister, two things: first -- and I'm not going to 
get into this -- I'm sure, Mr. Minister, if you and I honestly sat down and 
forgot about our politics and went to the budget, we could easily find 15 
or $20 million that would be much better spent on libraries and education 
that what it is being spent on right now.  I'm sure we could, but those 
decisions, you and I aren't going to make them.  And we could do that, and 
that is what's bothering a lot of people, that they see new programs coming 
up and new money being found almost on a weekly basis by the government, 
which is announced -- not by you, I agree, but that's maybe where I have 
some criticism.  Some of the other ministers seem to be finding money. 
 
Mr. Minister, you didn't answer my question.  I asked you: did you, did the 
department itself make presentation to the federal minister or through your 
own Minister of Finance, did you make presentation to the effect of getting 
exemption, for provincial library materials and books that they will have 
to purchase, from the GST?. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, the Minister of Finance is the 
spokesman on these particular issues with regard to the GST and I would 
hope, as a former minister of Education and responsible for libraries, that 
he would be very much concerned about this tax going on to library 
materials.  So I will be following up on that with him to ensure that he is 
taking that to the table and doing some negotiating on it.  So I will take 
that upon myself to ensure that he is doing that for us. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, I have a number of letters that I could read 
to you from the Weyburn area, from the Moose Jaw area, North Battleford 
area.  All are saying that unless funding is substantially -- and that's 
the word they used -- substantially increased, the quality of the library 
service in Saskatchewan will deteriorate rather drastically. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to just ask you one further question.  Can you comment 
on what stage the negotiations are in, or has it been resolved, the salary 
negotiations in the North Battleford library?  Has that been resolved?  I 
know that they have written to the Premier and I know you have received a 
copy of the letter.  Could you comment as to what stage that is at and 
whether or not there's anything that you can do in using your good office 
if it has not been resolved, to resolve that dispute? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, as I understand it's not North 



 

 

Battleford, it's Lakeland regional library where negotiations are going on.  
This is their first contract, and this is between the employer and the 
employees.  It has really nothing to do with us.  And the fact that it is 
their first contract, as I understand it, it is taking a considerable 
amount of time. 
 
So to tell you how it's coming, it's apparently not settled yet.  But I 
couldn't tell you whether they're close or where they are because it's 
really nothing to do with us. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- But, Mr. Minister, it does have something to do with you.  
One of the main reasons, or the main reason that they can't sign a contract 
is that they don't have the money.  And they simply say, look, it's your 
underfunding that is causing the problems that they're having in 
negotiating a settlement.  And obviously you . . . I assume that you 
answered their letter that was written to the Premier, of which you got a 
copy.  I would assume that because you are the Minister of Education and 
you got a copy of their letter that you would have answered it. 
 
Also, did you not respond to their concerns, Mr. Minister, of which they 
made you aware? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I would disagree with the 
member opposite when he says that it's because they don't have the money 
for it.  I mean otherwise, let's take a look at Southeast in Weyburn, 
they've settled; they got the same increase in grant as Lakeland.  Palliser 
in Moose Jaw they've settled, and the fact of the matter is that these are 
older, well-established libraries.  And you've got Lakeland, this is their 
first contract; they're taking a little bit longer.  So two of them have 
settled out of the seven and we expect that the other ones will probably be 
settled as time goes on as well.  So the lack of funds, as you say, or a 
shortage in their grant is not the answer as we understand it. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, I was hoping that I wouldn't have to spend all 
that much time on this.  Did you or your officials not read the letter?  I 
mean, it's very clear that Joan Bunce makes that a paramount issue in her 
letter, where she says, look, we can't pay the people the kinds of salaries 
that they are requesting and that they should be paid. I mean they simply 
can't do it.  And all right, maybe in some other areas the municipalities 
are paying more.  But I don't think you can just simply say, well that's 
got nothing to do with me.  It has everything to do with you.  Had you been 
able to provide them with a 5 or 6 per cent increase in their library 
allotment this year instead of the 2 per cent, or less than half per cent 
over the last five or six years, they may not be in this predicament. 
 
Mr. Minister, let me remind you that I believe, if I remember correctly, 
they have not signed an agreement since 1985.  I think that was their last 
agreement.  They've only received less than half a per cent increase in 
their grants from the provincial government and that is why they can't sign 
an agreement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I would simply reiterate that 
Lakeland is not being treated any differently than anybody else.  All of 



 

 

the other regional libraries in the province have settled their contracts.  
This is a new contract for Lakeland Regional College as I understand it, 
since they were unionized.  Now the discussions are taking longer than 
probably they would have hoped, but again, it takes two sides to negotiate. 
 
And their grants are in the same proportion as anybody else's in the 
province, and the others have been able to settle.  Since this is the first 
contract it's taking them longer.  So, I mean, as far as the letter is 
concerned, yes, certainly I've read it, but at the same time there will not 
be any more money.  So they are going to have to sort that out themselves.  
The grants are the same; it's the same proportion, provincial versus the 
local moneys that they get.  And other regional libraries have been able to 
get by with that.  And we would anticipate that Lakeland eventually will 
have it resolved as well. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Well, Mr. Minister, it's just too bad that everybody else is 
just so incapable of functioning.  And it's everybody else's fault but the 
Minister's.  Many of the others, Mr. Minister, indicated very clearly to 
you that if they don't receive substantial increase in funding, the library 
system is going to suffer very badly.  Mr. Minister, it's right in their 
brief.  It's in their brief.  Now read the briefs; at least you could pay 
them that courtesy. 
 
Mr. Minister, I don't want to spend any more time on it.  I want to go to 
another area.  You also received a letter, and I hope I can have a little 
more sympathetic ear on this one.  It's a letter written to you from Lois 
Nelson of the Learning Disabilities Association of Saskatchewan.  And I 
again, I don't want to spend that much time on it, not because it isn't an 
important issue.  What I want to ask you: have you got an individual or 
several people in your department that are looking very seriously at what 
can be done for the learning disabled people for post-secondary education?  
I'm not just referring to universities, but I'm referring to SIAST and 
private schools and also it will be the regional school.  And this, Mr. 
Minister, is not just people with learning disabilities, but people with 
all kinds of disabilities, emotional disabilities, physical disabilities, 
and whatever. 
 
I know you received a letter of February 26, 1990 written to you, and in it 
-- I could go through it but I don't want to spend the time on it -- but 
they are asking a number of things.  One of the things that they are 
asking, that there should be a human rights code of Saskatchewan that gives 
the disabled a right to education, and then they go on to explain it. 
 
I'm just wondering, have you addressed many of the issues that they wrote 
to you about in February 26?  Have you met with them or have your officials 
met with them, and what can they expect from your department in moving into 
this particular area? 
 
(2000) 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I'm certainly aware of the 
concerns that the member is raising and I know that it's been raised for 
some time now.  There have been some programs, I suppose, tried in the 



 

 

past.  But what we have been doing within the department -- we have an 
advisory committee on this that has looked into the concerns, meeting with, 
working with the University of Saskatchewan, I would assume the University 
of Regina as well, also the SIAST campuses, and identifying the needs that 
are there with regard to assessment and with regard to programming.  And I 
know that the University of Saskatchewan is anxious. 
 
Things are moving ahead.  But at the present time, the report has been 
written, it's now in the second draft stage.  And what we will be doing is 
looking at the report and the recommendations that are within it and then 
going back to these different groups, the universities and SIAST to take a 
look at how we can work together in implementing some of these 
recommendations.  So we're aware of the concern.  The question is going to 
be then looking at the recommendations and how we're going to address the 
problems. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, when can the learning disabled association 
expect . . . what's your timetable? 
 
You've said that a report has been written. Do you mean a report written by 
the group that you have set up in consultations with the post-secondary 
institutions?  And if there is a report written, is there any possibility 
that I could have a copy of the interim report?  More specifically, Mr. 
Minister, what I want to know: does the report come to grips with the 
suggestions that they make in the letter they sent you? 
 
For example, will the learning disabled be included in setting 
accessibility standards in post-secondary education?  Number two, will 
there be provided psycho-educational assessments for many of these people 
with disabilities?  Number three, is there any way that the report comes to 
grip with meeting the day-to-day needs of disabled people?  And they can be 
many, they can be many from psychological to physical and social.  Number 
four, will the report come to grips with providing in-service for faculty 
from which the learning disabled will take their classes?  And lastly, 
number five, they want to know what kinds of resources are there to provide 
for advocacy for this particular group. 
 
Mr. Minister, what I really want for this group -- and they've asked me to 
get back to them, and this has been some time now that I have talked to 
them -- I've told them that I would want an answer from the minister.  And 
I would like to have a timetable from the minister and I'd like to be able 
to go back to them, through Hansard of course, and by speaking to them as 
to where the department is at and where the minister is at as far as coming 
to grips with the problems that exist and when can they expect some 
concrete action. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I'm very familiar with the 
association that the member is talking about, and Lois Nelson.  I would 
point out to him that Wayne Adair, who is the former regional co-ordinator, 
special ed., in the North Battleford region and has a lot of background in 
special education, is the one that has been involved with the committee, 
the one that's writing the report.  I've had some discussions with him with 
regard to the concerns.  And I haven't seen the report yet, but as far as 



 

 

timetable, we are expecting it to be done, at the very latest, by the end 
of June.  This is information you could pass on to Lois if you see her 
before I do. 
 
I would assume, certainly, the things that you're talking about, the LD 
(learning disabled), they're obviously going to be included in here.  I 
think that the major concerns that we're dealing with are those with 
learning disabilities and the problems that some of these students have 
when they go on, when they leave our K to 12 system and end up in our 
post-secondary institutions.  And I think that this is an area that I have 
a personal concern about because I think we have to start looking about 
special needs people from kindergarten right on through into the 
post-secondary. 
 
Because I think in some cases now what happens, when they leave our K to 12 
system, we lose them for a few years and then they show up some time later, 
maybe in university or maybe in SIAST.  So we've got to work to overcome 
this problem and this gap.  I think in some cases too the information . . . 
You talk about assessment.  There's a lot of assessment done on these 
people when they're in the K to 12 system, but in some cases I know that 
that information isn't passed on when they move on to a post-secondary 
institution.  And to me, for us to want to go through all of this all over 
again . . . I know that reassessments are needed from time to time, and you 
know that as a former counsellor, but I think at the same time there's a 
lot of testing information that should be passed on from the one 
institution to the next. 
 
So we have to ensure that that sort of thing is being done. 
 
But again at the same time, there is other assessment that needs to be 
done, again as you would know from your counselling background, with regard 
to people moving into areas where they do have definite strengths.  And 
that may, of course, be done at the SIAST campuses or, of course, if 
they're at university, then we have to take a look at other ways in which 
they can be assisted because there are some of these people that may not be 
able to learn by reading, but it isn't because they haven't got the 
ability.  I'm sure that we both know of students that have gone through 
university with a severe learning disability but have come out with a 
degree, have done very, very well because they've had the appropriate 
support while they've been attending classes, whether it's someone taking 
notes for them and explaining things to them or they're using a tape 
recorder or whatever the case might be. 
 
But we are moving ahead in that area.  SIAST has applied to the 
Saskatchewan Human Rights Association for an education equity program which 
will also assist to deal with some of these concerns that you're raising.  
But we are moving along on that and we want to have some firm idea by the 
latter part of June then as to what we're going to be doing. 
 
We should obviously then too be having a lot of discussion with the 
Saskatchewan Association for Children with Learning Disabilities and 
working with them.  And I would think that the committee has been involved 
with them.  I would hope that they've been involved with them as this 



 

 

report has been written.  So I would be surprised if they haven't. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, certainly from my experience, a lot of 
assessment is, has, and is being done from the K to 12.  I want to tell you 
that when I was in the field, there was a lot of co-operation with 
post-secondary institutions and we met regularly with the psychologist and 
psychiatrist from the U of S in Saskatoon; we had not regular meetings, but 
certainly periodic meetings with the people from SIAST. 
 
So we did have that kind of rapport.  And I don't disagree with you that 
that information should be passed on because it's very costly to do 
assessment again and again when you have the results readily available.  
But it must also be remembered that once you leave the secondary school and 
you get entirely into a different environment, that sometimes reassessments 
have to be done, and what they are saying -- and I know you don't disagree 
with me on that -- is that we have to make resources available for these 
people. 
 
What happens, Mr. Minister, is that when resources are very scarce, these 
people are on the bottom rung of the ladder; they are not given the 
priority that they should receive.  And I'm not being harsh on the 
institutes now because they just don't have the funds and when you start 
dealing with disabled people on a one-to-one basis, it becomes very, very 
costly.  And consequently, because they are underfunded, these people are 
shunted aside and they don't get the service that they should have. 
 
Mr. Minister, can any one of your officials assure me that in writing up 
this report or doing this study that members of the disabilities 
association have been involved in this study and also in the writing of 
that report?  And if they have been, who are the individuals? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- I'll answer the latter question first.  With regard 
to input, the department approached 20 advocacy groups including the SACLD, 
the Saskatchewan Association for Children with Learning Disabilities, and 
as well, there were written briefs sent in by nine other groups.  So 
there's been pretty fair representation from around the province. 
 
Now with regard to what's happening in talking about resources.  We 
currently spend over $2 million on vocational rehabilitation of disabled 
persons, the VRDP program, and that includes learning disabled.  This 
current year, as I understand it, 173 students at university and 305 at 
SIAST that are being assisted.  So this includes money for special services 
including assessments.  And some of those specialized assessments that you 
mentioned, where new information is needed and for an entirely different 
area, not necessarily an intellectual assessment. 
 
So there is a fair bit of money being spent then on these particular 
people.  But we've got to ensure that we haven't got some that we're losing 
or missing out on, and this has grown substantially.  I'd point out too, 
that since '84-85, for example, that the number on VRDP programs 
(vocational rehabilitation for disabled persons) has grown from 503 to 846.  
So we've got a lot of people and these are ones in the post-secondary 
institutions that have been able to benefit from this particular program. 



 

 

 
So we are doing a fair bit, but we've got to ensure, and I'm sure we will 
after this report is finished because of the input from so many different 
groups and individuals, that we should have a pretty good idea as to the 
types of needs or services that there are out there.  And we will be able 
to better address them then because of that input.  So we should know that, 
as I said, within the next month to five or six weeks. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, how much of that money if any comes from the 
federal government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- 50 per cent comes from the federal government. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- I just didn't want you to leave the impression that that was 
$2 million spent by the provincial government. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Minister, I want to . . .  We could spend a lot of time on that 
particular area.  One of the things, Mr. Minister, when I was the Minister 
for post-secondary education, one of the concerns that the federal 
government always had was that they were not getting sufficient recognition 
for moneys spent in post-secondary education.  So I'm just giving Brian 
Mulroney and his troops a little credit for spending some money in 
post-secondary education -- not enough, but they're spending some. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to now turn to regional colleges, but more 
specifically before I go to regional colleges, to junior colleges.  Mr. 
Minister, as you know you were invited to a symposium in September I 
believe, last fall in Melfort, Saskatchewan . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . oh yes, yes you people were invited.  But your position was vacant.  
As it was in Saskatoon, Mr. Minister, the member from Melfort did bring 
greetings at noon hour but there were no questions directed at him because 
he said he only had a few minutes.  He had to be away. 
 
And I can understand why you didn't want to be there, Mr. Minister, but I 
do want to know your position and the government's position on junior 
colleges in this province.  We know that some of the other provinces have 
gone in this direction.  We know that there is a proposal has been put 
forward by the members of the . . . or pardon me, it's a proposal for a 
Saskatchewan junior college system prepared for presentation to members of 
the provincial cabinet, and this was presented to you in January 17, 1989.  
I know you weren't the minister at the time, but you were certainly a 
member of cabinet. 
 
I want to know what your response is to that presentation and where you 
stand in the whole area of junior colleges for the province of 
Saskatchewan.  Is that the direction that we should be going, or is that 
your intention as far as regional colleges are concerned?  Is it your hope 
and desire that regional colleges will develop into junior colleges, or 
where do you stand on the whole area of junior colleges for the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
(2015) 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well I can tell you quite clearly, Mr. Chairman, 
we're not looking at junior colleges in Saskatchewan, and I think that 
really what we're getting down to here is a title that's used.  The term 
that we're using in Saskatchewan is regional college because we feel that 
that more appropriately covers the type of programming that is necessary in 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
You've indicated that junior colleges have been tried in other provinces 
and very successfully, but I would suggest too that even in the province of 
Alberta, they don't any longer call them junior colleges.  I think now they 
call them community colleges.  So again, the service that's being delivered 
isn't going to be determined by what it's called.  So regional colleges is 
the title that we're using in Saskatchewan. 
 
With regard to the Melfort conference, there was a good reason why I wasn't 
there.  This was something that I received word on very late and had 
another commitment, but I would point out to you that we were represented 
there by Chris Stuhr, principal at Cypress Hills Regional College.  He was 
there as our spokesperson and as someone who has a fair bit of experience 
in dealing with regional colleges. 
 
And I can point out to you as well that I have met with the Melfort group 
on two or three occasions.  I know Dub Henderson, one of the people up 
there very involved with it, quite well, and that I worked with him in the 
department for four years up there. 
 
But at the same time I don't think that there's really that much difference 
in the goals and objectives that we have.  I think that we're not talking 
about taking an area and buying 10 or 20 acres of land or whatever, and 
establishing another campus as such, where you're going to have not only 
the college facilities but also residential facilities.  That's not what 
we're looking at. 
 
I think that you know as well as I that we have some very large facilities 
around this province that are not being fully utilized, and I think for 
anyone to suggest that we're going to go into any community and build 
completely new facilities when you've already got some that are not being 
fully utilized, that would be a total misuse of funds. 
 
So we want to take a look at each area in the province with the regional 
college board, and some of them have presented very, very good five-year 
plans as to the type of direction that they want to go -- the expansion of 
university courses, also a greater number of vocational programs, along 
with the adult basic ed. programs and the literacy programs. 
 
So I think we've got a lot of excellent services being provided.  But there 
was some disagreement, I know, with the Melfort group and others in the 
province as to what should be happening. 
 
But I think we can achieve the same objectives in taking a look at each 
one.  Each area is different too I would suggest.  When you look at the 
Swift Current area for example, their needs in that area are somewhat 
different than what they would be in Palliser, or not necessarily Palliser 



 

 

but in Carlton say in the Humboldt area, or in Cumberland, and if you go 
out to Parkland in Yorkton.  So we have to look at each one individually. 
 
Now we've got a lot of good things happening. There's a lot of excitement 
in the group right now with the increased budgets that they have as to some 
of the things that they are now going to be able to do.  We've got good 
people like Jim McHugh from North Battleford who is the head of the 
regional colleges in the province. 
 
And I would point out, by the way, that he attended that symposium in 
Melfort as well.  He's head of the trustees' association and, as I 
understand it, participated on the panel.  So I think we had good 
representation there, and people that have been very directly involved in 
the provision of programs through regional colleges. 
 
So we're looking forward to a lot of good things.  We'll work with the 
Melfort people in trying to address their needs, and it's just that we're 
not going to be calling them junior colleges and setting up special 
campuses as such.  There was some disagreement in that particular area. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, I'm glad you asked the last sentence because 
my question was, you had said all along, I don't think there's very much 
difference between what they requested and what we want to do. 
 
Let me tell you, Mr. Minister, that they were disappointed that there was 
not a cabinet minister there.  It's quite different from having an elected 
official.  There were a number of your officials there from various 
community colleges.  I had a conversation with many of them and I know many 
of them personally -- many good people; I'm not arguing with that. But 
that's not what they wanted; that's not what Melfort wanted.  Melfort 
wanted a cabinet minister there who could answer some of the policy 
decisions for them.  An official can't do that.  An official carries out 
your policy.  They can't say that the government is going to do this or the 
government is going to do that. 
 
And Mr. Hodgins was there.  Mr. Hodgins was there to give a greeting at 
noon hour.  He spoke for about five minutes and that was it, but didn't 
accept any questions; He was busy to go somewhere else. And that's fair 
enough; that was fair enough.  But he had his lunch and he left -- and I 
think he was well fed.  But he didn't . . . I must admit I don't think we 
got our money's worth . . . And I'm not saying that being serious about it, 
but it would have been nice if he could have stayed or a minister could 
have been there to answer some of their questions.  That's what they 
wanted.  I'm not being critical of the officials that were there. 
 
Mr. Minister, what I . . . I'm glad you did answer or put in your last 
sentence where you said we're not specifically going to set up campuses.  
Because that's what Melfort wanted.  And in their brief, I'm not sure what 
cabinet said to them and I'm not privy to it, but they very clearly asked 
for. 
 

 We envision a junior college that would have a strong presence in the 
community.  Having a campus as its base would foster a sense of pride in 



 

 

the students and faculty. 
 

I made a suggestion, Mr. Minister, at that time that we ought to have a 
look at post-secondary education in this province, vis-a-vis do we want 
junior colleges?  Do we want regional colleges?  Do we want to offer a 
three-year or four-year degree program in rural Saskatchewan through 
various campuses? 
 
And I suggested that we set up a committee under the auspices of Dr. Leo 
Kristjanson who I know is very familiar with rural Saskatchewan and is 
certainly familiar with education in Saskatchewan.  Mr. Minister, that 
resolution was passed unanimously and I had hoped that maybe you would take 
that to heart and act on that particular resolution that was passed. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to ask you: you say that you feel that there are areas 
out there that will offer a five-year university program, or have submitted 
to you a program for a five-year university degree.  I think that's what I 
heard you say.  And if that is true, would you mind telling me in what 
areas they will be offering these programs?  Secondly, if that is not true, 
then ignore that, Mr. Minister, but tell me: do you foresee in the next few 
years, your regional colleges offering a degree program, let's say in arts 
and science or in physical education or in education.  Do you foresee that?  
Is that the direction that you are giving to regional colleges? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- We're not looking at degree programs.  We're 
looking at first and second-year only at this point.  But that what I had 
suggested to you what was a five-year plan as to where they want to go over 
the five years as to the different courses they're going to offer.  No, not 
a five-year degree program or anything like that. 
 
We know that other provinces are looking more at that.  B.C. is just gone 
to that, as you know.  In the last year, I believe that they have three of 
their colleges now that are granting degrees.  I think another one is going 
to be added this year.  So they're having a fair bit of success with that, 
but I think we got to walk before we can run.  So I think we have to look 
at increasing the number of courses, first and second-year university, the 
same with SIAST.  But we got to make sure that we can have that mesh then, 
so that these students can take those courses and that they will work right 
in with what's being done on the home base. 
 
Now again with regard to Melfort, let me point out to you that -- and I can 
understand what you're saying about it's always good to have a minister 
there -- but I did make a point of going to Melfort and meeting with those 
people on an individual basis and listening to them and discussing the 
concerns with them.  But at the same time, I don't think that it would be 
wise for anybody to be looking at putting a lot of additional money into 
bricks and mortar as such, if you've already got facilities that are 
sitting empty or not fully utilized.  I think that we've got to look at 
more money that can be put into staff and programs.  I know that some have 
suggested the idea of mini-campuses. 
 
Now there's a little bit a difference there.  And I think that you could 
see . . . And I'm not just sure how much space is still available at 



 

 

Melfort, but I know some of the larger comprehensive high schools -- and 
Melfort was one of them, quite frankly -- were built for maybe a thousand 
or 1,200 students, and we're sitting there with maybe 6 or 700 of them. 
 
Well I think that there's an opportunity to utilize more of that space 
then, and maybe it is a matter of, maybe it's a matter of a mini-campus 
that is set up, where you do have your post-secondary programs along with 
the secondary.  And in some cases you can have a wider offering then.  You 
could beef up some of those shop areas and do more vocational programs. 
 
Again, you talked earlier about resources in libraries.  I think that there 
could be a lot of work done in that area, but it doesn't mean establishing 
a total new junior college, separate free-standing campus.  Let's do it 
with the facilities that we've got.  And I know that others are wanting to 
do more of that sort of thing, and that will meet their needs.  And I think 
that's what our main concern is. 
 
You said you wanted another study done.  Well, keep in mind that the former 
minister of Education had many, many meetings and a lot of consultation 
around the province prior to the reorganization of SIAST and the regional 
colleges.  And the one thing that was coming across quite clearly from 
rural people was that they wanted greater access for their children.  They 
wanted more first and second year university courses available in rural 
Saskatchewan, and a greater opportunity in so far as vocational courses 
were concerned. 
 
So that can be provided through the regional colleges that we are looking 
at now.  And with new money and more money and a difference in the 
mechanism by which they're funded, there is much more that can be done. 
 
I think, quite frankly, when I talk about different areas and the way that 
they have to examine their own needs, Northlands college in La Ronge is the 
best example that we've got in the province, I think, where specific 
courses are being provided to meet specific needs.  And I'm sure that the 
member from Athabasca would agree with me on that when he looks at the 
programs that are being offered up there.  They are designed by people in 
the North for the jobs that are out there and the specific training that 
they need.  And I think that that's something that we can use as a model 
for more of our other regional colleges in the province.  And it does point 
out that everyone of them is unique and different, and they have their own 
special needs and let them then work to developing programs to meet those 
needs and we'll work along with them. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, I don't want to -- let me make it 
categorically clear -- I don't want you to carry on the kinds of 
discussions that your predecessor had.  That's not discussions.  He did 
more harm to post 
_secondary education than any minister in the history of this province, in 
the history of this province.  The harm that he caused by the method that 
he used in changing post-secondary education in the technical schools is 
unforgivable.  It was scandalous, Mr. Minister. 
 
I don't want you to support your predecessor, because that's not the kind 



 

 

of consultation that anybody would like to have done again in this province 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . oh, I didn't know he was here but I'm 
glad he is.  Yes, I've said this to you before and I'll say it again.  The 
educators in this province were very, very pleased when you left that 
particular post.  They weren't very pleased when you got Finance but I'll 
tell you they were pleased to get you out of Education. 
 
(2030) 
 
And they had high hopes for this present minister and I'm willing to give 
him another chance.  He didn't fare very well in his first budget . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . oh but you didn't, you fared very poorly.  
You fared very poorly.  Very, very poorly.  I did very well.  And, Mr. 
Minister, you want me to outline how well you did?  Two per cent for 
libraries when the track record was less than half a per cent for five 
years.  You call that good?  I don't.  I don't call that very good, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Let me give you another one -- 2.9 per cent for universities.  Two point 
nine per cent for universities, you say that's good?  When inflation rate 
is almost 5 per cent, you say that's good?  Mr. Minister, I'd be ashamed.  
I'd be ashamed.  I'd be ashamed to say that you were successful.  No, Mr. 
Minister, you did not do well.  You did not do well and neither did 
education do very well by you. 
 
But as I said, we're hoping that you will have more clout in cabinet next 
time around, if your Premier doesn't call an election.  If he calls an 
election you won't have to worry about it; we'll take care of it.  The 
members on this side will take care of it. 
 
But I'm telling you, Mr. Minister, and you know you did not do well.  
You're doing your best out there to try and defend the budget that you've 
got, but when you see the type of mill rate increases from kindergarten to 
grade 12, when you see what's happening at the university when our 
president of the U of S has to possibly cancel colleges -- as we will get 
into it a little bit later -- don't tell me you did well.  You didn't.  You 
did very poorly. 
 
And I'll show you very shortly your government's record as far as operating 
grants is concerned.  By your own annual report your operating grants to 
universities is scandalous.  You know what it works out in the last five 
years, Mr. Minister? -- 1.8 per cent per annum. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- No. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Yes, in your own report.  Well I'll show it to you very 
shortly in your own report.  Mr. Minister, you fared very badly.  But at 
least, Mr. Minister, I think you understand education.  You spent 30 years 
in it; you should understand it.  What I want to know, Mr. Minister, is in 
your regional colleges -- and this is some concern to the universities -- 
are you, or can you guarantee the universities that should you get 500 
students in your regional colleges this year and another 500 next year, how 
will the universities be able to take care of those students when they come 



 

 

into the university on their third year?  Dumping 500 students let's say 
into the universities suddenly, how are they going to accommodate those 
students?  Now you might say, well we're not going to have 500.  Well if 
you're only going to have 100, then I think you misspent or misallocated a 
lot of money. 
 
And before we get into that, Mr. Minister, can you tell me what success 
excluding Prince Albert -- if you want to include Prince Albert then give 
me the figures separately for Prince Albert -- but excluding Prince Albert, 
what success have you had in first-year and possibly second-year courses 
that were taken by students in regional colleges?  Don't give me the 
number.  I want the number of students, but I also want the number of 
courses because many of them may have only taken one course or two course 
or a half a course.  I want to know the total number of courses and the 
number of students. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Now, Mr. Chairman, I think that when the member 
talks about the fact that we didn't do that well as far as the budget, I 
think $888 million for education and an increase of some $47 million is 
pretty fair considering the economic times.  Now I've told you before we 
can always use more money, but you're not prepared to accept reality, the 
fact that the economic times are tough.  So let's take a look at that. 
 
Now you ask about the number of courses and the enrolment in the different 
regional colleges.  Well Carlton Trail had 13 courses, 150 enrolment; we've 
got Cumberland, 15 courses, 106 enrolment; Cypress Hills, 40 courses, 289 
enrolment; Lakeland, 2, a total enrolment of 15 there, that must have been 
the satellite; Northlands, 6 there, 37 enrolment.  We're talking university 
now.  North West, 17 with an enrolment of 226; Parkland, 42, 450 students; 
Prairie West, 26 courses, 172 enrolment; Southeast, 50 courses with 350.  
So a total of 211 courses and the enrolment of 1,795 students. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, would you tell me what those 211 courses were 
mainly in, what areas.  Two hundred and eleven courses -- I'm not quite 
certain what you mean by the course.  Could you provide for me -- maybe you 
could send over here -- a listing of the courses that students were taking.  
Were they psychology courses?  Were they English courses?  Were they 
history courses?  Were they sociology courses?  What courses were they?  
Are you saying courses or classes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Classes. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- You're saying classes.  Okay.  Could I have a breakdown of 
that, a list of that. I'd like to see it.  Mr. Minister, while you are at 
it, could you tell me how many students will complete their first year - 
_ in other words will have five classes -- and how many this coming year, a 
good possibility will be completing their second year and the university 
can expect to see them on their doorsteps next year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- We don't have a list of the courses.  We could 
probably try and get that for you.  By courses, I mean the classes that are 
being offered on each of these campuses.  Nor could we tell you how many 
are completing first or second year because of the way that the courses are 



 

 

being offered right now.  This is one of the reasons for changing the 
mechanism by which they are funded because up until now it's not always 
been possible for students to do any long-range planning because they have 
never always known whether or not a course was going to be offered.  It 
depended on how many students were enrolled in it.  So if there weren't 
enough students, even though the course might have, or class, might have 
been in the calendar, it wouldn't have been offered because it wasn't going 
to be paying for itself. 
 
So all of the students are registered with the university, and we would 
have, I think, quite a time trying to find out all of the numbers of 
courses that they take and also whether or how many are finishing first or 
second year university.  But I think from here on in, there can be much 
closer tracking of it, because now as they change -- we've changed that 
mechanism -- they're now going to be offering more programs.  It will be 
possible; students will now be able to look at the calendars and say, well, 
now if I can take these courses or classes this year and these next year, 
they can now be prepared to take a full year each of those two years. 
 
So it'll be much easier for them to track, but right now the only thing I 
could give you would be the different classes that have been offered 
through the SCAN network. If you want that information, I have it right 
here. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, I wish you would check with your officials 
again.  I don't believe what you said to me, I just don't believe it. 
 
Your department . . . No, let's run through this.  You tell me that so many 
classes have been offered -- 211 classes.  You knew exactly how many 
students were in each of those courses at each of those colleges.  All they 
had to do then in each of those courses is write behind it whether it was 
English or history or sociology or psychology.  When they've tabulated, 
then they knew exactly how many students were in each of those courses.  So 
when they tabulated it, they would have to go through the courses. 
 
I just don't believe when you say that you don't know how many English 
classes, for example, were given.  How many students have taken first-year 
English?  How many students have taken a senior English class?  I mean, if 
they did the tabulation, as you indicated to me, they must know exactly the 
courses that were offered and how many have taken various courses.  I mean 
I just don't believe that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, let me point out to the member that 
all of these students have to be registered at the university.  All that 
the regional college is doing is offering a brokerage service. 
 
Now when I give you these numbers . . . I said that we don't have that 
here.  What we will have to do, and we can do that for you if you want, we 
will contact each of the regional colleges and find out how many English 
courses -- or psychology, or whatever -- they offer.  We don't have that 
information with us.  We are simply able to tell you the number of courses 
that they had and the enrolment.  If you want that information, we'll get 
it for you but we don't have it here tonight. 



 

 

 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Okay, Mr. Minister.  I can understand you may not have it at 
your fingertips.  But, Mr. Minister, I find it somewhat difficult to 
understand how you can tell me that we have . . . And I didn't write the 
figures down, but hypothetically let's say we have 22 in Parkland took so 
many courses; we have another 42 in North Battleford took so many courses.  
Now where did you get the numbers from in Northlands College, for example, 
if they didn't calculate how many were in each of those classes? 
 
They know; they've got those figures; they have to have them.  And by 
knowing if student A has taken four classes or five classes, we know he or 
she has completed the first year.  And if they've taken 10 classes, we can 
pretty well ascertain that they have finished their second year and will be 
on the doorstep of the university this year.  And I would think that the 
universities would want to know how many students have completed, or will 
have completed next year, their second year of university.  Of the 1,795, 
will 1,000 have completed their second year next year?  And can the 
universities then expect a thousand students knocking at their door wanting 
to get into third year university?  Surely we must have thought of that, of 
the impact of regional colleges . . . courses offered at regional colleges, 
and the impact it will have on the universities.  What are we going to say 
to those students when they apply to get into university in their third 
year?  Sorry but you can't get in; there's no room; we have quotas.  Where 
are they going to go?  Surely there must have been some long-range planning 
on this. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the member's going on and on 
here about something that is just . . . well he just has to stop and think 
for a little bit here.  I've already indicated that these students are 
registered with the registrar on the campus. 
 
Now let's take the University of Saskatchewan.  They know then which ones 
of these students are in first year or second year.  I mean it's part of 
their total count.  So it isn't that there's going to be a surprise here; 
they're not going to know how many are going to be coming on campus here in 
third year or whatever the case may be.  They know how many are there. 
 
Now the courses may change from time to time, or from year to year, in the 
regional college campus.  They don't offer the same ones every year.  I've 
already indicated to you that we can contact each of these regional 
colleges and find out whether they have English and psychology, or math, or 
a German, or history, or whatever.  I told you we don't have that 
information here now. 
 
(2045) 
 
But I point out again that these students are all in the computer.  They're 
registered by the registrar at the University of Saskatchewan or the 
University of Regina.  So they already have that information there.  It's 
simply a matter of the regional college then acting as a broker to deliver 
the service.  Instead of it being delivered on the campus, it's delivered 
in the regional college.  So I don't know what you're making such a big 
thing out of this for when they're already in the computer, by the 



 

 

register.  It's just that they're not taking the course on the campus; 
they're taking it in the regional college.  I've indicated to you that I 
will endeavour to get those courses for you, but we don't have it here 
tonight. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, it's strange how you always put a different 
inflection on the question I asked.  I never asked what the future programs 
were.  I did not ask what the future programs were that these students were 
going to take. I simply asked you, how many students took English; how many 
took sociology; how many took history?  That's the past tense, Mr. 
Minister.  I didn't say, how many will take English; how many will take 
history.  I never asked you that. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- You weren't listening. 
 
 DMr. Rolfes: -- Yes, I was listening.  You're the one that wasn't 
listening, and that's why these estimates are taking a long, long time.  If 
you simply answered the questions that we ask you, we could get through 
with these estimates. 
 
Mr. Minister, the reason I'm asking these questions is because the 
universities are concerned.  Would you mind telling me how are the 
universities going to accommodate these students for third year when they 
show up at the university.  How are they going to accommodate these 
students?  I know they know how many programs they have taken, but how are 
they going to accommodate them when they all show up at the university? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I think that if you take 
everything into consideration that there may be some slight increase at 
some point, say, third year, but that may not necessarily be the case.  
These students are all in the computer, put in by the registrar.  They know 
how many are in first year, second year, and third year and so on.  I think 
we know as well that there are students on campus that may drop out in the 
first and second year.  They're doing that now. 
 
I think as well that if we consider what Saskatchewan's population is, that 
we have been seeing an increase in the number of students, but I don't see 
that that is going to continue, Mr. Chairman.  I mean, surely to goodness 
with a population of a million people that we have in the province, we must 
be nearly reaching our plateau as to the number of students that are still 
going to be going on to the campus and using those facilities. 
 
So I think that when you consider that we are working together with the 
universities, with the administration, and with SIAST and the regional 
colleges, these are the types of issues that they're going to be dealing 
with, if in fact they see that there is going to be a problem.  But I don't 
think that right now that we have to be seriously concerned about it. 
 
We do have a planning committee right now that consists of all of the 
different institutions, and I'm sure that these are problems that will be 
resolved because they're going to be aware of what's happening.  They are 
going to see if there are large increases.  We're not sure at this point 
how many more students we're going to have on any of the regional colleges 



 

 

on their campuses because of some changes that we're making.  But I 
anticipate that there will be several because some of those rural young 
people now will have access to taking these courses where otherwise they 
wouldn't have that opportunity if they had to go into Saskatoon or Regina 
and pay the high amount of money for their living expenses.  Now they're 
going to be able to live at home and take those courses.  The committee 
will deal with those types of concerns as time goes on, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Yes, Mr. Minister, you sure will, just like you dealt with 
the quotas at the U of S on Arts and Science.  We didn't have quotas.  We 
didn't have quotas when we were the government.  As I will indicate to you 
very quickly, Mr. Minister, why they have to have quotas is because your 
operating grants are so low -- 1.8 per cent per annum over the last five 
years. 
 
Mr. Minister, you may not be concerned about it, but when I met with the 
officials at the U of S, that's exactly the concern that they had.  What do 
we do with the third-year students that will come into the U of S from the 
regional colleges?  That was a concern that they had.  And they simply said 
to me that, well what will happen is that many students will be denied.  
Maybe not, I mean it will be on academic standing.  So that means that 
those students who want to come in, and many of them, Mr. Minister . . . 
because I don't think the drop-out rate is very high in first and second 
year at the university -- it's not that high.  And the dean of Arts and 
Science will tell you that.  I mean, Mr. Minister, look at, "U of S Arts, 
Science quotas expected to remain," and follow-up is, "Quotas are to remain 
indefinitely." 
 
And I'll tell you, Mr. Minister, they are concerned.  They don't have the 
money, they don't have the staff, they don't have the library facilities, 
they don't have the space for these extra students . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Now look, you had eight years to address it and you 
didn't address it, and you knew what the projection figures were at that 
time.  Right across Canada the projection figures weren't that high.  You 
could have dealt with it and you didn't. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to turn to your annual report on education, and you 
say that I am wrong on my figures.  Well if I am wrong you better have a 
look at your annual report of 1988-89, Saskatchewan Education.  And I want 
you to turn to page 63 -- I mean this isn't my report -- and table number 
six.  Table six says grants to universities, 1983 to 1989.  Mr. Minister, 
those were your budgets -- those were your budgets. 
 
Let me just read out to you what the operating grants were.  And it's not 
the capital grants that they're concerned about, and certainly because they 
needed $160 million over the next five years at the University of 
Saskatchewan.  The Regina campus needs a lot of money for capital, as my 
members pointed out to you the other night when I wasn't here. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, I want to indicate to you in 1983-84 that operating 
grants to universities were 126 million-and-some-dollars.  In 1984-85, 132 
million; in 1985-86, 139 million; 1986-87, 143 million; 1987-88, 143 
million because you didn't raise it at all.  And in 1988-89, 149 million.  



 

 

And, Mr. Minister, that works out to an 8.4 per cent increase.  Over five 
years that's a 1.68 per cent increase per annum for your operating grants. 
 
That is what you have offered to the universities and that's why they're in 
trouble, and they'll tell you that.  Now you can't tell me that over those 
five years that the inflation rate was only 8.4 per cent.  That's the 
problem that . . . And I said to the minister last year when he brought in 
his enhancement fund: oh, this was the greatest thing since sliced bread.  
But the universities knew what he was up to and we knew what he was up to 
and your government was up to. 
 
And that is because you didn't want to include it into the base funding.  
And when I asked the minister, will it be included in the base?  Well, he 
says, we're thinking about it, we're thinking about it.  And your 
department, Mr. Minister, promised the university, your department 
officials promised the university if they carried out certain conditions 
that that enhancement fund would be included in the base.  Oh yes they did.  
Oh yes they did. 
 
Now I have no reason to believe that the officials at the U of S aren't 
telling me the truth.  I have no reason to believe that they're not telling 
me the truth.  They lived up to those conditions, and then it wasn't 
included in the base.  Had you included in the base, Mr. Minister, your 
base for this year for the universities would have been about 153 million.  
And then if you'd have added on 3 per cent, you'd be up to about 155 or 
$156 million.  Now that's the problem, Mr. Minister, that we're having with 
universities, is that you have not addressed the operating grants 
adequately, and our universities simply can't continue.  That's why we have 
quotas, and that's why over a thousand students, who otherwise would have 
been eligible for post-secondary education at our universities, didn't 
receive that education.  Many of them went to other provinces.  Others just 
simply didn't take it.  And you have denied those students the opportunity 
to educate themselves and to contribute to this province by having a 
university education. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Minister, your government's priorities are all wrong.  
And you can't tell me you don't have the money because you do have money 
for the Cargills.  You do have money for the Pocklingtons.  You do have 
money for the Weyerhaeusers. 
 
And as I pointed out to you the other night, if Weyerhaeuser was paying the 
going rate today over the 30-year agreement that you signed with them, they 
would have paid another $432 million.  And, Mr. Minister, what we could do 
with $432 million for our universities!  We could do a lot.  So you have 
the money but you've got the wrong priorities; that's what the problem is. 
 
Oh you got lots for your selected and privileged few, but when it comes to 
the young people of this province, when it comes to the operating grants 
for our universities, you don't have it.  You had another example today 
with WESTBRIDGE.  We had an example last year in GigaText -- millions, 
millions poured down the drain.  Cargill, $38 billion in expenditures, and 
we have to -- a province of Saskatchewan, our budget is miniscule to the 
budget of Cargill -- and we have to subsidize a multinational corporation 



 

 

of Cargill? 
 
Don't tell me we don't have the money.  You just have set the wrong 
priorities, Mr. Minister, and I think it's time that you take your 
responsibility a little more seriously.  You go into cabinet and you fight 
for the young people.  You start fighting for the universities.  You start 
fighting for the educational opportunities for our young people in this 
province so they don't have to leave and seek their opportunities somewhere 
else.  If you can't do it, then give the job to someone else. 
 
(2100) 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, we just hear the member running 
on and on again telling a whole bunch of statements here that are just not 
accurate, not accurate one little bit, not prepared to accept that at all.  
He talks about Weyerhaeuser and he talks about Cargill and all the rest of 
this.  Nothing can substantiate that.  Cargill, the government isn't giving 
Cargill any money.  He keeps rambling on and on about this.  He's not 
prepared to look at the facts.  And he raises things like GigaText.  I 
don't hear him talking about Nabu and the $7 million or whatever that 
you've put in there.  Never even created one job.  I don't hear you talking 
about Golden Acres Motel, Moose Jaw.  How many million dollars did you 
squander away on that? 
 
For every one that you give me I'll give you another one -- for every one 
of them.  So you sit there and you talk about all of these different 
things.  I'll give you an example for every one that the NDP blew a whole 
bunch of money on, and hey, what about that?  Yes, you had the problem, 
yes, you left us the problem.  What were you doing with all the money you 
were putting into potash mines?  Why didn't you put more of that into 
education?  Where were you then? 
 
When you talk about space at the university, well I'll tell you, capital 
funding to the University of Saskatchewan, this year alone $48 million in 
capital.  All right, let's talk capital.  Let's talk operating.  You said 
here a minute ago that if this government had . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well you said here a minute ago now . . . Do you want 
the answer or not?  I mean are you just making fun here and asking 
questions . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I'm going to give you 
operating. 
 
Now let me just tell you here what you're trying to mislead everybody here 
again.  You said a few minutes ago that if the enhancement fund had been 
included in the base grant, okay, and then taken the 3 per cent over and 
above that -- I'm going to point out to you how bad your mathematics is, 
okay? -- you said that they would have been better off.  Well I'll tell you 
. . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- I did not. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Yes you did. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- I did not. 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- You said that if . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- You check Hansard. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well we'll check Hansard.  You said that if they 
added the enhancement fund to the base grant and then took that and took 
the 3 per cent of that this year, they'd be better off.  You said that. 
 
So let me tell you what the real story is, Mr. Chairman.  The base grant, 
Mr. Chairman, this year is 3 per cent; base grant is 3 per cent.  But I 
would point out to the member opposite that the enhancement fund this year 
has increased by 21 per cent, 21 per cent.  It's going to be divided 
between the universities and SIAST and the regional colleges.  But it's 
increased by 21 per cent. 
 
So let's take a look at the whole picture here.  You wonder about who's . . 
. I'm told that the 21 per cent is the increase to the universities -- 21 
per cent just to the universities, not SIAST, not the regional colleges, 21 
per cent to the universities. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- In the enhancement fund. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- In the enhancement fund.  Well now how can you tell 
us then that if it had been added to base budget and they took the 
percentage over and above that, it would have been more?  I'm telling you 
that it would not have been the case at all. 
 
Let's take a look at what's happened to the operating grants to the 
universities.  From 1975 . . . Well let's take 1982 on up to 1991 -- 
increase from 117 to $162 million in grants.  Annual percentage increase 
has gone up substantially over the period of time when you people were in 
government.  So there has been a very large increase as far as the 
operating grants, increased by 5.5 per cent after inflation -- 5.5 per cent 
after inflation. 
 
You look at the amount of money that has gone into the College of 
Agriculture building in the last couple of years and a substantial amount 
that's going into it this year.  Now that was something that the university 
were after you people to do for some 25 years and you never did anything 
about it at all.  So maybe if you'd done something like that when the cost 
would have been considerably lower and when the university was asking for 
it . . . So you beat on the government of the day because we aren't doing 
all of the things the university asked for. Where were you?  You weren't 
doing it in the '70s when economic times were a lot better than they are 
today. 
 
So our commitment is very clear.  Certainly the universities would like 
more money, but we're giving them as much money as we can now in comparison 
to what the taxpayers can afford to pay.  But the capital that we're giving 
to them, and the operating grants, are considerably more.  You haven't made 
any mention at all about the University Renewal and Development Fund -- 
$125 million over five years.  Why don't you talk about something like 



 

 

that?  A tremendous amount of capital expenditures have gone on on the 
campuses. 
 
Now granted, I am fully aware of what the University of Regina wants.  I 
know that the students want their own student union building and that the 
fine arts building is something else that's very badly needed.  And as soon 
as we can move on those areas, we will, but with the URDF . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Lots of money for everything else. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well if we want to use your terms, which are not 
based on any fact whatsoever -- you're opposed to fertilizer plants; the 
members from Moose Jaw aren't.  You've got two stories for everything. 
 
You talk about Weyerhaeuser. I don't think that you had any paper mill 
built up in Prince Albert when you were in power.  You don't want 
diversification in this province.  Where is increased money to come from 
for education unless we get into more of this manufacturing and processing?  
Where is it to come from? 
 
So you don't want to talk about those things, but that's what the people 
want in this province today.  They want more manufacturing and processing 
because it's through those industries that we are going to have the revenue 
we need in the future to provide more grants for universities and regional 
colleges and SIAST and to the K to 12 section. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- This is becoming rather enjoyable, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. 
Minister, it's quite logical isn't it that if the people really want what 
you are giving them today that you should be at 15 to 18 per cent in the 
popular vote -- 15 to 18 per cent maximum.  And you say that people want 
what you are offering.  Mr. Minister, anybody can build if you supply all 
the money.  Anybody can build if you take all the chances.  Anybody can do 
that. 
 
I'll give you a good example of the hotel here in Regina.  Anybody could 
have built that hotel if someone signs an agreement for eight-year lease 
for $12 million.  That's how you're wasting public funds.  That $12 million 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, a lot of people could have built 
that hotel.  I mean who couldn't build a mill in Prince Albert if you give 
them concessions and interest rates alone of $432 million.  Meadow Lake, 
exactly the same position. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, Cargill.  Why do you have to subsidize Cargill?  Not 
only subsidize them in the building of the plant but subsidizing in the 
selling, marketing of the fertilizer.  Oh the poor Cargill.  Of course I 
know why they're doing it.  I know why they're doing it, because Cargill . 
. . you look at the contributions Cargill has made to that political party.  
Thousands of dollars from Cargill has gone into that political party and 
the same thing with some of the others. 
 
Mr. Minister, you say that I haven't been honest.  Mr. Minister, you say 
that I haven't been honest with the operating grants.  I want, Mr. 
Minister, I want you to turn to page 63 and tell me, are those figures 



 

 

correct or aren't they?  Mr. Minister, would you answer that question.  In 
table 6, are those figures correct?  The operating grants went from 126 
million-and-some dollars to 149 million-and-some dollars in those five 
years.  Are those figures correct, Mr. Minister? 
 
Mr. Chairman, I wonder if we could bring a TV I could watch in the 
meantime.  I could watch some of that hockey game. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, the table is accurate there in so far 
as what it says, but it doesn't include the whole story.  The operating 
grants are probably accurate, yes, but it doesn't include enhancement fund 
which would have been also . . . that went into operating.  The capital 
grants, you don't have all of the information there on that.  Operating 
grants increased then from 131 million up to 173 . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- That's not operating. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- What is it?  Oh that's the total of 126 to 149 
then.  I would assume that's accurate. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, would you also admit that that is an 8.4 per 
cent increase over five years in operating grants to the universities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, again I think that we have to 
consider more than an operating grant.  I mean, what you have there is the 
accurate picture of whatever that percentage is, but I think at the same 
time, you can see why the enhancement fund then was introduced the 
following year to address some of the specific concerns.  It's not in here, 
no, but it came in the following year.  And the reasons are obvious why it 
came in: to address some of the specific pressures that the university 
campuses had at that time. 
 
But I don't think you can necessarily divorce the operating grants from all 
of the capital grants because there is a tremendous amount of money that 
was being spent there.  If we'd taken the same stand that your government 
did and hadn't built anything on the campuses, well sure there could have 
been an awful lot more money for an operating grant, but then you would 
have had the buildings falling down too. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- They are falling down. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well there's been a tremendous amount of money 
spent in the last eight years, partly because you weren't doing a heck of a 
lot about it when you were in power.  So you could have been building new 
ones.  You didn't do anything for College of Agriculture.  Why didn't you 
do that?  I mean when you look at $92 million going into one building, one 
building, certainly that could have been added to the grant.  You didn't do 
anything about the administration building.  That's been in trouble for 
many, many years.  You never addressed it.  So I mean don't just isolate 
operating grants.  Let's take a look at the whole picture and all of the 
money, taxpayers' money that is going onto those campuses. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, you will admit then that over five years, from 



 

 

'83-84 to '88-89, your government operating grants to universities was 8.4 
per cent of an average per year of 1.68 per cent.  A point that I want to 
make and a point that the universities make when I meet with them is: 
that's why we're in trouble.  We have gotten further and further behind as 
inflation eats away.  We didn't even get inflation, not nearly the 
inflation rate. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want you now -- and if you don't agree with these figures 
you can work them out for yourself.  In fact I want to turn this over to 
the minister so that he can look at it himself.  The operating grants from 
1975 to 1991, these were the operating grants.  Mr. Minister, let's turn to 
those.  In 1975-76, 23.4 per cent, that's when we were the government, Mr. 
Minister, 23.4 per cent increase; 1977, 14.3 per cent increase; 1978, 10 
per cent increase; 1979, 9.6 per cent increase; 1980, 7.6 per cent 
increase; 1981, 8.5 per cent increase; 1982, 12 per cent increase; 1983, 
and this was the '82-83 budgets and the last one before the government 
changed, a 17 per cent increase. 
 
(2115) 
 
Mr. Minister, you add up those averages.  And what has happened since the 
government changed?  And here's what happens: operating grants, '83-84, 
7.7, 5.3, 4.2, 3, 0, 2, 2, 3.  Well, Mr. Minister, what I'm saying to you 
is, and my figures are out slightly . . . yes, but they're not out very 
much, and if you want to, do your own calculations.  Do your own 
calculations and you will find that the universities are simply saying to 
you that you have not provided adequately for them in operating, number 
one.  So they cannot accommodate those students who should be eligible for 
university and who were eligible in the past. 
 
It is a well-known fact that those students who graduate from grade 12 with 
a 65 per cent average function well at the university.  This year students 
only with a 73 per cent average can get in, not because the others can't 
function at the university, but because of the lack of funding by your 
government of operating grants to the universities is why they are denied 
entrance to a university. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, the people out there don't buy it.  We don't buy it that 
you don't have the money.  You simply have the wrong priorities -- you 
simply have the wrong priorities.  You could cut out $10 million in 
partisan government advertising.  You could cut out 10 million of your 17 
million that you spent last year, and no one -- no one -- would suffer, 
except maybe your ego and your particular party, your image.  But the 
people of Saskatchewan would benefit because that $10 million you could use 
for universities. 
 
As I said to you before, if you and I sat down, forgot our politics and 
went through that budget, we could find millions of dollars -- millions of 
dollars for universities which you simply haven't provided. 
 
Mr. Minister, those figures I have given you come right from your annual 
report.  Mr. Minister, I also want to ask you . . . I see a new future 
minister of Education.  Well he may do all right, who knows?  Never know, 



 

 

he hasn't done very well in Agriculture lately, but that's shadow-boxing . 
. . no, from somebody that has been involved.  That shadow-boxing will have 
to stop soon, Mr. Minister.  Soon you're going to have to quit that and 
come through with that money that is sitting in Ottawa, and your timetable, 
yes, your timetable will have to change. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Mazie's quitting. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- No, Mazie isn't quitting. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- He's giving up. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- No, he didn't have . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order, order.  The debate from across the floor isn't 
adding anything to what's going on in this House this evening, so I'd ask 
the members to allow the member from Saskatoon South to put his question. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, we could have finished a long time ago if I'd 
get some co-operation from you.  Mr. Minister, had you simply said to me 
right from the start, yes, you are right in your figures, we could have 
been on to another topic.  And look, these are your own.  And what the 
universities tell me, Mr. Minister, and I meet with them also as the critic 
in the opposition, they tell me that they simply cannot provide all the 
programs they presently are. 
 
And I want to ask you, Mr. Minister: what mandate, what mandate do you 
expect of our universities?  Are they to continue with the traditional 
mandate of providing all the activities and offering all the programs they 
presently are, or are you saying to them, Mr. Minister, that they must cut 
programs and cut colleges?  Is that what you are saying to them, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, we're not suggesting to the 
university that they cut programs, and I would hope that any cuts they have 
to make would be minimal, but they'll make those decisions.  And I talked 
to the president of the University of Saskatchewan yesterday or the day 
before and certainly aware of some of the current concerns. 
 
But, Mr. Chairman, I want to answer the question here that the member has 
put forward about the grants and changes, and he's making his argument 
about the small increase that we've had over the years.  But let me point 
out that in spite of the difficult times that we've had, since from 1981 to 
1989, that operating grants were increased by 5.5 per cent after inflation.  
Now . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- 1981, sure you're including two big years of ours. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- All right, but you're being selective.  You wanted 
to pick certain years, all right.  I mean, you want to distort everything.  
Now just listen. 
 
I've said then that 5.5 per cent after inflation.  Now in comparison in 



 

 

much richer times, after inflation in the last seven years that your 
government was in power, grants increased by .5 per cent, .5 per cent. 
 
Now let's take a look at something else.  Let's take a look at something 
else.  You wonder about why these grants aren't increasing.  The farmers' 
income today -- and that's still our main industry in this province -- the 
farmers' income today is 43 per cent of what it was 10 years ago, 10 years 
ago.  We've also seen the price of uranium probably come down about . . . 
It's probably about a third of what it was 10 years ago.  The price of oil 
hasn't done all that great.  What's the price of potash in comparison? 
 
So when you look at those four main generators of revenue and consider what 
has happened during the last 10 years, is it any wonder that we haven't 
been able to increase the grants any more than we have.  I'm surprised, 
really, that there hasn't been a large cut in some areas.  I think we've 
been doing pretty well, but it's been coming about because we've had to 
change priorities and we've had to have deficits.  But I think that there 
are things that we're pretty fortunate . . . Certainly I would like to see 
more money for the universities.  We fully understand the important role 
that our universities play in this province.  But I would also point out to 
you that this is not a problem that is unique to Saskatchewan when it comes 
to funding at universities. 
 
Now I got a copy here of the changes that are taking place in the province 
of Alberta.  And you like to talk so much, or your colleagues do, about the 
number of young people that are leaving our province and going to Alberta 
and B.C. because they're going to get jobs.  Let's take a look at what's 
happening in Alberta.  This is a province where their economy is 
considerably better than ours, but university fees, they're going up 15 per 
cent at the University of Alberta, 15 per cent.  And let's take a look at 
the fact that they're cancelling 900 course sections and laying off some 27 
people this year, a lot of support people.  And there are other positions 
that they've been vacant and they're not going to be filling those 
positions. 
 
So now I'm sure that you could take a look right across this country and 
see that the same thing is happening on all of the campuses.  Tuition fees 
are having to go up to try and meet some of the increased operating costs.  
They're all asking for more and more money, but even in the province of 
British Columbia you're finding that tuition fees are going up 
substantially.  And I suppose that their grants are larger than ours, but 
I'm sure that the universities are saying, we want more.  Well when is more 
going to stop, Mr. Chairman?  I mean we give as much as we can, we give as 
much as we can . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, sure, I mean he 
comes back with the same old rhetoric, same old rhetoric, but no idea about 
building in the province so that we can ensure that we're going to have 
more money for generations to come as far as education. 
 
So I point out, Mr. Chairman, the reasons why we cannot increase the grant 
substantially more than we have.  But when you compare our record to their 
record -- when the economic times were considerably better -- our record 
will stand up against theirs any time, Mr. Chairman. 
 



 

 

Mr. Rolfes: -- It'd be a joke if it wasn't so serious, Mr. Minister.  I 
want to tell the public out there a couple of things before we get to that.  
Mr. Minister, if you took the 432 million that you have subsidized to 
Weyerhaeuser, the 20 million you gave to Pocklington, and the 64 million -- 
and not to look at the guarantees that you made to Weyerhaeuser -- you've 
got over $500 million.  I want to tell the public: $500 million that they 
are giving to three corporations.  That money they could've used for 
universities.  And I'll tell the public that's why they don't have the 
money . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, that's why you're at 15 per 
cent.  That's why you're at 15 per cent. 
 
It's interesting to see how the minister wants to use the figures of the 
previous government -- of our government -- he used three figures for 
operating grants when we were the government.  One was 8.5 per cent, one 
was 12 per cent, and one was 17 per cent.  He used those and threw them 
into his figures. 
 
Of course it'll boost your figures.  You said 1981.  In 1980-81 it was 8.5 
per cent; 1981-82 it was 12 per cent; 1982-83 it was 17 per cent.  Mr. 
Minister, I did some quick calculation while you were talking.  And when we 
were the government from 1975 to 1982-83, you know what the operating 
grants went up by?  102 per cent for an average of 12-point-some per cent.  
You know what the inflation rate was, Mr. Minister?  The inflation rate was 
9.6 per cent average, 9.6 per cent average.  Oh, he says,  
 Dterrible.  It's not so terrible, Mr. Minister, when you look at they were 
getting over 3 per cent per year more than inflation and, and, Mr. Minister 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, let me tell you that when you're 
giving them 1.6 per cent, pardon me, 1.8 per cent per year, when inflation 
is around 5, well I'll take ours any day, Mr. Minister, any day, and so 
will the universities, so will the universities, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to tell you that you did very poorly, and you might as 
well admit it.  You haven't got the clout that you'd like to have in 
cabinet and that you should have, that you should have. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- How do you know? 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Well, if you had the clout . . . (inaudible interjection) . 
. . Oh, Mr. Minister, I want to tell the people the minister says he does 
have the clout.  Well obviously, Mr. Chairman, I want to tell the people of 
Saskatchewan then this minister is not protecting education, then he is not 
sticking up for education in cabinet.  He says he has the clout.  Then why 
did he get less than inflation for education?  Why did he manage to only 
get two point some per cent on operating grants for universities?  He 
doesn't have the clout.  He doesn't have the clout. 
 
Mr. Minister, you didn't fare well; you didn't fare very well. And that's 
why, Mr. Minister, you got a tough time or the universities have a tough 
time to try to meet with you because you can't defend the budget that you 
are providing.  You just can't defend it. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have a number of other topics that I want to get through 
tonight yet.  I want to ask you . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, 



 

 

we'll be back; we'll be back on this . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
No, no, I got tomorrow and next week.  We got tomorrow and next week.  If 
we don't finish, we'll go the following week.  We'll do the following week.  
And if you interfere, we'll do it the following two weeks too . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . No, I haven't taken my clubs out yet. 
 
The Minister of the Family says I have a tee off time Monday at 2 o'clock.  
Well I'm not a cabinet minister.  No, we have to do our work here and we 
can't tee off. 
 
Mr. Minister -- I'd love to tee off -- Mr. Minister, I want to ask you a 
question.  Last year we asked the then minister of Education about a 
contract that was signed between the university and WESTBRIDGE in building 
a WESTBRIDGE building on the U of R.  I'd like you to tell me the progress 
of that building, where it is at, and what the funding arrangements are 
today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, we're not providing any money for 
WESTBRIDGE for the construction of the building in the research park. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, we must be on the different building then.  
WESTBRIDGE, a year ago it was reported in this House that WESTBRIDGE was 
building a building on the university campus for computers.  Is that 
correct?  Is that building going on and what is the funding arrangement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- The project is well under way.  Maybe you need to 
go out and take a look at it.  It's well under way.  But we're not 
providing any funding for that; that's an agreement between the university 
and WESTBRIDGE. 
 
(2130) 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, can you tell me, since you provide the funding 
to the university, what is the arrangement between the university and 
WESTBRIDGE? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, it's my understanding that the 
University of Regina is constructing the building and have a lease 
arrangement with WESTBRIDGE for it, so we're not providing any money for 
that.  As I understand it, the leasing arrangement that they have would pay 
for the building, I think, within about 10 years or so. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, what was the original arrangement made between 
the University of Regina and WESTBRIDGE?  I want you to think seriously on 
this.  What was the original arrangement, and has that arrangement changed, 
the financial arrangement there was between WESTBRIDGE and the U of R?  Has 
that original arrangement changed?  And if it has, what is it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, the agreement there with WESTBRIDGE, 
that's all with the University of Regina.  We're not providing any funding 
for that.  As I understand it, the university is putting up the facility 
and they are leasing it to WESTBRIDGE.  And as I understand it, the 
agreement is such that the building will pay for itself over some 10 to -- 



 

 

I think maybe -- 12 maximum years.  There was some minor change that was, I 
think, made in the overall plans that they could accommodate their head 
office out there, as well as the computer facility that they're putting up.  
But that's the only change that has been made.  So it's nothing to do with 
us, other than the fact that we have to give them approval to borrow the 
money to put up the building.  So I mean, that's the only involvement that 
we would have.  But the deal is between the University of Regina and 
WESTBRIDGE.  So the board of governors and the administration have approved 
that arrangement. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Minister, was that the original agreement that you would . . 
. I assume that you're guaranteeing the loan.  Are you guaranteeing the 
loan? 
 
Mr. Minister, I have before me an order in council.  And the order in 
council simply says this: that -- it is section 63 of The University of 
Regina Act -- provides as follows: the board shall not incur any liability 
and so on.  You're all familiar with that.  Section 67.1 says The 
University of Regina Act provides as follows: 
 D 

  The board shall not incur any liability or make any expenditure 
exceeding $500,000 . . . 

 
And then it goes on to say that: 
 

 It is desirable and in the public interest to repeal Your Honour's Order 
901/89, dated November 1, 1989 which approved the expenditure by the 
University of Regina of an estimated cost of $8,200,000 to be shared by 
the University of Regina and Westbridge Computer Corporation for the 
purpose of constructing a building in its research part which Westbridge 
Computer Corporation will lease from the University of Regina. 

 
Number four goes on to say: 
 

 It is desirable and in the public interest to modify the funding 
arrangements for the University of Regina for the construction of a 
building in its research part to be leased to Westbridge Computer 
Corporation in which Westbridge Computer Corporation will consolidate its 
computer operations and will resolve in positive interaction between the 
two organizations. 

 
The estimated cost of the project is $10 million, not 8.2 but $10 million, 
which will be the responsibility, Mr. Minister, of the University of 
Regina.  Now there's quite a difference.  Let's go back to paragraph three.  
It says in paragraph three: 
 

 . . . an estimated cost of $8,200,000 to be shared by the University of 
Regina and Westbridge Computer Corporation. 

 
Four says it will be paid totally by the University of Regina, but don't 
tell me that the original arrangement hasn't been dramatically changed. 
 
Now I asked you . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well that's not what 



 

 

you told me and I asked you to think about it very carefully.  And again 
you said that the original arrangement had not been changed.  Well we'll go 
to Hansard and we'll find out what you said, Mr. Minister.  It goes on to 
say: 
 

 The undersigned has the honour, therefore, to recommend that Your Honour's 
order do issue pursuant to section 67.1 of The University of Regina Act: 

 
 (a) repealing Your Honour's order of 

901/89 dated November 1, 1989 which approved the expenditure by the 
University of Regina, the construction of the WESTBRIDGE building at 
an estimated cost of $8.2 million to be shared by the University of 
Regina and the WESTBRIDGE Computer Corporation; 

 
 (b) approving the expenditure by the 

University of Regina of an estimated $10 million for which the 
University of Regina will be responsible for the purpose of 
constructing a building in its research park which WESTBRIDGE 
Computer Corporation will lease from the University of Regina. 

 
Mr. Minister, I asked you very specifically, was the original agreement 
changed, and you said no.  And I said, Mr. Minister, think about it 
carefully, that it was my understanding that the building was to be shared.  
In other words, the University of Regina, through the Government of 
Saskatchewan, was to pay out $4.1 million.  Now the university is paying 
out $10 million, an increase of 5.9 million and WESTBRIDGE is paying 
nothing.  You mean to tell me, Mr. Minister, that that wasn't a dramatic 
change to the original agreement between WESTBRIDGE and the University of 
Regina?  That is the question I had originally asked you; your answer was 
no. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I'll go through this again on 
one condition -- that the member is going to listen this time to what I 
said. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Oh you read Hansard tomorrow. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- I'll read Hansard again tomorrow.  Mr. Chairman, 
maybe I'm going too fast, but this was a deal that was brought to the board 
of governors at the University of Regina and they thought that this was a 
tremendous deal.  The administration thought this was a tremendous deal and 
I think it's a tremendous deal.  The fact of the matter is that WESTBRIDGE 
has a deal with the University of Regina for this computer building.  Now 
the original cost they had estimated was $8.5 million. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Eight point two. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, 8.2 then.  The difference is immaterial, as 
you'll see when I go through this.  The idea was that the University of 
Regina is going to put up the building.  They have a lease arrangement with 
WESTBRIDGE.  Okay? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- How much was WESTBRIDGE going to put in? 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- WESTBRIDGE aren't putting anything in. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- How much were they, originally? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Nothing.  The university is putting up the money.  
The university is putting up the building.  They are going to lease it to 
WESTBRIDGE.  Within 10 years the plan is that that building will be paid 
for.  It will pay for itself.  At the end of that time the building will 
belong to the University of Regina. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the member isn't listening now, would you get after him or 
something there? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Don't get smart.  You got caught. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- I'm not caught.  No, I'm not caught at all. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I want the people of Regina and the people of Saskatchewan to 
hear this because this member is just totally out of line. 
 
Let's take a look at the deal with the University of Regina.  They are 
going to put up a building that WESTBRIDGE is going to lease back from 
them, and that over about 10 years this building will pay for itself and it 
will then belong to the University of Regina.  No cost to the taxpayers of 
this province, no cost whatsoever.  I think a terrific deal. 
 
Now he wonders about the change.  And I indicated, yes there was a change 
and I told you what it was.  I told you what it was.  The change came about 
because the decision was made that WESTBRIDGE now wanted to combine the two 
facilities and move their head office down there.  All right? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- You never said that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- You're the only one in here that didn't hear it.  
The idea was then, Mr. Chairman, that they would move their head office 
into that same facility and that would mean that they needed more space.  
So they came back with a request to increase the amount of money that they 
had to borrow from 8.2 to $10 million.  The plan is still there, that this 
building will pay for itself over 10 to 12 years, and the lease arrangement 
that they have with WESTBRIDGE -- at that time the University of Regina is 
going to own this building; no cost to the taxpayers whatsoever. 
 
The board of governors feels this is a tremendous deal; the administration 
feels it's a tremendous deal; and it is a tremendous deal, Mr. Chairman.  
If they can put up that facility, which is housing all of that research 
equipment and the benefits that that is going to provide for the students 
at the University of Regina, I think that that is a tremendous deal.  And 
in the end result, after the 10-year period, the University of Regina will 
own that building paid for through the lease arrangements that they have 
with WESTBRIDGE. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, if the hon. member opposite feels that that's a bad 



 

 

deal, I fail to see it, and I'm sure that the people of Regina, the people 
at the university, and the people in the province of Saskatchewan would 
disagree with him very strongly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, the problem was that you didn't tell the 
truth.  That was the problem.  Yes, didn't tell the truth, and you can 
check Hansard, Mr. Minister. 
 
I asked you very specifically: was the arrangement changed, the original 
arrangement changed.  Your answer was no.  You can't tell me, Mr. Minister, 
that when the original arrangement was for $8.2 million, shared equally by 
the University of Regina and WESTBRIDGE.  Each was to pay $4.1 million and 
suddenly we change the OC (order in council), we repeal the original OC and 
the University of Regina now pays $10 million, an increase of 5.9.  You 
can't tell me that that original agreement wasn't dramatically changed. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- We can't tell you anything. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- No you can't because . . . no that's why you're sitting way 
over there and you'll be out very shortly.  Mr. Minister, I asked you very 
carefully to consider your answer, very carefully to consider your answer.  
And you again repeated that the original agreement had not been 
dramatically changed.  Not only was it dramatically changed, it was 
repealed, and a brand new agreement was signed whereby WESTBRIDGE paid 
nothing for the cost of constructing the building.  They went from 4.1 
million to zero and the University of Regina through the government -- of 
course the government is providing the money -- is paying $10 million, from 
4.1 to $10 million. 
 
Mr. Minister, the problem was that either you weren't listening to the 
question I asked you, and I asked you twice, or you just didn't understand.  
But you did not give me that answer when I first asked it.  You did not 
answer that way.  And you read Hansard tomorrow and you tell me that you 
answered the way you did the second time around.  Because you got caught 
not knowing the answer and you should have checked with your officials 
first. 
 
Surely you should have remembered that you signed the OC.  You signed it 
and you should have been able to tell me, yes I signed the OC and we made 
different arrangements where WESTBRIDGE now will pay nothing towards the 
construction of this building and the U of R will pick up the total cost. 
 
I don't know whether it's a good deal or a bad deal; that has nothing to do 
with it.  What has everything to do with it is that the original agreement 
was changed dramatically and WESTBRIDGE is paying $5.9 million less than 
what the original agreement was agreed to.  Isn't that right, Mr. Minister? 
 
(2145) 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, as I recall it -- and I'm 
talking about the latest OC where the change was made -- the request that 



 

 

came back was for the University of Regina to have permission to borrow the 
$10 million to go and put up this building, and WESTBRIDGE has a lease 
arrangement with them.  This was a request that came from the board of 
governors and from the university administration.  The arrangement is that 
WESTBRIDGE, WESTBRIDGE is going to be paying the full shot for the 
construction of this building through the lease arrangement. 
 
Now not to my knowledge was there a change that WESTBRIDGE was going to put 
in.  We can check that.  If you've got the OC there . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- I've got the OC right here. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- The original OC?  Well the change that came back, 
the request from the University of Regina, and the government is not 
putting any money into this whatsoever in spite of what you are saying.  
They came back for permission to borrow the $10 million because WESTBRIDGE 
now wanted to move their office over there, and this additional cost, going 
from the 8.2 to the 10 million, is now built into the lease costs, the 
lease arrangement. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- But the original deal was WESTBRIDGE paid 50-50. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well the difference of WESTBRIDGE . . . I'm not 
sure if that's what . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order, order.  If the member from Saskatoon Nutana wants 
to ask questions, certainly she can rise and be recognized and she then 
would have an opportunity to ask questions of the minister.  I recognize 
the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- The fact of the matter is, Mr. Chairman, that 
whether the money was being put up front and the original agreement was 
changed, it's now written into the lease with the University of Regina.  
The fact is that it remains a good deal for the University of Regina 
because they're going to get that facility after the ten-year period of 
time.  WESTBRIDGE will be paying for the whole thing through the lease 
arrangement that they have. 
 
But this is not something that the Government of Saskatchewan has put 
forward.  This came from the university board of governors and the 
administration -- Dr. Lloyd Barber, very supportive of this.  This is not 
something that was initiated by the government. 
 
I still firmly believe this is an excellent deal for the University of 
Regina, not costing the taxpayers one nickel.  They will recover the total 
cost of that building and they will get the building after a ten-year 
period of time, Mr. Chairman. 
 
So whether the original deal was changed . . . the only understanding that 
I have of any change that was made was where I increased it from 8.2 to $10 
million, and I've indicated the reason for that.  And I think that's a very 
good deal for the University of Regina, not taking one nickel of taxpayers' 
money.  The government is not involved in that; it's a deal between the 



 

 

University of Regina and WESTBRIDGE. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, that was not my question.  I want you to check 
Hansard and see what my question was and what your answer was. 
 
My answer was, was the original arrangement changed on the WESTBRIDGE 
building at the University of Saskatchewan?  You said, no.  And I asked you 
then to consider it very carefully, because I had the OC here and the 
original arrangement in the OC says $8.2 million shared equally between the 
University of Regina and WESTBRIDGE.  That to me means each one will put in 
$4.1 million for the construction costs.  You repealed that OC.  Then it 
was brought forward that the building will cost $10 million and the U of R 
will carry the total cost of that building.  I don't care what the lease 
arrangements are.  I didn't ask you that.  I was going to come to that 
after. 
 
My question to you simply was, was the original arrangement changed.  The 
answer was no.  And I'll tell you, if you think that you can change it from 
8.2 million to 10 million, and the first where it's shared equally, and the 
second where the U of R picks up the total cost for the construction, and 
you as a minister can answer, no it wasn't changed dramatically, then 
there's somethings wrong with our English language.  There's something 
wrong.  And I had asked you to consider it carefully -- your answer.  And, 
Mr. Minister, I'm having it xeroxed so that you can a look at the OC. 
 
Mr. Minister, this evening we just have a few minutes left and I want to 
turn to the U of S.  Mr. Minister, at the senate address by Dr. Ivany, just 
last week I believe, May 4, he said the following, Mr. Minister, and I want 
you to listen carefully.  He said: 
 

 The operating grant that we received from government falls far short of 
the requested amount.  Specifically, we requested an increase of 8.4 per 
cent, approximately 10 million, which we described as a needs budget to 
enable us to return our budget trajectory to a healthy state.  What we 
received was a grant increase of about 3.6 per cent, which leaves us 
nearly $6 million short. 

 
 In the short term I have proposed and our board has approved a budget 

which provides for a deficit of approximately 2.5 million for the 1990-91 
fiscal year.  To continue this pattern would, however, be irresponsible, 
particularly (and here, Mr. Minister, I want you to listen) in the light 
of the fact that when allocating the current budget the government did not 
make any statement of support about our mandate.  From this I am 
interpreting the budget message, albeit unstated, is that our university 
must reduce its array of activities. 

 
So the president has now set up the president's committee on renewal.  And 
Mr. Minister, it seems that there has to be some very drastic cuts at the U 
of S.  And I hear that they're thinking of cutting total colleges in order 
not to have a deficit for next year or the year after.  I know it takes a 
while to cut the colleges because there are a lot of commitments to staff. 
 
But what I really want you to answer for the university: is your government 



 

 

anticipating an indifferent role for the U of S and the U of R because of 
the underfunding that you have provided?  Are you sending a message to them 
by saying to them: look, you have too many programs, you have too many 
colleges, cut back?  If we can't provide services, let's say, for example, 
in pharmacology, can't provide it in law, or we can't provide it in 
medicine, cut a college.  Those students will have to seek their education 
somewhere else. 
 
Is that what you're telling the university, that we can't afford the array 
of activities that we've had traditionally, and are you telling them to cut 
some of those activities?  And if so, Mr. Minister, I know you won't tell 
us which ones, but it would be sure helpful to the university if they could 
have your support in which ones you want them to cut. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, I thank the member for sending a copy 
of the OC over with regard to the WESTBRIDGE change, and again a 
misunderstanding maybe of what I was referring to as far as the change was 
concerned and what you were talking about. 
 
The request came back from the University of Regina that they wanted this 
change made.  So they obviously have a new lease arrangement with 
WESTBRIDGE that now takes into consideration the fact that they are putting 
up the building by themselves and not having the cost sharing, as you would 
suggest here, that it was going to be $4.1 million.  That's what I would 
understand from the wording here. 
 
But that was their request, so they obviously have a new leasing 
arrangement whereby they are going to increase the lease and they are going 
to recover all of that money within that 10-year period of time. 
 
Now, when you talk about the University of Saskatchewan.  I've had several 
discussions with Dr. Ivany at the University of Saskatchewan, and I think 
that when we consider the fact that Dr. Ivany has recently moved here from 
British Columbia where their economy is substantially better than ours, 
that for him to be making a suggestion that they have an increase of 8 or 9 
or 10 per cent, I think it was indicated to him at that time when he was 
suggesting that, that that was out of line with the present economic 
situation in Saskatchewan, out of line. 
 
The next thing that I would suggest as well, that is that the government, 
the Department of Education do not make the decisions as to what programs 
are going to be changed or cut or whatever at the university campus, and 
you know that.  The administration does that.  The underfunding, well, 
farmers have been underfunded too, so is business, so is business . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . well, sure, well where are they going?  
Where are they going?  They're going to provinces like British Columbia and 
Alberta where, Mr. Chairman, they diversified some time ago.  They maybe 
have their fertilizer plants and their paper mills and their pulp mills and 
bacon plants and meat processing plants.  Now they have all of those.  But 
the member over on the other side, Mr. Chairman, doesn't think we should 
have any of those operations here in Saskatchewan. 
 
So the University of Saskatchewan administration are reviewing their 



 

 

programs.  They will have to make that determination if in fact there are 
some that can be cut back.  Maybe there are some that are now redundant.  
Maybe they can be changed.  I hear stories from, in talking to faculty, 
where they've got equipment that they've purchased on campus, expensive 
equipment that hasn't even been taken out of the crate.  One would question 
then, why was it bought?  Maybe that's a waste.  I understand too of some 
other cases where special facilities have been constructed, haven't even 
been used.  And one has to wonder then too if there isn't some 
mismanagement of funds within some of the colleges on the campus.  So those 
are the things that the administration are going to address, Mr. Chairman.  
At any rate, I would hope that any changes are going to be moderate, but as 
I pointed out earlier, the problems at universities -- that's not unique to 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We see today, for example, Mr. Chairman, what is happening at the 
University of Alberta in a province that has an economy that is some 
substantially better than ours where they are having to cut back on their 
programs, where they've increased their tuition fees by 15 per cent, and 
where they're going to have to be cutting some staff.  Those are decisions 
that the administration is making, Mr. Chairman. 
 
The university administration in Saskatoon are going to have to also review 
their programs and take a look at what changes can be made.  At this point 
or to this point, we have not had any request from the University of 
Saskatchewan that they run a deficit.  Whether or not they're going to be 
doing that or whether they're going to be able to manage it, that's 
something that we'll have to wait and see, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, that's an easy cop-out for you, but it's not 
so easy for the University of Saskatchewan.  And I have talked to President 
Ivany also and the administration at the U of S and the U of R, and I know 
there are some very difficult decisions are going have to be made.  And all 
I think we can hope for is that before those decisions are made that an 
election is called and we have a new government in place that will look at 
the priorities in a different manner than what you people are. 
 
I can assure you that the U of S and the U of R can and will get additional 
funding so that those students who are eligible to go to university will be 
able to go.  We will get rid of those quotas, and we'll give additional 
money in operating grants to those universities so that they can 
accommodate those students who are eligible. 
 
Mr. Minister, what you are doing is you're off-loading onto the 
universities and onto the university students.  The university tuition fees 
will have to increase at least 30 per cent over the next three years, and 
that means that there will be a denial, because of lack of funding, to many 
eligible students to get post-secondary education in this province.  Mr. 
Minister, even if they could afford to go, they can't go because there 
isn't access; there isn't access to the university. 
 
Mr. Minister, I am told that when they submitted their budget to you, your 
department said to them, what they had to consider was zero to 4 per cent 
-- even though that was totally unrealistic, from your department's point 



 

 

of view, in saying to the universities that they had to live within zero to 
4 per cent, that they couldn't consider anything higher than that.  That, 
Mr. Minister, I think, is being irresponsible on your part, particularly on 
your part, and on the part of your government, to put the universities in 
that predicament and then to have the audacity to say to the universities, 
now it's up to you to make the decisions -- oh we're not asking you to cut, 
but we're not going to give you sufficient money to continue with all the 
programs that you have had in the past.  That, Mr. Minister, just doesn't 
wash.  It doesn't wash with the public; it doesn't wash with the 
universities. 
 
Mr. Minister, as I had indicated to you the other day, you had $22.2 
million for student loans for many private vocational schools, many courses 
which were worthless.  Many of those dollars could have been going to 
students who were eligible to go to university.  That's where the dollars 
should have gone.  Again, no you had to go on your privatization kick and 
make that money available to private vocational schools, to students 
attending private vocational schools.  And is it any wonder, Mr. Minister, 
that we don't have sufficient money for the University of Saskatchewan and 
University of Regina so that our students can get quality education. 
 
We haven't even looked, Mr. Minister, at the libraries at our universities.  
And where, Mr. Minister, do they compare in Canada?  They are about 106th 
or 107th compared to many of the other libraries at the universities in 
Canada.  That is what has happened because of the lack of funding and the 
wrong priorities that your government has instituted in the last seven or 
eight years that you have been in power. 
 
(2200) 
 
Mr. Minister, I wish that you would sit down, you and your officials, with 
the president of the U of R and the president of the U of S and work out a 
long-range program for those universities so that . . . Mr. Chairman, as 
long as the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster's going to interfere, I will 
stay on my feet and I will talk.  If that's what he wants to do, fine with 
me.  If members opposite want to interfere with these estimates and not let 
us carry on, that's all right with me.  But, Mr. Minister . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order.  Being 10 o'clock the committee will rise and 
report progress. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:03 p.m. 
 


