















































Hansard: March 21, 1990


 

 

March 21/90 
 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to introduce a delegation to you, and through you to members of the 
Assembly, a delegation sitting in your gallery. 
 
As you know, I'm sure, Mr. Speaker, this is International Day for the 
Elimination of Racial Discrimination and these individuals represent 
organizations that are working towards the elimination of racial 
intolerance and to promote equality. 
 
The delegation, there are representatives from various organizations 
including the Saskatchewan Coalition Against Racism and the Southern Africa 
Solidarity Committee.  And I'm sure the members of the Assembly would like 
to wish them luck in their endeavours, pledge our support in making this a 
tolerant society, a tolerant Saskatchewan, and I would ask that we join in 
our usual fashion to welcome them to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Organization of Consensus Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  My question today is to 
the Deputy Premier in the absence of the Premier, and it pertains to the 
Speech from the Throne of Monday, which is somewhat euphemistically and 
perhaps ironically entitled Building the New Saskatchewan Consensus -- 
after this government has spent eight years destroying the Saskatchewan 
consensus. 
 
But none the less my question to the Deputy Premier is this: on page 4 or, 
I'm sorry, page 2 of the printed document that I have in front of me is the 
announcement of something called Consensus Saskatchewan.  And I wonder if 
you'd be kind enough to tell the people of the province of Saskatchewan 
with respect to this 100-person Consensus Saskatchewan, this latest and 
newest Crown corporation created by your government, who these people are 
going to be; who's going to pick them; how are they going to be picked; how 
often will they meet; to whom will they report? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Let's be clear to the Leader 
of the Opposition.  We are not talking about a Crown corporation.  We are 
not talking about a government agency, Mr. Speaker, but rather we are 
talking about the people of Saskatchewan having a mechanism to have a say 



 

 

in what their future is going to look like.  That is what Consensus 
Saskatchewan is all about.  Not state ownership, not Crown corporations, 
but the people of Saskatchewan making decisions on their future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will be asking for nominations from right across the 
province.  There are approximately 4,000 letters that have gone out asking 
for names.  We would welcome names from the opposition, and we have asked 
that these nominations in fact be in by April 6. 
 
After that, the 100 will be chosen, based on the geographic locations 
within the province.  We would like to see a mix of rural/urban.  For the 
member from Quill Lakes, we would like to see a mix of male/female, senior 
citizens, the youth.  And we would like to see all political stripes.  The 
true intent of this is to be non-partisan . . . (inaudible interjection) . 
. . And while the member from Quill Lakes will have some difficulty with 
that, I think it's important that we make that decision and put the will 
behind it that in fact that's what we are going to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the Deputy Premier.  
I would tell her that she's dead right.  I have a lot of difficulty with 
that, keeping in mind the way this government has acted, which, as I have 
said, has been to destroy consensus.  You didn't consult with the dental 
technicians, for example, when you dismantled that program.  You didn't 
consult with the highways' workers when you destroyed them, too.  You 
didn't consult with those people involved in the health care system on the 
drug plan, and the record goes on and on.  But what I . . . and the member 
behind you is pointing his finger at me, and you might as well just answer 
this question too:  where was the consultation at the time of SaskEnergy, 
for example, when you bulldozed ahead against the wishes of the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
But my question to you, Deputy Premier, is again the one that I asked to 
begin with:  what is going to be the budget for these people, and who is 
going to make the appointments of these people?  Would you give us some 
clear, specific answers on those two questions? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- Mr. Speaker, we have set up a structure within 
government under the leadership of myself.  There will be four ministers 
involved, and there will be four public servants and public citizens that 
will be co-chairing the four groups.  These four groups are going to be set 
up, Mr. Speaker, based on the need for economic development, 
diversification, community stability, programs that apply to people and 
their potential, whether it be in the health sector, social services, or 
the education sector. 
 
And last, Mr. Speaker, but not least, will be the issue of fiscal 
responsibility.  Many of these people, Mr. Speaker, will in fact be doing 
this on a volunteer basis.  Those that cannot afford, whether it be time 
away from work without pay loss, then we will look at assisting those to 



 

 

ensure that there is a cross-section there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the objective of question period is to try to 
get some nice, simple answers and to clarify things.  And I must say I'm 
sure, Mr. Speaker, you'll agree, listening to that minister's answer, it 
gets curiouser and curiouser and more complicated and more complicated. 
 
Let me ask the minister with respect to this new Consensus Saskatchewan -- 
and by the way there must be some acronym to make this a little easier 
stated that Consensus Saskatchewan.  I want to ask with respect to the 
mandate: do you visualize, Madam Deputy Premier, that if this group, this 
chosen group of 100 Saskatchewan citizens, called Consensus Saskatchewan, 
were to recommend to the government of the province of Saskatchewan and 
your recalcitrant Minister of Health over there that the dental 
school-based children's plan be fully reimplemented the way it was set up, 
that you will adopt that recommendation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- I suspect, Mr. Speaker, he's not going to like . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  There are two members in the House that 
would also like to join.  You will have the opportunity.  The Deputy 
Premier is on her feet. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I suspect the Leader of the 
Opposition won't like the rest of the answers too.  But even if he doesn't 
like the answer, Mr. Speaker, that does not mean that the answer is not 
valid. 
 
And I would suggest to the Leader of the Opposition that it's about time 
there was room for varying opinions on how things should be done.  I would 
also suggest to the Leader of the Opposition that it is time, Mr. Speaker, 
that the decision-making process within democracy became to a much greater 
degree decentralized than what it ever has been in the past. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we only have to take a look around as to what is 
happening, not only in the world but in Canada, in various provinces right 
across Canada, to know that the public, the people -- and that's who this 
institution belongs to -- are demanding a say in the public affairs of 
their province.  And that's what this process is going to be doing, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question for the Deputy Premier.  
The Deputy Premier talks about the need for decentralization of decision 
making, a revelation I might add, Mr. Speaker, after eight years of closed 
government by the ladies and the gentlemen opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 



 

 

 
Mr. Romanow: -- Will the Deputy Premier tell us whether or not this chosen 
group of 100 people, chosen of course by the Premier and your cabinet and 
the mechanism of decision that you've described, will you tell us whether 
or not the 100 people that are so named are going to be holding their 
meetings in public so that the journalists and the public will know exactly 
what's being deliberated, what's being on the order plate, what's being on 
the agenda discussed, and what the decisions are? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- Mr. Speaker, this a public process, a public process 
for the people of Saskatchewan, and it will be held publicly, including the 
100 people that will be disbursed from around the province.  And I would 
only say one thing to the Leader of the Opposition.  Don't prejudge until 
you've seen the results of it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a brand-new question for the Deputy 
Premier.  I like to make a policy of not prejudging, but unfortunately for 
the people of the province of Saskatchewan we've seen eight years of your 
actions, and there's lots to judge to say that you're incompetent and not 
capable of making the right decisions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, my question to the Deputy Premier is this:  in 
view of the fact that the Speech from the Throne mandates these chosen 100 
people, chosen by Mr. Premier and the cabinet opposite, mandates them, 
among other things, "to make recommendations on how best to take 
Saskatchewan through the next decade and into the next century." -- no use 
thinking small I suppose, Mr. Speaker -- if that is the recommendation and 
that is the mandate, what in the world is the job of your government?  What 
in the world is the role of the cabinet minister and all of those 
legislative secretaries, all of whom are either in the position, with the 
exception of one back bench; what is their position?  In view of the fact 
that this is the mandate, that you have now in effect passed on your 
responsibility to the chosen 100, will you recommend to the Premier that he 
eliminate the cabinet size over there and the legislative secretary size 
over there so at least if nothing else comes out of this exercise we can 
save the taxpayer some money?  How about that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- Mr. Speaker, the government's record on 
decentralization, I would invite the scrutiny of the Leader of the 
Opposition to compare the two terms of government under this side of the 
House, and the issue of decentralization. 
 
He should also, while he's at it, take a look at the record of employees 
being able to directly participate in the companies that they work for.  
Take a look at taxpayers directly participating in Crown corporations, Mr. 



 

 

Speaker.  That record stands second to none. 
 
And if that isn't enough to be scrutinized, he should look at the issue of 
for the first time Saskatchewan being able to process its resources instead 
of shipping those jobs down the pipeline south and to the east, right here 
at home in Saskatchewan.  That's what the member should be looking at. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Trade Emissaries to Europe 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to ask a question of the 
minister responsible for trade matters, whoever that is under the latest 
reorganization. 
 
My question concerns the throne speech, and the speech states that the 
government will sponsor delegations of Saskatchewan people to eastern 
Europe as trade and agricultural emissaries.  Now the minister will know 
that your government has a long history of appointing former cabinet 
ministers to trade posts, including of course Bob Andrew and Graham Taylor 
most recently, but also Paul Rousseau prior to that. 
 
And my question is: will you disclose to the House today, Minister, what 
your plans are for the appointment of other former cabinet ministers to 
filling these trade emissary posts?  May I speculate that it may be the 
member for Souris-Cannington or Maple Creek or Rosetown?  Just tell us what 
you have in mind. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- To inform the member opposite, Mr. Speaker, I am 
responsible for international trade and economic diversification. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- And it's unfortunate that the members opposite are 
more interested in political wrangling than in actually doing business in 
the world so that we can earn some money to flow into this province. 
 
Maybe the members opposite haven't heard, or maybe they are lamenting the 
fact that there has been a free election in East Germany.  Maybe they 
haven't heard what's happening in eastern Europe.  And just maybe we, as 
Canadian citizens and people in this province, should go to eastern Europe 
and do business with these people who are now gaining their freedom.  Not 
only are they gaining their political freedom but their economic freedom.  
And with economic freedom there will be trade, and with trade that means 
potential prosperity for this province.  So we are going to go there; if 
necessary I will go there personally as the current minister, and we will 
do business with all of the world.  We will not hide in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

Mr. Mitchell: -- A new question, Mr. Speaker.  This minister doesn't answer 
questions any better as a minister for trade than he did as the minister of 
Social Services. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- And I most strenuously suggest that he not go to these 
countries to try and improve trade. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- I've got a better suggestion as to who might get over to 
Europe and do some work -- some real work -- and that is the officer that 
you have in London, Paul Rousseau, the former cabinet minister, and save 
the taxpayers the expense of sending you over or sending over some other 
former cabinet minister that you might have in mind.  Your government has 
recently bought Mr. Rousseau an expensive new automobile to the tune of 
some $23,000, and I suggest that you contact him and tell him to get on a 
ferry over to the continent and get in that new car . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I'm afraid that the minister didn't hear the 
question.  If he did, he has better ears than I do.  Your preamble 
certainly didn't indicate your getting to any question.  I rose to 
interrupt you, and I give you the opportunity to present your question now. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- When I saw you rise, I sat down.  My question is to the 
minister: will you instruct your trade emissary in London, Mr. Rousseau, to 
get in that expensive car and get driving around Europe and start promoting 
some trade on behalf of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- The answer is yes, Mr. Rousseau will be doing 
everything possible to expand business with all of Europe.  Mr. Speaker, I 
don't know whether we bought a $23,000 automobile for Mr. Rousseau, but it 
seems to me that in Europe $23,000 is not a very expensive Volkswagen, so 
we will see what he drives with.  But certainly in Europe it would be 
cheaper to drive than to fly.  He will be there and he will be doing 
business, and so will the people in our New York office and the people in 
our Minnesota office and the people in our Hong Kong office, because you 
can't sit and do business here in Regina when the world is carrying on.  
And we will be everywhere.  Diversification starts here and it continues 
around the . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order. 
 

Size of Cabinet 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my question is to 
the Deputy Premier and it concerns Monday's throne speech.  Madam Deputy 
Premier, your speech made a very bold statement and I quote, "waste will 
not be tolerated."  With that in mind, could you explain why the people of 
Saskatchewan are paying the member from Souris-Cannington a full-time 



 

 

salary as a cabinet minister when his only duty is to look after the 
provincial seal and emblem and presumably to run your next election 
campaign. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- And, Madam Minister, can you also tell us why the 
member from Regina . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I'd like to ask the Minister of Justice not 
to interfere, not to interfere with the member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to as well 
ask the minister why the member from Regina South is being paid as a 
full-time cabinet minister for a job that other ministers have done in 
conjunction with other portfolios.  And isn't it true that the people of 
Saskatchewan are financing this part-time minister to bolster what I would 
call a futile attempt to retain his seat?  How can you justify that waste? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- Mr. Speaker, I don't think that the member would 
disagree that, if there was ever a time in Saskatchewan where the emphasis 
had to be on economic development and diversification, now is the time.  I 
don't believe the member would disagree with that statement. 
 
I would like to state very clearly for the member's benefit, this minister 
is working full time.  You know, he talks about the Provincial Secretary.  
Part of that is tradition.  However, there's been some other things that 
have been added, including chairman of the Crown Management Board.  Plus, 
the job, Mr. Speaker, and the opposition have stated several times that the 
various economic departments in government need to be co-ordinated.  Mr. 
Chairman, he is co-ordinating those various departments, and at the same 
time he is also out in the smaller cities, the large cities, the towns and 
the villages in terms of public consultation on economic development and 
diversification. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- I have a new question to the same minister.  Madam 
Minister, nobody would argue that he's not working full time, but I would 
believe it's part time for the PC Party of Saskatchewan, and you know that 
as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Madam Minister, you say that your government wants 
consensus.  The consensus of Saskatchewan people is that you should cut 
back on the 20 cabinet ministers that you've got and the 10 legislative 
secretaries that are sitting around there, one of them working for the 
Provincial Secretary.  That's the consensus of the people of this province. 
 
How can you say that you're committed to ending waste when you cut three 



 

 

departments from government but you don't cut the ministers, and you 
maintain the 10 legislative secretaries, whose only duty is to sit around 
here and collect extra pay.  When are you going to address that waste, 
Madam Minister?  When are you going to cut that bloated cabinet, and when 
are you going to unload those non-productive legislative secretaries? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Or do the people of Saskatchewan have to do that for 
you . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- Mr. Speaker, I can only state once again the importance 
of the emphasis in Saskatchewan being on economic development and 
diversification.  And that priority is going to have to remain for some 
time, whether it's development in the rural communities through the rural 
affairs or whether it's in urban Saskatchewan.  But it is going to take 
time and effort, not only on the minister's part but on this Assembly.  
That means opposition, too. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Public Funds and Private Companies 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to the Minister of 
Economic Development, and it concerns Monday's throne speech as well.  The 
throne speech said on page 13, and I quote: 
 

 Agencies and third parties receiving government funds will be required to 
prepare detailed public financial statements for the people of 
Saskatchewan to know how and where their money is spent. 

 
Mr. Minister, does this mean that we can anticipate such full audited 
statements in the very near future from Cargill, Saferco, from Millar 
Western, and from Peter Pocklington? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Speaker, Cargill has an annual report, and I doubt 
if the member opposite understands it.  The other companies have reports.  
There is nothing to hide here. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- The members opposite object to this government joint 
venturing with corporations, Mr. Speaker, who have never gone broke -- 
corporations who are very successful, corporations who are world-wide, and 
corporations who have expertise. 
 
Certainly we cannot find these corporations in eastern Europe, so we have 
to deal with corporations from Canada, corporations from the United States, 
and corporations from western Europe.  Now we cannot . . . I mean, their 



 

 

friends don't have corporations, so I can't deal with their friends; that's 
the problem. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Mr. Speaker, a new question to the same minister.  Mr. 
Minister, let me see if I have this straight.  A transition house receiving 
a few thousand dollars from your government is to be called on to account 
for every penny, yet huge companies like Cargill, Saferco, and Millar 
Western can come in and write their own ticket, bleed the treasury dry, and 
they don't have the same responsibility to account to the taxpayers as does 
that transition house.  The consensus of Saskatchewan people, Mr. Minister, 
is that this is grossly unfair, and my question is this: is that what your 
government and is that what you're telling the people of this province, 
that there is a double standard in your tax grant policy?  You want audited 
statements for transition houses but secrecy for your corporate big 
business friends. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Speaker, last night my father and I had a 
discussion -- my grandfather was a founding member of the Saskatchewan 
Wheat Pool; my father was 19 years an agent of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool 
-- and we had a discussion about people being opposed to Cargill and the 
government building a fertilizer plant.  And he said, I can't understand 
it.  He said the wheat pool was given a chance to join in, the co-op was 
given a chance to join in -- they weren't interested.  What do we do then 
if an international corporation like Cargill is interested in producing our 
natural gas and processing it into fertilizer in Saskatchewan?  Then we 
should proceed with that production in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now who's opposed to this plant?  Well, they're competitors.  Cominco is 
opposed, all of the competitors of this plant are opposed, and the NDP are 
right in there with the competitors of this plant.  Why?  Because none of 
them -- the competitors and the NDP want this plant to fail.  Well Cargill 
and the Government of Saskatchewan will build a successful plant, and once 
it's up and rolling, we will turn those shares over and roll them over to 
citizens in Saskatchewan so they can participate in that plant. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Hungry Children in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of Social 
Services and it relates to the acknowledgement, at long last after three 
years, in this throne speech that there is widespread hunger in the 
province of Saskatchewan.  Now in light of that acknowledgement, Mr. 
Minister, I would like to ask you whether you are prepared to indicate 
today that immediately your government will put in place the funding that 
is required for a school breakfast and school lunch program to be delivered 
by local school boards and day care centres in this province, wherever 
hunger is a demonstrated problem. 
 



 

 

I ask you, sir, on behalf of the 22,000 children who last year in this 
province had to rely on a food bank as a result of the policies of your 
government, whether you will at last, Mr. Minister, put in place this 
urgently needed school breakfast, school lunch program in the province of 
Saskatchewan and provide the funding that's required. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- Mr. Speaker, as the Minister of the Family, I've been 
dealing with the hunger issue.  I'm delighted to say, Mr. Speaker, in 
discussing this problem with people throughout the province during the last 
four months, I discover that we have, in this province, been dealing food 
programs to children since 1972. 
 
As a matter of fact, there are 2,000 children who are fed every day in this 
city; in the neighbourhood of 3,000 throughout the province.  The 
government of Saskatchewan funds 1,600 meals every day in this city alone 
to children who are hungry. There are a lot of food programs -- feeding 
programs, lunch programs, or hot lunch programs, hot breakfast programs -- 
for children around the province. 
 
I want to congratulate the people of this province, the volunteers and the 
organizations of the school people and the churches, who are involved in 
the feeding program.  Mr. Speaker, over the years they've done an excellent 
job. 
 
What my role is, Mr. Speaker, and has been over the last little while, is 
to discuss with these people how we, the government, might help them best 
in their programs.  And they've been telling me how that can be done, Mr. 
Speaker.  And I'm delighted to say that I think in the near future I'll be 
able to address their responses more concretely, the way that they would 
like them to be done. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Namibian* Independence 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today, the Brotherhood of 
Nations welcomes a new member.  The State of Namibia today celebrates their 
independence.  This represents the end of an arduous and difficult 
struggle, but more importantly a new beginning for its people. 
 
At a time when people in other parts of the world are gaining their 
freedom, this development represents a very positive first step in South 
Africa.  We applaud the efforts of those citizens of Saskatchewan and 
Canada who have contributed to this independence. 
 
We are particularly proud of three citizens of this province who in fact 
served as the election supervisors: Ms. Janice Gail Baker,  Mr. Geoffrey 
Pardoe and Mrs. Helen Pardoe. 
 



 

 

Today we join Namibians in their jubilation with our congratulations, and 
we wish them well for the future. 
 
Today's recognition of their independence is especially appropriate, since 
March 21 has been proclaimed by my colleague, the Minister of Culture, 
Multiculturalism and Recreation as "International Day for the Elimination 
of Racial Discrimination." 
 
I ask my colleagues on both sides of the House, and indeed all citizens of 
Saskatchewan, to in fact recognize this important day and to join with me 
in working to promote racial tolerance and to end racial discrimination. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you Mr. Speaker.  On behalf of the opposition, I 
join the Deputy Premier in welcoming this important development that has 
taken place in Namibia. We applaud and welcome what is happening there. 
 
I think it is important to note that there are still, in many parts of the 
world, oppression and discrimination, but as is I think exemplified by what 
is happening in Namibia and in places like Eastern Europe and other places, 
there is a momentum for hope; there is a momentum for hope that some of 
that that people in the free world have been concerned about and have tried 
to change is beginning to change. And certainly our encouragement and our 
joy with what's happening in Namibia is extended to them. 
 
There is nowhere, I think, better than in Saskatchewan for an understanding 
of how people can truly live together and understand their differences, and 
yet be able to develop something in unison and in common as we have done in 
this province, because in this province we have people who have settled 
here from literally every part of the world.  It's not unusual to go on any 
street corner in Saskatchewan and hear any language spoken and not be 
surprised by that. 
 
And so I say, Mr. Speaker, in joining with the Deputy Premier, that we 
extend our congratulations to the people who served as election supervisors 
from Saskatchewan, and we congratulate the people in Namibia and we wish 
them well in the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Appointment of Commissioner to Conduct Judicial Inquiry 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I'm pleased to announce, Mr. Speaker, the appointment of 
the commissioner who will conduct the judicial inquiry into the alleged 
improper payment of money to officials of the Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company.  The Hon. Russell Brownridge, former justice of the Court of 
Appeal of Saskatchewan, will assume his duties as commissioner immediately. 
 
Mr. Brownridge served as a justice of the Court of Queen's Bench from 1959 
until 1969 when he was appointed to the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal.  He 
retired from the Court of Appeal on July 3, 1988.  Since moving to Regina 
in 1962 he served as elder of Lakeview United Church, member of the 
Canadian Club, a member of the board of Regina Symphony, chairman of the 
Regina chapter of The Canadian Council of Christians and Jews, president of 



 

 

the Saskatchewan division of the Red Cross Society, and national president 
of that society.  He served on the board of St. Andrew's College, 
Saskatoon, and actively supports community organizations in Regina.  On two 
occasions Mr. Brownridge has served as chairman of the federal electoral 
boundaries commission for Saskatchewan to redraw the federal electoral 
boundaries for this province. 
 
Under the commissioner's direction, this inquiry will have responsibility 
to inquire into and report on the allegation that officers of the 
Saskatchewan Transportation Company obtained money improperly in connection 
with the purchase of motor coaches by the Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company from Eagle Bus Manufacturing, Inc. 
 
Secondly, the allegation that money obtained in connection with the 
purchase of motor coaches by the Saskatchewan Transportation Company from 
Eagle Bus Manufacturing, Inc. was to be used for political purposes in 
Canada. 
 
Thirdly, the purchasing practices of the Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company with particular reference to previous or proposed purchases of 
motor coaches from Eagle Bus, or, in the discretion of the commissioner, 
any other purchases of motor coaches by the Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company. 
 
Fourthly, the accounting methods used by the Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company with particular reference to the recording, review, and 
verification of transactions with Eagle Bus Manufacturing. 
 
The commissioner may also petition the Lieutenant Governor in Council to 
expand these terms of reference to cover any matter regarding the 
Saskatchewan Transportation Company that the commissioner may deem 
necessary as a result of information coming to his attention during the 
course of the inquiry. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to thank the minister for 
providing a copy of the statement.  Obviously we've had a very short period 
of time to take a look at it, but I want to make a few comments. 
 
And I must say that it's a sad day at the beginning of a legislative 
session here in Saskatchewan that we open and we have the allegations of 
criminal wrongdoing, criminal case under way in the United States, RCMP 
investigation here in Canada, and now a judicial inquiry on top of it. 
 
I want to say that as a result of the allegations that have been made, that 
there is a cloud over this entire government.  And I say this and I say 
that the terms of reference have to be as broad and as wide as possible.  
And I would have thought that when the government is under the cloud as 
well, or could be . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- No, it is. 
 



 

 

Mr. Koskie: -- Is, in fact, because they are the government and the 
employees who have been charged.  I would have thought that the government, 
rather than secretly setting down and deciding on their own the terms of 
reference, that they would at least have come to the opposition and 
indicated, take a look at these terms of reference, and is this in fact 
going to clear the air once and for all for the people of Saskatchewan?  
And that's what we're going to be demanding. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Mr. Speaker, we are going to be considering in detail the 
terms of reference, and we are going to be reserving the decision as to 
whether or not they're broad enough.  My first glance at them -- they're 
far too narrow, and we will accordingly be providing the minister with a 
number of questions in the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Constituency Vacancies 
 
The Speaker: -- Before we get to the hon. members, I would like to take the 
opportunity to make one or two announcements that are of interest to the 
House. 
 
It is my duty to inform the Assembly of the following vacancies in 
representation; in the constituency of Kindersley, due to the resignation 
of Mr. R. Andrew; and, in the constituency of Indian Head-Wolseley, due to 
the resignation of Mr. G. Taylor. 
 
I now lay on the Table their original letters of resignation. 
 
In view of Mr. Andrew's resignation from this Legislative Assembly, I must 
inform members that his name is dropped from the membership list of the 
Standing Committee on Estimates, the Standing Committee on Private Members' 
Bills, and the Special Committee on Rules and Procedures. 
 

Membership of the Board of Internal Economy 
 
The Speaker: -- Further, I have received the following communication from 
Her Honour, the Lieutenant Governor.  The letter reads as follows: 
 

 Dear Mr. Speaker: Pursuant to section 68.7 of The Legislative Assembly and 
Executive Council Act, I hereby inform the Assembly the membership of the 
Board of Internal Economy, effective November 15, 1989: the Hon. Arnold 
Tusa, chairman; the Hon. Grant Hodgins; the Hon. John Gerich; Michael 
Hopfner, MLA; Murray Koskie, MLA; Eldon Lautermilch, MLA; Lorne McLaren, 
MLA.  Sincerely, Sylvia O. Fedoruk, Lieutenant Governor, province of 
Saskatchewan. 

 
I now lay this letter on the table. 
 



 

 

Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I ask leave of the Assembly to 
extend condolences to the three families who lost their sons in the tragic 
car accident over the weekend. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

CONDOLENCES 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I ask you, and through you the 
other members of the Assembly, to extend condolences to Terry and Laura 
Ross of Regina and family who lost Ragnar Alexander Ross; to Bela Szabados 
and Soja de Grandmaison and family who lost Imre Nickolas Bela Szabados; 
and to David and Donna McLaughlin and family who lost Angus McLaughlin. 
 
These three boys, Mr. Speaker, all attended Sheldon-Williams Collegiate, 
which is in my constituency of Regina Lakeview, and we share the grief of 
the families and friends of these three boys.  They were very popular 
students and very well liked by all the other students in the school.  And 
the principal of the school has said all three boys were well-rounded and 
very solid kids. 
 
We take this opportunity then, Mr. Speaker, to send them our sympathy and 
to tell them we are thinking of them in their grief.  Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- On behalf of the government, I would like to join with 
the hon. member in expressing our condolences to the families of the three 
young boys that were killed in a tragic highway accident.  Mr. Speaker, the 
condolences are as well to their friends. 
 
I've had the situation of knowing a couple of good friends of one of the 
people involved in the accident, and the young people, of course, when 
faced with a tragedy of this nature, are affected in many cases stronger 
than most.  It's the first time it's happened to them, and many of the kids 
are having a great deal of difficulty in coping with the tragedy of the 
other day. 
 
So our condolences, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government are to the 
families.  I know in one case it was a single child, which means that the 
grief is even greater, if that's possible, but also to the families and to 
the friends of these young people who are also suffering. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Prior to orders of the day, I would like to seek leave 
of the Assembly to pass some standard business motions.  I've given copies 
of these proposed motions to the Opposition House Leader, and I'd like to 
go through them with leave of the Assembly. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
(1445) 

MOTIONS 
 
Referral of Retention and Disposal Schedules to the Standing Committee on 
Communication 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to move, seconded by the member 
for Rosthern, with leave of the Assembly: 
 

 That the retention and disposal schedules approved by the Public Documents 
Committee be referred as tabled to the Standing Committee on 
Communication. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Referral of the Report of the Saskatchewan Legislative Library to the 
Standing Committee on Communication 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd also like to move, 
seconded by the member for Rosthern, by leave of the Assembly: 
 

 That the report of the Saskatchewan Legislative Library be referred as 
tabled to the Standing Committee on Communication. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Referral of the Report of the Provincial Auditor to the Standing Committee 
on Public Accounts 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd further like to move, 
seconded by the member for Rosthern, by leave of the Assembly: 
 

 That the Report of the Provincial Auditor for the fiscal year ended March 
31, 1989 be referred as tabled to the Standing Committee on Public 
Accounts. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Referral of Public Accounts to Standing Committee on Public Accounts 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd also like to move, 
seconded by the member for Rosthern, by leave of the Assembly: 
 

 That the Public Accounts of the province of Saskatchewan for the fiscal 
year ended March 31, 1989 be referred as tabled to the Standing Committee 
on Public Accounts. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Referral of By-laws of Professional Associations to Special Committee on 
Regulations 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to move, seconded by the member 
for Rosthern, by leave of the Assembly: 
 

 That the by-laws of the professional associations and amendments thereto 
be referred as tabled to the Special Committee on Regulations. 

 



 

 

Motion agreed to. 
 
Referral of Annual Report and Financial Statements of Crown Corporations to 
Standing Committee on Crown Corporations 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to also move, seconded by the 
member for Rosthern, by leave of the Assembly: 
 

 That the annual reports and financial statements of the various Crown 
corporations and related agencies be referred as tabled to the Standing 
Committee on Crown Corporations. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in reply which was 
moved by Mr. Toth. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It gives me a pleasure 
to address once again the members of the Legislative Assembly on the Speech 
from the Throne, this being the fourth session of the 21st legislature and 
what I think, or fervently hope, a lot of Saskatchewan people hope in any 
event, will be likely the last session before there's an election called by 
the government opposite so that the people of this province can decide the 
next direction for the next four years. 
 
In any event it is a privilege to be a member of this Assembly, and it's a 
privilege and an honour for any one of us, whether we're Conservatives or 
New Democrats, to have the freedom to speak up in a democracy about issues 
concerning our society and ways and means to shape our society to make it 
more relevant, to make it truly a society which is capable of sharing the 
benefits and the opportunities and the hopes for the people of our 
community in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to come right to the point of my address and to say 
that, having read very carefully the Speech from the Throne -- I heard it 
and then I read it very carefully -- that one can only conclude that this 
Speech from the Throne is unwittingly an indictment out of the mouths of 
the Progressive Conservative government opposite; an indictment that eight 
years of economic and social policies have brought this province on the 
brink of disaster.  I don't think there's any overstatement when I use the 
word "disaster"; a searing indictment, which I think unwittingly was 
drafted by the Premier and the PC cabinet opposite, about the economic and 
social failures and the lack of opportunities and the intolerance and the 
lack of compassion and the destruction of our social fabric and our 
economic opportunities, which is now on our plate, on our agenda after 



 

 

eight years of the government of the Progressive Conservatives in Regina, 
and, I might add, aided and abetted by five years of government in Ottawa. 
 
It's an admission of abject failure by its own words.  The Premier, of 
course, tries in this document to explain away the extreme difficulties of 
our province and our community by saying that these are created by 
circumstances outside of the control of the province of Saskatchewan, that 
these are international forces.  In fact, the words that he used are that 
the international community has declared war on the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, that that is essentially not true.  While there are 
some elements of a very difficult economic situation globally, while it is 
true, to be fair, that there have been difficulties with respect to drought 
and circumstances beyond the control of any one of us as the good Lord and 
Mother Nature conspire to deliver the benefits or the lack thereof to us, 
but it is true those are circumstances no government can address. 
 
The fundamental assertion of this government that the economic 
circumstances have somehow conspired to in effect thwart the hopes and the 
dreams and the ambitions and the goals of our young people, of our farmers, 
of our working men and women, of our business people -- that fundamental 
assertion, Mr. Speaker, is false.  It's not that the international 
community has declared war upon the people of the province of Saskatchewan.  
Far from it.  I say, Mr. Speaker, and I'll elaborate upon this in a few 
moments, it is the policies and the actions of this government opposite 
that has declared war on the people of the province of Saskatchewan, not 
the economy and not the drought and circumstance of the weather. 
 
The abject failure of these policies are confirmed, as I say, by the words 
contained in the Speech from the Throne, but I think the most damning 
statements which confirm my proposition that this government has lost its 
will to win, has lost its direction and purpose to govern, has lost its 
agenda, has no agenda -- I'll say a word about all of those things in a 
moment -- after having seen eight years of an agenda attempted to be 
implemented by the gentlemen and ladies opposite. 
 
The stark words which really bring home to me the defeat of this government 
is the establishment of this new body called Consensus Saskatchewan.  One 
hundred people, men and women, chosen on the basis of some sort of a 
lottery mechanism where people write in, some chairperson decides which of 
the hundred, or many applicants decide to serve and those that don't, in 
the secrecy of the cabinet room. 
 
And this Consensus Saskatchewan is given this mandate -- this is their job, 
Mr. Speaker, and I read directly from the Speech from the Throne: 
 

 A group of one hundred citizens from all walks of life will be called on 
to make recommendations (get these words -- will be called on to make 
recommendations) on how best to take Saskatchewan through the next decade 
and into the next century.  These one hundred people (this speech says) 
will focus on proposals within four specific priority areas the public has 
identified. 



 

 

 
And then the four areas are set out here. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the point about this statement is that there is the 
establishment of Consensus Saskatchewan.  One hundred people whose job it 
is to make recommendations on how best to guide Saskatchewan through the 
next decade. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I thought that was the job, in a democracy, of an elected 
government and an elected premier.  I thought it was the job, in a 
democracy, of people who had been mandated by the best consultative device 
yet devised by mankind -- elections and democracies; that that was the job 
of the 20 ministers or so, and there's a huge backdrop of support ministers 
as well; that it was the job of those men and women who have gone through 
the consultative process of 28 days of an election campaign; who have heard 
these people in the period running up to the election campaign.  It was the 
job after that extensive consultative process to come up with those 
recommendations to guide us in these four and other critical areas for the 
future of the province of Saskatchewan for the 1990s. 
 
And what a challenge it is before us in the 1990s, Mr. Speaker.  What a 
great opportunity, what great challenges, what great obstacles, what great 
hope there should be as we enter this new decade, the 1990s.  What optimism 
a government, properly consultative and properly democratic, might be able 
to guide and lead us to, which we find by this administration its 
abdication and its passage over to a hundred men and women selected, we are 
unclear how; the mandate we are uncertain of, with the exception of the 
points that I have read here; the background work required to do their 
assessment, we don't know who prepared that; and most importantly, Mr. 
Speaker, with no electoral, democratic accountability. 
 
These recommendations will be made by a hundred Saskatchewan people, none 
of whom, so far as I know, will be sitting in this legislature; none of 
whom will be capable or able, in fact will not be charged with the 
responsibility of answering the questions that we may pose to them about 
those recommendations; none of whom have to stand for elected office; none 
of them have to defend those recommendations to the public at large; none 
of whom have to seek the approval of their neighbours and their friends.  
And somehow this is represented as being democracy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Somehow this enclave of a hundred e pélite people, a hundred hand-picked 
people meeting sometimes in public, undoubtedly meeting sometimes in 
private with no accountability mechanism.  We don't know what the budget is 
going to be, whether it's going to be large or small.  This 100 magical 
group basically picked on a first-come, first-served basis, or perhaps 
picked on a political basis, or picked on some other random basis.  They 
will be recommending to us, the legislature, and to our constituents, the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan, the way to go for the 1990s. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is an indictment out of the words of the government 
opposite that they do not have those ideas, that they do not have those 
recommendations, that they have lost their will to govern.  They have lost 
their ideas, destructive as they have been, and I'm going to say a word 



 

 

about that; that they are stuck in the middle of the Atlantic Ocean, as it 
were, in a boat, a row-boat, in an economic storm, not knowing which way to 
paddle to get to shore; not knowing who the captain is; not sure that the 
crew members are on board or bailing out, and not certain that the boat is 
going to survive.  It seems to be capsizing under the weight of public 
opinion which has condemned, turn after turn, month after month, the 
directions of this policy. 
 
This is an indictment.  This is a searing condemnation that this government 
has lost the capacity to govern.  And, Mr. Speaker, I say, when any 
government in a democracy can no longer rely on those of us who are elected 
and mandated by our people to govern, when any government has run out of 
ideas and cannot recommend, it is time for an election to defeat that 
government and send in a new group that is able to govern and to guide. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, let's not be fooled about this attempt of 
building the new Saskatchewan consensus.  How bitterly ironic, how bitterly 
cynical that phrase is in the Speech from the Throne.  Building the new 
Saskatchewan consensus is what they say.  Eight long years of PC government 
in Regina, Saskatchewan, and here we are on the eve of a provincial 
election, probably in June of 1990. 
 
After eight long years of PC policies -- I'm going to say a word about 
those -- policies which have given us record numbers of people who have 
fled this province in pursuit of jobs; families who are hurt if not 
destroyed by their young and others leaving; businesses going bankrupt; a 
thousand farmers a year going off the farm lands; the small towns 
struggling for survival, Canora, Saskatchewan, and Sturgis and Stenen, 
Saskatchewan, and all of the ones in this province we know.  After all of 
this period now we see this government's policies. After eight years they 
say they are now going to build the Saskatchewan consensus. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they are going to build the Saskatchewan consensus after eight 
years of policies destroyed the Saskatchewan consensus.  And I say that no 
political party and no government that follows that course -- namely, 
deliberately goes about to destroy that which our pioneers and centuries or 
years of forefathers and others who took part in the political system built 
up in this province.  Any political party which deliberately has set about 
to destroy that consensus and now says in its dying months before the next 
election that it is going to build that consensus, simply cannot be 
trusted, cannot be trusted and will not be trusted come the next election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- This is eight long years of Tory administration in Regina; 
five long years of Tory administration in Ottawa, Mr. Speaker.  I said they 
started out to destroy the Saskatchewan consensus, and there was a 
Saskatchewan consensus.  There still is in our hearts, Mr. Speaker.  I'm 
going to say a word about that. 



 

 

 
There was a Saskatchewan consensus before these people took office in 1982.  
It was a consensus which was fashioned by who we are and where we came from 
and how we reacted to the circumstances surrounding us, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are people who have come from all over the world -- it's been said 
before -- from Germany and from France and Poland and Hungary and Romania 
and Ukrainians, Icelanders.  And we mingled with English people and 
French-speaking people, and we've built a tolerant society.  And we've had 
to build from that a program of compromise and tolerance. 
 
We are a people in the middle of a North American heartland which is, in 
effect, affected so greatly by climate which is so harsh, and distances 
which are so long, and small markets and small population; and we've 
suffered through the indignities of federal governments in Ottawa, be they 
Liberal or be they Conservative; sometimes Liberal, sometime Conservative, 
governments in Ottawa which are essentially remote and they don't know our 
tradition and they don't know our hardships and they didn't experience it, 
and they ignored it, and we had to rebel. 
 
We started the progressives and we started the CCF (Co-operative 
Commonwealth Federation) and we started the Social Credit.  We fought 
against the Conservatives and the Liberals of that period because we had to 
fashion our own uniquely Saskatchewan consensus in order to build a life 
for our families and for our people and our communities and our churches 
and our social organization.  And what a consensus we built.  And we built 
it on the values that have made this province great, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Just think of those values.  In that period of our pioneers, the values and 
the virtues of hard work -- my, how the pioneers worked hard!  And 
innovation, how innovative and inventive they were!  They didn't let the 
crisis get to them; they didn't declare that there was a war staged on them 
by the world at large.  They rolled up their sleeves and did something 
about it.  They decided that they had to be honest and they applied honesty 
in government, at a local level and at a provincial level. 
 
They didn't practise the politics of patronage and the politics of cynicism 
and the politics of polling.  And they realized that we had to be our 
brother's and sister's neighbour and keeper.  We had to be compassionate 
and we built all of the support structures around this province to achieve 
that goal.  And above all we went to values of community, and we practised 
not only the ethnic but the methodology of co-operation, because that was 
the way we could defeat the climate and the geography and the distance and 
the economics and the politics.  We had to be smarter.  We had to be more 
efficient.  We had to be more productive.  And with some ups and downs, we 
were smarter, we were more productive, we were more efficient and we 
preserved the basic fundamental values of honesty and innovation and 
entrepreneurship and truth and hard work and community.  That is the 
Saskatchewan consensus that we had into 1982. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- And the arrival of peoples from all over the world 



 

 

contributed to that motion and that attitude of tolerance and compromise 
and compassion that we're too sadly now not exhibiting in the Saskatchewan 
society. 
 
I have here a lapel pin which has the picture of a number of new Canadians 
on it and a simple slogan which says, "We are all Canadians."  A period of 
multiculturalism which has been brought to the history of this province of 
Saskatchewan, fostering the tolerance which existed and was a hallmark of 
our way of life, in addition to these values that I've talked about. 
 
And so we practised co-operation and we believed in co-operation as a 
value, and we shared and we worked and we dreamed and we dared to dream and 
we dared to be great and we achieved.  We overcame these obstacles, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
You know, when the history of the province of Saskatchewan is being 
written, as it has been from time to time in a variety of books on 
political leaders, whether it's a recent book, say, on Ross Thatcher, or a 
book going all the way back written by Dr. Eager on the history of the 
province of Saskatchewan, these people, the writers, document these dreams 
and they document the uniqueness of what it was about Saskatchewan which 
makes us a distinct society, if you will, in a Canadian context; which made 
us a social laboratory; which made us that kind of combination of 
individuality and spirit and get up and do it and stick-to-it-ness which 
resulted in the great accomplishments of the past that we have had. 
 
And what great accomplishments they are.  I'm not going to belabour the 
House because I've mentioned this in passing on previous speeches, but the 
accomplishments of health care and social services which were the finest in 
the world, I would argue, certainly in the North American world.  
Compassion.  And, by the way, it made good economic sense. 
 
And the policies of human rights where tolerance was also fostered.  We 
implemented the first Human Rights Commission and the Ombudsman in order to 
bring this place closer to people in a meaningful, real way. 
 
And we innovated education reform.  The late Woodrow Lloyd, CCF leader, one 
of my predecessors, premier of the province of Saskatchewan, had a vision 
for education where he decided and his cabinet decided.  The men and women 
of our party dreamed about the fact that although we may be in the middle 
of the North American prairies, our children could be the very best that 
they could be, and they could take their place almost anywhere in the 
world, in any field of activity and be the best.  And they are there in the 
world, being the very best, because of that education system, because . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- . . . because we dared to dream.  And we dared to dream and 
we dared to build, and we built practising those values and those ethics 
which were always foremost to our dreams, the ethics of innovation and 
compassion and hard work and thrift that I've talked about.  And the co-op 
system that's been built, that's a testament to what I'm talking about, now 
an important aspect of the economic engine; the co-op system and the 



 

 

multicultural facets of the province of Saskatchewan which still remains as 
one of the most different provinces in all of Canada, our multiculturalism. 
 
I mentioned the other day at the opening banquet, on the occasion of the 
opening of the House, that our province still is -- I believe I stand 
correct in this statement -- as the only one where both the 
non-French-speaking and non-English-speaking Saskatchewan people are 
swamped, if I may put it that way, by the rest of us -- the Romanows and 
the Tchorzewskis of the world and everybody else who comes from a different 
part of the world, either directly or indirectly through their mothers and 
their fathers. 
 
Yes, we dreamed and we built, and the pillars of our growth was family on 
the one hand and community on the other hand.  And the glue that built that 
structure were the values.  I'm talking about values of honesty and hard 
work and patience and determination, and above all a sense of optimism that 
no matter how tough it would get in the world economically, socially or 
otherwise, we were going to find a way to do it. 
 
Because the consensus that we built was the world's economy was not going 
to control us totally.  That's not to say that we could separate from the 
world.  No.  We would try to match the world and to meet the world, but we 
wouldn't lay over and play dead for the world.  We had, by necessity being 
the mother of invention, to come up with a better way to achieve the 
quality of life that the people of the province of Saskatchewan so rightly 
expected and still expect, and so rightly attained and had, prior to 1982.  
That was the Saskatchewan consensus, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I say, in the hearts of the people of the province and in many ways, it is 
still the consensus of the province of Saskatchewan.  And I say that it was 
that consensus that this government eight years ago embarked upon in 
destroying and has made significant -- unfortunately -- strides in 
destroying.  It is now incumbent upon us to pick up the pieces, and 
building from that tradition move to tomorrow to provide the hope and the 
inspiration for the youth and for the people, the farmers and the workers 
and the business people, that we can do it again in the 1990s as we've done 
it in the past.  And we shall do it again as we've done in the past. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- I said that was the consensus that they set about to 
destroy, Mr. Speaker, and it indeed was their mission to destroy the 
consensus.  When the next history books are written about the province of 
Saskatchewan, I hope that they're written about this period of eight years 
of Conservative rule, this brief interregnum in the consensus of the 
province of Saskatchewan.  That's all this is, is an interregnum. 
 
This eight years has got to be analysed by the political scientists and the 
thoughtful journalists and the rest of us who are concerned about what it 
was that these people were doing and how it was that they took office and 
implemented their approaches and their attempt to insert different values, 
different to this consensus that I've described. 
 



 

 

Rather than building on our traditions and on this consensus and on this 
culture, Mr. Speaker, which is what a smart government, a wise government 
would have done, in 1982 these people came in like children in search of 
candies in a candy store.  They came bulldozing in and they saw all of 
these candies located there and all of these foundations, and without any 
thought to principles or ideals or values, they were in there trying to 
either to sample all of them, or most of them, and what they didn't like 
they destroyed or they shelved or they put aside.  And rather than 
preserving their building they were in there in some sort of naïve 
exuberance, some sort of naïve sense of perhaps misguided hope that out of 
all of this that they could eat all these candies and not end up giving 
Saskatchewan one big stomach-ache, as a result. 
 
And they implemented policies, Mr. Speaker, which in effect decided to 
remove the consensus, decided to dismantle that consensus.  They did it 
with their values.  I ask you, sir, to remind yourself to go back to 1982, 
and what were the words of the ladies and gentlemen opposite of the 
government in direct contrast to the Saskatchewan Consensus?  Well, we got 
the words of "competition."  All of a sudden it was unbridled competition.  
We had to be -- remember the phrase -- first class and world class.  That 
meant we had to compete.  And it didn't matter if some of those in the 
province of Saskatchewan couldn't compete; didn't matter if our aboriginal 
people or the native people who were pushed aside by history and not able 
to compete because of the failings of the system, ours and ongoing systems, 
education.  Doesn't matter; it was unbridled competition. 
 
Acquisition -- go ahead, satisfy yourself.  That was the attitude.  Look 
after number one.  That was the approach of these people opposite.  After 
all, to the victor of the race go the spoils.  And if I happen to be born 
because of a little inheritance, well, I mean, why were you so unlucky not 
to be born with a good inheritance?  If I happen to have gotten a good 
education, well, it's your tough luck that you couldn't get it, but that's 
the way of the world.  It's going to be competition and it's going to be 
me.  And I'm risking and I'm going to reward myself. 
 
That was the ethic.  That is what is at the core of the PC Party, make no 
mistake about it, if you take an honest analysis of what the system is all 
about.  And of course the plea to materialism, the plea to acquisition, the 
push to second and third television sets and second and third cars and all 
of the things of the good life which of course these people brought in, 
forgetting for the moment the consensus of compassion and sharing and 
innovation and thrift and discipline and hard work and, putting it bluntly, 
good, old-fashioned conservatism in its true and good meaning of the word. 
 
That was all out the window by these newcomers.  They in fact didn't even 
come from within the generic background of the old Conservatives, Mr. 
Speaker.  This is not even a Conservative Party which comes out of the 
history of John Diefenbaker. 
 
(1515) 
 
I knew the late Mr. John Diefenbaker, and I knew him quite well, Mr. 
Speaker.  I met with him on many occasions in official and unofficial 



 

 

circumstances, and that might rile or upset some of the members opposite, 
but that is a fact. 
 
And obviously I do not agree with many, in fact most of the larger 
philosophical positions of Mr. Diefenbaker and the Conservative Party, but 
I tell you there were some common threads and themes about the Saskatchewan 
consensus of which I have just spoken to which the Diefenbaker 
Conservatives adhered to -- the love of this legislature, the love of 
family, fidelity to truth, the fidelity to the system in answering, the 
question of supporting business, but not being so crazy about it that you 
could say to them, well, come on in, like a kid to a candy store, and take 
whatever you want and use it whenever you want.  These people don't even 
come from this Diefenbaker tradition. 
 
These people come from some sort of nouveau riche materialism, lack of 
principled idealed values of consumerism, rampant consumerism, and, by the 
way, based on the idea of unbridled competition, based on the idea that you 
can step on your farmer neighbour friend because he or she's got some 
difficulties, and buy that quarter section of land if necessary; that is 
the ethic from which they come and it is foreign to the John Diefenbaker 
Conservative message.  Diefenbaker and the Conservatives worked from within 
that Saskatchewan consensus of which I speak. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if John Diefenbaker were alive today, I guarantee you he would 
turn his back and reject the actions of this PC government and, I say, the 
actions of the PC government in Ottawa as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Diefenbaker, whatever else he believed in -- by the 
way, while I'm just talking about the consensus and how this party is out 
of the mould of the consensus, this party opposite -- do you think Mr. 
Diefenbaker would have tolerated Meech Lake?  Do you think Mr. Diefenbaker 
would have said that we have here the embryonic development of two Canadas, 
two solitudes? 
 
John Diefenbaker, when he was defeated and finally resigned as the leader 
of the Progressive Conservative Party of Canada, did what every prime 
minister has done since that time.  He has stood for a united Canada at all 
costs because united, this country and this province has the greatest 
opportunity for the '90s of any country in the world.  I'm convinced of 
that. 
 
He would not have presided over the dismantling of Canada through free 
trade, through Meech Lake, and through these values of unbridled 
competition, acquisition or, putting it bluntly, good old-fashioned, plain 
greed which the gentlemen and the ladies opposite in this government and in 
Regina and Ottawa subscribe to.  That's what Diefenbaker would have done. 
 
In effect, when the historians write the record of this government 
opposite, Mr. Speaker, they will ask about the consensus which this 
government now seeks to build in its remaining weeks and months, a 
consensus which over eight years it destroyed, as I see it, as I've 



 

 

described that consensus.  Those historians will see that record.  They 
will see those policies, Mr. Speaker, and they will judge harshly the 
actions of this government.  And I say, Mr. Speaker, come the next 
provincial election -- the sooner the better -- the people will reject 
those actions and return back to the Saskatchewan consensus of which I 
talk. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- I said they started out to dismantle the consensus.  Some 
might want to say, well exactly how did they do this, Mr. Leader of the 
Opposition?  Well I think the evidence is everywhere. 
 
The first thing they did in 1982 is they announced open for business, close 
the door on the needy or at least limit it, but come on in everybody else, 
big business, we're now open for business.  Of course, it turned out to be 
a bust because it's contrary to the consensus and the way the economic 
realities of Saskatchewan work. 
 
Then secondly, they decided to enter into big royalty give-aways, Mr. 
Speaker, with the large multinational resource companies.  And so they got 
many tax breaks, but not you, sir, and not the back-benchers and not the 
farmers and not the working people and not the communities.  They didn't 
get a tax break. 
 
In fact they broke their promises almost immediately, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 
Speaker, I want to stress this to you, sir.  They broke their promises, now 
promises which said there would be taxation reductions. 
 
Do you remember, sir, that promise that says that the sales tax was going 
to be done away with?  Where's the sales tax today?  Seven per cent.  The 
promise that says that income tax is going to be reduced, and what's 
happened to that?  We have the flat tax and it's gone up.  The promises 
that said that we were going to preserve health care and education, and 
what's happened to those?  They've been dismantled and attacked.  And I'll 
say a word or two about that before I take my place. 
 
They broke their trust and their promise.  If this wasn't a parliamentary 
forum I would use a more blunt word to describe what they did to the people 
in 1982, what they said and what they did.  And I'm not talking about 
trivial, I'm talking about major, major statements. 
 
And then they went about destroying the consensus, Mr. Speaker, by entering 
into special deals with some of their special friends, the Manalta coal 
deal down in the south-east corner.  Then they entered into millions with 
Pocklington.  Then they entered into more millions with Weyerhaeuser.  Now 
they've entered into more millions with GigaText . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Do I hear "excellent" there to, from the Minister of 
Highways?  He's been saying "excellent" all along because they endorse 
this. 
 
Then they've decided to enter into something called free trade, Mr. 
Speaker, which of course is the dismantlement of the capacity of government 



 

 

to be able to do in a community way, a Saskatchewan consensus, do it here 
in Saskatchewan what we have to do in order to meet the international 
challenge.  No, they've taken that away now with free trade which does away 
with subsidies, does away with all of the many things which we have used as 
tools to develop our province and our country.  Their support is of free 
trade.  "Excellent," the Minister of Highways, the member from Melfort, 
says. 
 
Then they introduced deregulation.  I suppose the minister would say that's 
excellent too.  Deregulation says get government off your backs, so part of 
the Saskatchewan consensus was destroyed there.  And we saw Pioneer Trust 
go belly-up and then we saw Principal Trust go belly-up.  And what happened 
to Principal Trust, of course, is that many, many people in the province of 
Saskatchewan, ordinary, hard-working, decent people who believed that part 
of the consensus was that government had a duty to at least make sure that 
on regulatory matters it was on their side.  That, of course, now is out 
the window and they've lost untold thousands of dollars in this regard, and 
the broken promises.  And I could go on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But you get my point.  My point here is that they have embarked upon the 
destruction of the consensus of Saskatchewan from 1905.  Each one of these 
policy initiatives was dedicated to disproving the work of our pioneers.  
Each one of these initiatives was to disproving the successes of successive 
governments.  Whether it was the Ross Thatcher government or the Blakeney 
government or the Woodrow Lloyd government or the Tommy Douglas government, 
they were out to undo it. 
 
They were out to prove that that great experiment called Saskatchewan, a 
prosperous, caring, sharing, humane, efficient, entrepreneurial community 
in the middle of a North American prairie could survive and blossom and 
grow.  They were determined to upset that consensus.  And those policies 
which I identified were the instrumentalities and the tools by which they 
went ahead and did it. 
 
And they did something else about the consensus, Mr. Speaker, for which I 
shall never forgive them or forget.  And Saskatchewan people will never 
forgive or forget, too.  They instituted the politics of hate and division 
in our community of this province of Saskatchewan.  They instituted 
deliberately the policy of division.  They pitted the native against the 
non-native.  They pitted the farmer versus the worker.  In every electoral 
scheme, in their speeches even to this day, they pit the cities against the 
towns and the villages.  They pit the poor against the middle class. 
 
Who of us in this Chamber can forget easily, and it isn't easy even to 
recall this, the words of the minister of Social Services at the time, now 
Minister of Labour, the member from Melville, in his onslaught and ongoing 
attacks on those who are needy and who are unfortunate and who, beyond 
circumstances that they cannot control, find themselves in a situation 
where a compassionate element needed to be there.  A part of the consensus 
should be prepared.  Who can forget those words of those attacks.  They 
pitted the poor against the middle class, and it goes down the line that 
way.  They still pit those differences; they seek to divide our society. 
 



 

 

Mr. Speaker, I may be talking on a philosophical basis, but I want to tell 
you, Mr. Speaker, that it is the job of a government in a democratic 
society not to divide.  It is the job of a government to build bridges and 
to build communities and to seek consensus. 
 
It is the job of a government to explain to the farmers the needs of the 
workers, and to the workers the needs of the farmers.  And it is the job of 
government to explain the disparities between the rich and the poor.  And 
it is the job of a government to say in this province, we're only a million 
of us, we can't afford to war, we've got to co-operate.  It is the job of a 
government to build that consensus. 
 
And this government, like in all of the other policies that I have 
identified, sir, Mr. Speaker, this government has embarked on a policy of 
divide and conquer, and they are now reaping a whirlwind for the seeds that 
they've sown.  They are now reaping this whirlwind; they are now where they 
are despised, distrusted, with no credibility, no ideas, no way to go 
because their ideals and their values ran up against the consensus that 
I've talked about. 
 
Their policies met the Saskatchewan farmer and the Saskatchewan farmer won.  
Their policies met the programs of compassion and caring and the people of 
the province of Saskatchewan won. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the first point I want to make in my address this afternoon is 
this. This Speech from the Throne says, building towards a new Saskatchewan 
consensus.  I say this government destroyed the Saskatchewan consensus -- 
this government destroyed the Saskatchewan consensus. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- And I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, that the dedication 
of the men and women on this side of the House to your left, those of us 
who are in opposition, our dedication is to once again renew that dream, 
those values, that consensus, to build on what we've learned in the past, 
to build the brightest future and to give the most hope for the people of 
Saskatchewan in the 1990s ever.  And with the help of the public we can and 
we will do it come the next election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- And so, Mr. Speaker, as I close my first point, the Speech 
from the Throne, if you take this theme of consensus, and I'm speaking 
right to the core as I see it, of what this Speech from the Throne is all 
about and where the government is at now, eight years into its cycle, I say 
to you, Mr. Speaker, that this speech has signalled that this government 
has come the full and complete cycle.  It is now finished.  It has now 
tried after eight years to destroy the consensus and has lost.  The people 
won.  The institutions and our cultures and our values prevailed.  The 
people won.  When they tried to destroy SaskEnergy, Mr. Speaker, the people 
won. 
 
There is only one last final act to complete this government's sorry walk 



 

 

upon the political stage of the province of Saskatchewan and that is the 
exit which will be brought about by the defeat at the next provincial 
election.  I guarantee you that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to say a word or two about the 
record of this government.  My first proposition is that they have 
destroyed the consensus.  Now I want to say a word or two about the record, 
because behind the philosophy and the values and the ideals that I have 
talked about, as important as they are, of course, are real men and women 
and children and families who have to live with the fall-out of these 
programs that have been instituted, and this destruction of the consensus 
which has been instituted by the government opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am not going to spend much time on this portion, I can 
assure you.  Nobody in Saskatchewan needs for me to describe the chilling 
facts, the statistics which are cold, relentless, severe.  Farm 
bankruptcies, all-time high; total bankruptcies, business, all-time high; 
population loss, I would say at an almost all-time high.  I will say one 
thing.  In the first two months of 1990 the net out-migration has been 
larger, Mr. Speaker, than the total populations of any of the towns of 
Lumsden, Coronach, Macklin, Canora, Preeceville, Rosetown, Indian Head, 
Shaunavon, Warman, or Biggar put together.  Now that's pretty big. 
 
(1530) 
 
Housing starts -- they've trickled down to nothing.  Jobs -- 5,000 fewer 
people employed in 1988, only decline recorded amongst all the provinces in 
Canada.  Retail sales -- down.  As I said, the details and the records are 
there. 
 
The population loss that I alluded to, Mr. Speaker -- 24,000 people last 
year, 40 per cent of whom were 32 years of age and younger.  That is our 
brightest and our best and our most educated.  It is our future, Mr. 
Speaker, and they have fled this province reluctantly.  And I know that 
it's been reluctant; I've spoken to many of them, and their homes are hurt 
and their families are, if not destroyed, they're impaired.  To see a son 
and daughter leave the province because there is no hope and no 
opportunity, that's part of the record as well. 
 
Those aren't statistics, Mr. Speaker, those are cold, hard facts, which is 
the record of this government.  There's another dimension, the question of 
mismanagement being monumental . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The 
member opposite said they're going to Alberta, and he says that . . . how 
many came in.  This is net out-migration.  After those that came in and 
those that left, 24,000 net loss.  And that's the Minister of Education 
asked that question.  He should know better.  Twenty-four thousand people 
net out-migration, and their answer, Mr. Speaker, is they should go to 
Alberta.  They're in Alberta, is what they say.  I say that's not my 
answer.  I want them working and living right here in the province of 
Saskatchewan, not in Alberta. 
 



 

 

Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- What appalling ignorance and indifference and, I would say, 
arrogance with those kinds of submissions and interjections made by the 
members in the minister's office.  This is an arrogance, Mr. Speaker, that 
I find hard to believe about a government.  Another example of why I say 
the government's come full cycle. 
 
But I want to make the other point.  In addition to this record that I've 
talked about, and I'm not going to belabour it, the record of mismanagement 
is monumental, Mr. Speaker -- the mismanagement of this government. 
 
Look at the situation with respect to GigaText.  The House Leader says it's 
a good idea. Lost how many millions?  Six million dollars.  Joytec. The 
Minister of Education was all in favour of Joytec.  How many has it lost? 
How many millions of dollars, Mr. Minister of Education, has it lost?  
Millions of dollars on Joytec.  Supercart, same thing.  High R Door, same 
thing. 
 
I don't blame any government, Mr. Speaker, for the fact that there will be 
some businesses that do not survive.  That is the nature of the free 
enterprise system and the competitive system.  But what I do is I blame the 
government pumping taxpayers' dollars into those ventures.  I blame the 
government in issuing press releases and raising the expectations along 
those objectives and those dreams, only to know that the research was 
either done so poorly or done so incompetently that they weren't going to 
succeed, and to see the millions of dollars lost and the jobs lost by this 
monumental incompetence by this record of the government. 
 
I don't think anywhere in the history of the province of Saskatchewan could 
you see this litany of destruction.  And what about the deficit, Mr. 
Speaker, talking about mismanagement?  Now this has got to be again brought 
to the attention of the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have here two documents in front of me.  One is an economic 
and financial paper of July 1982 signed by the Hon. Bob Andrew.  You, sir, 
will remember the Hon. Bob Andrew; he was a minister of the Crown. And I 
know it was the same Hon. Bob Andrew that you know because his picture is 
there on the top of the report, the document. 
 
And this is what he says about the situation as they came into office in 
1982, when they took over the consensus which we had built and the 
prosperity that we had left behind.  He says this: 
 

 On a combined basis the Consolidated and Heritage Funds showed budgetary 
revenues of 2.66 million, expenditures of 2.54 million (get these words, 
Mr. Speaker), and a combined surplus of $139.3 million. 

 
And there's his signature, Mr. Bob Andrew's signature.  Not Roy Romanow's 
signature, not my signature, sir.  Not the signature of the the former 
minister of Finance, my colleague, the member from Regina East, not the 
signature of the former premier.  This is the signature of the minister of 
Finance of the current administration which is in office. 



 

 

 
And then if you take a look at another document, July 1986 Saskatchewan 
economic and financial position -- different minister, I can tell that by 
the picture.  It's not Bob Andrew.  This is the member from Qu'Appelle; 
he's now the Minister of Justice.  And the member from Qu'Appelle gives the 
report with the minister of Finance to the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan.  And I refer you, sir -- I know that you're very much 
interested in this -- to page 13 of the report, of this financial report.  
And what does the minister of Finance of the day say as late as 1986? 
 

 There is excess of revenue (note these words), excess of revenue over 
expenditure in the province of Saskatchewan as of 1982 (1982 figures), 
139.2 million. 

 
He said it again; he said it four years after making this statement. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Did he sign it? 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- And he signed it.  My colleague asks, where'd he sign it?  
There it is on page two.  I see his signature, Mr. Speaker, same situation.  
But I'll tell you something else.  If you go down this line and you see 
what the net excess of revenue, namely surplus position is, 1982 it's 
$139.2 million.  You know what it is by 1986, unaudited?  Minus $584.1 
million.  That, Mr. Speaker, is a turnaround of $700 million in four years.  
It's a turnaround from $140 million surplus to a deficit of about $600 
million.  That's a 700 to $800 million deficit.  They were given the 
records and the books in a position of good management and good efficiency, 
because we worked on consensus, we worked on a mixed economy.  We looked 
after the needy.  We provided the best in education.  We looked after the 
social services.  We provided the best health care and we still had a 
surplus of 140. 
 
And in four years these people, with their destructive policies and their 
incompetence and their mismanagement, have come up with eight deficit 
budgets in a row.  I predict next week it'll be nine deficit budgets in a 
row.  Today we've got a $4 billion cumulative debt.  That's a debt on our 
children and their children.  That's a debt that hocks the province of 
Saskatchewan to the bankers of New York and Switzerland and Toronto.  
That's a situation which cuts down the ability of this government and this 
legislature to speak for the communities. 
 
They say they're setting up a hundred people called Consensus Saskatchewan 
to devise the strategies for the future.  How will they be able to do that 
with this kind of a debt wrapped around their neck with the bankers calling 
the shots on the hundred people called Consensus Saskatchewan?  They have 
destroyed the consensus.  Their mismanagement and their attitude here, Mr. 
Speaker, is worthy of condemnation just as much as their division policies 
are as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- But I guess we should have known that.  Because on January 
19, 1983, and I have the direct quotation here, the Premier of the province 



 

 

went down to New York.  As I said, they were like children into a candy 
store now, these people, first time round, wow, we're in government here 
now.  Down goes the Premier to New York and he speaks to the New York 
investors on January 19, 1983.  And I guess we should have known in 
Saskatchewan that something was wrong with this kind of an attitude because 
he said: 
 

 Saskatchewan has so much going for it that you can afford to mismanage it 
and still break even. 

 
Was what the Premier said in 1983. 
 
Well that was an attitude of profligacy and waste and spending money like 
drunken sailors to try to get re-elected.  That was an attitude which 
simply said, we didn't care about managing the dollars of taxpayers 
efficiently or well.  That's an attitude which simply says, we don't care, 
we're not here for a long time; we're here for a good time, and we're going 
to simply waste, waste, waste.  And here we now are in this debt position.  
And then now being caught in the debt position, what do they do?  They 
increase taxes.  That's what a government does, and cut back.  And so our 
taxes go up.  They break their promises.  They eliminate the property 
improvement grant.  They put the used car tax on.  What happened to that?  
Had to back that off. 
 
Flat taxes established at .5 per cent.  Then the flat tax is up to 1 per 
cent.  Then the flat tax is up to 1.5 per cent.  Now the flat tax is going 
. . . Where is it going? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Higher. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- It's going higher.  It's going up to 2 per cent, the flat 
tax.  Then they increased the . . . gasoline tax.  That's now back on.  
Remember, they promised sales tax would be reduced.  Where is it going? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Higher. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Seven per cent.  They said they were going to do away with 
income tax.  Where is the income tax going? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Higher. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Higher it is, my colleagues are saying.  And then now we 
have something else on our plate.  It's called GST (goods and services 
tax).  That's the colleagues and the brothers and sisters in Ottawa, 
Conservatives also, who have also the mission to destroy a consensus, the 
consensus of Canada, through free trade and through a strong united Canada 
and deregulation.  Now their brothers and sisters in Ottawa want to destroy 
the Canadian consensus and they've got something called the GST. 
 
And what do we see here at first?  And I've got the clippings in front of 
me right here, Mr. Speaker.  I can't display them because the rules 
prohibit, but they say -- I'll read them -- and this is a quotation so I'm 
not quoting the minister here: "Devine stands ground in support of sales 



 

 

tax"; "Devine odd man out among premiers on GST"; "Premiers agree to 
disagree with feds proposed sales tax Premier supports." 
 
And not only that, but then in an open letter by one Dennis McKnight, sorry 
Bill McKnight, the hon. minister who's the federal cabinet minister to the 
government in Ottawa from Saskatchewan, he writes the following.  To this 
government, to the minister, he writes . . . when they got on the fence, 
when they couldn't take the political heat, when they were finally 
beginning to listen only a few months ago, McKnight writes to the Premier 
and he says: 
 

 May I also remind you that we (referring to Ottawa and Regina) engaged in 
extensive discussions with all 10 provinces for 18 months after the 
release of the white paper on the GST (for 18 months).  In fact (Mr. 
McKnight writes) these discussions made an important contribution to our 
own work on the design of the goods and services tax. 

 
And this government has the gall to say that it is now opposed to the GST, 
having helped to fashion the GST. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is there anybody in the province of Saskatchewan who is going 
to believe this government in Regina when they say they weren't shaping the 
GST?  Is there anybody here in this legislature in the province of 
Saskatchewan who doesn't believe that the Premier and the Minister of 
Finance are hook and part and parcel and hand in glove in this tax grab 
unprecedented in the history of the province of Saskatchewan?  Does anybody 
believe otherwise? 
 
And look at the dilemma we're in.  The taxes keep on going up, and yet the 
deficit keeps on going up and the services keep on going down.  And the 
poor people are hurting ,and the farmers are being driven off the lands, 
and the banks are profiting, and unemployment is going up in the midst of 
all of this, because it's eight years of open for business and eight years 
of privatization and eight years of deregulation and eight years of free 
trade and eight years of a consensus-destroying government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say this to you and to the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan: you don't have to be a New Democrat, you don't have to be a 
Liberal or a PC, or you can be uncommitted, or you can be a Liberal or a 
PCer; if you are committed to honest government, competent government, fair 
government, then I tell you it's time to defeat the ladies and gentlemen 
opposite and put a government in there that can do the job. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- So my second point, Mr. Speaker, is the economic record of 
mismanagement and all the statistical data which is clear and for everybody 
to see, which needs to be placed on the record. 
 
I want to say, however, one other aspect of this record which is very 
disturbing to me, Mr. Speaker, and that is the way it's been translated to 
social policy and the negative of social policy. 
 



 

 

I've already referred to education.  The teachers and the trustees and the 
administrators are pleading for more money.  That's stated here March 12, 
1990.  We need a new vision for education.  We're committed to that.  
Health care -- they want a new consensus, the people do, about health care.  
We're committed to that. 
 
But you know what the real tragedy is, is the poverty profile in the 
province of Saskatchewan.  Sixty-four thousand kids are in a poverty line 
going hungry -- 64,000 people.  That's the second highest in all of Canada, 
and this is stated here in a report from National Council on Welfare.  I 
have here "An Inquiry into Hunger in Regina" prepared by another body, the 
City of Regina.  Hunger in the midst of plenty in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to give you one statistic here.  Food Banks.  
Saskatoon food bank has grown by 165 per cent since 1985.  In 1988, Mr. 
Speaker, the food bank in Saskatoon fed 76,164 people -- 76,164 people; 
Regina, 59,705 people; Prince Albert, 12,242 people, and it's now expanding 
the concept of food banks to other smaller centres.  And do you know the 
tragedy is that people opposite are accepting this as almost a reality, a 
way of life.  I think that that is a tragedy.  It's a condemnation. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Speaker, my colleague, the member from Saskatoon University, headed a 
special task force on hunger and what can be done about it.  I've got a 
copy here which I'm not going to refer to at length, but it documents a 
game plan to deal with poverty and hunger in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Can you imagine the immorality of the situation?  Here we are in the middle 
of the bread-basket of the world, perhaps, and somehow we can't figure out 
a way to get the food from those who produce, at prices which allow them to 
continue to produce, to those people who need the food right here in our 
own communities.  We haven't been able to figure that out.  We can send men 
and women to the moon.  We can have the best in all of the science, 
technology, and health in other areas, but we can't figure out a way to 
feed the poor.  I want to tell you, we'd make a bigger dent on the health 
care budget if we just fed the poor and the poverty people in this province 
with good food.  We'd make a bigger dent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- And, Mr. Speaker, it is the worst argument to say, as the 
ministers opposite in defence have been saying, oh well, you know it's 
always been with us.  That's what they tried to say today in question 
period.  It's always been with us.  That's false.  It's not always been 
with us.  It's been with us since the consensus, the Saskatchewan 
consensus, has been dismantled.  That's been when it's been with us. 
 
It's been with us when the new attitudes of competition and acquisition and 
greed -- look after number one -- took over in 1982, not the attitudes of 
compassion and caring and sharing, the Saskatchewan consensus which they 
had.  It's not true; it's not always been with us.  It's only been with us 



 

 

since 1982. 
 
And I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, this side of the House is committed 
that when that election takes place and when we are elected to office, we 
are going to put as a priority, as an objective within the first term of 
our government, the elimination of the food banks in the province of 
Saskatchewan.  Nothing less will do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Oh, some Tories say, well, that's a dream.  You know, 
poverty's always with us.  Well I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, it might 
be a dream, but I come from that old Saskatchewan consensus that I've 
talked about and I still can dream.  And I still can dream that young 
children should be clothed and fed and can go to school and can learn and 
be able to learn and to prosper and to grow and to stay at home and to work 
here.  That may be a dream, but I tell you, for as long as I'm in politics, 
provincially or anywhere else, that's a dream that I and my colleagues are 
going to adhere to.  And I guarantee you, it's a dream we're going to work 
to fulfil if we're elected come the next election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Now let me raise another point about this Speech from the 
Throne, Mr. Speaker.  The idea that this government is listening -- the 
hundred points of light, Saskatchewan consensus, the hundred people.  Well, 
the government says it's listening.  Mr. Speaker, I say if you believe 
that, I've got a bridge for you to buy -- it's located in Saskatoon -- at a 
pretty good price just because I like you, sir.  And I think the feeling is 
mutual. 
 
But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, I don't think that this government is 
listening at all.  I don't think the 100 citizens in Consensus Saskatchewan 
are going to go anywhere except for one big disappointment. 
 
The Deputy Premier assured us it wasn't another Crown corporation.  Well 
what is it?  Who is going to fund it?  What's the budget?  How is the money 
going to get from here to the consensus group?  Who's going to administer 
it?  Are there going to be financial statements?  What's on the agenda?  
How do things get on the agenda?  Will there be an annual report?  Will 
there be bureaucrats advising? 
 
Of course they'll be bureaucrats advising.  You know what's going to 
happen.  Here's another bureaucracy going up.  Another government.  That's 
what it's basically -- a parallel government outside of the legislature, 
because these people say they want to listen. 
 
Well is it really listening?  Is this government really listening?  I'll 
tell you, Mr. Speaker, if this government was really listening, they could 
prove its faith, if it was listening, if, rather than appointing a hundred 
people for this Consensus Saskatchewan, it had issued a statement saying, 
we made a big mistake in not following the environmental laws at Rafferty, 
and we didn't listen when people on my side here, the member from Regina 



 

 

and others were saying, you aren't listening; you should follow laws.  Now 
that would have been proof of listening.  No, it took the court to make 
them "listen." 
 
They'd have been listening if they'd issued a statement saying, you know, 
megaprojects, 248 million bucks to Weyerhaeuser -- no, I'm not so sure 
that's a good idea in today's economic circumstances.  That would have been 
proof of listening. 
 
I think that they would have listened if they had taken Cargill -- I want 
to say just a word about that for a moment -- and said, you know, this is 
something which is a way of the past in the 1990s, given the fiscal 
situation of the province and the fiscal capacity of Canada.  This is 
old-style politics, Cargill.  Megabucks for megaprojects. 
 
They know the farmers don't go for this.  They know that the farmers need 
help.  And they see guarantees for Weyerhaeuser and they see guarantees for 
Pocklington and they see guarantees for Cargill, but no guarantees for 
them.  They see that the priorities are all mixed up.  Now that would have 
been an admission of listening if they had said, we hear, and Cargill is 
the wrong way to go. Sixty-four million dollars cash, $370 million, roughly 
speaking, all told, in one form or another as a commitment. 
 
Now some journalists and others say, well that's a contingent liability. 
Well of course it's a contingent liability.  But none the less, it's a 
commitment.  It's a legally enforceable commitment if the thing goes 
belly-up as Cargills did go belly-up in Alberta and as the industry tells 
us, it's very likely to do. And for that amount of money, that amount of a 
commitment, we roughly translate ourselves into a situation of $3.4 million 
dollars in one form or another for every permanent job created. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does anybody in this room believe that if we came up with a 
scheme that said, we'll give you $3.4 million on one condition -- you've 
got to create more than one job -- that we couldn't do that?  Of course we 
could do that.  Where are the environmental concerns?  No indication that 
there is going to be an environmental study.  If this government was 
listening, Mr. Speaker, they would have said, we're going to have an 
environmental hearing. But they say no. 
 
Where are the cost-benefit figures and analysis, if this government was 
listening, that the press wants to see the figures?  The opposing industry 
wants to see the figures. They've got a right to take a look at them. The 
public wants to see the figures.  Where is the cost-benefit analysis?  We 
want to hear that and want to see it.  They're not listening.  No such 
figures at all. 
 
And what about the commitment to smaller communities?  They say they're 
listening, but what happened to Rosetown?  What happened to Melville?  What 
happened to Melfort?  Now maybe the alternative project isn't the one that 
would have worked, I don't know, but at least here is an entrepreneur who 
said, I want to come and do it by myself and I don't want government money 
to do it.  And the town said, we want to help you to do it.  And they say 
to the governments, let us do it.  Are you listening, they say to the 



 

 

Premier.  No they're not listening at all. 
 
Instead they commit millions of dollars in these loan guarantees.  And most 
importantly why they're not listening is because they have decided that 
that's the way to go.  That's why I asked the question in question period 
today.  Supposing the hundred people called Consensus Saskatchewan said to 
the government: stop Cargill; it's not the way we should be developing; 
it's contrary to the Saskatchewan consensus of community and innovation 
that I've talked about.  What would this government do?  I bet you it would 
ignore the recommendation and proceed.  It's busily signing up all the 
documents and all the financial documentation now.  Are they listening, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
I want to make one other point, and that's privatization.  And to me, Mr. 
Speaker, this is a very important point, and it's going to become more 
important in the weeks and months ahead on privatization.  I am not going 
to argue the issues on privatization again.  Those have been talked over at 
length in this House.  But you know what it means: loss of control, loss of 
jobs, the deficit hasn't been reduced, the deficit keeps on going up.  They 
say they sell the Crown corporations to reduce the deficit, but you know 
what happens?  The Crown corporations go down and what happens to the 
deficit?  It just keeps on going higher.  So there's no success there.  And 
on it goes.  And they're still pursuing it. 
 
I have here in front of me, Mr. Speaker, a 1990 privatization conference, 
May 13 to 16 in Saskatoon.  And there it is.  It's endorsed by the Premier.  
Here's a message, and by the way, by the Prime Minister in this particular 
document.  Ten hundred and fifty dollars per person to join.  That's how 
they're listening. 
 
Not the person from the social welfare rights group -- I don't think he or 
she can pay ten hundred and fifty bucks to get in.  Not the average trade 
unionist, ten hundred and fifty bucks.  I don't think the farmer in Sturgis 
or Stenen can pay ten hundred and fifty bucks for registration to get in.  
But they're going to plough ahead.  They're going to go ahead and they're 
going to privatize.  And this conference is going ahead. 
 
And here's my point, Mr. Speaker.  And I bet you, by the way, that they're 
going to be funding, that the government's going to be funding it.  Here's 
my point: last year privatization was the number one agenda of this 
government opposite.  In the midst of the agricultural crisis -- I spoke 
about agriculture at length yesterday and so I won't today -- but in the 
midst of the agriculture crisis, they made privatization the number one 
issue.  It was going to be the Alamo of the NDP.  In effect it turned out 
to be the Alamo of the government because it broke the consensus that I 
talked about.  And we don't know where the government stands on SaskEnergy. 
 
I want to say this, Mr. Speaker, and I want to underline these words, and I 
say it to you, sir, and I say it to the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan: mark my words; re-elect the Conservative government in Regina 
and they will finish the job of trying to privatize SaskEnergy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 



 

 

 
Mr. Romanow: -- Make no mistake about it.  A vote in the next election for 
the Conservatives of this government is a vote to finish the privatization 
of a Crown corporation public utility and a further dismantling of the 
consensus of which that mixed economy, that Crown corporation, is a part 
of.  This election, if they get elected, will result in that privatization, 
I guarantee. 
 
And I'll tell you why.  Because they told this house in 1988 that they 
wouldn't privatize SaskEnergy.  What did they do?  They broke their word 
and then tried.  They said to the Leader-Post they wouldn't privatize 
SaskEnergy.  What did they do?  They broke their word and they tried.  Can 
anybody trust the Premier of the province to say in this election that he 
won't privatize it again?  Would you trust him? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- No. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Nobody would trust him. 
 
I say that the trust and the credibility of this government on 
privatization is nil.  I say to the people of the province of Saskatchewan, 
if you want to save the Crown corporation SaskEnergy, if you want to build 
the consensus, if you want to provide jobs and to build from there -- not 
only at home but in the world -- don't take a chance on the PCs.  There has 
to be a vote for the NDP to start building for the future in the 1990s.  
That's what's behind this issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- And let me make one other point, Mr. Speaker.  As we debate 
the opening of this session, the theme of my message is a consensus.  It 
was there.  What is the consensus?  I've described it.  And I've contrasted 
what they've done to try to break the consensus and try to establish a new 
one -- where I think they failed.  And I've tried to describe the real 
consequences for people as a result of that failure.  I've described that 
too. 
 
And I've also said just now, a few moments ago, that the agenda is not 
finished.  That this 100 Consensus Saskatchewan group is just a sham.  It's 
a facade.  It's an idea of the PC pollsters that if they get re-elected 
they will finish the job of selling off the heritage, the privatization, 
and it will be complete -- their values and their goals -- it'll be 
complete. 
 
And now I just want to say two very last things in quick summation and 
closing.  There's another part of this.  In this election that's coming up, 
Mr. Speaker, it is that this consensus destruction policy that I have 
described is aided and abetted by Mr. Mulroney and the Progressive 
Conservatives in Ottawa. 
 
The Premier of this province is at one end of the teeter-totter, the Prime 
Minister of Canada, the PC leader, is at the other end of the 
teeter-totter.  And they just keep going up and down in their political 



 

 

interests.  But their message and their consensus and their approaches to 
Canada are similar, from free trade to privatization to dismantlement that 
I've already talked about.  Whether it's free trade or Meech Lake or GST or 
privatization or cut-backs in interest-free cash advances or changes to 
crop insurance or the cut-backs in the rural post office system or the 
destruction of VIA Rail or the EPF (established programs financing) 
dismantlement -- this, Mr. Speaker, is a major issue. 
 
What did we get?  Two paragraphs on the established program financing, a 
major issue.  They didn't fight.  This government's not prepared to stand 
up to the Prime Minister.  This Premier and this government are so buried 
deeply in the hip pocket of the Prime Minister they can't see daylight.  
They do not defend the Saskatchewan interests. 
 
And you know as I travel the province of Saskatchewan there is so much 
discontent and alienation from Ottawa.  People say they're doing this and 
they're doing that and they're not listening.  And Mr. Mulroney seems to be 
travelling all over the world and he seems to be favouring one region over 
another.  And there's no consensus building.  And they said, we're 
frustrated and what can we do.  We're having a farm crisis and we're having 
a business crisis. 
 
(1600) 
 
And people say to me, Roy, what can we do?  And I say to them this, Mr. 
Speaker, which I am going to say to you also in this election.  There is 
something you can do.  There is hope.  They may not listen to your 
telephone calls.  They may not listen to your questions, and they may not 
pay attention to your letters, but I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, one 
thing that will make them pay notice and pay attention, and that is if this 
government is defeated by the largest majority in the history of the 
province of Saskatchewan, I guarantee you Mr. Mulroney will hear it even in 
24 Sussex Street, without a doubt. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- It's time to get a government, a government of men and 
women who will stand up and fight for Saskatchewan, who know where we came 
from and know where we're going to; a government with a vision, with a 
mandate; a government that'll make mistakes, but a government that is 
future oriented; a government which is non-ideological; a government which 
wants to build and restore that consensus that I've described.  And I say 
that's us. 
 
And let me close on this last point that I said I would close on.  People 
often ask me, they say, well you know how are you going to do it, Roy?  And 
I say it's not going to be easy; there is no magic wand; there is no way 
that we can do it.  But I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that we've got to 
try.  There's no easy way to do it, but there's only the only way that 
we've done it in the past. 
 
First, we've got to return to understanding what our basic values have been 
and are in this province, as part of restoring truly the consensus of which 



 

 

I speak.  And those values are honesty and compassion and hard work and 
innovation and fairness and co-operation, and it means that a future 
government is going to have to measure every Bill and every statute as 
against whether or not those values are advanced and propagated. 
 
Secondly, we're going to have to have an open government, a truly open 
government.  We're going to have to institutionalize a collaborative system 
of concerning input by government and input by working people and by the 
farming community to open up the books . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
The Minister of Justice is asking, what are we going to do with 
Weyerhaeuser and with Cargill?  I'll tell you what we're going to do with 
them.  I'll tell you exactly what we're going to do.  We are going to make 
all the documents financially and contractually legal to the point of 
light.  We're going to tell the people of Saskatchewan exactly what kind of 
secret deals and other deals you've made to benefit them.  And I tell you 
that if you've done it contrary to the interests of the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan, we are going to act in the interests of the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan to remedy it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- And I would say to the . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I'd like to draw the attention of the 
Minister of Justice not to vociferously interrupt the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  And I would also say to 
the Minister of Justice, I would say to the government opposite, that if 
there is a change in government, if there is, all those documents are going 
to be on the table, openly and publicly, immediately, on every 
privatization that takes place. 
 
They're all going to be out there in the open.  Not the ones -- all.  All 
of the Crowns, the STCs, and all the ones which you're . . . (inaudible) . 
. . because the people have got a right to know. 
 
And there's something else that we're going to do as well, Mr. Speaker.  
And there is . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  It now seems that several hon. members would 
like to get into the debate.  They will have the opportunities.  At this 
moment let us allow the Leader of the Opposition to continue. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm going to conclude by saying 
we're also going to, in collaboration with these people that I've 
identified, develop long-term programs for farming. 
 
I talked about some of them last day.  I won't repeat again at length, but 
income stability, the debt restructuring, land transfer, intergenerational 
land transfer, work toward an international grains agreement, work toward 
world food banking, if required, for those countries of the world that need 
it, a whole range of programs dealing with conservation and environment 



 

 

with respect to agriculture and other areas, including Crow benefit and the 
like. 
 
I've  talked about those, and detailed policies will be advocated in 
consultation, because we are saying to the farmers, we're here to stay.  
We're going to recommit to being the best in health care in North America 
once again. 
 
We're going to give education the top priority.  President Bush says that 
by 1990 he's going to have 90 per cent of students there get grade 12.  I 
think we're at 82 per cent or less in Saskatchewan.  That's just not 
acceptable.  We're going to get that record matched and bettered.  And I 
don't mean only in science and technology; I mean in education of 
humanities and values and goals and co-operation as well -- the best 
education to get our people the best that they have been in the past and 
can be in the future. 
 
And we're going to get business and people working together.  We're going 
to employ the mixed economy.  We're going to abandon ideological fervour in 
this policy. We're going to tackle the deficit. I've outlined that in 
speeches to business groups.  We're going to provide jobs and we're going 
to make families come back again to live and to prosper here, and we're 
going to exhibit compassion. 
 
We're going to tackle poverty as I've described.  We're going to put an end 
to food banks.  We're going to give people the right to deal in dignity and 
in decency.  We're going to promote tolerance, and we're going to promote 
multiculturalism, and we're going to say that this province of Saskatchewan 
is the greatest place in all the world to live; that the 1990s is the area 
where we are not going to simply play dead and roll over to these forces 
externally that seemingly have swamped the government, that they are not 
able to deal with. 
 
We are going to return to the Saskatchewan consensus and those values that 
I talk about to build a better and brighter and new tomorrow, to build the 
most exciting decade of growth and opportunity and development that this 
province has ever known. I guarantee you that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to commend the Leader of the 
Opposition on a very eloquent speech.  The Leader of the Opposition 
certainly has the gift of the gab, if you like, Mr. Speaker.  He's been in 
this legislature for a long time, and he talks very smoothly, Mr. Speaker.  
He talks with a lot of what is apparently conviction . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I'm sure members must be having difficulty 
hearing the minister, as I am.  I would like to ask for your co-operation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite speaks with a lot of 
apparent conviction, but I think in reality when you take away all of the 
flowery words and all of the flowery presentation, take away all the fluff 
and get right down to the real issues that face this province today, Mr. 



 

 

Speaker, I think you would agree with me, as well as I believe that the 
people of Saskatchewan would agree, that the member opposite failed to 
address a lot of the serious issues that are facing Saskatchewan in any 
meaningful way whatsoever. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great pleasure to enter the throne speech 
debate. I have quite a bit that I would like to talk about.  Today I would 
like to adjourn this particular debate and it'll be my pleasure to enter 
into the debate tomorrow. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- Mr. Speaker, with leave I would like to introduce a 
condolence motion. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

CONDOLENCES 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, and it is seconded by the Leader 
of the Opposition, the member from Saskatoon Riversdale: 
 

 That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the passing of a former 
member of this Assembly, and expresses its grateful appreciation of the 
contribution he made to his community, his constituency, and indeed to the 
province. 

 
 Michael Feduniak, who died in Saskatoon on August 30, 1989, was a member 

of this Assembly, representing the constituency of Turtleford from the 
years 1971 to 1975.  Mr. Feduniak was born at Fairholme on June 1, 1914.  
He was educated at Saskatoon Technical Collegiate and Hamilton Vocational 
School.  At Hamilton he met Eva Crocker whom he married in 1942.  In 1945 
he returned to Saskatchewan to open a general store in Glaslyn.  A few 
years later he opened a farm implement dealership. 

 
 Mr. Feduniak took a strong interest in his community.  He served on the 

Glaslyn village council and was a member of the local credit union, and as 
well he took an active role in the Glaslyn Elks Lodge and the village's 
Anglican church.  In the 1971 provincial general election he won the 
Turtleford seat of this Legislative Assembly. 

 
 Mr. Feduniak left active politics in 1975, and when he retired he moved to 

North Battleford.  He enjoyed travelling and had a particular fondness for 
auction sales. 

 
 In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, this Assembly 

expresses its most sincere sympathy with members of the bereaved family. 
 

Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise to second the motion of the 
Deputy Premier expressing the acknowledgement of this Assembly of the 
contribution of Mike Feduniak to the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Many members of this Assembly perhaps would have known Mike not directly in 



 

 

their capacity as elected members of the House, because Mike served between 
the years of 1971 to 1975 -- I was one of those who was present between 
1971 and 1975 -- but whether or not members served with him in the 
legislature, almost everybody knew Mike from his political and community 
activity.  And the one thing which can be attested to is his unflagging, 
unswerving interest to the welfare of the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan and the optimism that he had for the future and the optimism 
that he had in the political system. 
 
Before entering political life Mike was a small-business man.  He owned a 
general store and then later he got involved in a farm implement dealership 
in Glaslyn, Saskatchewan.  And as typical of Mike, and as the Deputy 
Premier has indicated, he was a member of the Glaslyn village council and 
active at the credit union, his church, and the Elks lodge. 
 
Some people might think that Mike was a quiet person who always kept his 
interests and his thoughts to himself. That's only partially true.  Mike 
was essentially quiet and very thoughtful, but there were many occasions, 
or perhaps I should say a few notable occasions where that quiet would give 
way to very strongly held and vociferously stated points of view. 
 
And I can tell you that although he was a partisan New Democratic Party 
member right to his very, very last moments, all of the time unswerving and 
unfailing in his commitment to the ideals to which we subscribe, he never 
hesitated where necessary to criticize us individually and collectively. 
 
This is a facet of political life today which we don't see nearly enough 
of.  We don't see enough of the independence of members of the Legislative 
Assembly and the political process as we all tend to pay homage to the 
necessity, also important to party unity and caucus unity. 
 
Mike never abided by that.  Mike in fact, I think, bridled at the notion 
that he could not speak up about his ideals and how he thought the New 
Democratic Party or how he felt the province of Saskatchewan should unfold.  
So much so that I personally believe that it contributed to his decision in 
1975 not to run for re-election again. 
 
But in the four years that he was there in the House, from '71 to '75, I 
have many, many fond remembrances, and I say fond remembrances, even on 
those occasions when I was on the opposite receiving end of Mike's frank 
thoughts on some issues -- fond remembrances of a person who made an 
invaluable contribution to the fulfilment of what I thought was a great 
plan at that time in 1971 of our party, called the New Deal for People. 
 
(1615) 
 
Mike, as I say, is a person who typifies all the best of Saskatchewan -- a 
person from an ethnic background, with educational opportunities somewhat 
limited, took full opportunity to show initiative, hard work and drive; was 
fairly successful in his personal affairs, financially and otherwise, but 
always found time, always found time, to understand that while we're on 
this earth our job is to try to benefit and improve the lot of others.  
Mike is sorely missed by his many friends, I know by myself and my wife 



 

 

Eleanor, and the members of his family, and the members of this caucus and 
party.  On behalf of the members of the NDP in this Assembly, I join all in 
extending our sympathy to the family. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Thank you Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to also join with the 
members of the Assembly here this afternoon passing on condolences to the 
Feduniak family.  I had the honour, Mr. Speaker, of doing the eulogy at 
Michael Feduniak's funeral in North Battleford.  Mike was, as has already 
been mentioned, born on the family farm in the Fairholme area.  And during 
World War II, Mike served as a machinist in the armaments industry in 
around the Hamilton area, and his partner Eva also worked in the war 
effort, manufacturing goods for the Canadian war effort. 
 
Towards the end of the war they moved to Glaslyn and purchased a general 
store.  Mike and Eva were always successful in business in the Glaslyn 
area.  He also was a person who always faced controversy with a great deal 
of determination and dedication.  I know that while he was active in 
municipal politics in Glaslyn, there was a great controversy about whether 
or not the town should have sewer and water.  And although it would seem 
strange, I suppose, at this point in time, Mike was one of those that 
fought to get sewer and water in the community of Glaslyn when he thought 
that would be a good idea.  And it just shows that he never did back down 
when he thought an idea was good.  He pursued it with a great deal of 
vigour. 
 
He of course after that time served as a member of this Legislative 
Assembly from 1971 till 1975, representing the Turtleford constituency, and 
he retired later to North Battleford. 
 
Mike was a person who was very dedicated.  He was a well-read person and 
for many respects a self-taught individual, not having a great deal of 
academic education, but nevertheless well-read and articulate in those 
issues that he would discuss.  He was a compassionate individual and cared 
a great deal for Saskatchewan people, regardless of their ethnic background 
or their race or their status in life.  And he was a great person for 
detail.  He would write many letters to the paper, he would have many 
discussions in coffee shops, that a number of retired politicians do in the 
province of Saskatchewan, and he would many times argue politics.  And I 
wouldn't want the Saskatchewan public to think that people who are of a 
different political faith were the only ones who experienced Mike's 
compassion about politics.  And if he had an argument, also people within 
the New Democratic Party which Michael served experienced that same 
difference of opinion when he had an honest difference of opinion with 
members of his own political party. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, on that very short intervention, I would like to 
pass on my personal condolences along with other members of this Assembly 
to his partner Eva and to their daughters Janice, Patricia and their 
families as well. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to. 



 

 

 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- Mr. Speaker, with leave, a condolence motion. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Leader of the 
Opposition, the member from Saskatoon Riversdale: 
 

 That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the passing of a former 
member of this Assembly and expresses its grateful appreciation of the 
contribution he made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province. 

 
 Demitro Michayluk, who died in Saskatoon on January 2, 1990, was a member 

of this Assembly.  He represented the constituency of Redberry from 1960 
to 1975. 

 
 Mr. Michayluk was born at Blaine Lake on December 23, 1911, and he was 

raised nearby on his family's farm.  He received his high school education 
at Krydor and then attended Moose Jaw Normal School.  After graduating in 
1933, he began a teaching career that spanned some 37 years, most of which 
was with the Blaine Lake School Unit No. 57.  In 1940 he married Mary 
Solodiuk of Krydor.  He took a very active role in the communities where 
he lived, especially Krydor where he lived most of his life.  He served as 
president on the Krydor board of trade, on various local co-operatives, 
the credit union, and the Krydor village council, the district Red Cross 
branch, the Redberry and district Saskatchewan Fish and Game League, and 
as a councillor of the Blaine Lake teachers federation. 

 
 In 1960 he ran successfully in the Redberry constituency and he held that 

seat through three subsequent provincial general elections.  Mr. Michayluk 
spent his retirement years in Saskatoon where he pursued his interest in 
antique collecting. 

 
 In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement this Assembly 

expresses its most sincere sympathy with members of the bereaved family. 
 

Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I again rise to second the motion 
of the Deputy Premier expressing the appreciation of this legislature for 
the contribution of Demitro (Dick) Michayluk to the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Dick was not only a close colleague of several members of our current 
caucus but he was also a friend of those members, and I can tell you he was 
a personal friend of mine.  Dick represented the constituency of Redberry 
from 1960 to 1975, and I first got to know him when I was first elected in 
the year 1967. 
 
Dick was one of a privileged number of members of this House who served as 
a member of the last CCF government in Saskatchewan and the first NDP 
government led by then Premier Alan Blakeney.  In between he served as a 
member of something called the CCF/NDP -- hybrid as we were then, I guess, 
named -- opposition caucus from '64 to 1971. 



 

 

 
In his 15 years as a member of the Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly, Dick 
Michayluk served his constituents with an unflagging sense of duty, and he 
served his province with great distinction.  He was a hard-working member 
of the Assembly; he was a determined member of the Assembly.  He was 
determined to serve his constituents well and to ensure that all the people 
of this province were well and properly served, be they CCF, NDP, or 
Liberal or PC. 
 
As well as representing the constituency of Redberry, Dick Michayluk was a 
long-time educator who retained his interest in schools and education until 
the end of his days.  He was a long-time educator with the Blaine Lake 
school unit where he taught school there for over a period of 37 years -- 
quite an accomplishment in itself.  And he was a long-time resident of 
Krydor, Saskatchewan.  There he served on the Krydor board of trade, the 
Krydor credit union, Krydor village council, local Red Cross, the Redberry 
and district to Saskatchewan Fish and Game League, and the Blaine Lake 
Teachers' Federation.  So you can see, Mr. Speaker, that he was a man of 
his community for all seasons.  He served his community and his province 
and his constituents very well indeed. 
 
Again, I have very many fond memories of Dick Michayluk in this particular 
Chamber.  And, Mr. Speaker, you will have heard me talk in the past about 
the then and the now.  And there's always a tendency to say that things are 
never quite today like they were in the good old days.  But I have to tell 
you that Dick Michayluk was a member of that breed and band of MLAs, male 
and female, who, in my judgement, were exceptional in their capacity for 
debate and oratory and their contribution to public life. 
 
The question of oratory seemed, as I entered politics in 1967, to be an 
important part of the business of the legislature and being an MLA.  I 
don't know whether it's the advent of television or what it is, but over 
the years, if I may say so rather sorrowfully, not too sorrowfully, the art 
of oratory and passionate commitment is somewhat faded, and I include 
myself, all of us. 
 
Dick Michayluk was before that period and was of a school where oratory, 
passion, logic, reason, words, communication of ideas . . . If you stop to 
think of it, Mr. Speaker, one of the most important things that can . . . 
tools and weapons that we have, more powerful than swords, or more powerful 
than weapons -- ideas and being able to communicate them effectively and 
emotionally and powerfully -- that's what the stuff of politics was all 
about. 
 
And Dick Michayluk and Bill Berezowski, Mike Feduniak, in his own way, 
these were people who were orators.  Perhaps they were not orators using 
words which would impress people at university halls or university lecture 
halls, but they were orators who could communicate the message to the 
community at large and their people. 
 
I remember serving and speaking with Dick on many public occasions where we 
shared the platform, and Dick had the capacity of not only, as I say,  
speaking logically, but very passionately.  And being a man of Ukrainian 



 

 

background -- not because of that, I suppose, but nevertheless being a man 
of Ukrainian background -- he would get so carried away in his addresses 
that he would all of a sudden interject into the phraseology a Ukrainian 
word or a Ukrainian phrase or sentence in mid-sentence, in mid-stream. 
 
That is to say, you wouldn't see the sentence logically complete itself in 
English.  He would go in English for about four or five words and all of a 
sudden the sixth word would be in Ukrainian, and it would continue straight 
through to the end.  And it made sense.  And the audience, of course, loved 
it because it was a facility which few people have, but it was another way 
of communicating so effectively the message that he was trying to get 
across. 
 
And these town halls that we shared, Dick Michayluk and I shared, were also 
of an era that I loved.  They were small and they were jam-packed, and 
farmers from all over the province, all over the area of the constituency 
would come, and the evening's entertainment and the evening's exchange of 
ideas was the political function, as opposed to nowadays, I guess, the 
impact of television and radio. 
 
I have one other reminiscence, if I might, Mr. Speaker, very briefly share 
with you.  It was a meeting at Whitkow, Saskatchewan.  Now I suppose many 
people may not know where Whitkow, Saskatchewan is.  I suppose the current 
member from Redberry does know where Whitkow is.  This was back in 1967.  
And I received a telephone call from a young politician from British 
Columbia who decided that he would volunteer his services and help me and 
other New Democratic Party candidates for office get elected in that '67 
general election where we were running against the late premier, also a 
great orator, Ross Thatcher. 
 
And this young MLA from British Columbia was a person by the name of Dave 
Barrett.  I'd never met Barrett before, didn't know what he looked like.  
He said to come around the hotel; I'll be standing outside; you can't 
mistake me for anybody else.  And when I drove by, sure enough, there was 
Dave Barrett in his inimitable fashion and appearance.  We got in the car 
and we drove out to Whitkow, Saskatchewan to share a platform with Dick 
Michayluk. 
 
And this was quite some meeting, Mr. Speaker.  The hall was kind of a small 
school building, a converted school, and they had about 65 people for a 
Sunday afternoon meeting.  At that the hall looked pretty full.  And the 
agenda was that our visitor, Dave Barrett, would say a few well-chosen 
words about why it was important to elect Woodrow Lloyd and the CCF/NDP.  
Forty-five minutes later Dave finished and the Chair decided to introduce 
the candidate and long-time MLA, Dick Michayluk, to say a few words about 
local issues.  And 45 minutes later, basically in Ukrainian and with some 
sprinkling of English words, Dick Michayluk was finished.  About an hour 
and a half or an hour and 90 minutes into the process, the Chair decided 
that they would probably call on the guest speaker who was myself at that 
time, first time neophyte political person, and there I am in Whitkow, 
Saskatchewan, giving them, I'd like to say less than 45 minutes, but it 
turned out to be 45 minutes as well, if not more. 
 



 

 

I think these people were either the most . . . best educated political 
crowd, the 50, 60 people, in the history of Saskatchewan politics or the 
most bored crowd after the two or three hours.  But I didn't get the 
impression.  They seemed to love it.  We seemed to love it. 
 
(1630) 
 
And we all ended up going to Con Swystun's house, who was a very strong 
supporter of Dick Michayluk's, and the perogies and the holubtsi came out, 
and the good water from the area also came out.  We were celebrating what 
turned out to be a very successful political function.  And Dick Michayluk 
carried it out with verve and spirit and sparkle in his life.  And I loved 
him.  I loved him.  Not only because of that, but I loved him because he 
brought that passion in his speech making. 
 
And as I mentioned in my comments with respect to Mr. Feduniak, people like 
Bill Berezowski and Mike Feduniak and others, Frank Meakes, were all of 
that same school.  If you think some of our speeches today are little bit 
long-winded and rambling -- I admit that they are -- back in those days 
when these people had things on their minds to say, they said it.  And they 
said it so passionately that on occasion you'd get one of the MLAs breaking 
out in a big nosebleed right in the middle of the speech.  And in those 
days we had not live television but live radio.  And so the trick was to 
continue delivering your speech while there was a nosebleed, with several 
hankies being passed forward to the MLAs from that area.  But they were 
tough.  They persevered.  They got rid of the nosebleed and made their 
comments, and they stood up for their ideals and their values and their 
principles. 
 
Well, as I say, these are reminiscences which perhaps don't have much 
bearing to the other members of the House.  But they are memories that I 
will share and remember of Dick Michayluk for ever.  And it's the kind of 
ideals and values that I'd like to subscribe to, passionate as one would 
like to think every one of us here is, committed to ideals.  Those are the 
lessons of Dick Michayluk, the lessons of Dick's commitment to the NDP and 
the people of the province of Saskatchewan.  And I think we'd all be better 
off if we in effect adopted some of those. 
 
He's going to be greatly missed by me.  I'll remember him for ever.  And I 
want to extend my condolences to Mary and the family and to everybody in 
his family from those of us on this side of the House.  Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- Mr. Speaker, thank you very much.  On an occasion such 
as this, when we finally and formally acknowledge the contribution that 
previous members have made to this House upon their passing, it is common 
practice for members of the Assembly to go to the parliamentary guide and 
other sources to review some of the background on the members they're about 
to speak about.  And as I did this, on this occasion I went to the 
parliamentary guide in the library and reviewed the material there on the 
people that we honour here today, that we pay tribute to today.  And those 
people presented a great variety, a cross-section of Saskatchewan people. 
Mr. Mike Feduniak of who we have spoken already; Mr. Walter Erb, Mr. Dick  



 

 

Michayluk, the person that I am speaking to at this point, Mr. Herschel 
Howell. 
 
It was common at that time, and probably is to a certain extent now, to 
list in the parliamentary guide the ancestry of the parents, the country 
from which they came.  And as I went over the material in the parliamentary 
guide, I saw that Mr. Herschel Howell listed English; Mr. Michayluk, 
Ukrainian; Mr. Walter Erb, German; Mr. Mike Feduniak, Ukrainian. 
 
So you see what we have here, Mr. Speaker, is a multicultural Chamber with 
people from many backgrounds represented at one time or another, some of 
them many years ago, back in the '40s. 
 
This is the basis of the strength of Saskatchewan people.  It was the basis 
of the strength of these people who served the people of Saskatchewan.  It 
distresses me a bit, Mr. Speaker, in this day and time, to see some of the 
intolerance and hear some of the intolerance that I hear in our society 
today when we had such a successful multicultural society operating in 
Saskatchewan for many years.  And I know these members that came from a 
variety of cultural backgrounds, had they been here today, would have been 
expressing opposition to some of the things that we hear today that smack 
of racial intolerance. And that is some of their strengths. 
 
I knew Mr. Dick Michayluk well.  As a matter of fact, as of recent years 
Mr. Michayluk was a constituent of mine.  I was his MLA, and from time to 
time Dick would give me a call and we would discuss some of the issues of 
the day. 
 
As has been stated by my leader, he was a passionate person that took his 
politics seriously and retained an interest in the political life of 
Saskatchewan even after he no longer was a member of this Assembly. 
 
I was honoured to be asked to take part in the reception following his 
funeral and had that opportunity to speak to the family, friends, guests 
who were there at that occasion.  He was remembered at that occasion by his 
fellow MLAs as well because there were at least eight or nine MLAs that 
attended the funeral and reception, including the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
And I think I can do little more than acknowledge some of those qualities 
that Mr. Dick Michayluk had, of tolerance of other people, of their racial 
background, and how he would, if he were here today, would be re-enforcing 
that kind of multicultural society and that kind of tolerance. 
 
I want to pass on my personal condolences to his wife Mary, their three 
children -- Leona, Ron, and Ken, all of which I know, and say to them in 
conclusion that I valued my experience in having known Dick Michayluk, 
having served in the legislature, and Saskatchewan was a better place 
because Dick Michayluk passed this way.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Gerich: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it's an honour 
for me to rise today to offer my condolences on the passing of the former 
MLA for the Redberry constituency, Dick Michayluk. 
 



 

 

In this day of hustle and bustle and ever quickening change, we cannot 
forget those that go before us.  We can't forget about the pioneers and the 
builders of our fine province.  Mr. Michayluk was just that.  He was a 
pioneer and a builder. 
 
Being born in Blaine Lake in 1911, Mr. Michayluk worked in and for the 
Redberry area all of his life.  In the Krydor area, he was a teacher, a 
member of the board of trade, an activist in the co-op, local 
co-operatives, a member of the village council, the district Red Cross, and 
the list goes on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, given his care and love for his area, the province, it is not 
surprising that he represented the constituency for 15 years.  He was very 
well liked.  I can only hope, Mr. Speaker, to demonstrate the same care and 
concern for the Redberry constituency that Dick has set before me -- goals 
to be attained only through hard work on behalf of his constituency.  That 
was his commitment to Redberry. 
 
We in this House should hold the same ethic that Dick did through three 
provincial elections and 15 years of tireless effort on behalf of his 
constituency.  He was truly a pioneer, a hard-working representative of his 
constituents, and someone who will be cared deeply for by his community. 
 
He will be missed.  Krydor will miss him.  Blaine Lake and area will miss 
him.  And the Redberry constituency will miss him.  Indeed, his kind of 
caring and contribution will be missed across the province. 
 
I join with other members of the legislature in extending our sense of 
bereavement and express my sincere sympathy to Mary, his wife, and members 
of his family.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- By leave of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, a condolence 
motion. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I move, seconded by the member 
from Saskatoon Westmount: 
 

 That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the passing of a former 
member of the Assembly and expresses its grateful appreciation of the 
contribution he made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province. 

 
 Jacob Walter Erb, who died in Los Angeles, California, on January 1, 1990, 

was member of this Assembly and represented the constituency of Milestone 
from 1948 to 1964.  He was born at Lang on January 16, 1909 and he was 
raised nearby on his family's homestead.  Mr. Erb received his early 
education at Sunnydale school and later attended Luther College in Regina. 

 
 In 1933, he graduated with a Bachelor of Arts degree from the University 



 

 

of Manitoba.  After completing university, he attended the Chicago 
Conservatory of Music on a two-year singing scholarship.  That began a 
singing career that saw Mr. Erb make many concert tours throughout the 
United States.  And in 1938 he married Edna Helsa of Lajord. 

 
 Mr. Erb returned to Regina during the Second World War to teach music and 

became the dean of boys at Luther College.  In 1943 he joined the Royal 
Canadian Air Force as cadet instructor.  He resigned from Luther College 
in 1945 to take up farming near his birthplace. 

 
 He was elected to the local school board and then broadened his interest 

in politics by winning the Milestone seat in the provincial general 
election of 1948. 

 
 From 1956 to 1961 he held the post of minister of public health.  In 1961 

he was appointed minister of public works, a position that he held until 
crossing the floor of the House in 1962. 

 
 After the election of 1964, Mr. Erb departed politics and was appointed 

chairman of the workmen's compensation board.  He held that post until 
1972.  While serving as chairman, Mr. Walter Erb was elected president of 
the Workmen's Compensation Board of Canada.  Mr. Erb retired in 1984 to 
enjoy his many hobbies. 

 
 In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, this Assembly 

expresses its most sincere sympathy with members of the bereaved family. 
 

Mr. Brockelbank: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise to second the motion of the Deputy 
Premier in expressing the appreciation of the Saskatchewan Legislative 
Assembly for the contribution of Jacob Walter Erb to the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
There are many members in this House who, while not having served with Mr. 
Erb, knew him, and knew him through his active political involvement in two 
parties spanning three decades, his term as chairman of the workmen's 
compensation board, active community life, and his ongoing love of music. 
 
Mr. Erb served as a CCF member from Milestone constituency from 1948 to 
1962.  In that time he served as minister of health and minister of public 
works.  As a member of this Assembly for the constituency of Milestone and 
as a member of the provincial cabinet, Mr. Erb served his constituents and 
the province of Saskatchewan in his own particular way. 
 
Having known Mr. Erb personally and having heard him sing at more than one 
occasion, I found that he had a fine, strong voice and was very pleasant to 
listen to. And I say that on a personal note. 
 
I want to repeat briefly some of the comments I made earlier on the passing 
of other members whose contribution we acknowledge here today.  And this 
comment has to do with the parliamentary guide and reference to that as it 
regards the other three members that we're acknowledging today -- Mr. Mike 
Feduniak, Mr. Dick Michayluk, and Mr. Herschel Howell. 
 



 

 

(1645) 
 
As I said previously, Mr. Speaker, it usually lists in the parliamentary 
guide the racial origin of the members, and I note listed in this group of 
four it covers a span, English, Ukrainian, German, and Ukrainian; Mr. Erb 
having a German background from his parents. 
 
And this illustrates the point which can easily be made, that this Chamber 
is made up in a multiracial forum, the people here from backgrounds coming 
from all over the world, as well as native Saskatchewan people.  And this 
means that we have a society in Saskatchewan which is racially tolerant. 
 
These people added to the strength of this Chamber.  And at this day in 
time, when people treat this lightly, it gives me pain, because really what 
they're doing is reflecting on these people who came from a multiplicity of 
backgrounds.  And I'm sure that had these other people, including Mr. Erb, 
been here, they would have readily spoken out against people who show an 
intolerance of that type. 
 
On behalf, Mr. Speaker, of the members of the New Democratic Party caucus, 
I second this motion, and in doing so, extend our sympathy to the members 
of the Erb family. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to join with other 
members of the Assembly in expressing condolences to the families.  I'd 
like if I could make quick reference to Dick Michayluk who, as the Leader 
of the Opposition said, was an orator. 
 
I served in opposition when Dick Michayluk was a member of the government 
of the day.  We always enjoyed his command of the English language and the 
precision of his language in debate, and he was always a treat to listen 
to.  We knew where he stood in the partisan debates.  But he was one, when 
he did speak in this Assembly, members certainly enjoyed his participation, 
and one of the members that you certainly enjoyed associating with when the 
debates were over. 
 
For Walter Erb, my condolences to Edna and his family.  I had some 
similarities of career, of course, with Walter Erb and I really got to know 
him after I took the same action that he did.  And he immediately thought 
that with the similarity of actions that we had something in common.  And 
that's when I got to know him a little better. 
 
Walter Erb was, as the member from Saskatoon Westmount said, a noted 
singer.  He was a true Renaissance man.  He was well read, enjoyed 
political life in this province and enjoyed the partisan debate, and never 
lost his enjoyment of the political life of this province and all that went 
into it.  And he knew the difficulties, he knew the partisanship, he knew 
the approbation that come with public life, but at the same time he never 
lost his enjoyment for it. 
 
He never lost, through all his years, his deep interest in the province and 
his love for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 



 

 

I had the pleasure of talking to him in the last year before his death. And 
again he was just wanting to know what's going on, staying on top of 
things, and still very, very interested even though his health was 
weakening near the end. 
 
I would like to take the opportunity to extend my condolences to the 
families of the deceased members.  I had the pleasure, and I say that, of 
serving with Mike Feduniak, Dick Michayluk and also getting to know Walter 
Erb.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to enter the debate on this motion to 
tell the Assembly of my experience with Walter Erb, which was brief but 
none the less has stayed with me over the years. 
 
At the time that I first encountered Mr. Erb I was going to the University 
of Saskatchewan.  And at that time, Mr. Speaker, there was an annual 
program in which university students who were interested in politics could 
come to the legislature and observe the sittings during the day, and the 
members of the legislature threw a banquet for the university students in 
the evening. 
 
And I came on one of those trips and as it happened, at the banquet I was 
seated beside Walter Erb.  And we had a conversation that lasted through 
the entire dinner, and I have not forgotten that conversation.  It had a 
deep impact on me as he told me about his life and the reasons why he had 
entered public life and the way in which he enjoyed serving in this 
legislature and serving his constituents. 
 
And as I say, that made a deep impression on me and I've never forgotten 
it.  And in part, Mr. Speaker, it was one of the considerations that was in 
my mind at the time that I decided to present myself to the good folks in 
Saskatoon Fairview with a view to being elected to this House.  So I have 
not forgotten Walter Erb and he'll live in my memory the rest of my life. 
 
As everyone in this Assembly is aware, Mr. Erb, following his own 
conscience, decided to resign from the government of the day on the issue 
of medicare.  He left the then CCF because he could not agree with the 
program being presented by the government at the time. And that of course 
has affected the relationship between Mr. Erb and my party since that 
occurred. 
 
But that's not to diminish at all the great contribution he made to his 
province in the 14 years in which he served in this House.  That's a long 
time, Mr. Speaker.  There are few people who have served the province for 
more than . . . for as long as 14 years by being a member of this 
legislature. 
 
I also met and knew Mr. Erb in a different relationship when he was the 
Chair of the Workers' Compensation Board.  That is a difficult job at the 
best of times.  Those were not the best of times because there seemed to be 
an atmosphere of real restraint at the time, which extended to the 
operations of the Workers' Compensation Board.  There seemed to be pressure 
from the government of the day to try and bring down the costs of workers' 



 

 

compensation so that the premiums could be brought down.  And Mr. Erb had 
to function as the Chair of the Workers' Compensation Board in that 
atmosphere. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that it was my experience that Mr. Erb 
performed the position of Chair of the Workers' Compensation Board 
admirably, particularly considering the kind of pressures that were in 
existence at the time.  Those were not subtle pressures; they were 
difficult to cope with. But he carried out the duties of that job with a 
great deal of compassion and understanding for the working people of this 
province. 
 
So I want to extend and add to the condolences that have been given by my 
colleague from Saskatoon Westmount and add my personal condolences to Mrs. 
Erb and the family. 
 
Mr. Sauder: -- I too would like to speak for a few moments to this motion 
of condolence to the family of Mr. Walter Erb.  I guess I met him under 
somewhat different circumstances than most other people.  When I was first 
elected as a member to this legislature I frankly didn't know of Mr. Erb, 
or I guess many of the others who had been here many years before. 
 
But the first winter when we were coming into session I was looking for a 
place to stay in the city here, and the intention was to bring my family in 
with me for the winter.  And asking around the buildings for some of the 
staff if they knew any place that might be available, preferably to have 
for the winter, people who might be away or something, a furnished home, 
one of the secretaries gave me a phone number of a neighbour of hers and 
suggested that I might try and call them.  I don't even recall her giving 
me the name or telling me anything about them but she knew they were 
planning to go away for most of the winter. 
 
I picked up the phone and the lady answered and I introduced myself, told 
her who I was, what I did, and where I was from.  And I guess the first 
question was whether we have children, and I said yes.  And her response at 
the moment was that they really weren't interested in anyone that had 
children to come into their place.  So I thanked her very much and that was 
it. 
 
I don't think that it was a matter of about two to three minutes and my 
phone rang again and a man came on the line and introduced himself then as 
Mr. Walter Erb.  Told me just a little bit about who he was, never met me 
before or never heard of me I'm sure before, but his response was that if I 
was an MLA, whether I had a family or not, he was sure that we could be 
trusted to take care of their place and we would be welcome to it if we 
were interested, and was only too happy to invite me over to meet them and 
look their place over and see what we could do.  That certainly did lead to 
us spending the winter in their home, which we very much appreciated.  We 
had occasion, Cheryl and I, to spend time with him and his wife, get to 
know them a little bit better before and after they came back in the 
spring. 
 
There were several things that stood out in his character to me.  One was 



 

 

just his genuine interest in people. As I said, he had no particular reason 
to call and offer to me, but a trust in what we might be and a trust that I 
think he had in all people, and a genuine interest in them and whether he 
couldn't help them. 
 
The other thing was his lasting interest in the political life and the 
turns that it was taking in this province and the various beliefs that he 
held.  And he loved to sit and talk about those things.  And we had on 
occasions afterwards whenever we would meet, as my colleague before 
related, he always was interested in what was happening. 
 
But he also impressed very much upon me as young person just entering 
public life, the very real commitment that he had to his own beliefs and 
that that had to be your first commitment as you went about service to 
others.  If you didn't have a genuine belief in the principles that you 
stood for, you'd be tossed like a ship on the open sea and wouldn't be able 
to stand up to the various winds of change that may blow from whatever 
direction. 
 
Those were the things I guess that I remember about Mr. Erb.  We certainly 
were saddened to hear of his passing.  And on behalf of my wife Cheryl and 
our family, I would like to join in extending our condolences to the family 
as well through this motion. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- By leave, Mr. Speaker, a condolence motion. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
(1700) 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- I move, seconded by the member from Saskatoon 
Westmount: 
 

 That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the passing of a former 
member of the Assembly and expresses its grateful appreciation of the 
contribution he made to his community, constituency, and to the province. 

 
 Herschel Lee Howell, who died February 27, 1990, at Vancouver, British 

Columbia, was a member of this Legislative Assembly representing the 
constituency of Meadow Lake from 1944 to 1948.  Mr. Howell was born 
January 13, 1912 at Copetown, Ontario.  In 1925 he moved with his family 
to Saskatchewan to establish a homestead near Tako.  Three years later he 
relocated to Saskatoon where he graduated from Bedford Road Collegiate. 

 
 It was Mr. Howell's intention to go to trade school and become a plumber 

but the depression caused him to abandon that idea.  After spending time 
working at Medstead, Mr. Howell enrolled in Saskatoon Normal School in 
1934.  After teaching for some time, mainly in the Meadow Lake area, Mr. 
Howell returned to school and graduated with honours from the University 
of Saskatchewan in the year 1940.  A year later he went on to earn a 
Master of Arts, and soon after he was appointed principal of Meadow Lake 



 

 

school. 
 
 Mr. Howell took an active interest in politics from an early age.  He was 

a member of the young people's society and he participated in many school 
debating clubs.  During his university days he was named as a member of 
the mock parliament. 

 
 In 1944 he successfully contested the Meadow Lake riding in this 

Legislative Assembly.  Mr. Howell was also president of the Saskatchewan 
Teachers' Federation for the Meadow Lake superintendency.  Later he was 
appointed principal of Battleford Central Collegiate.  In 1955 he wrote a 
history of the Battleford area. 

 
 Mr. Howell enjoyed church work and was proud of his United Empire Loyalist 

ancestry. 
 
 In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, this Assembly 

expresses its most sincere sympathy with members of the bereaved family. 
 

Mr. Brockelbank: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise to second the motion of the Deputy 
Premier expressing the appreciation of this House for the contribution of 
Herschel Howell to the province of Saskatchewan.  Mr. Howell maintains a 
special place in the minds of members of the New Democratic caucus as he 
served in the first social democratic government in North America.  In 1944 
Mr. Howell was elected as a CCF member for the constituency of Meadow Lake 
and served in this Assembly until 1948.  As were all members of the CCF 
caucus at that time, Mr. Howell was a pioneer, a pioneer in a new style of 
government, a pioneer in new approaches to the role of government in the 
social and economic development of this province. 
 
While the members of my caucus are particularly proud of the contributions 
made by Mr. Howell and his colleagues at that time, I am confident that 
this view is shared by the people of Saskatchewan as well. 
 
Many of the innovative measures undertaken by that government are still 
with us.  The philosophy of co-operative government, the essential 
characteristic of that government remains as a central philosophical 
foundation of our provincial culture today. 
 
Mr. Howell was not only a member of this Assembly, but as well a respected 
educator and local historian.  He served as principal of Meadow Lake School 
and Battleford Central Collegiate.  In 1955 he authored a history of the 
Battleford district. 
 
I did not know Mr. Herschel Howell personally, although I believe as a 
child I had the opportunity to meet him, since of course my father was a 
peer of his in this Assembly and they served together. 
 
The fact that I didn't know Mr. Howell personally, no less detracts from 
the condolence that I extend personally to his family.  In expressing our 
appreciation for the contributions of Mr. Howell to the people of 
Saskatchewan, I wish as well on behalf of my caucus to join with all 
members of this Assembly in extending our sincere sympathy to the Howell 



 

 

family for their personally felt loss. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise as well to join with 
the Deputy Premier, the member from Saskatoon Westmount, and other members 
in this House, to extend condolences to the family of Herschel Howell, 
really on two counts.  First of all, the one which may be more obvious to 
people here and that is that he was a representative for the Meadow Lake 
constituency which I am now proud to represent. 
 
But secondly, because Mr. Howell, through his family and more particularly 
his wife Erva, had a connection to my mother in that they were friends and 
had been school mates.  Really Mrs. Howell had gone to school with my late 
uncle in the Wilkie area. 
 
As people will know -- many of you will know, many will not -- but in the 
early '40s in Meadow Lake, in that area, was a fairly new area, certainly a 
developing area of the province, some difficult conditions and so on.  
People who moved in there, people in those days in the community around 
Meadow Lake spoke of when anyone left the community to go anywhere else 
they did, as is often the case in farther points of northern Canada now, 
they speak of going out; have you been out this year, or out in recent 
weeks, or whatever.  That was the sort of circumstance surrounding this 
time when Mr. Howell was first running for election, when he first came to 
our community as a teacher. 
 
Mrs. Howell, as I said earlier, was a friend of my mother's from another 
location in the Wilkie area.  They were frequent visitors to our home, as I 
understand it.  I was an infant, really, in the latter part of his term in 
this House. 
 
Mr. Howell is known, as has been mentioned, as an educator.  They also 
operated a store in the Compass district, which is west of Meadow Lake.  
During the time, in fact, that he was a member of this legislature, he was 
known around, and I have heard it even as a campaigner in the political 
business that we are all in, in recent years, he travelled from place to 
place around the constituency in those times riding a bicycle. 
 
So the member from Westmount spoke of the dedication of those members in 
the early days, but this gentleman certainly showed that, and he's still 
remembered even now as he who campaigned with a bicycle at that time. 
 
So I want to join with all of the members here to express a condolence to 
the family and, I guess, more on behalf of my own family and certainly my 
mother, who I'm sure will be in contact with Mrs. Howell in her own right, 
to the Howell family, the three daughters, and join with everyone else in 
that condolence.  Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- By leave of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded 
by the member from Saskatoon Westmount: 
 

 That the resolutions just passed, together with a transcript of oral 



 

 

tributes to the memory of the deceased members, be communicated to the 
bereaved families on behalf of this Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:09 p.m. 
 


