





























































Hansard: April 19, 1990


 

 

April 19/90 
EVENING SITTING 

 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Rural Development 
Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 43 

 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I 
want to continue to pursue a number of items in respect to the submissions 
that have been made to the provincial cabinet and to you. 
 
And in a brief, SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) 
calls on the government to -- something that we talked about earlier this 
afternoon -- to encourage lending institutions to enhance land leaseback 
arrangements to original farm operators that can show viability, by 
extending the time span of the leaseback and exploring the possibility of 
buy-back arrangements on some parcels, with a lease on the balance.  That 
is a presentation or a part of the brief that they presented to you. 
 
And you may have also received a number of briefs from individual RMs, as I 
have, and making submissions going beyond even this extending the 
leaseback.  They're calling for the purchase of the farm site at 50 per 
cent of the value.   They're talking about, in their brief, being able to 
purchase back machinery at 50 per cent of the value.  They're talking about 
a write-down in respect to the land so that it's at 6.5 per cent of the 
assessed value, so that if they're going to purchase it, that it be set at 
that value.  In other words, a write-down. 
 
But in this particular one, it says that encourage lending institutions to 
enhance land leaseback arrangements to the original farm operators that can 
show some viability, by extending the time span of the leaseback and 
exploring the possibility of buy-back arrangements of some parcels, with a 
lease on the balance.  Now I've heard the Premier saying that he has gone 
to Ottawa, and I heard that he went to the meet with the bankers -- him and 
Mazankowski.  And I know that you were saying that's a good idea.  I guess 
what I'm asking, Mr. Minister -- I know you'll say it's a good idea -- I 
guess what I want to know is what has your government done?  What in fact . 
. . what actions have you taken?  Are there any results that you can report 
to the RM's who have made this submission to the provincial cabinet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Well first in regards to the write-down of the farm to 
50 per cent of value and the machinery to 50 per cent of value, whatever 
else was in that presentation:  one RM had made a presentation to the 
advisory committee that I have set up, the advisory committee which is made 
up of six ADD (agricultural development and diversification) board members 
selected by the ADD boards themselves, one from SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association), two from SARM, and one from Saskatchewan 
Women's Institute, didn't agree with that and they advised me not pursue 
that any further, as they felt it would cause more harm than good. 



 

 

 
In regards to extension of the time-leaseback arrangements, you can say I 
agree with you.  Well I do, and we have encouraged both the banking 
institutions and certainly farm credit to do that.  With lands branch we 
have already made arrangements where, if they had made a purchase of 
properties and were having some problems, we would allow them to go back 
into a lease arrangement with all the money they paid into as credit, and 
we have really looked after any of those that had any problem that way.  
And they've all . . . I don't think there's any left that haven't been 
satisfied to that manner.  So the lands that we lease ourselves as lands 
branch, we have done I think a reasonably decent job of dealing with our 
lessee holders. 
 
In regards to the financial institutions, certainly we have made 
representations to them.  We have made representations to farm credit.  
I've had meetings with both farm credit, farm security board, the Farm Debt 
Review Board, and they've all made representations to both the financial 
institutions and to farm credit.  So all we can do is put pressure on to 
see if they will do that for us. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Well, Mr. Minister, again, you know, all we can do is put 
pressure on.  Mr. Minister, the fact remains that you have a Tory 
government here and you have a Tory government in Ottawa, and you continue 
to put forward the myth that you're backing the farmers.  And when I ask 
you in respect to a presentation of a brief and a concern of SARM to you, 
you say you have made representations; that's all we can do. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you indicate to me whether you have made any public 
statements denouncing the banks or financial institutions from taking a 
reasonable position as is set out here in the SARM, extending the lease?  
Have you made any public statement in respect to condemning what . . . or 
the reluctance of Farm Credit Corporation?  And if you have, Mr. Minister, 
it would be news to the people of Saskatchewan, because it seems to me that 
no matter what the federal government does, whether it's GST (goods and 
services tax) or whether it's taking oats out of the wheat board or whether 
it's taking the rebate on gas to farmers or whether it's increasing the 
transportation costs, you simply have not fought on behalf, or at least 
vocally on behalf of the farmers of the province. 
 
So you've made representation.  Have you made any public statements?  Can 
you file any documentation as to your presentation on behalf of the 
representation that has been made by SARM?  You keep saying, yes, we made 
representation.  What I want to ask you: can you file tonight in the House 
any press statements that you have made indicating indeed that Farm Credit 
Corporation has been approached and that you categorically criticize any 
lack of movement on behalf of the Farm Credit Corporation to in fact extend 
the lease? 
 
Have you challenged the banks publicly, that's the question.  It's not 
enough to stand there and say, oh well we made representations, you know, 
and the Premier was down and Mazankowski talked to them and everything is . 
. . we've done all we can.  The thing is that the situation requires the 
top effort, Mr. Minister, not just glib answers that we've made 



 

 

representation. 
 
Can you present any documentation as to whether you have, in fact, made a 
presentation and the nature of the presentation to Farm Credit Corporation 
vis-a-vis the area of concern as raised in the brief of SARM?  Can you 
visibly provide to the opposition your brief, your position, any statements 
that you have made in order to substantiate that you really are out there 
making representation?  Or is it . . . are you just mouthing the Tory line: 
we're doing all we can; it's really the federal government's fault. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Mr. Chairman, I have spoke at many, both rate payers 
meetings last night again at Rosthern and the RM of Calder.  I have spoke 
at the SARM convention.  I don't know if it's carried in news conferences 
or not or news presses or not, I don't . . . that's the decision only the 
press makes.  But I can say that the two things that we don't need is to 
get so confrontational that the credit to all the ones who do need it dries 
up.  And you can get to a point where it's just straightly confrontational, 
and you will never achieve any kind of a write-down. 
 
The second thing that I will say is that many, many of the financial 
institutions in this province are credit unions.  And I believe that 
working with them is very, very important and if you put pressure on one, 
you put pressure on all.  And I think that the credit unions in this 
province have done an excellent job and they're working well with us.  I 
think a lot of the banks have started to make an effort at least.  I 
believe they can do a great deal more, but I think we do a lot more through 
consultation than we can through confrontation, particularly when it comes 
under federal jurisdiction.  It is tough.  We have no authority and cannot 
exercise any authority over the federal banks.  We can over the provincial 
credit unions and I don't believe that would be the right place to go. 
 
In regards to farm credit, I think every one of us in this legislature, at 
least on this side, one time or another has either spoken about the need or 
. . . more than once and many times, in regards to the interest rate that 
needs to be set and farm credit could be the leading institution to do 
that.  I said earlier I went and appeared before the Standing Committee of 
Agriculture in the House of Commons and I made a presentation to them on 
exactly that, and certainly you have that presentation or it can be made 
available to you. 
 
So we've done those and that's important.  But at the same time we can't 
get so confrontational that we dry up the credit that is needed for those 
80 per cent of the farmers who use those banking institutions to operate 
their farms and their small businesses.  So we have to work with it.  We're 
bound by federal legislation.  Federal government has to make some moves in 
the area of farm credit, I agree with you.  And I believe by continuing to 
put pressure on we will get a lot more done, and I believe that we can get 
some long-term leasebacks and hopefully with lots of pressure we can get 
some reasonable interest rates made available to our farmers. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Well on what facts do you base your conclusions at the end 
of your comment that we believe we can get some long-term leasebacks?  What 
are the facts that on which you base that conclusion?  That's what I'm 



 

 

asking you.  How far have we gone?  What is the response of the federal 
government in respect to Farm Credit Corporation?  Those are the questions 
the farmers have to know.  Can you provide some of that detail? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Mr. Chairman, first of all, as I said earlier today, 
that I don't attend all the meetings that the Associate Minister of 
Agriculture attends, nor do I attend all the meetings that the Minister of 
Agriculture, which is the Premier, attends.  I don't pretend to do that 
because the Department of Rural Development is a delivery of services out 
there. 
 
I've tried to answer the questions to the point where I have went as the 
Minister of Rural Development and to some degree to what we went as a 
government.  I can't speak for the Associate Minister of Agriculture nor 
the Premier in the detail end of it, which he's really asking me. 
 
When the Minister of Agriculture or the Associate Minister of Agriculture 
is answering agriculture questions, I am sure they will have lots of both 
answers for you and detailed information of what they've done in regards to 
discussing and lobbying and pressuring the federal government and the FCC 
(Farm Credit Corporation) into getting what we believe is a reasonable 
response for our farmers. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Mr. Minister, I'm only using your words.  You said that we 
have reasonable prospects of being able to get longer-term lease backs 
arrangements.  All I'm asking you is: on what facts do you base that?  On 
what evidence do you base that general statement?  That's the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, first of all, in the regulations 
under farm credit, they can go to six years which is certainly a reasonable 
length of time.  Now if we -- to ten years he could change the regulation.  
I believe that would be reasonable and it would be acceptable.  On top of 
that, Mr. Chairman, I have a lot of confidence both in our Premier and the 
Associate Minister of Agriculture to get the job done.  And they will do as 
good a job as anybody in this province to getting the job done -- much 
better, Mr. Chairman, much better than was ever done before when the other 
folks were in because it . . . when they had 22 per cent interest.  And I 
sat right where the member from Quill Lakes is sitting now and asked the 
same question, and you know what the answer we got is -- nothing we can do 
about it. 
 
We're saying we believe there are some things we can do about it and we'll 
try hard to do those. 
 
(1915) 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Well I'll tell you, I wouldn't want to depend on my 
livelihood as a farmer on your representation or the concreteness of the 
results that you got, Mr. Minister, because they're just flap.  All there 
is, is a waggling of the tongue with no substance. 
 
I ask you whether or not you could bring forward any reasonable, concrete 
response from the department, from Farm Credit Corporation and/or the 



 

 

federal government, and/or the financial institutions, primarily the banks, 
indicating that they are considering a timetable within which it may be 
brought to bear. 
 
And you say, well I don't attend all the meetings.  I didn't ask you that 
because I don't think your presence would add an awful lot.  But the real 
fact is this, farmers out there want to know whether you're just whiffing 
wind or whether there's something coming -- can't wait much longer.  And I 
guess that's the question I ask.  Or is it, are you basing it solely on 
that sweeping statement that confirms everything, that if the Premier and 
the associate deputy minister are doing it, a job will be done better than 
anybody else. 
 
Well I'll tell you, ask a lot of farmers across this province, and they're 
getting less and less comfortable with that answer. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to turn to yet another in respect to the brief that's 
been presented by SARM, and these are right at the crux of the problem that 
I initiated at the beginning of the estimates.  And there also they call 
for lower interest rates. 
 
You say that you've made a submission.  And I guess what I want to ask you 
is can you tell me how successful you and the Premier have been in getting 
the Royal Bank or the Bank of Canada to listen to you recently.  The 
interest rate has been set at 13.61; it's expected to increase --I think 
tomorrow -- to 13.75. 
 
I went through the rates that Farm Credit Corporation have been doing.  
There have been over four increases within the last year.  The last four 
months there have been four increases in the interest rate, a total of 2 
per cent in Farm Credit Corporation -- increasing faster than even the Bank 
of Canada rate. 
 
And so I ask you, Mr. Minister, is this another area that we say, and your 
evidence is that we're doing all we can.  We've sent the Premier down -- 
and what's that other fellow's name, associate deputy minister -- and 
they're doing all they can. 
 
What I'm asking you, Mr. Minister, we have a difficult situation, as I 
think you indicated too, an increase of a percentage of interest rate is 
astronomical on the debt of agriculture.  And so I'm asking you then, what 
actions have been taken by your government in making representations to the 
Minister of Finance and the Prime Minister?  I'm asking you what 
communications that you have gotten back.  I'm asking whether you have 
communicated with the governor of the Bank of Canada. 
 
I'm asking you whether your government has proposed any other proposal.  If 
they want to cut down inflation in eastern Canada, in Toronto or Montreal, 
is there any other proposal which would alleviate the high interest rate 
here in western Canada?  Those are the questions. 
 
You indicated that you got nothing out of Farm Credit Corporation in 
respect to extending the lease term.  You basically have got nothing except 



 

 

increases in respect to interest rates.  You got nothing in respect to 
asking them to retain the tax rebate to the farmers on fuel.  You got 
nothing in respect to a number of other issues and the increase of 
transportation costs. 
 
On this very vital interest, Mr. Minister, what are you doing?  What in 
fact has been done in respect to the representation made by SARM?  What is 
the state of the communications, and what is the likelihood of interest 
rates being reduced in the immediate future? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Mr. Chairman, I don't know.  I can't say what the 
interest rates will be in the immediate future.  I have no idea if you're 
talking about the Bank of Canada rates.  I know what they are in Canada.  I 
know what they are in the United States, and I know there's a great deal of 
difference. 
 
He asked me, what have we done in regards to making representation to the 
Bank of Canada governor in regards to all the other things that go with it.  
That's being done through the Premier and through the Associate Minister of 
Agriculture.  That's their role as agricultural ministers.  They have been 
doing that on a continuous basis. 
 
I want to make mention that he asked, what about the interest rates? And I 
mentioned a moment ago that I can remember seeing there when they were 22 
and 24 and even 25 per cent in some cases for operating loans, and I asked 
him what the Blakeney-Trudeau government was doing at that time, and they 
basically said, nothing.  We can't do nothing, and you just have to wait 
for it to change its style or until it goes down.  Nothing we can do. 
 
That was in the really good economic times, never mind when we've had four 
or five years of drought.  So you know, in respect to that . . . So I look 
at that.  He asked what we done at provincial level in regards to interest 
rates, and I read this list off yesterday. 
 
I could read a bit of it today, but certainly something like livestock cash 
advance; the interest subsidy of $74 million over the last five years.  You 
look at the livestock investment tax credit, whether feeder lots and all 
that of $36 million.  We look at ACS (Agricultural Credit Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) capital loans where we write the interest rate down.  It's 
almost $75 millions. 
 
Irrigation assistance, we're putting in irrigation, and a lot of the 
farmers along the irrigation belt over there, $22 millions.  Provincial 
stabilization, $122 millions.  The green feed program we brought in a 
couple of years ago to help farmers in the area get feed, put up their own 
feed, and many combinations of it, both through crop insurance and other 
feed that wasn't insured under crop insurance, $10 million.  And we had the 
livestock drought program here last year which covers about . . . the year 
before was $17.7 million.  We also had $1.224 billion in crop insurance 
payments that's been put into this province over the last five years. 
 
And he asked, what has happened?  What have they got from the federal 
government over the last while?  Well nothing's perfect but I'll tell you 



 

 

something, we have got quite a few dollars out of them.  The total amount, 
if you look at the western grain stabilization, has paid out $1.9 billion.  
That's a 3:1 contribution, and it's paid back 10 or 12.  That's helped us 
in times when it's been tough.  That's a price guarantee . . . I wouldn't 
say guarantee, but certainly an assistance in price. 
 
The agricultural stabilization, $32 million.  Special grains, Canada grains 
programs, we have $858 million in this province that was brought in 
specially, and the Premier the leading agent at bringing that one in, the 
person who was responsible for bringing both those programs here, no doubt 
about it in anybody's minds in this province.  Certainly wouldn't have been 
got under the former administration with the former federal government.  
Never.  Never was and never would have been.  The Canada drought assistance 
program, $335 million. 
 
So there's a whole list of them here I can read off.  So there's a lot of 
money has come into this province over the last five years, both from 
provincial coffers, at a provincial level, with interest subsidies and 
assistance, and certainly special grain payments, western grain 
stabilization, crop insurance, and all the rest. 
 
When you total them all together, Mr. Chairman, you're up about almost $8 
billion.  That's a lot of money to bring into our province.  Now some of it 
would have come just on its own because that's the way it's set up.  Much 
of it wouldn't have come without certainly some lobbying and a lot of 
pressure being put on by our Premier to the federal government.  It would 
have had to be a federal government like we have today to get that.  And 
it's important that we recognize that they have done a great deal.  They 
can do a great deal more and should do a great deal more, but we've got a 
lot of dollars out and we need those dollars and we need some more. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Everything's wonderful, Mr. Minister.  You've done a great 
job except that you've got 20,000 farmers ready to lose their farms. 
 
You said you made representations for lower interest rates.  Now I want to 
remind you, Mr. Minister, again that we asked you to join with us in a 
motion condemning our . . . at least asking the federal government to 
reduce the interest rate.  A unanimous motion addressing interest rate. 
 
I want to read that motion that we presented to this House, and asked leave 
to present . . . leave to move it: 
 

 That this Assembly condemns the Government of Canada for its high rate 
interest rate policy which is causing great hardship for Saskatchewan 
farmers, and further, that this Assembly urges the Government of Canada to 
rewrite Farm Credit Corporation farm debt to reflect realistic land values 
and to ensure that the FCC interest rate be no more than 8 per cent on 
(that) farm debt. 

 
I would have thought that was a positive support.  I thought it would have 
been a reasonable representation; that you could have this on to the 
Minister of Finance or the Prime Minister and it would have been 
recognized.  I would have thought that the problem was of a nature that 



 

 

here came the opposition and the government, moving, knowing the 
devastation that high interest rates have on the farm economy and, in fact, 
on the whole economy of Saskatchewan and particularly small business.  And 
the problem is, Mr. Minister, you refused it just like you refused the 
motion that we put in condemning the institution of the GST.  And what I'm 
saying here is you're not sincere in wanting to solve the problem. 
 
And your government came out and you're going to go with a consensus of 
working people all working together to build this province because of the 
magnitude of the problems.  And when we attempt to be positive and bring 
forward a motion that you should be able to support; one motion that you 
brought forward in agriculture we were able to support and hopefully it 
will help. 
 
So I think the question has to be asked: what's sincerity?  And no matter 
how much you float around in figures, the problem is, Mr. Minister, that 
both the provincial government and the federal government . . . they have 
poured some money into it, there's no doubt about that.  They absolutely 
refuse to address it on a long-term basis and an analysis of the problems 
that are confronted in agriculture.  And as a consequence, now you're 
hiding behind the fact.  You're going to say that 10,000 farmers can go 
under because now you have to protect the taxpayer.  What a farce. 
 
When you gave away 5 million, 55, 5.5 million to one French Canadian 
business man and gave him a cheque-book and said here's your sole signing 
power and he took off with it . . . And the other priorities that you have 
demonstrated in this House. 
 
Mr. Minister, I suppose you tried on this one too.  SARM brief to the 
cabinet also calls for your government agency to seriously investigate the 
cost of farm inputs.  Now I don't know if you'd want to tackle that one or 
not because that's the multinational corporations that run these 
insecticides and weed-control chemicals.  And I think the records would 
show that they support your party pretty good and obviously you have never 
challenged them throughout the years. 
 
But at least SARM has asked whether or not you would at least turn it over.  
That would be the last department I would turn it over to, but at least 
they asked whether you would turn it over to the Department of Consumer and 
Commercial Affairs in order that they would do an investigation into the 
cost of inputs and to determination of whether or not the farmers of 
Canada, indeed of Saskatchewan, are being fleeced by the chemical 
companies. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, whether or not you have done all that you could in 
respect to this representation? 
 
(1930) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Mr. Chairman, in regards to cost of chemicals, I think 
we're the first government to support a plant to come into this province, a 
new plant that is being proposed, a farmers' operated and owned facility.  
A man called Ken Goudy at Melfort put together a chemical called triflurex, 



 

 

which is a treflan which was used in canola and in some of the other 
products, flax and that were for weed and wild oat control.  We supported 
that. 
 
He's now looking at . . . he calls the new company he's got, Focus on 
Inputs.  Through ADF (Agriculture Development Fund) and through other areas 
of government we have been assisting him, with about the 15,000 that they 
have signed up now, on bringing a generic chemical for Roundup which will 
give us a cheap, very cheap type of weed control chemical which will 
control grasses as well as broad-leaf weeds to our province, which 
certainly will have a great effect on the cost of chemicals to our farmers. 
 
We also have for the first time, we have Hoechst here now in Regina 
producing chemicals for our farmers.  With the new free trade agreement 
they're working with the Department of Environment federally and 
provincially to allow chemicals that are approved by the specs required by 
the Department of Environment Canada and Agriculture Canada to allow 
chemicals to come from the south side of the border into Canada and into 
Saskatchewan, which will reduce our cost of chemicals.  So we're working 
with them to get a fair price for our farmers. 
 
Now some of the chemicals, I believe, are very high priced and they have to 
. . . but we also have an advisory board member, Margaret Cline, I met with 
today, and some of the other members of SWAN (Saskatchewan Women's 
Agricultural Network) were in today.  We talked about chemicals and the use 
of chemicals to make them both environmentally safe and to allow our 
farmers to have access to cheap chemicals. 
 
So we've been doing a lot of things, Mr. Chairman, in regards to looking at 
the cost of chemicals for our farmers.  So we're working on it, and 
certainly in the area up there where the member from Humboldt comes from, 
the member from Quill Lakes comes from, generic Roundup, Focus on Inputs 
are looking at it and will have done a great deal of work and hope to have 
it in production, I believe, by 1993. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, just seeing that 
you brought up the Focus on Inputs issue, I know that through ADF there has 
been some money put in and the focus group has worked closely with Atomic 
Energy Canada in order to get product specific registration; they have a 
retainer on the Dana radar base.  And I would ask you, Mr. Minister, aside 
from the ADF funding that was put in, what amount of money is your 
government, through your department or any other department, going to be 
putting into supporting the Focus on Inputs group to establish a plant at 
Dana? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- I understand that they put together a group of different 
departments that are looking and working with Focus on Inputs to see what 
is needed, how the financing could be put together.  SEDCO is involved and 
they're working together very closely with Focus on Inputs to put the 
financial structure in place so that Focus on Inputs will be able to go 
ahead when they have . . . there's a few things left they have to do. 
 
So I understand, to the best of my knowledge, that we've been working with 



 

 

them and that financial package is being put together with them using all 
the means we have available to us as a province. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Minister, can you tell the House today how much money 
the Focus on Inputs group is asking the government for?  Are they asking 
them to match a certain amount of money put up by the Focus group?  Could 
you tell me whether or not, or tell me how much money they're asking for 
and whether or not you're going to comply with the amount required to get 
this plant operating? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- No, Mr. Chairman, I don't know how much they're asking 
for.  The lead agency has been Economic Development and Diversification as 
well as Department of Agriculture; they've been the two lead agencies and I 
don't know what has been requested or where it's at right now. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Minister, what is your department doing?  Is your 
department involved at all in the Focus on Inputs group at Dana with 
regards to the environmental aspect of having a plan up there?  Surely I 
know there's been some representation to myself from farmers concerned 
about the possible environmental impact of a plant, and I think that it's 
very important that we have studies done. 
 
Is the department of rural affairs going to ensure that the . . . make 
representation to the Department of Environment to ensure that the 
environmental aspect of this plant . . . impact studies are done to ensure 
that there's no snags when it comes to actually putting the plan forward? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- I'm sure, Mr. Chairman, without even having to do that, 
these people, Ken Goudy and the people involved, the 15,000 farmers that 
are involved, would absolutely insist on the environment being protected 
and safe, and that would be part of any proposal when you're looking at 
chemicals.  So that's an automatic.  And it'll have to be done to make it 
environmentally . . . it'll have to be environmentally safe before it would 
be approved even from our end, for funding. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to pursue a couple of 
other topics here, Mr. Minister.  In respect to some of the briefs that . . 
. the brief that has been presented to the cabinet.  And the SARM brief in 
plain and unmistakable language asks that the cost of financing education 
be gradually shifted off the property and off the land base.  And as you 
know, during your tenure in office there has been steadily shifting more of 
a burden for education onto the local ratepayer, and that trend continues 
to the recent provincial budget. 
 
And I think you'll be aware, Mr. Minister, in your own area, in the Tisdale 
School Division, that there's going to have to be something like an 8.8 
mill rate increase and that the funding has been decreased.  And the 
Saskatchewan School Trustees Association tell us that the provincial 
government's operating grants to school boards in '81-82 amounted to almost 
54 per cent of the school boards' costs.  Half-way through your 
government's first term in office, you had cut back your share -- it's 
under 50 per cent of the total cost of education.  And if you continue that 
trend much longer, the province will be only covering a third of the cost 



 

 

of education. 
 
I guess what I'm asking you, because the submission says to the cabinet "to 
initiate ways to remove or at least phase out the cost of education and 
social programming from farm land."  I wonder, Mr. Minister, have you made 
as much progress in this as you have in fighting the GST and as much 
progress as you have made in getting effective cut-back in high interest 
rates?  So would you, in fact, then detail to us what progress you have 
made in respect to this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Mr. Chairman, when it was presented on the floor at the 
SARM convention, the person making the presentation said we shouldn't even 
have it here because we don't have an alternative.  Without an alternative 
it's hard to take anything to the provincial government.  So I guess my 
answer to that is they did present it at the floor.  They didn't have an 
alternative way of financing education, and they haven't proposed to us an 
alternative way of financing education.  And I think that would, you know, 
speak for itself then. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Have you ever sat down and thought whether there might be 
another way -- your government, your cabinet, your back-benchers?  I wonder 
whether you have any proposals of your own that might address it or do you 
want SARM to write your policy total?  So I ask you, Mr. Minister, that 
brilliant think-tank back there that you have surrounded yourself with, 
have you any -- have they come up with any brilliant ideas in respect to 
alleviating the pressure on rural land tax base for education? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I don't think that was an 
appropriate comment he made when he talks about the people that work for 
the Government of Saskatchewan.  I don't believe that.  I wouldn't say that 
about anybody; I don't believe that's fair. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Don't blame your civil servants. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Well that's what he inferred and that's not appropriate.  
That is exactly what he said, and I just want to . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- You're not telling the truth again. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- I always tell the truth.  Anyway, I just want to say 
that we have worked with both . . . as the Department of Education has 
worked with the boards of education around the province.  I know it's a 
problem for the farmers.  I know it's a problem for business people.  I 
know it's a problem for small businesses in this province. 
 
At the same time we do not . . . and you can say whatever . . . We don't 
have an alternative to raising the additional 3 to $400 million.  I don't 
believe we can tack it on to the wage earner.  I don't believe that that 
can be done. 
 
And so therefore there's 2 or 3 places that you get money from.  You get it 
through taxation, you can get it through royalties, or you can get it 
through income tax or that kind of stuff.  That's the only areas you get 



 

 

your money from and that's the only areas any government gets it from.  So 
I don't know; we don't have an answer.  I just say we don't have an 
alternative way of financing education tax on property, and until we do 
have a way of doing it there's no other alternative. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Well that's a brilliant answer again.  You threw up your 
arms and said, well he can't address that one.  Well I think there are some 
ways that you could address it, Mr. Minister.  I think you could, because a 
couple of years ago, and when they brought in a budget here you know what 
the minister of finance, the then minister of finance, the present Minister 
of Justice did?  Well he said we had to have a level playing field for the 
corporations.  And he levelled her right down, and he cut her down from 17 
to 15 per cent while he increased the tax on ordinary individuals by 
increasing the flat tax.  So you levelled her off for him, Mr. Minister.  
You found a way to level the field for him.  You were innovative there.  I 
don't think you were innovative; I think they got to you.  They financed 
you.  You represent them.  You're the puppets of big business; that's what 
you are.  They pull the strings.  Obviously, you're going to concede to 
them. 
 
Well I'll tell you there's another way that you could have got it, because 
you know what you forgave the opportunity in this province?  And it's 
totally clear, Mr. Chairman.  In 1982, the total oil production value was 
$1.2 billion, and under the scheme of royalties that was in place under the 
Blakeney government it took in over $700 million to the coffers of the 
provincial government, and in 1985, under better prices of oil, the total 
value of oil was at $2.4 billion.  And do you realize, Mr. Chairman, that 
they opted to go for a little less revenue out of twice the production 
value and they gave it to the oil companies? 
 
I guess if you start to opt and you cut out corporations and you cut their 
tax, I guess if you cut back royalties to the big corporations, I guess if 
you support high interest rates so that bankers make their money, I suppose 
you start cutting your options, Mr. Minister. 
 
But the last budget, Mr. Minister, I think you're aware -- I don't think 
there's any fact, any dispute to the facts that while you presented a 
budget here saying that, oh great increase for education . . . Well you 
start talking to the school boards across this province.  You go into the 
Humboldt constituency, a rural school division which covers a large portion 
of my riding, and what do they find?  A massive increase, that they had a 
cut of something like $106,000 -- cut, cut in revenue to rural school 
division of Humboldt.  They are going to have to increase their mill rate 
by 6 to 7 per cent, six or seven mills. 
 
(1945) 
 
They are also looking at the possibility of having to cut six teachers. And 
the ministers says, well there's not many ways we can get it.  That's true.  
That's true, Mr. Minister, especially when you're in the pocket of the oil 
companies and the multinational corporations and the banks.  You start 
limiting your right to revenue.  Because if you cut the corporate tax, as 
you did, you can't get it to replace property tax. 



 

 

 
What I'm asking you, Mr. Minister, you indicate here that you have no 
alternatives.  I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, do you take the 
representations that are made by SARM seriously?  Have you called together 
a committee which are studying the alternatives here, like increase in 
corporate tax, increase in royalty tax, maybe increase in personal tax on 
the ability to pay?  Have you looked at any of those options, and if not, 
why not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Well first of all, Mr. Chairman, I work with SARM all 
the time.  I not only attend their conventions, I attend all their district 
meetings.  I go to ratepayers meetings -- many, many of them.  I meet with 
RMs on a continuous basis, on a continuous basis, either at ratepayers 
meetings or at their annual meeting.  Certainly I go to all of their 
district meetings.  I meet with SARM executive once a month and sometimes 
oftener than that if necessary.  I have two of SARM sit on my special 
advisory board.  In fact Margaret Klein from the Saskatchewan Women's 
Institute is up in the galleries right now.  She's on my advisory board as 
well.  Those things I do all the time. 
 
But I want to go back a little bit.  He said the reason that we're not 
doing it is because we're in bed with big business.  That's what the member 
said.  That's what he said.  Let me go back and tell you how much increases 
there was.  Under the former NDP government the municipal mill rate and the 
school mill rate increases -- increases.  In 1976, Mr. Speaker, in 1976 the 
average mill rate increase, municipal mill rate increase by RMs was 17 per 
cent -- 17 per cent.  The school mill rate increase was 15 per cent in that 
same year.  In 1977, Mr. Chairman, the municipal mill rate was 16 per cent 
on the average across the province, increase.  The school rate was 11 per 
cent. 
 
But then we get to 1978, election year.  Do you know what the increase was?  
It was still fairly high -- 6 per cent for the municipal.  Do you know what 
it was for the school?  It was 7 per cent.  But now we go back into 1979.  
You know what the municipal increase was?  Average, 12 per cent.  Do you 
know what the school rate increase was? -- 12 per cent.  Now just continue 
on; let's keep on going. 
 
In 1981, in 1980, in 1980 you know what the municipal mill rate increase 
was? -- 16 per cent.  Do you know what the school rate increase was? -- 22 
per cent.  Now what about 1981 -- 1981 what was it?  The municipal rate 
increase was 11 per cent.  And what was the school? -- 17 per cent.  Now 
let's go on from then, and let's just be fair about it.  We'll go fair 
about it. 
 
In 1982 . . . 1983, it's all the same -- 7 per cent, 5 per cent, 2 per cent 
mill rate increases for schools on the average.  For the municipal rate for 
'83, 6; '84, 4; '85 was actually a minus 1.  And '86, what was it? -- .4 
per cent.  In '87, zero; '88, zero; '89, 2.3 -- that's municipal.  School 
rate increases -- 4 per cent in '86; 4.6 per cent in '87; 4.0 per cent in 
'88; and 5.4 per cent in '89. 
 
Let's just be fair about it.  When they had the best times there was in 



 

 

this country, in this country and in this world, they were increasing as 
much as 22 per cent and that's school tax increases, never mind . . . and 
the municipal at 16. 
 
Now if you were a taxpayer out there you were getting hit extremely hard.  
They didn't really care at that time.  Now because it's 4 or 5 per cent 
increases, they say we don't care in the tough times we have.  So let's 
just put it in its perspective and be fair about it.  Those are facts. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Oh boy were you powerful there!  Man, did you come on!  The 
only thing is, man, I've got the statistics in respect to the percentage of 
funding that we did under our government relative to yours, and it's 
substantiated by the Saskatchewan school trustees.  They say that in 1981 
it was almost 54 per cent of the total board's costs.  And what you have 
done regardless of all your statistics is reduce it under 50 per cent.  And 
let's face it, what you're doing -- just like Mulroney government did to 
you -- is to pass down the costs now to local government and the 
municipalities.  And that's what's happening. 
 
I thought, Mr. Minister, you might have come up with an answer to my 
particular question, whether or not you have set up a committee.  And by 
the way, the reference to those incompetents -- if I use that word -- was 
not in respect to the civil service.  I talk about the hacks that you have 
hired and the back-benchers that nod their head as this government goes to 
its death.  I ask you, Mr. Minister, have you established, in fact, any 
committee looking at alternatives to having such a burden of education cost 
levied against property, and in particular, farm land?  That's the 
question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- My understanding is that Education and Finance have did 
some of those studies but I don't have them available to myself. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Would you be able to go into the moth-balls and find one of 
those and present it to the opposition some of the alternatives that you've 
looked at.  Would you be good enough to be able to present any of the 
preliminary, or is just this some more talk -- doing all you can, can't 
present it but I think we're doing something -- are you able to present any 
concrete evidence that you're looking at other proposals? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- My understanding was that the government finance 
commission tabled a report in this House on that. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- What was their recommendations in the report, Mr. Minister?  
You sit in cabinet. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- You could have two choices.  You could ask the Minister 
of Education or you could get the report from the provincial library, from 
the Legislative Library.  It'd certainly be available for you. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Mr. Minister, you don't know the answer, do you?  That's 
your problem.  Why wouldn't you know in an integral discussion of SARM that 
has made a presentation to your government in a brief asking for you to 
look at it, that you wouldn't have any knowledge of it? 



 

 

 
Mr. Minister, I'm going to ask you again.  Is the fact true that you don't 
just know; or one, you don't care; or three, you don't want to say? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- I understand that the government finance commission 
never come up with a total answer.  They had three or four alternatives 
that they . . . and those alternatives were all the way from how we'd have 
to raise individual taxes, on personal taxes, how you'd have to . . . that 
it would cost for funding or how'd you have to change your property tax 
base.  Those are available in the report if you want to get it at the 
Legislative Library. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Has your department, in conjunction with SARM, done any 
review on it?  Have you brought them in on some of the options in respect 
to your responsibility in dealing with some of the concerns of SARM over 
and above this here mythical presentation that you gave, that supposedly 
Finance did and they couldn't find any suitable answer?  Have you done any 
further work on it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Our understanding is that we were involved in 1984-85.  
At the time I wasn't even the minister responsible for Rural Development or 
for Education or Finance.  Although I did see the brief, I'll be honest 
with you, I didn't read it to that degree that I would know or could report 
without going back through it again because that's five years ago. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Well I accept that you know nothing about that.  Mr. 
Minister, let's go on to another concern of SARM, and I wonder what you 
have done.  This was a brief to cabinet in January and it calls on the 
provincial government to take immediate steps to ward off the federal 
government's proposal to change the cost of sharing percentages for the 
funding of crop insurance.  In other words, they want it other than what 
eventually ended up.  The provincial government should take immediate steps 
to ward off the federal government proposal to change the cost-sharing 
percentages for the funding of crop insurance.  While the present sharing 
in the federal is 45 per cent, provincial 10 -- this is before they changed 
it -- producer 45, we understand the new proposal calls for federal 30 per 
cent, provincial 25, producer 45.  And what they say, a more reasonable 
sharing, in our opinion, would be the federal 45 perc ent, provincial 25, 
and producer 30. 
 
That was the representations that they made in respect . . . to you in 
respect to crop insurance.  I would have thought that you would have again 
consulted, in your consultative mood, and wouldn't have moved unless you 
had everybody on side like you're going to do with the Crow benefit rate.  
And accordingly I ask you: what is the present ratio of cost sharing in 
respect to the crop insurance, and whether there was any consultation in 
respect to the farm groups as whether that was satisfactory.  And as we 
know, the share of responsibility of the federal government was reduced 
substantially, and I want to know why you felt obliged to take more cost 
onto the taxpayers of Saskatchewan and off of the federal government in 
respect to the cost sharing of crop insurance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Mr. Chairman, I can get into this or we can have crop 



 

 

insurance at the next one coming up, so we could do either way.  I'll say, 
just to be brief, that last fall I had 13 meetings around the province, had 
in excess of 4,000 producers out . . . farmers out to the meetings.  We 
went through the whole series of things including how the financing would 
be put in place, the cost sharing of it, what their thoughts and views were 
on it.  All the changes to crop insurance which have been major and I 
believe very, very positively received by the farm groups out there this 
year. 
 
We have changed from area coverage which was an optional, to individual 
coverage which is enhanced, and 90 per cent of the farmers are changing 
over because of a large, a much better, and a much better enhanced coverage 
out there, in some cases at a much better rate.  Been very, very well 
received in that end of it.  We've brought in a lot of things under crop 
insurance and I'll certainly get into them when we bring crop insurance up. 
 
The funding has not been finalized yet with the federal government.  We've 
made presentations to the Senate by the president of crop insurance here 
about three weeks ago, in regards to some of the Bill that was being 
passed, in regards to such things as, one of them was the funding 
arrangements; two, the set was how and what would be in and out of crop 
insurance; three, if we were going to be cost sharing in the funding, then 
we would have equal say, not just the federal government through their 
regulations, and some other series of things which I'll bring up as we get 
into crop insurance. 
 
But the agreement has not been finalized with the federal government.  And 
we had tentatively agreed on cost sharing provided.  We got a much enhanced 
crop insurance program, a much enhanced, to give the farmers and producers 
a wider range of coverages, a better coverage, and certainly make it more 
optional for them.  With that we agreed verbally and at meetings that we've 
had that we would go 25-25 federal-provincial, 50 per cent producer, the 
federal government and the provincial government cost sharing the 
administration; the federal and provincial government cost sharing the 
reinsurance fund, which is a very major part particularly in the last few 
years, and also cost sharing the federal government refunding immediately 
any reinsurance that's issued by the provincial government instead of 
waiting for a year to get it back.  So there could be some cost savings for 
us and enhanced crop insurance coverage for the farmers when it's all put 
together, and that's what we're working towards. 
 
(2000) 
 
Mr.Koskie: -- Mr. Minister, last year, in respect, I spoke to the then 
Minister of Finance and he indicated that part of the acceptance by the 
federal government of invoking or putting into place the drought payments, 
that they had been demanding that they be cost-shared by the provinces.  I 
think you'll agree that that was the position of the federal government, 
that indeed that you put in a cost sharing in the drought payment that went 
out to the farmers.  You know, that disastrous one, that one that was 
cooked up during the federal election and they didn't know exactly where 
they were going.  And there was a demand that the provincial government in 
fact make a contribution to it, and the Minister of Finance indicated here 



 

 

that in lieu of the provincial government making a deal to take on greater 
responsibility in the cost sharing of crop insurance, that that was 
credited towards their contribution in so far as drought payments. 
 
Now are you aware of that, or is that interpretation wrong, because that's 
the interpretation that I got from the then Minister of Finance, the now 
Minister of Justice, and that in fact you had to make the commitment 
because you didn't come up with the cost sharing in respect to the drought 
program that was instituted by the federal government which they demanded, 
similar to what they're demanding now, I guess, under the deficiency 
payment.  And that in the end I believe he indicated that he had to come up 
with one-quarter of the total input of that program, and that a balance was 
hit and a deal was struck.  That you in fact had to assume and cut back 
from the contribution of the federal government payment towards the 
administration and cost of crop insurance from 50 per cent to a 25-25 per 
cent split.  Was there any of that involved in the discussion when you say 
that you tentatively agreed on the respect to the cost sharing of the crop 
insurance here in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Mr. Chairman, the drought program falls under the 
Minister and the Associate Minister of Agriculture, but certainly there was 
discussions on that, there's no doubt about it.  It was public and I think 
the Minister of Finance said so in the House last year. 
 
But in regards to crop insurance, we have not come to a conclusion on what 
we expect in crop insurance, nor have we signed an agreement with the 
federal government in regards to 1990's cost sharing or how it'd be 
cost-shared for 1990.  My understanding is that the federal legislation 
which went through the Senate, I understand, and back to the House of 
Commons, where we did make representation by the presence of crop 
insurance, in regards to the concerns that we had with the proposals that 
the federal government had in their legislation.  So all I can say is that 
that's where it sits right now, and the system . . . or we have been on a 
continuous basis, on a daily basis, weekly basis, talking with the federal 
government in regards to the concerns we have. 
 
I met with the Minister of Agriculture from Alberta and the Associate 
Minister of Agriculture from Alberta in regards to crop insurance and the 
concerns I had, which they had the same, and also the Minister from 
Manitoba who had the same concerns.  We met several times, had phone calls 
on it.  I think it's fair to say that we all agree that what we need is . . 
. We've come to an agreement of what we believe has to be in it, and none 
of us have agreed to go any further than that until we have in place what 
we think is a good, a very much enhanced crop insurance for our producers 
out there; and that really in the end that we will be the winner and the 
producer will have the kind of crop insurance that's needed for today's 
farmer. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Mr. Minister, a couple more submissions have been made by 
SARM that are, I think, important, and this deals with one of the major 
cut-backs by the federal government again where we didn't hear a squeak out 
of you or a squeak out of the Premier or a protestation at all. 
 



 

 

The SARM submission to cabinet in January calls on your government to 
pressure the Mulroney administration to reinstate the full rebate on the 
federal excise tax on farm fuels.  I want to ask you, Mr. Minister: can you 
tell me if you have ignored this recommendation by SARM or can you point to 
some action on your part that indicates that you're taking seriously the 
job of representing the needs and wishes of rural Saskatchewan? 
 
In that respect, their submission to you, Mr. Minister, and to your cabinet 
was: 
 

 The reinstatement of the full rebate of the federal excise tax on farm 
fuels, and we urge the provincial government to lobby the federal 
government to help bring this about.  The action of the federal government 
in removing the fuel tax rebate represents a significant increase in cost 
of production . . . 

 
And a very significant one.  And at a time, Mr. Minister, this is the 
serious thing: they may want to make some adjustments as they go along in 
the federal government, and I can understand that.  But at a time of the 
major crisis in agriculture, what you have allowed is the interest rates in 
the Farm Credit Corporation to go up, you have allowed them to decrease 
their contribution in respect to crop insurance, and now what you have done 
is allowed them off the hook in respect to the excise tax rebate on farm 
fuels. 
 
I ask you again: have you been as successful as you have been with some of 
the other major items that they have presented to you to make 
representations to the federal government?  Is there any progress in 
respect to the reinstitution of the rebate and excise tax for farm fuels? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Mr. Chairman, we haven't made representation.  Finance 
and Agriculture would be looking after that part of it, so I'm not sure 
where it's at.  So it's no use saying anything more about it. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Yes, I can understand that it may well be in another 
jurisdiction.  I ask you this then: you got the submission from SARM and I 
presume that it would go to cabinet.  Have you followed up to determine 
whether any other branch are acting on behalf of SARM?  Have you any 
knowledge that any action has been taken because, after all, you represent 
SARM and therefore would be reporting I suppose back to them.  And I wonder 
whether you can indicate whether, to your knowledge, whether you've passed 
that request on and whether you have made any inquiries to see whether 
subsequent work has been undertaken by any of your colleagues in respect to 
it.  I don't ask you the details of it because it may be under the other 
jurisdiction, but certainly you should have a report as to whether or not 
action has been taken, when action was taken, and what action was taken. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I don't know.  The presentation was 
made to cabinet and appropriate agencies would pick it up and follow it up 
from there . . . I'm sure the Minister of Agriculture will be up shortly 
here and you can ask the appropriate -- either that or the Finance -- and 
we'll find out which one was following it up. 
 



 

 

Mr. Koskie: -- Mr. Minister, in your tour around the province in 1987, one 
of the major recommendations that you made to solve the farm financing 
question was equity financing.  The Premier, last year in his budget here 
in this House, indicated that he was going to set up a model equity 
financing, I believe, in the Weyburn area, but again this is a 
representation from an organization which you represent and closely 
represent.  And a written submission, Mr. Minister, again, SARM presented 
to cabinet January 15 takes a very strong stand against equity financing 
for farm land.  The brief says this on the subject of equity financing: We 
believe it won't work because it is based on profit motive.  Had equity 
financing been available to farmers throughout the last decade, those 
farmers would have used it . . . would find themselves without a farm 
today.  I guess, again, I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, have you had any 
further discussions with SARM?  Is there any position as Rural Development 
minister whether or not it is the intention of your government, and you as 
minister of rural affairs and a minister who went out heading up a 
committee of MLAs and cabinet ministers recommending it? 
 
Can you give us an update as to where you stand on equity financing at this 
time in view of the overwhelming rejection of one of your major 
recommendations that foreign owners and profiteers should take over the 
land of Saskatchewan and that the farmers should become a leaseback from 
foreign owner-owned land?  That's the proposition of equity financing and I 
wonder whether that is still in the mill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Mr. Chairman, what was recommended there was a pilot 
project using local farmers.  I think it's fair to say we've listened to 
SARM and even the pilot project hasn't went ahead.  So it's fair to say 
that's where it sits right now. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Well the people of Saskatchewan stopped you again.  They 
stopped you in the privatization of SaskPower and they stopped you in 
selling off the family farm to foreign investors and to those that have no 
interest in farming. 
 
Mr. Minister, as you know, one other issue of concern, and I think we 
perhaps have dealt with this, but I have in summarizing some of these major 
concerns that have raised here by SARM -- and all of them are not entirely 
within the purview of your jurisdiction, however, they relate back to the 
organization that you work with very closely -- and in a capsule, I guess, 
Mr. Minister, it's rather disappointing.  In many of the major areas that 
this government hasn't both vocally, in press, and in organizing opposition 
to some of the steps that have been taken by the federal government, which 
is detrimental to rural Saskatchewan and particularly agricultural 
community. 
 
And I think that has been a basic disappointment because it seems to me 
that they cut the tax, excise tax rebate on farmers, cost them a sizeable 
amount of money. 
 
Interest rates.  You have made representations but nothing has happened.  
The GST, which is going to be staggering, absolutely devastating to the 
western economy and to ordinary people who are getting less and less 



 

 

income, and you refuse to take a stand in respect to that.  I guess in 
respect to crop insurance, the off-loading of the federal government onto 
the province, you've been unsuccessful there. 
 
And so in all of those areas, Mr. Minister, we have been very, very 
concerned.  And before supper I spoke to you and I don't want to belabour 
it entirely but Mr. Minister, it still dismays . . . it's unexplainable, 
put it that way, that you and your colleagues indicate that you are opposed 
to the GST, and at the same time, Mr. Minister, you say you are and we move 
a motion in this House, Mr. Chairman, and your government refuses to give 
leave even to discuss that issue. 
 
The GST, Mr. Minister, is going to be devastating, not only from the impact 
of the money that it takes from the ordinary person.  It's going to have 
another devastating effect and that is the increase in the inflationary 
rate.  It's estimated that in the implementation of the GST that there's 
going to be an increase in inflation from 1.25 to 2.5 per cent and that is 
massive. 
 
And how in the name of the world, are our farmers and our small-business 
men going to continue to operate if you have an imposition of a 7 per cent 
GST, Mr. Minister, increase inflation, which again will drive up the 
interest rates further. And you will not take a stand here with all of us 
in this House. 
 
Mr. Minister, I guess you can play politics with it, but I would think that 
the concern of the situation in Saskatchewan is more than simple politics.  
In our motions in respect to interest rate, our support of your 
agricultural motion is indication of our willingness to co-operate as best 
we can.  And similarly on a very important issue, on GST, you refused. 
 
(2015) 
 
Every legitimate  . . . We brought a motion into this House before the . . 
. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order, order! 
 
I'd ask the member for Rosthern and the member for Regina Centre to allow 
the member from Quill Lakes to make his comments.  Order. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- My concern was not the member from Regina Centre, it was the 
member from Rosthern that was really interfering, by the way. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Chairman, that we brought before this House, this full 
Chamber, a motion, before the Speaker of this House, and we asked and the 
motion as I read before supper, indicated and asked that we unanimously 
condemn the federal government for the imposition of the GST.  
Straightforward, direct. And the government undertook to reject and give 
leave for that motion.  That's where it stood, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, we have tried to co-operate in many, many regards.  And we've 
asked you today again, when I brought up the issue and the Chair indicated 



 

 

that we could not move a substantive motion in the committee.  And I concur 
and I appreciate the ruling of the Chair.  But, Mr. Minister, if you had 
the courage you could have said, one, if you can't bring it in here, that I 
am prepared to support it if you bring it, I think the Chair would have 
allowed it. 
 
Secondly, you could have said, Mr. Minister, you bring in that motion 
tomorrow and I'll guarantee you that every one of us in this side of the 
House, we have changed our mind and we will indeed support the motion 
criticizing the implementation of the GST. 
 
Mr. Minister, I think you have disappointed the people of Saskatchewan.  
And what I'm going to move, Mr. Chairman, is a motion that I believe, 
seconded by the member from Humboldt again.  And it reads, and I think it's 
a substantive motion, a motion which is acceptable to the Chair.  I'll give 
it to you for your ruling.  But it reads: 
 

 That whereas the Minister of Rural Development has refused to join with 
the opposition in the approving of a motion of the opposition that this 
legislature opposes the imposition of the GST, therefore be it moved that 
the minister's salary be reduced to $1. 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order, order.  I find the motion not in order.  The 
preamble of the motion expresses an opinion, and I cite Beauchesne's, Fifth 
Edition, section 492: 
 

 It is not allowable to attach a condition or an expression of opinion to a 
Vote or to change the destination of a grant.  Sir John Bourinot, 
Parliamentary Procedure and Practice in the Dominion of Canada (4th ed., 
1916), p. 428. 

 
Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Apparently, Mr. Minister, no 
matter how widely the opinion may be shared, it may not find its place into 
the beginning of a motion, but the opinion is widely shared. 
 
Mr. Minister, I've listened with growing annoyance at the hypocrisy of your 
government on the issue on the goods and services tax.  Mr. Minister, you 
began with the then Minister of Finance who said he thought it wasn't a bad 
idea.  That's a fair summary of what he said.  You then find out that the 
public were vehemently opposed to it, and since then you've been trying to 
balance between being good . . . between remaining on good terms with your 
colleagues in Ottawa, your partners in Ottawa I should say, your senior 
partners, and trying to keep peace at home. 
 
Mr. Minister, you'll get up in the House, as you did today, and you'll say, 
I'm opposed to the GST and you will list a number of reasons why, most of 
them valid because you've heard them directly from the public.  Then, Mr. 
Minister, when it comes to actually doing something useful, when it comes 
to expressing the will of a legislature, Mr. Minister, you do nothing. 
 
I remind you the other day, I remind you, Mr. Minister, it's only about two 



 

 

weeks ago that we moved a motion under rule 39, which requires unanimous 
consent.  Your government failed to give consent to what was a reasonably 
worded resolution.  I wonder, Mr. Minister, how you can have the gall to 
say that you're opposed to the GST and yet refrain from taking any steps 
which would effectively communicate that to Ottawa.  I really wonder, Mr. 
Minister, how you can be that two 
_faced about an issue of such importance to the public of Saskatchewan. 
 
Surely, Mr. Minister, you believe that you at least owe the public some 
integrity.  At least you owe them an honest decision.  Either you're for 
it, for whatever reasons one might be for it, or, Mr. Minister, you're 
opposed to it, in which case surely, Mr. Minister, if you're opposed to it 
you want to be prepared to express that in a cogent fashion to Ottawa.  
Every time we've attempted to do that, Mr. Minister, your government has 
refused to give us leave.  Mr. Minister, in light of the hypocrisy which 
you've shown, which other members have shown, Mr. Minister, I'm going to 
move, seconded by the member from Quill Lakes: 
 

 That the salary of the minister be reduced to $1. 
 

Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order.  I find the motion out of order -- order, order -- 
because the minister's salary is statutory under vote 19. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Minister, this may be fortuitous.  While we write 
out a motion and put it in the proper order, I want the minister to think 
carefully about what you've done here today.  You've expressed, Mr. 
Minister, your opposition to the GST in terms far milder than the public of 
Saskatchewan would express it.  And yet, Mr. Minister, you refuse to join 
in doing anything concrete about it. 
 
If you're opposed to it, Mr. Minister, why do you take all conceivable 
steps to prevent this legislature from expressing the same view?  How could 
you be opposed to it, Mr. Minister, and yet deny leave to move a motion 
which would express that in a cogent form? 
 
Mr. Minister, you and your colleagues are going to pay for this hypocrisy 
and there's no other word for it; that's what it is.  When you're within 
earshot of the Saskatchewan public, you pretend you're opposed to it.  
When, Mr. Minister, you're out of earshot, or when Ottawa might hear you, 
you haven't anything to say at all, just, Mr. Minister, as you haven't any 
leadership to provide to the public of Saskatchewan. 
 
For these reasons, Mr. Minister, you and your colleagues I think are going 
to pay heavily at the time of the next election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Minister, you can't continue to say one thing and 
do another and expect the public to treat you as leaders.  Mr. Minister, 
that is just blatantly dishonest and you have been blatantly dishonest on 
this subject.  At least I will say for the former Minister of Finance -- 



 

 

and I'm not a particular admirer of that member -- but at least I will say 
he was relatively honest in saying he felt the goods and services tax had 
something concrete to offer.  I vehemently disagree with that, but at least 
I respect his integrity. 
 
You, Mr. Minister, have been much less than that.  You, Mr. Minister, have 
tried to pretend to the public of Saskatchewan you oppose it, but you won't 
take any concrete steps to express that.  I really wonder, Mr. Minister, 
how you can be so hypocritical as to say you oppose it and then deny leave 
to move it. 
 
Mr. Minister, I'm going to move, seconded by the member from Quill Lakes, 
another motion: 
 

 That the vote be reduced by the equivalent amount of the minister's 
salary. 

 
I move that, seconded by the member from Quill Lakes.  Mr. Minister, I want 
to say, if I may, just one comment.  If you indicate, Mr. Minister . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . I said I was going to.  If the member from 
Lloydminster would listen to what's being said, Mr. member, you might make 
some kind of a contribution. 
 
Mr.  . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well there's the 3-cent man, the 
member from Wascana, the 3-cent man who has a good . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order, order.  Allow the member from Regina Centre to make 
his comments. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Minister, I want to say, Mr. Minister, that the 
time has come to put your hypocrisy to an end.  We're going to move this 
motion . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order, order.  Would the member address his comments 
through the Chair. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- All right.  It's time we put the hypocrisy of the 
minister to an end, Mr. Chairman. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- He's one of the few who's not a minister. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- He's one of the few who's not.  Mr. Chairman, I say to 
the minister: Mr. Minister, if you're prepared to indicate to this side of 
the House that you will join us in moving a motion under Rule 39, if you're 
prepared to give us that commitment, that we will have leave to move such a 
motion, then, Mr. Minister, I think this motion could be tabled. 
 
(2030) 
 
So, Mr. Minister, if you're prepared to give us that commitment that you 
will move, you will join with us, give us leave under Rule 39, or 
alternatively move such a motion yourself, this could be tabled . . . 
 



 

 

Mr. Chairman: -- Order, order.  The member is moving a motion and he cannot 
attach conditions to the motion. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- The Chairman is quite out of character.  The Chairman 
is mistaken about what I'm doing, Mr. Chairman.  What I'm saying to the 
member is, what I'm saying to the minister is, and I'm going to move it in 
a moment, but we'd be prepared to join and having it tabled if the minister 
indicates he'll move a motion condemning GST, in the very words he used 
earlier in the day, or he will give us leave to move such a motion, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, with that I move, seconded by the member from Quill 
Lakes: 
 

 That the vote be reduced by an amount equivalent to the minister's salary. 
 

Mr. Chairman: -- Order! . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Anyone can 
rise at any time to debate in committee.  It is not necessary to have a 
seconder in committee. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Chairman, out of deference to the opposition, I'll 
let the seconder speak now. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Well I want to really appreciate the minister from Melfort 
because actually I was kind of awaiting to hear how he was going to support 
his position of playing both . . . on both sides of the fence. 
 
And I want to say in moving this motion, in seconding this motion, Mr. 
Chairman, I want to say that we're dealing here with one of the most 
regressive taxes that has ever been imposed on Canadian citizens.  I can't 
find any group in Saskatchewan that stands there and will support the Tory 
regressive tax, the goods and services tax. 
 
I'll tell you, if you take a . . . if you talk to the independent small 
business, and they have indicated that it's going to be an absolute 
nightmare for small business, no doubt about it.  The cost is horrendous.  
The implementation, as the minister indicated today, for small business has 
consequences that will cost them somewhere it's estimated between 1 and $2 
billion just to set up the mechanisms across the country to deal with it. 
 
Farm organizations have indicated that even if the large items are in fact 
excluded, that the tax under the present system will have to be paid and 
then rebated, and the cash flow is going to be astronomical at a great 
disadvantage to the farmers. 
 
Seniors have rallied indicating that this is going to be a terrible tax in 
respect to seniors.  The tax is going to be particularly regressive to 
lower income individuals, although the federal government indicates that 
there will be some rebates to those on lower income.  But seeing is 
believing, Mr. Chairman. 
 
The other aspect of this tax is that it's going to have, as I indicated to 
the minister, a staggering effect upon a rise in the increase in the 



 

 

inflationary rate.  Even in the government's estimate it indicates that 
it'll be an increase in inflationary rate from 1.25 to 2.5 per cent.  And 
the independent assessments indicate it'll be closer to 2 or 3 per cent. 
 
As a consequence of the implementation of this tax, inflation will increase 
and the result is a higher interest rate resulting from it.  Exactly the 
opposite of what this country needs.  The people are against it. The polls 
have indicated that 70 to 80 per cent of all Canadians are opposed to this 
hideous tax that's being imposed by the Mulroney government.  And in spite 
of that, they're marching forward.  In spite of the fact that two of their 
own back-benchers in Ottawa have walked out of the Tory caucus -- Kilgour 
and Kindy walked out of the Tory caucus -- or at least got expelled from 
the Tory caucus  
because they wouldn't support and vote for the goods and services tax. 
 
The federal government has also introduced closure to a debate in the House 
of Commons.  And the only rescue that we have is in respect to this hideous 
tax supported by Tories here in this legislature.  And the member from 
Wilkie I'm sure is totally in agreement with what Brian Mulroney is doing. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chairman, that this tax should be stopped.  The 
people of Canada have spoken, the people of Saskatchewan have spoken.  And 
I say that the minister has an obligation to stand up for rural 
Saskatchewan and indicate that he will take a stand with us to oppose this 
tax.  And that's what we gave him the challenge to do.  We gave it to him 
today.  We gave him an outing, an option.  And I say to you, Mr. Minister, 
the people of Saskatchewan will know that the Tories here in Saskatchewan 
are saying, let it go ahead, just as the minister said.  We can't stop it.  
It's going to go ahead.  Let's see if we can modify it. 
 
But we say that's not good enough.  I think that a unified voice from this 
Chamber would have an influence.  I think it would in respect of interest 
rates and I think it would with GST and I think it did on agriculture.  But 
some reason, the Tories here in Saskatchewan, while mouthing publicly that 
they are opposed to it, absolutely refuse to take a concrete stand and to 
have all the elected officials of this legislature join together in the 
condemnation of this very vicious tax.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, I think if we 
examine this motion put forward by the NDP, I think one has to take a look 
very, very closely at what this motion says, and what the symbolism is that 
you might attach to such a motion. 
 
Here we have, Mr. Chairman, a Saskatchewan economy that I don't think is 
any big surprise to most reasonable people, that is in some reasonably 
difficult times.  Mr. Chairman, here we have a situation where our farmers 
are about to go and plant the crop for the year.  Spring seeding is about 
to take place.  And, Mr. Chairman, I think you would have to agree with me 
that there is a large number of farmers out in Saskatchewan today that are 
having difficulty coming up with money to put the crop in. 
 



 

 

I think it would be safe to say, Mr. Chairman, that this government, this 
administration, this group of members on this side of the House that 
represent most of rural Saskatchewan, would be totally dismayed and find 
totally unacceptable a motion of this nature tonight, that would actually 
cut back funding to the Department of Rural Development. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I am shocked.  I am disappointed and I am amazed that an 
opposition in the province of Saskatchewan because they wouldn't support 
and vote for the goods and services tax. 
 
The federal government has also introduced closure to a debate in the House 
of Commons.  And the only rescue that we have is in respect to this hideous 
tax supported by Tories here in this legislature.  And the member from 
Wilkie I'm sure is totally in agreement with what Brian Mulroney is doing. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chairman, that this tax should be stopped.  The 
people of Canada have spoken, the people of Saskatchewan have spoken.  And 
I say that the minister has an obligation to stand up for rural 
Saskatchewan and indicate that he will take a stand with us to oppose this 
tax.  And that's what we gave him the challenge to do.  We gave it to him 
today.  We gave him an outing, an option.  And I say to you, Mr. Minister, 
the people of Saskatchewan will know that the Tories here in Saskatchewan 
are saying, let it go ahead, just as the minister said.  We can't stop it.  
It's going to go ahead.  Let's see if we can modify it. 
 
But we say that's not good enough.  I think that a unified voice from this 
Chamber would have an influence.  I think it would in respect of interest 
rates and I think it would with GST and I think it did on agriculture.  But 
some reason, the Tories here in Saskatchewan, while mouthing publicly that 
they are opposed to it, absolutely refuse to take a concrete stand and to 
have all the elected officials of this legislature join together in the 
condemnation of this very vicious tax.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, I think if we 
examine this motion put forward by the NDP, I think one has to take a look 
very, very closely at what this motion says, and what the symbolism is that 
you might attach to such a motion. 
 
Here we have, Mr. Chairman, a Saskatchewan economy that I don't think is 
any big surprise to most reasonable people, that is in some reasonably 
difficult times.  Mr. Chairman, here we have a situation where our farmers 
are about to go and plant the crop for the year.  Spring seeding is about 
to take place.  And, Mr. Chairman, I think you would have to agree with me 
that there is a large number of farmers out in Saskatchewan today that are 
having difficulty coming up with money to put the crop in. 
 
I think it would be safe to say, Mr. Chairman, that this government, this 
administration, this group of members on this side of the House that 
represent most of rural Saskatchewan, would be totally dismayed and find 
totally unacceptable a motion of this nature tonight, that would actually 
cut back funding to the Department of Rural Development. 



 

 

 
Mr. Chairman, I am shocked.  I am disappointed and I am amazed that an 
opposition in the province of Saskatchewan in these difficult times, for 
whatever reason, would propose a cut-back to rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, the members opposite can say well this has to do with 
the GST.  Well indeed the goods and services tax is a major issue 
confronting this entire country, a major issue that affects business 
people, individuals, farm people, city people, the whole spectrum not only 
across this country but across this province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, for the members opposite to use that out of context in 
this particular application and zero in on the Department of Rural 
Development, and say, well we don't care about rural Saskatchewan, and here 
is living proof where they would actually cut back the expenditures to 
rural Saskatchewan.  Where have the members been, Mr. Chairman?  Where have 
the members been when this administration has time after time after time 
expended more funds on rural Saskatchewan in various programs? 
 
Here is the minister in fact, Mr. Chairman, who is well respected across 
this entire province.  You go to one, you go to any rural municipality and 
every rural municipality in this province, Mr. Chairman, regardless of 
political affiliation of the members, I believe has a significant amount of 
respect for our Minister of Rural Development. 
 
I remind you, Mr. Chairman, that here is a minister, Mr. Chairman, that has 
been the founding minister of such things as the rural development 
corporations.  Mr. Chairman, here is a minister who has been in charge of 
the major change in restructuring when it comes to rural service centres 
all across this province, widely accepted as a much needed change, Mr. 
Speaker, providing far better and far wider ranging services to our farm 
families right across Saskatchewan. 
 
And here is an opposition that says no once again to agriculture.  Here is 
an opposition that once again is showing their true colours, Mr. Chairman, 
true colours that they do not really care for rural Saskatchewan.  And 
furthermore, Mr. Chairman, an opposition that does not understand rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
It is beyond me, Mr. Chairman, that that member, that that party, that the 
NDP Party in these times would propose a cut-back of any nature to rural 
development.  Mr. Chairman, I am very, very shocked. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I'd say here is just something that the opposition has 
dreamed up, spur of the moment, let's use the GST as an example in this 
specific situation to make a cut-back to rural Saskatchewan.  Mr. Chairman, 
members on the government side of the House have fought long and hard and 
stated their positions well on the goods and services tax.  Mr. Chairman, 
our Minister of Finance, our Premier has stated the position on the goods 
and services tax, I think very articulately. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I believe that this motion is totally unacceptable not only 
to members on this side of the House who primarily represent rural 



 

 

Saskatchewan, but to the entire populous of Saskatchewan who would be 
shocked and dismayed, in these particular circumstances, at any political 
party who would nonsensically propose to make a cut-back to rural 
development.  And, Mr. Chairman, I wanted to share those remarks with you 
before we look closer at this particular type of a motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(2045) 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, I just want to join 
with my colleague, the Minister of Environment, in a few remarks to this 
particular motion that's before us in this legislature here this evening. 
 
We've spent about two hours now ridiculously joking and clowning around 
trying to come up with some sort of a motion that could be presented to the 
Chamber through rules of this House, through different procedural moves.  
And I want to indicate to you, sir, that that's just exactly . . . And I 
want to point out to the people of this province, the people that would be 
watching this proceedings here tonight, that this is precisely the types of 
child's games that we put up with in this Legislative Assembly from session 
to session.  We're dealing with nothing but radicals in this province, 
radicals from members of the opposition.  The Leader of the Opposition 
can't control these people.  In fact he even has to be ashamed of what 
these people mean to and represent, how they represent his party throughout 
this province. 
 
I want to indicate to you, sir, that when we look at the question of the 
GST and that particular motion, I as a government member, sir, have been 
one of those members that have been travelling in this province, speaking 
out against the GST in its complexity, Mr. Chairman.  I want to say that I 
joined Kevin Avram and his association, Saskatchewan Association of 
Taxpayers, in Lloydminster, in my own riding, speaking out against the 
complexity of the GST.  We had a house full of about 400 people at that 
particular meeting, and I will tell you, it was one of the largest 
gatherings in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I want to say to the members opposite that the people that came out to 
that meeting were serious.  They too were against the complexity of the tax 
system here across this country.  They are upset with the tax system we 
have today in place, the thirteen and a half per cent which we are dealing 
with that is hidden.  They're upset with the tax system we have today, and 
they are also upset with the tax system, with the GST, the way it has been 
presented.  And that is basically the arguments that are out there on the 
street. 
 
And members opposite know this very well, but there isn't any one of them 
have the courage to admit to anyone else, other than because of the 
political rhetoric that government members on this side of the House have 
taken that exact stand, because that is the truth, Mr. Chairman.  That is 
the truth. 
 
Many more of my colleagues here have taken the same stand that I have done.  



 

 

And being we've taken the stand as government members, the people of 
Saskatchewan, realizing that we've taken that stand, also realize the fact 
that we do not vote.  We do not have the final vote, and yet members of the 
opposition say, well they're your Tory cousins in Ottawa.  Well so be it.  
If they're Tory cousins in Ottawa, well they're Tory cousins that aren't 
listening to these Tory cousins of theirs in regarding to the complexity 
problem. 
 
And I want to indicate to you sir, and members of the opposition, I want to 
indicate to members of the opposition that although they may be Tories in 
Ottawa, there is not such a thing that says you don't have a disagreement 
in a marriage.  You don't have a disagreement in any kind of family 
relationship with your children or anything else.  Maybe you people are 
something perfect.  Maybe you don't live in the real world, but I want to 
indicate to you that in the real world there are disagreements in a 
marriage.  There are disagreements with your own family. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order, order.  The question before the committee, be it 
resolved that the vote be reduced by the equivalent of the Minister's 
salary, I believe that I have allowed wide-ranging debate from the mover 
and his seconder, and I would ask members now from both sides of the House 
that they should bring their comments back to the motion that is before the 
Assembly, or before the committee. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I was just rounding off to come 
back to that very point, is that basically, Mr. Chairman, is when there are 
disagreements between governments and whether they are from the same sort 
of party symbol, that it doesn't always suggest to the fact that we do 
always agree.  We do have some disagreements and some very major 
disagreements.  And I say to you, sir, that it's because of the GST and the 
members opposite, that's why we have such a motion here in front of us on 
the floor of this legislature right now. 
 
And I want to indicate to you, sir, that when that motion is tabled, it's a 
motion again, as the Minister of Environment has said earlier, that it is a 
motion and it is a motion condemning every one of the civil servants and 
every one of the individuals that are in the Department of Rural Affairs -- 
every one of them.  And against every program, every monetary program that 
is out there helping rural people in rural Saskatchewan, farmers, small 
business people, schools, hospital facilities, the whole thing.  It all 
knits into one big basket out there because everyone is affected.  Everyone 
is affected. 
 
Our minister here has been standing in front of this legislature explaining 
the programs in rural affairs and they made fun.  And they laugh now, Mr. 
Chairman.  And it's too bad that the cameras can't show those people joking 
and laughing and not taking any of this serious.  They're laughing at rural 
Saskatchewan; they're laughing at farmers; they're laughing at everyone. 
 
And I say to you, sir, we had people from all over Saskatchewan in the 
galleries today.  We had everyone of the benches filled in this gallery 
from people from rural Saskatchewan, all over Saskatchewan.  And I say to 
you, sir, that they make a joke of that type of visitation to this 



 

 

Assembly.  These people are here.  They're wanting this Assembly to work on 
their behalf.  They're wanting this Assembly to have a responsible 
opposition to keep departments honest. 
 
So they come before the people whenever the departments of rural affairs or 
any other departments or any other minister in this Assembly come before 
the people, that's right here in this legislature.  They're before the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I want to say that because the members of the opposition cannot find 
any dirt and filth, then all of a sudden then they've got to try and create 
something.  They've got to try and create an atmosphere out there from 
people that may be watching tonight, that this government is for the GST, 
that this government is for this and that, when we've opposed it.  Actually 
to tell you the truth, Mr. Chairman, this government and my back-bench 
colleagues and my other minister colleagues here, have been more of an 
opposition in our caucus than what we've seen as opposition here in front 
the people of Saskatchewan in this legislature. 
 
And so be it to the media.  I give the media a lot more credit for being 
the opposition here in getting answers for the people from the government.  
Answers that these people refuse to ask because they're positive, positive 
remarks, positive program -- positive programs. 
 
Ministers talked about the road program in rural Saskatchewan.  Well I'll 
tell you something.  Our government had introduced a heavy-haul program -- 
a heavy-haul road building program first in its . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order.  I've asked the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster 
to keep his comments relevant to the motion that's before the committee, 
and I would ask him again to keep his remarks on the motion. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate that.  I guess we do 
get wrapped up and carried away with the . . . And I apologize to you and I 
apologize to the people that may even be watching this proceeding. 
 
But I want to indicate to you, sir, that I do ask the members of the 
opposition to really seriously take their deliberations on this floor of 
the legislature through a motion such as that and consider it as being just 
that, a joke. 
 
And let's get back to some seriousness and quit the clowning around and 
trying to find different ways of writing up a motion here.  And let's get 
through the estimates; let's get the officials back to their departments; 
let's get them so that they're able to work and serve the people of this 
province, and forget about the politics.  Thank you. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, I just want to say a few words to enter 
the debate on this motion, which would ultimately reduce the minister's 
salary to $1, which is a very proper form of protestation within the 
British parliamentary system.  The government House Leader may not 
understand this, but this is a proper form of protestation that takes place 
in many legislatures across Canada, and in the Parliament of Canada, and in 



 

 

committees. 
 
And I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, and through you to the Government 
House Leader, that this happens hundreds of times in the history of Canada.  
This is not something unusual or unwarranted.  This is done from time to 
time when ministers refuse to take their responsibility, as the minister 
has here in this committee today.  And on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan we have moved a motion that would reduce his salary to $1 as . 
. . 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order.  The motion, the motion before . . . Order.  The 
motion before the committee is: 
 

 Be it resolved that the vote be reduced by the equivalent of the 
minister's salary. 

 
Order, order.  The minister's salary is under vote 19.  It is statutory.  
It is reducing item 1 of the rural development estimates. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, I agree and what is intended here 
is that the salary of the minister, the indication here is that the 
equivalent of the minister's salary -- which is exactly what the motion 
says  
_- would be cut back, to send a signal to the government and to the 
minister that that reduction would be the equivalent of his salary. 
 
I think you understand that, Mr. Chairman.  I'm sure you do, because this 
is a very standard form of motion.  In consultation with yourself in the 
Chair -- we consulted with you when we were writing the motion -- to get 
the intent of reducing the amount in the budget of this department by the 
equivalent of the minister's salary.  Now you understand that; I'm sure you 
do because we consulted with you when we were writing the motion. 
 
Now I want to say the reason why we were doing that, and consulting with 
you in doing it, is in order to show the people in Saskatchewan how 
disappointed we are in the minister of rural affairs for his inaction in 
dealing with the GST, the goods and services taxes, which has been 
introduced and passed in total opposition to the majority of people in the 
country, and with their tacit approval -- not with their opposition, but 
with their approval. 
 
And we have many statements in the press by the Premier of this province 
early on where he indicated he was in favour of the GST.  We know that; 
everyone knows that. That's public document.  That isn't my word, or the 
Government House Leader's word; this is public document that the Premier of 
this province supported the GST in the initial stages. 
 
It was only after the polling indicated that a few per cent of the people 
in the country approved of it that he then changed his mind.  But it was 
already too late. He had given his commitment to the Prime Minister of the 
day, and I say that is the reason that we now have the GST, because of the 
people on that side of the floor. 
 



 

 

That's why we moved the motion.  It's a serious motion and it deals with a 
very substantive issue, the goods and service tax, and why we and the 
majority of Canadians and the vast majority of the people in Saskatchewan 
are opposed to that. 
 
I say as well that the reduction that we move in this section is nothing in 
comparison to the reduction that is taking place in the budget in general, 
in this department.  In both of the ordinary expenditures which is reduced 
by $2.1 million, and in capital expenditures which is reduced by $2.2 
million, there shows no concern for rural Saskatchewan.  And I say if 
anyone should be concerned about cut-backs to rural Saskatchewan it should 
be the Government House Leader who stands in his place and sanctimoniously 
worries about whether we're in favour of cut-backs. 
 
(2100) 
 
Well I say to you, Mr. Chairman, and through you to the member who spoke, 
the Government House Leader, that your reduction of $4.3 million will do 
much damage to the department of rural affairs. That's your decision. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, what seems strange to me is that while 
we have a government that is allowing the grid road system in this province 
to fall into rack and ruin -- and anyone from rural Saskatchewan knows 
this, that RMs are not pleased with this government, and are not pleased 
with this minister, and this has nothing to do with the people who advise 
the minister.  This has to do with the Finance minister and the Premier who 
allot the money to this department, are very concerned about the grid 
roads. 
 
In my RM, the roads have never been in a tougher situation.  That's not 
because of the RM.  That's because they lack the money to build roads and 
to buy gravel.  It simply is a huge problem and I'm sure you, Mr. Chairman, 
who come from a rural area, get calls from some of your constituents who 
worry about the condition of the grid road system in this province.  It is 
in bad, bad shape.  You know that and I know that. 
 
And it's unusual that at a time when we have the road structure, the 
infrastructure of the rural department in this kind of condition, highways 
in this kind of condition, that both in Rural Development and in the 
Department of Highways we have major cut-backs this year, by this 
government, by this Tory government.  And yet they claim to be the 
supporters of rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Well I'll tell you that in the next election we're going to make a point of 
this Premier, the Minister of Agriculture, the Premier, as well as this 
minister of rural affairs and what they have done to rural Saskatchewan 
because it's a disaster.  It's a disaster. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Now I just wanted to put that on the record, Mr. 



 

 

Chairman, because there seem to be some confusion, both from the Government 
House Leader and maybe from the Chairman about what was the intent of this 
motion. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order, order.  The member is out of order to bring the 
Chair into the debate, so I'd ask the member to refrain from that. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I didn't mean to say that you were confused.  I meant 
to say that there may have been some confusion in the minds of the members 
of the government benches as to what the intent of this motion was. 
 
The intent of this motion was to send a clear signal, by reducing the 
amount of this vote equivalent to the minister's salary, to tell everyone 
in Saskatchewan how disappointed, and also to bring to this legislature on 
behalf of the people of rural Saskatchewan, that at least someone is 
standing up and defending rural people in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I just wanted to enter into 
the debate for a few minutes to discuss the motion put forward by the 
members opposite.  I think that the members opposite should come clean with 
the Assembly tonight and realize that they probably messed up a little bit 
in the timing of their motion.  The member from Regina Elphinstone is 
right; it is a common parliamentary practice to, at times, bring forward a 
motion to reduce the minister's salary to one dollar, but that should be 
done at the appropriate time, during the estimates of that department. 
 
What the opposition have effectively done, as the House Leader has pointed 
out, is that they have reduced the vote of the Rural Development department 
by the equivalent of the minister's salary.  And all that will do is, 
obviously, bring hurt to people out there, and they should've get their act 
together before they put together a motion such as that. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I think it's important when we talk about the area of rural 
development, that members opposite have not so far in the debate of these 
estimates talked about any of the pertinent issues that have been out in 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
They've refused to talk about the 23 rural development corporations which 
have come about in this province under this administration.  And I must say 
that a lot of the work with those particular rural development corporations 
is because of that particular minister and the staff that he has in his 
department.  People that have been very proactive in rural Saskatchewan, 
helping them set up these rural development corps so that people in rural 
Saskatchewan can have some of the opportunities to develop diversification 
and infrastructure that people in urban Saskatchewan have taken for granted 
for a number of years through other departments and incentives. 
 
They've refused during these estimates, Mr. Chairman, to talk about the 54 
community economic development committees that have resulted because of the 
work done by that particular minister and his officials out in rural 
Saskatchewan.  They've refused to talk about the new rural service centres 



 

 

which have had wide agreement from farm commodity groups, from people that 
have used the traditional crop insurance system, have used the traditional 
ag rep system.  These people have said this is a smart idea to draw these 
particular entities which have been services to rural people into one 
particular area, in effect get one-stop shopping to get access to computer 
facilities, Mr. Chairman, to have the ability down the road to be patched 
into some of the universities, into some of the experimental farms that we 
have in western Canada. 
 
This concept has been widely accepted by people in rural Saskatchewan and 
indeed in urban Saskatchewan.  And I think of the new rural service centre 
which was recently opened in Moose Jaw.  And by and large the community as 
a whole, both urban and rural, have said this is a good idea, and it has 
come under the initiative of that particular minister and his officials. 
 
They forget to talk about the 43 ADD boards, Mr. Chairman, which are out 
there in rural Saskatchewan.  They forget to talk about the nearly 12,000 
volunteers who are entirely through this entire structure that I've been 
talking about.  These volunteers are working on behalf of rural 
Saskatchewan with their time, their effort, their money, because of the 
initiatives of that minister and his department.  And yet the members 
opposite refuse to talk and ask questions about these initiatives.  That is 
where the money is being expended by Rural Development to help people in 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Do we get any questions from the members opposite in regard to any of the 
things mentioned, Mr. Chairman?  No.  Instead they bring forward a motion 
in this legislature to cut back on the number one vote of the department 
and deny funds to people in rural Saskatchewan, deny funds to those 12,000 
volunteers who are out there to develop the infrastructure of rural 
Saskatchewan and save our towns and villages and develop things that we 
know are necessary on the value added sector in order to keep rural 
Saskatchewan healthy. 
 
That is the kind of motion we get from the members opposite.  That is the 
level of understanding that we get from members opposite in a motion such 
as that.  And it is truly a shame, Mr. Chairman, truly a shame, as has been 
pointed out by my seat mate, has been pointed out by the House Leader, that 
we in this Assembly have to put up with those kinds of motions.  If they're 
going to make a motion, do it in the right place and get on with it. 
 
Mr. Chairman, there are many more things in rural Saskatchewan that this 
minister can take an awful pile of credit for.  I can think of a gravelling 
program over the last number of years.  I can think of lots of things that 
are happening out there because of the initiatives of that minister and his 
department.  Everyone in it should be commended for those initiatives. 
 
I don't know of too many departments in government in any administration 
that are able to drag together, bring together the number of volunteers 
that are working in the various areas that that minister has responsibility 
for.  And I think that all of those volunteers out there would be ashamed 
of this Assembly taking the time that we are, debating a motion such as the 
one brought forward by the members opposite.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 



 

 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Seeing that the debate started 
over how much I should be paid and then went into the GST and now 
suggesting that we reduce the amount of grants to the administration of 
rural development by the amount of my salary, I thought I should just 
mention a few things that I think are appropriate here this evening. 
 
We have went through almost six hours, Mr. Chairman, of discussion here in 
this Legislative Assembly over the last two days in regards to Department 
of Rural Development.  And yet only two questions have been asked directly 
regarding to all the things that we do in the department. 
 
Now I know that some of the other things that have been broached have been 
broached by associations and by the opposition that certainly has a bearing 
on the agriculture industry out there.  But if you go through all the 
questions that's been asked, in all fairness to everybody here, you'll find 
that there's only been two questions asked in regards to the department.  
I've had staff people here for two days prepared to answer some of those 
detailed questions and I would like to mention some of the areas that . . . 
The member from Thunder Creek spoke about a few of them. 
 
Just to mention a few of the areas that I think are important out there, we 
have set up 52 rural service centres across Saskatchewan to serve the 
people of rural Saskatchewan, not just the farmers, but everybody out 
there. They're designed to serve the community.  For the first time in a 
long time we really have communities starting to work together. We have set 
them up; they're across the province; we have put into those very 
professional people.  There's 90 professional people through those 52 
offices -- 90 people. 
 
We have taken the department or the government to the people instead of 
people having to come to the government.  It is the first time that has 
been done.  And I say thank you to all the staff for doing it. 
 
It isn't a minister that does that, it's the quality of people that operate 
these rural service centres; it is the quality of people that make it 
happen.  Government doesn't make that happen, it takes people to make that 
happen.  It takes real people with a real goal and a real vision for rural 
Saskatchewan. That's what it takes.  It isn't whether we reduce somebody's 
salary or increase somebody's salary, it takes a commitment.  Those people 
have a commitment with the rural service centres, and if you ever went to 
an opening, and the member from Quill Lakes has just left, but he . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order.  I'd ask the minister not to make referrals to 
members' absence or presence in the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Sorry, Mr. Chairman.  The member from Quill Lakes has 
been to two of the openings there and he knows quite well, as well as the 
rest of us, that they are very well received. They do and are there to 
serve the people of Saskatchewan. 
 



 

 

There's a lot of things in those rural service centres, Mr. Chairman, that 
have been put together for the people to be used. And I say that I would 
like to get into some of that because I think it's so important that the 
people of Saskatchewan know that they're there, know how they can use them, 
know how they can make it a better place for their community, certainly 
lots of information linked  
 Dtogether.  I mean there's a whole series of things that we can do with 
that. 
 
I look at the RDC (Rural Development Corporation) program, and I talked 
about it earlier, and the member from Thunder Creek mentioned it.  We have 
23 RDCs signed up now; that's communities working together.  RMs, towns, 
villages, and in fact one city is working, and the city of Melfort is 
involved in an RDC, and they want to look at their area.  How can we 
develop our area, how can we build our area together, not just by 
themselves, but build it together. 
 
Really important and I could list you at least 25 or 30 industries related 
to what the people out there are doing, those volunteer people who work for 
no wages, who work because their commitment is to their community.  That's 
what RDCs are about.  I have ten more groups of communities that want to 
sign RDCs in the next few months; that is communities across this province 
working together. 
 
I look at such things as the economic development committees that are under 
the Department of Rural Development.  That's urban communities working to 
bring retail and wholesale and business to the area, all part of a 
structure, all part of that structure of making their community a little 
stronger. 
 
I look at our ADD boards that were set up.  We have 43 ADD boards.  I think 
the member from Thunder Creek mentioned that.  We have 43 ADD boards out 
there.  Their role isn't just to serve agriculture.  Their role is to serve 
an area, their community, to work together, to bring industry to it, to 
bring service to their community, to look at the whole structure in there 
within their ADD districts. 
 
And that is important, Mr. Chairman, if you're going to look at the whole 
picture of rural Saskatchewan.  So there has to be a picture out there of 
how you can do it.  We've got a lot of stuff put together.  Every RM, every 
RM now have appointed an ADD committee.  An ADD committee forms part of the 
ADD board and just think of that structure: the ADD committee, the ADD 
board, and I have an advisory committee which I saw one of the members 
sitting up in your gallery. 
 
Those are the kinds of things that restructure and rebuild and make rural 
Saskatchewan a strong place to be.  Those are important parts of our 
department.  Those are what the 400-odd people who work in the department 
work to achieve and accomplish.  We didn't come in here to debate politics 
or get into that end of it.  That isn't what this should be about.  It's 
about interest of our community, interest of our province, and interest for 
the people that they serve. 
 



 

 

I want to talk about about lands branch.  No, I never heard one question on 
lands branch and a lot of people lease land out there.  If I remember 
right, it's about 12,000 lessees we have, somewheres in the neighbourhood 
of 12,000 lessees out there. 
 
(2115) 
 
We have 9 million acres of land that being leased by lessees out there, 9 
million acres.  And we have been working with them, one on one in many 
cases.  And the department, the lands branch here, I say to them, they've 
done a fine job, each and every one of them across this province in making 
those people, those people available to the lessee out there.  We have 58 
community pastures in this province.  Those community pastures serve our 
farming industry.  We have -- I'm sorry, 54 community pastures; I said 58 
-- 54 community pastures.  And I'll just give you an example of some of 
things that we do.  We have 22 million acres of range land in this province 
-- 22 million acres of range land.  A third of that is administered by 
rural development. 
 
We have 127 grazing associations.  Just to put it into perspective, we also 
have some PFRA (Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Administration) lands out 
there.  So just to put it in its perspective, I want to say to everyone 
here, if you take money from rural development, any part of money from 
rural development, you hurt rural Saskatchewan.  And that's what they're 
doing. 
 
The motion isn't to take wages from me; the motion is to take money from 
the administration end -- the people who make that happen, the people who 
work for people in rural Saskatchewan.  They work for them.  They don't 
work because of them, they work for them.  And it's a whole attitude out 
there and you have to realize and be there to know how important they feel 
just serving those people out there in rural Saskatchewan.  Each and every 
one of them feel very important, Mr. Chairman.  They feel important because 
they are a part of a process that is building rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And I say that there's many other areas that we could talk about, detailed 
areas, if they want to get into it.  And I say, Mr. Chairman, I don't know 
what else a person could do in rural Saskatchewan as we structure that 
together, except to continue to work with the 12,000 volunteers that's in 
place now; to work with our client services out there; to work with the 
rural service centres; to work with crop insurance who are also part of 
this whole package; to work together to make it a better Saskatchewan. 
 
We can do all the debate in here -- six hours of debate -- on political 
procedure.  That isn't what we're all about.  We're about building and 
making rural Saskatchewan a better place to live. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The division bells rang from 9:18 p.m. until 9:40 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 



 

 

Yeas 
 
 Shillington Goulet t 
 Lingenfelter Hagel t 
 Koskie Lyons t 
 Brockelbank Calvert t 
 Upshall Lautermilch t 
 Simard Smart t 
 Kowalsky Van Mulligen t 
 Anguish Koenker t 
 
--16 R 

Nays 
 
 Schmidt Sauder t 
 Hodgins Toth t 
 Maxwell Petersen t 
 Hardy Wolfe t 
 Kopelchuk McLaren t 
 Martens Baker t 
 Meiklejohn Swan t 
 Martin Muirhead t 
 Hopfner Johnson t 
 Swenson Gleim t 
 Neudorf Britton t 
 Klein Gardner t 
 Pickering Saxinger t 
 
-- 26 R 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, you would admit 
that the main contact for rural municipalities within the government would 
be your department, and I'm wondering if you view your department as 
representing the best interests of rural municipalities in the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- You asked, am I representing the rural municipalities?  
The answer is yes. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Could you tell us, Mr. Minister, when the Department of 
Highways has a gravel pit and Department of Highways no longer want to 
utilize that gravel pit or the Cabinet is willing to take that gravel pit 
away from the Department of Highways, has it not always been past practice 
that it would first be offered to the rural municipality in which the 
gravel pit is located, sir? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Mr. Chairman, we do the surface lease; Energy and Mines 
does the quarry lease. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- I asked, Mr. Minister, if it is not the usual practice that 
when Highways releases a gravel pit that the rural municipality in which 
the gravel pit is located has the first option to utilize that gravel pit. 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Mr. Chairman, for a group that just voted against rural 
development, I have to say that I'm surprised at the concern they have over 
RMs, but I will say this: that yes, it is normally the practice of a rural 
municipality to have access to gravel if the Highways don't want it. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Well, Mr. Minister, were you at the cabinet meeting where 
there was an order in council passed, taking away gravel pit number 73K66 
from the Department of Highways and awarding it to one individual, private 
individual, without prior consultation with the Rural Municipality of 
Meadow Lake, sir?  Were you at that cabinet meeting where the order in 
council was passed? 
 
(2145) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Well my understanding is . . . I have to go back and 
look at whatever the order in council number was, 877 or whatever it was, 
in regards to . . . I assume you're still talking about the one at Meadow 
Lake. 
 
My understanding is that the RM has access to all the gravel that they want 
from that same pit.  And that was an agreement, part of the agreement where 
it was part private and part RM.  They have access to all they want. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- That's not true, Mr. Minister.  If you're that familiar 
with the situation of sharing gravel in the pit, you would certainly 
remember whether or not you were at the cabinet meeting where an order in 
council is passed by the cabinet that you're a member of, taking the 
Highways gravel pit number 73K66 away from the Department of Highways and 
awarding it to a private individual without prior consultation with the 
Rural Municipality of Meadow Lake. 
 
I ask you very simply, sir, if you can remember the details you've just 
espoused here, you certainly could remember whether or not where at the 
cabinet meeting where you seized the gravel pit from the Department of 
Highways. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Just for . . . What I've been informed here by the 
staff, is that the land was owned by highways, was transferred, was sold 
to, or a quarry lease was issued by Energy and Mines to Wagman, but before 
the RM would give their approval to have lands branch issue the surface 
lease, they went through community planning and they have access under 
agreement, through Wagman, to have access to the gravel. 
 
So yes, Energy and Mines . . . or Highways did issue the permit through 
Energy, or Energy and Mines issued it through Highways, or however you want 
to put it, to Wagman before they contacted the RM, but that has since been 
rectified before it was given approval under department of lands through 
community planning. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- You told me earlier, Mr. Minister, you represent the best 
interests of rural municipalities in this province.  In fact, when Energy 
and Mines sent out the notice that the gravel pit was being taken away from 
the Department of Highways, that it went to the wrong RM.  They sent it to 



 

 

the RM of Beaver River and not the RM of Meadow Lake. 
 
I go back to my question, Mr. Minister. I ask you very simply, if you have 
this kind of detail on the gravel pit situation that was not owned by the 
Department of Highways -- it was leased land. In fact, the land was located 
on 14-61-21 west of the third.  What I'm asking you, if you represent the 
best interests of rural municipalities in this province, were you at the 
cabinet meeting where the order in council was signed taking away the 
gravel pit against the wishes of the Department of Highways and placing it 
in the hands of a private individual, sir?  Were you at that meeting? 
 
Mr. Hardy: -- Well first of all, whether I was at the cabinet meeting or 
not is not to be disclosed at this place or any other place. That's 
confidential, first of all, and I don't think it's appropriate to even ask.  
Second, it wasn't taken away from Highways. They had no need for it, no 
requirement for it, and I told you it went through the process.  Highways, 
before it could be given a surface lease, had to be turned over to the 
Department of Rural Development to the lands branch.  Then before it could 
be then issued a surface lease it had to go to community planning which the 
RM had an input into, and which was resolved at that time, their access to 
the gravel.  So yes, we did look after the RM's interest when we found out 
about it, and it had to come through us and community planning and the RM, 
and it's all been satisfied. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Sir, you only looked after the RM after they came to Regina 
to their convention -- the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities 
-- and requested a meeting with ministers of the Crown.  Mr. Minister, you 
do not represent the best interests of rural municipalities in this case.  
You might be correct in your process that you've laid out here tonight, but 
that process was not followed.  In fact, if the rural municipality had not 
come and lobbied here in Regina, they would have had no access to gravel 
from that gravel pit. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister, in the detail that you have here this evening, why 
would the Department of Highways want to turn over a gravel pit to a 
private individual that has an estimated million yards of gravel in the 
gravel pits, sir.  Could you answer that for us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- First of all, that's Highways' question and they will 
tell you why they want to do it.  And I'm not even going to speculate why 
they want to do it.  Maybe they didn't require it, maybe there's other 
reasons for it.  And certainly with all fairness to Department of Highways, 
they have sufficient gravel there . . . I just was double-checking with the 
department officials here.  We still have the surface lease that we haven't 
turned over yet to Wagman so that it hasn't even officially been turned 
over.  Just in the process of being done, although it is going to be done. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Minister, who represented Mr. Wagman?  I didn't bring 
his name up in this conversation.  I don't know why you would bandy his 
name about in this legislative forum.  I don't know what kind of political 
mileage you would want to make out of that.  It's you that mentioned the 
name.  But since you mentioned the name, I ask you, who represented Mr. 
Wagman in terms of attaining the gravel pit in his name and not the name of 



 

 

the rural municipality? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- I assume, Mr. Chairman, that he had a lawyer to do it.  
I don't know who he had to do it, and if he's talking about a Mr. Wagman, I 
don't know who Mr. Wagman is.  I don't know who a lot of the contractors in 
this province are. 
 
I can say this much, that it's been done through the process that was set 
up.  The RM was fully aware of it.  They have, as every RM knows, as every 
RM in this province knows, always access to come and talk to me.  If I'm 
not aware of a problem and if there is a problem, we always sit down and 
resolve it in a way that is reasonable, sensible, and to the RMs -- in most 
cases, and I think in all cases, to their satisfaction. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Why do you think, Mr. Minister, a minister of the Crown 
would phone the secretary-treasurer of the RM and lobby them not to take 
the gravel pit and accuse them of going into the sale of gravel? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Well that's an interesting comment he just made.  He 
said a minister of the Crown phoned the secretary.  If he is referring to 
me, that's absolutely not true, and I don't know why he would say that.  
Accusations seem to come pretty easy if that's what he's saying, and I 
would like to have him say that outside of the House, not in this House. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- I did not say you, Mr. Minister.  I don't know why you'd be 
so sensitive.  I addressed the question to you.  I asked you as to why a 
minister of the Crown would phone the rural municipality and accuse them of 
going into the gravel selling business when they have every right to 
acquire gravel pit number 73K66.  Every right they should have had to that 
gravel pit.  They only found out about it after Mr. Wagman was awarded the 
gravel pit by order in council of your government.  No courtesy extended 
the RM. If you represent the best interests of rural municipalities in this 
province, why weren't you on top of that situation?  Why did the gravel pit 
go to a private individual and not the Rural Municipality of Meadow Lake, 
sir? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Well I'm just checking.  To the best of the knowledge of 
the officials here today, there was no order in council turning that land 
over to anybody because it's not required an order in council.  There was 
an order in council went through cabinet that I'm aware of, that went 
through for the site for the Millar Western mill to go into Meadow Lake, 
which is going to create a whole bunch of jobs up there and do value added 
to forest industry. 
 
I'm aware of that one, but I'm certainly not aware of one going to in 
regards to that gravel pit, an order in council that is, going through.  
Now the department officials said, as far as they know one was not 
required, and I am not aware of one going through in that order. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Minister, why would you bring up Millar Western in 
regards to a gravel pit?  Is there any connection between the gravel pit 
and Millar Western?  I never mentioned Millar Western. You're now bringing 
up Millar Western.  Why would you bring up Millar Western when we're 



 

 

talking about a gravel pit that's several miles away but in the same rural 
municipality?  You categorized your orders in council by rural municipality 
in the province, sir. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- First of all, when you asked me about an order in 
council, I said the only order in council that I know went through cabinet 
was for a site for Millar Western mill, and that was part of that package 
which brought industry to the North, jobs for both our native people and 
people of the North, and certainly value added to a forest industry up 
there.  That's what I said, number one. 
 
Number two is that in regards to where the gravel pit is located, I'm told 
by my officials that an order in council was not required and I am not 
aware, personally aware, of an order in council going through in regards to 
that gravel pit. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Well thank you, sir.  I appreciate that information.  Now 
let's get down to the gravel pit.  Why was the gravel pit not offered to 
the Rural Municipality of Meadow Lake, as opposed to it being offered to a 
private individual?  You stated earlier, Mr. Minister, that standard 
procedure would be for a gravel pit -- once Highways has released it -- to 
go to the rural municipality in which the gravel pit is located.  Why has 
this happened?  Has your department got an explanation as to why the 
private individual gets the gravel pit and not the Rural Municipality of 
Meadow Lake? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Well I think I explained to him a couple of times.  I'll 
try it one more time.  We do not issue quarry leases, number one.  We issue 
surface leases which allows the quarrying to take place.  Before we issue a 
surface lease, the RM has to have community planning approval.  Those are 
the three processes that it goes through.  They have been through those 
three processes now in regards to the gravel pit. 
 
Whether Energy and Mines wishes to or don't wish to release the gravel, you 
would have to ask Energy and Mines. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- You, sir, represent the best interests of rural 
municipalities in the province of Saskatchewan.  You stated that on the 
record here this evening. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Why would you stand by, Mr. Minister, and allow a private 
individual to get a gravel pit that has an estimated one million yards of 
gravel in it, when the rural municipality wanted it.  The due process was 
not followed.  They were not notified of the transfer of the gravel pit 
from Highways to a private individual.  Why did you not intervene and make 
sure that the RM's voice was heard when they finally found out that the 
gravel pit was being turned over to a private individual, why did you not 
intervene so that that RM could obtain the gravel pit that they so deserve? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Well, I'm not going to go back over it again, except to 
say that to the best of my knowledge they have never made a representation 



 

 

to me in regards to that, the RM of Meadow Lake. 
 
Certainly, I can give you the other facts that are here.  So I don't know . 
. . And they never came to me in regards to that concern that you're 
raising here today. 
 
My comments to you are three.  One, Energy and Mines does the quarrying 
lease.  Two, Highways owned the property.  Three, that before we could 
issue a surface lease it had to be turned over to us; and four, before that 
surface lease was then issued, it had to go through community planning of 
the RM of Meadow Lake.  Those have all been done. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Sir, your department had knowledge.  You've admitted that 
tonight because you had to approve at least one stage of the transfer of 
the gravel pit.  At least that's what I understood you to say.  Are you 
saying that your department would not bring to your attention a procedure 
that is unprecedented or at least, at the very least is very unusual?  The 
procedure in the past has been that gravel pits turned over or released by 
the Department of Highways go first to the rural municipality.  If the 
rural municipality doesn't want it, then it can go elsewhere. 
 
So are you telling us that no one in your department brought to your 
attention that there was an unusual situation occurring where that RM of 
Meadow Lake was not even aware that a gravel pit was being taken away from 
Highways and turned over to a private individual?  Are you telling us, sir, 
that you had no knowledge of that? 
 
Hon. Mr.Hardy: -- What I'm telling you is that before we get . . . All we 
basically do, I went through the four steps.  And before we give the final 
. . . all we give is approval to the RM of Meadow Lake's planning and 
community planning by-laws.  That's what we do.  We give approval to that, 
which allows it to go forward.  So what we have done and will be doing, 
because the RM of Meadow Lake has passed it under their by-laws, we're 
giving approval to that to let them go ahead and have the surface lease for 
the quarry.  So it's the RM of Meadow Lake have made the decision, not the 
Department of Rural Development. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order.  Being near 10 o'clock the committee will rise and 
report progress. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:02 p.m. 
 


