





























































Hansard: April 19, 1990


 

 

April 19/90 
 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 

Standing Committee on Private Members' Bills 
 
Clerk: -- Mr. Britton, as chairman of the Standing Committee on Private 
Members' Bills, presents the sixth report of the committee, which is as 
follows: 
 

 Your committee has duly examined the undermentioned petitions for private 
Bills and finds that the provisions of rules 56, 57, and 60 have been 
fully complied with: 

 
 of the trustee board of Saskatchewan Conference of Mennonite Brethren 

Churches of Swift Current in the province of Saskatchewan; 
 
 of Millar Memorial Bible Institute of the village of Pambrun in the 

province of Saskatchewan; and 
 
 of the religious order of the Sisters of Charity of Montreal "Grey Nuns." 
 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 
my colleague from Moosomin: 
 

 That the sixth report of the Standing Committee on Private Members' Bills 
be now concurred in. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to 
introduce to you, and through you to all members of the legislature, 
hundreds of Saskatchewan teachers who have joined us this afternoon for 
question period. 
 
I am sure that each one of us have memories of a very special teacher or 
teachers that have made a tremendous difference in our lives.  For me, 
there are four -- Miss Douglas, Mr. Culham, Mr. Zultok, and Mr. Goetz -- 
all high school teachers at Walter Murray Collegiate in Saskatoon. 
 
Individual teachers have been important to the cultural, political, social, 
and educational life of our province.  We are indeed honoured to have 
teachers with us this afternoon.  We salute you and we welcome you to the 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It is my 
pleasure as well to introduce and welcome all of the STF (Saskatchewan 
Teachers' Federation) councillors who are with us today. 
 
I know that these people are to be commended for the fact that they give up 
their Easter break to attend council each year.  And this is a time when 
some very important deliberations are held, policies are set, and 
directions made for not only the coming year but for years to come, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Having served on council at one time myself, I know of the very hard and 
committed and dedicated work that these people do, and I want all members 
to join with me in welcoming them as well here to the legislature today. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Speaker, as well, I would like to introduce a 
couple of guests in your gallery, and they are the mayor of the city of 
Saskatoon, Mayor Dayday, and Phil Richards, director of finance, visiting 
us today and in Regina for meetings.  And I would ask all members to join 
with me in welcoming his worship and Phil Richards to the legislature 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  On behalf of the 
official opposition, I also want to welcome Mayor Dayday, who is the mayor 
of the city of Saskatoon -- which is the city I represent -- along with 
Phil Richards, the financial director. 
 
I know that they're probably here to support the teachers in their meeting 
here at the legislature today, Mayor Henry Dayday being a former teacher 
himself.  So welcome to the city of Regina and to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Funding for Education 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  My question was going to 
be to the Premier, but in the absence of the Premier I'm going to direct it 
to the Minister of Education, or perhaps the Minister of Finance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as has been pointed out by my colleague and the Minister of 
Education, the galleries today, publicly, are absolutely filled by teachers 
from all over the province of Saskatchewan who are concerned.  They're 
concerned about education and they're concerned about the future of the 
children that they teach, and they're concerned because they've seen, Mr. 
Speaker, a consistent pattern of underfunding for education over the last 
eight years. 
 



 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, to the minister is this. In view of the fact that 
this current provincial budget did nothing to improve the situation -- in 
fact I would say worsen the situation by having operating grants of less 
than 3 per cent which is less than the 5 per cent inflation rate -- done 
nothing to improve the situation, my question to you, sir, is this: will 
you give the Saskatchewan teachers, the parents, the trustees, the House 
today, a commitment that you will immediately review the government's 
current spending priorities with a view to freeing up much needed 
additional funds for schooling, for teachers, for trustees and the 
students. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Speaker, let me tell the hon. member that 
education has been a priority in this province for as long as I can 
remember.  There is no difference today than what there was when they were 
in power.  The government of the day has always given as much money to 
educational spending as they possibly could. 
 
And I think that we always have to keep in mind, Mr. Speaker, that when we 
are funding programs within this province, whether they be in health or in 
education or in other areas, that the amount of money that can be put into 
any budget is going to be determined by the ability of the taxpayers to 
pay. 
 
We have not exactly enjoyed good economic times in this province in the 
last few years, as you would well know. And the fact that we are paying, or 
going to be spending in the coming year some $888 million towards 
education, to me, Mr. Speaker, that is a very substantial amount of money 
going into education, and I can say that we can stack our record up with 
any other province or any other government in this country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question for the minister.  Mr. 
Premier, Mr. Minister, you say that the objective of governments has been 
to devote as much money as possible for education, but I draw to your 
attention, sir, that on March 12, 1990, the SSTF -- the SSTA (Saskatchewan 
School Trustees Association), STF, LEADS (League of Educational 
Administrators, Directors and Superintendents), the educators and trustees 
all said in a rather damning and damaging press release that the funding 
for education has been gravely eroded by your government, sir.  In fact in 
the words of the president of the STF, Susan Bates, quote: 
 

 We have gone through a long period of economic restraint that has left K 
to 12 education pared to the bone (pared to the bone). 

 
That doesn't sound to me like doing all that you can for education. 
 
My question to you, Mr. Minister, is this: in view of these facts; in view 
of the fact that there is a simmering contract dispute between the teachers 
and the trustees right now; in view of this press release; in view of the 
fact that your colleagues defended a few days ago a salary of over $700,000 



 

 

to the president of PCS (Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, Inc.) because 
the market dictated it, my question to you, sir, is why doesn't your 
government apply the same principle when it comes to education and pay to 
education what the market demands so the students can get their benefit 
too? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  I realize that question period is very interesting 
and, I guess, paying close attention, and they may be moved to respond 
themselves from time to time; however, I would like to remind you that the 
traditions of the House don't allow for guests in galleries to participate.  
And I'd like your co-operation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The current year and the 
past year and in decades in the past, Mr. Speaker, we have generally in 
Saskatchewan tried to keep pace as well as we could with what's happening 
in other provinces when it comes to teachers' salaries, benefits, payments 
to school boards, and so on. 
 
That's no different this year, Mr. Speaker, than it has ever been.  The 
fact is that the school boards have received, or will be receiving, a 3 per 
cent increase in their operating budgets this year, plus Educational 
Development Fund, some $90 million which have already been paid out.  That 
was something that was initiated by this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And many of the directors of education in this province that I have talked 
with, and school boards, feel that the budget this year and the 3 per cent 
is fair.  And the only concern that I have had raised for the most part 
about cuts in programs or cuts in staff is by members on the other side of 
this House. 
 
Now let's point out quite clearly, Mr. Speaker, let's point out quite 
clearly that the enrolment in this province has gone down substantially, 
some 2,260 students in the last year.  The number of teachers has gone up 
by 79.  So for them to be saying that we're going to be having cuts and 
that all the school boards in the province are unhappy, that is entirely 
wrong, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the minister, and 
quite frankly, I must say, Mr. Minister, I'm amazed at this response. 
 
How in the world is it that you can stand up in your place today in this 
legislature and say, in the face of a press statement by SSTA, STF, and by 
LEADS, all of the educators who quickly and properly point out that funding 
is in fact at a very dangerous level, how in the world can you maintain the 
position that it is adequate funding? 
 
Take a look at these figures, according to your budget: Arcola school 
division mill rate, up 11.5 per cent; Last Mountain, up 7.6 per cent; 
Tisdale, up 8.8 per cent; North Battleford, up 7.3 per cent.  Moreover, 



 

 

you're passing the buck from Regina right on to the ratepayers and the 
local property tax payers, putting the crunch not only on the teachers but 
on the trustees. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question to you is very simple.  In the view of this 
united demand for increased funding for education -- and keep in mind it's 
not for the teachers and the trustees; it's for the youth of tomorrow.  In 
the face . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- In the face of these shortages, in the face of the fact 
that we are going to be short-changing our future, short-changing our kids, 
in the face of all of this, how in the world can you justify $370 million 
for Cargill and a cut-back for education like I've said . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Speaker, I think we see another example of the 
Leader of the Opposition playing fast and loose with figures.  I think that 
if we consider the fact that the formula today that's used by this 
government and the Department of Education in funding school divisions in 
this province is the same as it was when they were in power, and we are 
looking at approximately a 50-50 split. 
 
I can point out, Mr. Speaker, to the Leader of the Opposition, that in 1982 
that the ratio then of provincial . . . the amount of provincial grant that 
was going in was, I think, in the neighbourhood of 51.1 per cent.  Today, 
Mr. Speaker, it's 50.1.  Now that's not a heck of a lot of a difference.  
And we can give them those figures, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would also point out to the Leader of the Opposition, when he makes 
comments about Cargill, and we're not giving Cargill 300-and-some millions 
of dollars.  Again, playing fast and loose with figures. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, if the Leader of the Opposition and that party, when 
they were in power, had been doing a little bit of building and developing 
some manufacturing and processing in this province, we might have more 
money for education today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the Minister of 
Education, and I can only help but ponder, where in the world has this 
Minister of Education been?  We've not had 25,000 people leaving the 
province of Saskatchewan during our term of administration, as has been the 
case under your term of administration.  That's how much building you've 
been doing.  Where in the world has the minister been? 
 
Here we have the Statistics Canada records which show that the per capita 
expenditure on schooling and the percentage on education is at the lowest 
level of all of the governments in Canada.  Those are the figures right 
here. 



 

 

 
An Hon. Member: -- That's not right. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- And the minister, the former minister of Finance, says it's 
not right because he's going to throw in the local property tax base as a 
part of the figure. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- You bet. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- And they say, yes, you bet.  Exactly, they're cutting back 
on their own responsibilities for education and loading it up on the local 
property taxpayers and playing the teachers off against the trustees, and 
that's wrong.  How about standing up and facing your responsibility for the 
children of tomorrow? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition insists 
on using numbers that are inaccurate and trying to mislead this House. 
 
I've sent him a briefing note that I hope he will take some time to read, 
which clearly points out where we rank as far as spending on education in 
this country.  And we are not last, Mr. Speaker, as the Leader of the 
Opposition would point out.  We, in fact, are sixth in this country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you stack that up with other provinces which have much 
more vibrant economies than ours, I think that we're doing very well to 
maintain that particular state. 
 
When we talk about the net migration of people from this province, I could 
also point out, Mr. Speaker, that there were substantial migrations from 
his province when they were in power, and for the most part it has been 
tied to what is happening in the agricultural sector. 
 
When you combine with what has happened in the agricultural sector in the 
last few years to what has happened in uranium and potash and oil, it's 
understandable why people are leaving.  They're leaving to get jobs. 
 
But again, Mr. Speaker, it points out the reason why we have to have more 
manufacturing and processing in this particular province -- paper plants, 
Mr. Speaker, fertilizer plants, bacon plants, and other manufacturing 
industries. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Now I wonder where you'd rank that answer on the bell 
curve, Mr. Speaker.  I think, a real failure. 
 
My question is to the Minister of Education. Mr. Minister, the Meadow Lake 
School Division actually received less in provincial operating funds than 
it did the previous year.  Larry Zemlak, the director of education for the 
board, is quoted in the Meadow Lake Progress as saying that the board may 
have to make cuts in unspecified areas to make up the decrease. 



 

 

 
What would you advise them to do, Mr. Minister?  Cut teachers, cram more 
students into class-rooms, shut down schools? What should this particular 
local school division do as a result of your underfunding? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Speaker, there are two factors that we have to 
consider when we're talking about operating grants that school boards are 
going to be receiving.  One of them is to do with assessment.  The other 
one was to do with the number of students. 
 
Now I'm sure that if you want to check the record that you'll find that the 
number of students in Meadow Lake has gone down; and you'll also find 
probably, Mr Speaker, that the assessment has gone up.  Those are the two 
determining factors. 
 
The majority of the school divisions in this province received more money 
than what they were getting last year.  And that of course is to do again 
with those two very specific reasons -- number of students and also what 
was happening with their assessment rate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- New question to the minister.  All I can say is, tell that 
to the farmers that have seen a tremendous increase in their local school 
property taxes, Mr. Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- I have a new question to the Minister of Education.  Mr. 
Minister, due to your government's underfunding, teachers are deeply 
concerned about conditions under which they now have to work.  Your 
government is risking the very quality of education for our young people.  
How long do you expect teachers in this province to continue to do their 
job of preparing young people for the future in overcrowded class-rooms, 
without adequate prep time and with insufficient resources? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Speaker, I think if you consider our schools in 
this province today, the condition of them, there's been a substantial 
improvement.  There have been a lot of new facilities constructed in the 
last eight years.  There have been a lot of facilities where renovations 
have taken place.  There have been a lot of materials purchased over the 
last eight years with the Educational Development Fund -- some 90 millions 
of dollars that have been provided.  A lot of schools that have been able 
to upgrade their libraries, put in computer programs and do a lot of other 
things with regard to efficiencies around their buildings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that our facilities in this province, for the most 
part -- and I will admit there are still areas that we have to continue to 
address -- but for the most part, the facilities in this province are very, 



 

 

very good, compared to what you would find in other provinces in Canada. 
 
I would also suggest that for the most part, the schools that I have been 
in -- and I have been in many of them; I think much more than I can say for 
some of the members opposite -- that there are going to be needs as time 
goes on, particularly with the core curriculum.  And we must continue to 
work with the teachers and with the trustees to ensure that there are 
adequate materials and adequate equipment to implement these new programs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- New question to the minister.  Mr. Minister, I'm not 
talking about facilities, I'm talking about resources and prep time and 
teachers to make sure we have an adequate education system in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Minister, surely you must know that teachers are being 
forced to take on more and more responsibilities.  They've become social 
workers; they've become counsellors.  They are distributing food and 
clothing to needy children.  They're dispensing medications.  They're 
taking on all kinds of functions that haven't traditionally been teacher 
functions.  It's obvious, Mr. Minister, that our school system requires 
much-needed funds to put support services in place to support students. 
 
And my question to you, Mr. Minister, is: when are you going to put funding 
into place so that teachers can do what they've been trained to do, and 
that's teach the young people of our province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Speaker, I would certainly agree with the 
member opposite -- we don't agree on everything -- but I would agree with 
her that teachers today are faced with many, many more tasks than what they 
used to have.  I know that from my own experiences that there have been a 
lot of changes.  We've got some problems in our class-rooms today that we 
didn't have five years ago.  Teachers are being expected to wear more and 
more hats as time goes on, and to fill more and more roles. 
 
So I understand that, and I know that we have to continue to assure that 
there is more support there.  And we have to look at counselling services, 
Mr. Speaker.  We also have to look at assistance in helping in those cases 
where there are hungry children in the schools, Mr. Speaker.  We also have 
to take a look at the fact that many of our social workers are overworked.  
And that type of support is needed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But at the same time, we are going to have to ensure that all of the needs 
of our boys and girls are met in the best way that we can.  I know that 
they need that support, and we have to continue to work together in trying 
to provide that support. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 



 

 

 
Teachers' Superannuation Fund 

 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have a question to the 
Minister of Education.  Mr. Minister, my question deals with a very serious 
issue of the alleged misuse of pension money. 
 
While you are giving a commitment to Cargill Grain of $370 million, Mr. 
Minister, you've taken money out of the Teachers' Superannuation Fund for 
other expenditures of the government.  Teachers are worried about the 
security of their future pensions, and they have good reason to be.  I ask 
you then, Mr. Minister: how do you justify this breach of trust in the use 
of the Teachers' Superannuation Fund? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Speaker, we've just seen another prime example 
of a member in the opposition trying to mislead.  When he stands in his 
place, Mr. Speaker, and suggests that money from teachers' pension fund has 
been used for other things.  That is totally inaccurate, totally 
inaccurate. 
 
It's also something, I think, Mr. Speaker, for a member on that side of the 
House and the member who was in government back in 1980 when the pension 
plan was changed, it's also something, Mr. Speaker, for that member to 
stand in his place and talk about teacher pensions when in fact the 
practice that is going on today is the same practice that was followed when 
that party was in power with regard to taking money over and above the 7 
per cent interest, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- A new question to the same minister, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 
Minister, the practice you speak of began in 1985 under your 
administration. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- As the result of your actions in this budget, teachers 
have been forced to go to court over the breach of trust by your 
government.  They don't want litigation, they want negotiation.  And so I 
say to you, Mr. Minister, will you assure teachers today in this Assembly 
that you're going to put a stop to this; that you will speak to your 
officials in the Teachers' Superannuation Commission and that you will make 
sure that they begin to talk to the Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation and 
settle this thing once and for all, and will you give that assurance today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Speaker, maybe we have to go back and review 
who was the minister of Finance back in the 1970s and back during the time 
when this new legislation was brought in. 
 



 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is the same member who was minister of Finance who's 
asking these questions.  What did they do with pensions?  We are following 
the same rules that they did.  We are bound by law, Mr. Speaker, to be 
making contributions into the Teachers' Superannuation Fund. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me assure you, let me assure this House and any of the 
teachers that are in the galleries today and any who are outside this 
particular legislature today: no one is in danger of missing out on their 
pension.  No one is in danger of that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are committed to ensure that we put money into the teachers fund every 
year as we have done in the past.  Not only have we done that, Mr. Speaker, 
and met the minimum contribution that was necessary, but over the last 
eight years this government has contributed in excess of $120 million in 
overpayment to the teachers' fund, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  A question to the Minister of 
Education.  Mr. Minister, when you talk about the superannuation fund 
earnings, you are wrong in law and you are wrong morally. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Mr. Minister, in 1985 your government started taking 
earnings over and above 7 per cent from the Teachers' Superannuation Fund, 
and since then you took $250 million in earnings from the Teachers' 
Superannuation Fund.  That's why the fund is at risk; that is why the 
teachers in this gallery, Mr. Speaker, are concerned about the security of 
their pension fund. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you table, can you document any authority that you have 
for this?  What right did you have to take those funds? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Speaker, it's interesting to listen to the 
members of the opposition talk about pensions.  I think the bigger question 
that we should be asking is what about the $1.5 billion unfunded liability 
that was left behind by that government?  If there's going to be any 
concern . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- We talk about rights, Mr. Speaker.  If there's 
going to be any concern about teachers' pensions in the future, it's going 
to be as a result of the unfunded liability that was left behind by them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- What gave them the right to withdraw any of the 
interest over and above 7 per cent when they were in power, Mr. Speaker?  
As I indicated earlier this government, during the eight years that we have 



 

 

been in power, have contributed in excess of $120 million over and above 
the minimum that we were required to contribute by law. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

The Professions Act 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you.  Mr. Speaker, I have a new question through you, 
sir, to the Minister of Education.  And may I say to preface it that if 
anybody would believe the answers given by the Minister of Education today 
on any of the issues raised here, would believe that that government 
opposite would balance the budget, something they haven't done for eight 
years.  They haven't been able to do that.  That's how factual and credible 
they are. 
 
My question to you, sir, pertains to the professions Act.  Now you just sit 
tight and listen to the question because you might learn something, Mr. 
Minister, although I doubt it. 
 
 DSome Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- My question to you, Mr. Minister of Education . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, my question to the Minister of Education is 
simple and important.  Yesterday the teachers were shocked, I would say, 
and dismayed to hear that your government has been drafting for quite some 
time now, something called the new professions Bill, an omnibus Bill which 
would encompass control, regulatory control from Regina, Big Brother doing 
it all, including the teachers' federation and The Teachers' Federation 
Act.  Yes, you have that omnibus Bill drafted. 
 
Tell me whether it's been drafted and whether or not that's the intention 
of the omnibus Bill, and when are you going to table the Bill in this 
House? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Speaker, I don't have to stand here and defend 
my record in education to anybody on that side of the House.  Let's make 
that very clear. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Secondly, Mr. Speaker, I would wonder if the member 
opposite was not at the same function I was at last night because I made it 
quite clear to all of these people who are visiting us this afternoon that 
with regard to the professions Act, that the teachers' federation will be 
exempt from any changes that are going to be coming into that Act. 
 
That is an Act, Mr. Speaker, that is very necessary, as it applies to many 
associations and groups within this province.  But as I assured the members 



 

 

last night, and I will assure them here again today, that under no 
circumstances will there be any changes that are going to affect the 
Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation when the new professions Act is tabled in 
this House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Hon. members, question period is over. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I would seek 
leave of the members to move a motion respecting the estimates of the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 
Referral of Estimates and Supplementary Estimates to the Standing Committee 
on Estimates 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to move, seconded by the 
Deputy House Leader, that is the member for Rosthern, by leave of the 
Assembly: 
 

 That the Estimates and Supplementary Estimates for the Legislative 
Assembly, being subvotes 1 to 3, 5 to 7, 17, 20 to 23, and 26 of vote 21 
be withdrawn from the Committee of Finance and referred to the Standing 
Committee on Estimates. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Rural Development 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 43 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, yesterday I spoke to 
you in some lengths about the very major concern that I have and the 
responsibility that you have as an integral part of the cabinet and as 
representing rural Saskatchewan.  And I come back, before I get into some 
of the specifics, to reiterate that major concern that I have, and I don't 
think it can be taken lightly. 
 
There is a history in this province, Mr. Minister, and the history of that 
province, when it started to turn around was in 1944 under the late Tommy 
Douglas.  At the time that he came to office . . . and I want to go through 



 

 

the histories of the priorities of then and the priorities today.  And I 
want to challenge what is happening in rural Saskatchewan today versus the 
history of the development of this province in working with the people of 
this province. 
 
I take you back, Mr. Minister, when the late premier took over this 
province, Tommy Douglas, that this province was in decimation, 
disintegration, and it had the highest per capita debt of any province in 
the Dominion of Canada.  There was virtually no infrastructure whatsoever.  
And through almost 20 years under the late premier we saw this province and 
rural Saskatchewan be developed.  We saw power taken to our farms, and 
telephones, and highway built in grid roads, and hospitals and schools.  
And we saw the premier at that time, as the farmers came out of the Great 
Depression, alleviate the debt of farmers that were ridden with debt at 
that time, Mr. Minister.  And he was able to do it on a very restricted 
base, a base of agriculture, small family farms at that time, particularly 
small, and he also had small business, but virtually no development of the 
resource sector of the province. 
 
And as I said, during all of those years, he built the infrastructure of 
rural Saskatchewan which today we see being destroyed.  Almost 20 years he 
worked with the people of this province, and with only the agricultural 
community base of taxation and small business, he was able to balance the 
budget.  And that was carried on by successive governments under the late 
premier Thatcher and indeed by the last premier of this province of the New 
Democratic Party, Allan Blakeney. 
 
And I want to say that Saskatchewan became the social laboratory of all 
North America.  There was a pride of the achievements and the 
accomplishments that we brought to all of the people of Saskatchewan.  And 
I want to say that indeed Saskatchewan became a leader of North America. 
 
And to mention only a few, hospitalization, the first hospitalization plan 
in North America. 
 
Medicare, founded here in Saskatchewan by the people of Saskatchewan and 
taking health care to whether you could afford the expense of health care 
or not, it became available to all peoples across this province, and 
subsequently was adopted as a medicare for all people of Canada. 
 
The prescription drug program, first program of its type and one of the 
best in North America. 
 
Children's dental program which went out to our rural communities, into our 
schools and provided preventative dental decay.  Those were services that 
were taken into every nook and corner of this province.  And you know what 
you did in respect to that, and you stood by and watched that service be 
taken from the rural schools, from the rural children of this province.  
And you call yourself a Rural Development Minister. 
 
Other great accomplishments were made.  Instituted the set up of the 
government insurance corporation that set up a network of small-business 
men serving people throughout rural Saskatchewan.  And today, under your 



 

 

administration, what looms is the privatization and the sell off of the 
general aspect of the insurance company, government insurance. 
 
Yes, those were some of the achievements.  We also instituted the first 
program of it's type for low income people that were working and having 
difficulty in raising a family.  And the first program in Canada was the 
family income program instituted here by our government to help the working 
poor.  Labour legislation that was introduced became a model to North 
America. 
 
And under the late premier Douglas, the Public Service Commission was 
established to take out and give an independence to the appointments 
through the Public Service Commission. 
 
And during the period, there was economic development.  And I want to say 
that during, primarily during the latter stages of Mr. Douglas's tenure, 
some under the late Ross Thatcher, some under Woodrow Lloyd, and more 
recently under Allan Blakeney, economic development and the development of 
our raw materials became evident.  And I want to say that we built and did 
economic development in this province, Mr. Minister, by using all methods 
available to us.  We used the co-operative movement; we used private 
investment; we used public, and we also used joint venture.  None were 
condemned to the back rooms because of ideology.  We fought and we worked 
for the development for the people of this province.  And the records will 
show that during the years of Douglas and Lloyd and Thatcher and Blakeney, 
never had a legacy of debt and mismanagement to the extent, to the 
disgusting extent of your government, Mr. Minister. 
 
(1445) 
 
And I want to say that there was economic development.  Today because of 
the actions of the Blakeney government, the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan is situated in Saskatoon, head office.  Otherwise there was no 
head office for potash even though we're one of the world's largest 
producers.  And working in that head office were a lot of Saskatchewan and 
Canadian people. 
 
And the profits of that corporation, and I want to tell you, were very 
substantial during our tenure -- $413 million into the coffers for the 
people of Saskatchewan.  And only under your mismanagement, as with the 
affairs of the operation of the government, did we see a decrease in the 
operation of the potash corporation. 
 
Saskoil was founded and today, although being privatized, Mr. Minister, 
head office is being built here, a new one, in Regina -- a direct result of 
the efforts in the founding of Saskoil. 
 
Uranium development, we had major uranium development.  And here in respect 
to uranium development we had joint ventures with companies from throughout 
the world.  And I want to say that throughout the 11 years under Allan 
Blakeney, prior to this administration taking over, there was 11 balance 
budgets.  The net debt position of this province when you took over was 
over $1 billion to the good, and today, today if you take all the assets of 



 

 

the province, subtract the liabilities, you've got over $3.4 billion in the 
hole.  That's performance, Mr. Minister. 
 
And I want to say that during those years under the previous 
administration, prior to this government taking over, the economic growth 
in Saskatchewan, as confirmed in a booklet that you put out right after you 
assumed office, indicating that economic development in Saskatchewan was 
outstripping all of Canada. 
 
Private and public investment was higher than any other province in Canada.  
Taxation was the lowest in the country.  The per capita debt was the lowest 
in all of Canada.  Those were the . . . That is part of what you took over.  
A province that was on it's way to prosperity and the provision of programs 
for both urban and rural people. 
 
And they come to the area of agriculture.  During those periods we saw the 
introduction of a program for hog stabilization, stabilization of hog 
prices under the SHARP (Saskatchewan hog assured returns program) program.  
We saw the introduction of the beef stabilization program which has become 
now a Canadian-wide beef stabilization program.  We saw the support of 
poultry and dairy and to supply management.  We saw the introduction of 
farmstart for the increase of diversification in hogs and poultry and dairy 
herds across the province.  And I'll tell you, the people of Saskatchewan 
had some hope then.  The people of Saskatchewan were indeed making money 
during those years. 
 
And in respect to small business, I can tell you, Mr. Minister, there were 
grants for research and development.  There was grants for the improvement 
of small businesses in small towns and communities throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
There was diversification.  And I can go through the list of 
diversification of manufacturing in my constituency.  And I'll tell you, it 
didn't happen under a Tory administration and it never will.  Because they 
are fixed on the multinational corporations, the great megaprojects, the 
Cargills of the world.  That's where their bread and butter is. 
 
And I'll tell you that SEDCO was also used to help small business.  And I 
remember when they took over, we looked at the expenditure of SEDCO, and 
you know what? -- 75 per cent of it was given to MacMillan Bloedel.  
MacMillan Bloedel got 75 per cent in one given year from SEDCO. 
 
And so what have we seen?  What have we seen in contrast, Mr. Minister?  
What is your priorities in respect to the people of Saskatchewan and to 
rural Saskatchewan?  Well I'll tell you. 
 
There have been a lot of promises made. And you promised rural 
Saskatchewan, and you were part of it, that in the first term of office 
that you would cut all E&H tax -- in the first term of office.  That's what 
the Minister of Agriculture said; that's what your Premier said.  That's 
what you campaigned on.  And you broke the promise, Mr. Minister.  You 
broke it.  But you not only broke it, you increased it by 40 per cent -- 
from 5 per cent to 7 per cent. 
 



 

 

Oh, they had another promise.  They said to the people of this province, 
we'll reduce the income tax 10 per cent across the board.  You put that on 
your campaign leaflets also, Mr. Minister.  And you broke that promise, 
because today we have the highest personal income tax rate in all of 
Canada.  And instead of cutting income tax, Mr. Minister, you know how you 
helped the people of rural Saskatchewan?  You put on a flat tax of 2 per 
cent -- increased it in a very significant way. 
 
Ah, another election promise: you're going to help all people, rural people 
and farmers, and so you said, well we're going to get rid of that gas tax.  
At the time it was 29 per cent, and you told the people it was 42 per cent 
. . . 42 cents, rather.  Not quite the truth, but what does that matter?  
It doesn't really matter, does it, Mr. Minister? 
 
And the Premier said in this House, in a commitment to people across this 
province: never again as long as I am Premier of this province will you be 
saddled with a gas tax.  And so he starts setting up a rebate of that gas 
tax.  And you know the other day, not long ago, before the House, he said, 
well I have to break that promise too.  And so what he did now is: instead 
of 29 cents or 26 cents as it was when he took over, the tax is now 45 
cents per gallon.  That's a help to the hard-pressed rural communities of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister. 
 
And what has been your obsession?  Has your obsession been with the 
struggle of the farmers and the small-business men of this province?  That 
hasn't been your priorities.  And you're part of it, because in the last 
session, what did we do?  Bill after Bill that was introduced in this House 
was on privatization, and the total House was dominated by that issue.  And 
let's face it, you're the ones that control the business of the House, and 
privatization was indeed your priority, not the concern of your report on 
farm financing.  That was not the concern.  The concern was not the exodus 
of people from the province.  It was not the concern about business men 
closing their doors or farmers being foreclosed on.  Privatization was the 
sole priority of this government. 
 
And do you realize that last session the only way we could get you to 
introduce the agricultural Bills was to embarrass the Premier into 
presenting them to this House.  And that's what happened. 
 
And I want to say that you have done privatization.  You privatized a 
number of them -- Saskoil and Sask Minerals and potash and Sask computer.  
You tried on SaskPower, and you're going to try after the next election, if 
you get elected again.  But that's not likely to come. 
 
You also have SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) on the slate.  
There's no doubt about it.  The only thing is that you were so far gone in 
respect to SGI that you had already made up the signs and all of the 
stationery.  And now what you're doing over there is shredding it so that 
the evidence isn't there that you may be privatizing. 
 
And what you have done, and let us not debate the issue of privatization as 
such, but let's take a look at what your government has done.  You have 
disposed of those assets of over a billion dollars.  Over a billion dollars 



 

 

of assets have been disposed of -- a billion dollars you have received from 
the privatization of those assets to date. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Minister, we have in contrast to what I have 
outlined was developed under Tommy Douglas and Allan Blakeney -- your 
legacy. 
 
The massiveness of the debt of this province of $4.4 billion in the 
Consolidated Fund; $13.2 billion collectively.  To pay interest alone, $493 
million annually.  As I read, it's $1.35 a day for each man, woman, and 
child. 
 
Poverty -- statistics indicate that we have the second highest incidence of 
poverty in all of Canada, second only to Newfoundland.  Taxes, I've 
indicated.  Every conceivable tax and fee schedule and licences have been 
massively increased under your jurisdiction.  So we have debt, increased 
taxes, services cut, assets disposed of, depopulation of the province. 
 
And basically what is happening is that the few rich are indeed getting 
richer, but the poor are getting poorer, and the numbers of poor are 
increasing.  The basic erosion of a middle class in Saskatchewan is in hand 
under this administration. 
 
And I want to say that during the years of our administration that I saw 
that . . . tried to espouse a philosophy, a philosophy of having people 
work together.  And I can remember so many times the late Tommy Douglas 
saying to the crowds that came to hear him, that we can't operate a society 
on human greed and rugged individualism where you run over your neighbour.  
And he used to say, we have to be our brother's keeper.  We have to have a 
share of compassion.  And through that share of compassion and 
co-operation, what we were able to do, Mr. Minister, is to build a pretty 
proud province here in Saskatchewan.  And that's what you have not only 
attacked, but you espoused.  Your slogans were: go out and get it.  Your 
slogans were: forget the next guy; you can be so much more; and give 'er 
snoose, Bruce. 
 
But I want to say, Mr. Minister, that the results are staggering as a 
result of the philosophy of your government.  And I guess worst of all and 
the biggest con game that I have ever seen is to this rural Saskatchewan 
and to the farmers of rural Saskatchewan, as I mentioned yesterday. 
 
And I really thought, Mr. Minister, that you wouldn't try to deceive the 
House in misrepresenting what our policies are in respect to agriculture.  
And we have outlined precisely and concisely in a document in Saskatchewan 
agriculture the case for government action. 
 
(1500) 
 
And we set out very clearly and I'm going to outline to the House and to 
the people of Saskatchewan what we have made public to the people and what 
we espouse for.  And I'll tell you this, that there is indeed a definite 
policy which we would ask you to consider, to adopt, and to help all of the 
farmers who I say are going to be driven from office. 



 

 

 
And I say to you, Mr. Minister, our program calls for a family farm 
stabilization program which I have alluded to before, based on the first 
8,000 bushels at the U.S. target price, which would guarantee price and 
production shortfalls on delivery. 
 
Our policy also calls for the strengthening of farm marketing boards and 
supply management, a revision of the mandate of the Farm Credit Corporation 
so that it becomes indeed a primary provider of loans, long-term financing 
at reasonable interest rate to the farmers, rather than a lender of last 
resort. 
 
We have joined here in the House with you, asking for the desperate need 
for a $500 million pay-out by the federal government at springtime, spring 
seeding time, to help cover the cost of farmers, to help them through this 
difficult time.  We have asked also for a spring seeding operating loan, 
guaranteed from the provincial government. 
 
And we also indicated -- and I want you to listen to this, Mr. Minister -- 
a moratorium on Saskatchewan farm foreclosures until July 1, 1990.  And 
that moratorium is called for, Mr. Minister, solely on the condition as 
follows: that the federal and provincial governments set a deadline of July 
1, 1990 to develop and implement a national farm income stabilization 
program which would guarantee production and price shortfalls by delivery; 
a moratorium tied to addressing it with an income stabilization program and 
only in that consideration. 
 
And that the Government of Saskatchewan introduce . . . and that the 
federal and provincial governments set a deadline of July 1, 1990 to 
implement, as I said, the national farm income stabilization program.  And 
secondly, that the Government of Saskatchewan introduce a program to assist 
with intergenerational transfer.  And secondly, that the federal and 
provincial governments set a deadline of July 1, 1990 by which to develop a 
national consensus with the farm groups for the restructure of farm debt. 
 
This is what we're saying, Mr. Minister, that there is a way.  If there is 
indeed a will and a determination and a commitment to address the crisis in 
rural Saskatchewan, if indeed there is, and I say if you do the individual 
steps that we have advocated within our program, you get the $500 million 
from the federal government . . . also loan guarantee to help with seeding.  
We've got part of those.  You put in a moratorium, but to July 1 and you 
set a deadline to introduce a long-term income stabilization program.  
Without it, if you go to just put a moratorium on without a solution, then 
there's no use of putting a moratorium on.  That's the purpose of our 
presentation and that's why we have indicated so clearly. 
 
And I was surprised that the minister saw fit to come into the House and in 
his own version of the truth to try to indicate that we had advocated a 
five-year term for moratorium.  And in any event, Mr. Minister, Farm Credit 
Corporation in 1986, which is a Crown corporation, instituted a moratorium.  
That's a Crown corporation. 
 
Over half of the debt by farmers are held, not by banks or credit unions, 



 

 

but by Farm Credit Corporation and also by ACS (Agricultural Credit 
Corporation of Saskatchewan) and it wouldn't, as you allude, to make it a 
problem with the financial institutions if ACS and Farm Credit Corporation 
were indeed to restructure the debt and put a moratorium subject to 
restructuring the debt. 
 
And so I say to you, Mr. Minister, the terrible legacy of what is happening 
in rural Saskatchewan.  And that's why I turn to it and I guess I feel so 
strongly as to what is happening there and the human misery and the broken 
homes and the suicides and the loss of losing a farm. 
 
And I guess it's perhaps best put in a way by the Leader-Post article by a 
well-known editorialist, Dale Eisler.  And I just want to read a couple of 
things, and this is how I feel, and I talked to people in rural 
Saskatchewan.  He said: 
 

 To make it even more cruel . . . (and he's talking about the crisis in 
agriculture in rural Saskatchewan) To make it even more cruel, those 
bearing the brunt of the economic decline in agriculture are often the 
young generation of farmers.  They tend to be the people 30-45 age 
category . . . who got into farming in the last 10-15 years . . . 

 
In the last part of his article he said: 
 

 "When you lose a farm . . . (he's quoting one lady that had gone through 
the experience of losing a farm)  "When you lose a farm it's different 
than losing a job.  It changes you.  That's discovered by anyone whose 
been through it," she says. 

 
 We're different people now, more embittered.  Our dreams are gone.  When 

you farm it becomes your soul, your life, your pension plan.  There wasn't 
a day when we didn't work on the farm, whether it was Christmas or any 
other holiday. 

 
And I guess what I'm saying to you as rural affairs minister, and I will 
not be unkind because I think you do care, and I hope you do, and I hope 
that you would share the concern that we have on this side as well. 
 
I can't possibly understand a rich country like Canada, with one of the 
great agricultural communities in the world -- and I see a headline in 
respect to the program that you introduced in the last budget, and it says, 
4,000 farms may just be written off.  But you realize there's a cynicism 
when you read the article.  That's only an estimate they picked up 
somewhere along the line.  It says: during the news conference Thursday, 
the Premier refused to speculate on how many loan applications will be 
turned down. 
 
Can you possibly feature going into a program and instituting a program 
that you wouldn't calculate how many you're going to leave out?  Do you 
really mean to say that the Premier doesn't know, on the the basis of the 
criteria that he set out in that program? 
 
And you know, Mr. Minister, you have to know, you couldn't possibly go into 



 

 

a cabinet meeting, develop a program and the criteria that will exclude 
some, and not know the consequences.  Or . . . I give up -- I give up.  
Because if it happens that way, then we have no hope, and perhaps that's 
the way the business is done over there. 
 
But I think you're a fairer person than that, Mr. Minister.  I think you 
know how many.  There's other estimates.  I read . . . what I was going on 
yesterday, I was saying somewhere in the neighbourhood of 20,000 because 
your statistics indicated that 1987, 11 per cent were insolvent and 28 per 
cent were in serious financial trouble in 1978.  And I didn't see any 
buoyancy in the agricultural community since then. 
 
And the Premier has said 20,000 are in desperate plight.  And what do we 
get today?  Well, he can't speculate.  He wouldn't speculate as to how many 
are going to be excluded.  Well, Mr. Minister, in fairness to the people of 
this province, don't try to play funny games with their lives.  And I know 
you're not administering the Act, but you are representing rural 
Saskatchewan and you have a responsibility to be fair with the people. 
 
And don't say you can set up a phoney appeal board for they can go to after 
they've been rejected.  It's not going to work, because you've got the 
criteria set down.  That's what you have.  If they have arrears, if they 
have a demand note, if they have a foreclosure, if they have a bankruptcy, 
what are they going to appeal?  They're excluded by the criteria.  Or are 
you going to challenge whether they were really in bankruptcy or not, or 
whether they were really being foreclosed or not. 
 
So what I'm asking, Mr. Minister, I guess what I'm saying is there's a 
massive crisis, and I would hope that you would be fair enough to the 
people of Saskatchewan, and I think you'd be fair enough that . . . I don't 
know how any government can tolerate that's 4 or 10,000 people are going to 
be forced off the land and do nothing about it. 
 
And what do we get from your federal counterparts -- and these are supposed 
to be the parties that have their support in rural Saskatchewan.  Higher 
interests rates, says the Bank of Canada.  It's going up to unprecedented 
level, back to '82 almost -- 13.75 per cent this morning they're predicting 
it'll jump to, from 13.61.  Farm Credit Corporation is doing exactly the 
same thing -- upping the rates. 
 
Another headline:  "Farmers deep in debt won't get seeding loans."  And I 
want to draw your attention to one other concern that I have, and that is 
the priorities of your government.  And I ask you, Mr. Minister, take to 
your colleagues in representing Saskatchewan rural people.  Change your 
priorities, because even the Leader-Post says in their article, cancel 
Cargill fertilizer deal.  That's what the Leader-Post says.  And I'll tell 
you, the Leader-Post is not a spokesman for the New Democratic Party, but 
even the Leader-Post advises you to do that. 
 
And so in winding this up, Mr. Minister, I guess what I've tried to do is 
to bring to you some sense of understanding of what exactly is happening 
and the callousness of really what is happening -- 4 to 10,000, I don't 
know; you do know.  You know. 



 

 

 
And so I ask you, Mr. Minister, will you ask and go to your cabinet 
colleagues and to the Minister of Agriculture and relay and join with us in 
meeting a major crisis and that is in rural Saskatchewan.  Will you get 
away from your fixation with megaprojects at least for the time, at least 
for the time being, and take a priority in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Will you give up your multimillion dollar advertising annual budget that 
this government tries to run its affairs on.  Will you give that up and 
press on with the concern of so many farm families who are losing their 
livelihood. 
 
And will you at least for the time being stop the waste and the 
mismanagement that has been so characteristic, and the patronage of your 
government. 
 
(1515) 
 
These are the things that I've been asked to address to you as a spokesman 
for rural Saskatchewan.  And I know you meet with many of the rural 
councillors and farmers and communities.  And I believe you have a feeling 
as deep as I do that this has to be addressed.  And so basically, Mr. 
Minister, what I want to know, are you going to continue to support blindly 
the priorities of privatization, of hand-outs to multinational 
corporations, the priorities of megaprojects, high powered advertising, or 
are you prepared to speak here on behalf of rural people of Saskatchewan 
and the farmers of Saskatchewan who are going to be left stranded without 
any recourse, without any support. 
 
Those are the questions I ask you, Mr. Minister, and I'd appreciate if you 
could be as brief as possible because I have a lot to cover, and I doubt if 
you'll change your mind. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  If the member from Quill Lakes 
will let me answer his questions. I was very quiet while he was speaking; I 
didn't say anything at all. 
 
I want to start where he started from just briefly, and I'm not going to 
take very long because I do believe there's some real questions to ask 
about lands branch, about rural service centres, about all the things that 
we do in Department of Rural Development.  And I'm sure he has some 
questions he'd like to ask on those. 
 
I want to just go back a little bit.  He talked about Mr. Douglas in his 
days back in the '40s and the '50s and then on.  He talked all the way up 
into the early '80s, and then after that too. 
 
I live and always have lived in a small area up in sort of the bush country 
of the world, we called it then, Hudson Bay area. And he talked about all 
the things that Mr. Douglas brought to Saskatchewan.  And I'm sure he did a 
lot of good, but where I come from we got very little of those good things 
that went on. 
 



 

 

I lived on the farm all my life up in the Hudson Bay area.  We never got 
power up there until the '60s, till the 1960s before we had power up in our 
area in the rural.  We never got the telephones until the '70s.  We never 
got private phones; in fact we're just getting them now.  We got the 
natural gas a few years ago into the rural part of our constituency. 
 
But I want to talk about roads.  You know, we lived up there and until 
1964, until 1964, Mr. Chairman, we never had a reasonable road to drive any 
place.  We almost had to take the railroad if we had medical needs.  That 
is a fact, Mr. Chairman.  And we did build a lot of roads.  There was a lot 
of roads built from '64 to '71 -- a great deal of roads were built in our 
area, good roads. 
 
New industries came to our town.  Two new industries, one he talked about a 
few minutes ago.  He was kicking, kicking it, called MacMillan Bloedel.  
MacMillan Bloedel come into our town, bought up a company called Wisewood, 
which was a new . . . which was a little company set up by some of the 
local people making poplar, a weed, into a board.  They bought it up and 
expanded it to almost 300 employees under the IWA (International 
Woodworkers of America); reasonably, I say, good wages.  They're still 
there, Mr. Chairman.  They've been there for 25-odd years and they've been 
a great asset to our community. 
 
He talked about them getting a loan back in 1982, I believe he said, or '84 
-- I don't remember what year he said -- taking 75 per cent of SEDCO's 
money.  What he didn't . . . of their financing.  What he didn't tell you, 
Mr. Chairman, is that two years later they remodelled that mill.  It was 
down to a point of needed to be rebuilt.  They remodelled it and within two 
years they paid us all back plus interest.  He didn't say that, Mr. 
Chairman.  And that's the way SEDCO should work, is when we get our money 
back, it creates job opportunities and lets the people continue to work in 
my town.  And in my town that was very, very important. 
 
I want to just mention also the talk about industries.  We never had an 
industry in our town.  We had the railroad; that's all we had till 1964 
till we got two industries.  Two new industries creating about 500 jobs in 
our community, and one of them being MacMillan Bloedel, the other being 
Simpson Timber.  Those were important to our community -- have been on a 
short term and a long term.  I'm not saying they didn't get anything in the 
South, but I'm telling you, we never got anything in the North.  Nothing, 
nothing at all until we got in '64 when we started to get industries and we 
started to get some roads. 
 
So I just want to make that clear that although lots of things were done . 
. . And Mr. Douglas did bring in medicare, and I don't think anybody says 
that isn't true.  It is true.  And he maybe did a lot of things in the 
South for us. 
 
And we had a very find gentleman whose son sits in the legislature here 
now, Mr. Brockelbank.  And I'm talking about Mr. Brockelbank Sr., who was 
the MLA for many years.  He was a fine gentleman but we just didn't get 
very much in our area, and that's a fact.  I just want to tell you that 
those are true facts. 



 

 

 
I want to go on a little . . . I just want to mention one other thing 
because sometimes they say things that aren't -- or we all say things at 
different times, I suppose, have different interpretations.  But from 1971 
to 1981 under the former administration, the NDP government, we had a rural 
depopulation by StatsCanada of 46,179 people.  That was under the best 
economic times this world has ever known -- the world has ever known, never 
mind Saskatchewan and the rest.  And we lost 46,000 people by . . . that's 
Stats Canada.  Now let's just make that clear.  And we lost almost 13,000 
farms. 
 
That, Mr. Chairman, tells me that there's changes out there.  Not 
necessarily because it was anybody's fault.  Those are changes; people want 
different needs, different ways, different transportation.  And I think the 
member opposite knows quite well that that's true. 
 
He talk about multinationals, and I'm going to answer a couple of his other 
questions. He talked about multinationals, and I believe there's one 
multinational right now going into his constituency at Wynyard called 
Vis-A-Vis.  They're going to put up a plastic bottling plant.  They're 
Japanese, and they're working with SEDCO for assistance, and they're 
working with the RMs out there for assistance, and they are coming into 
there. 
 
They are a good . . . I believe it to be a really good industry.  It's 
going to be good for that community.  It's going to make plastic bottles, 
which is a demand in this province.  But they are coming in. They are a 
multinational company coming into this here province. 
 
He talks about multinationals.  We have the wheat pool now becoming a 
multinational company. 
 
 DSo, Mr. Chairman, there's many things going on out there, and don't take 
it all out of content and don't say everybody's bad or everybody's good. 
But certainly there's opportunities there. 
 
I want to just make mention about some of the things that's been going on 
out there before I get into the farm end of it, just to touch on some of 
the comments he made about their policies on the farm agricultural end of 
it. 
 
Under the . . . he talked about small or multinationals, but what he didn't 
talk about is all the little industries that are starting to come out there 
in rural Saskatchewan, due in lot, due in part and in a lot to the RDC 
(Rural Development Corporation) program we put into place, and also to the 
municipal economic development grant that we have available for 
municipalities.  Municipalities, both rural and urban, have become involved 
now in looking at industries, and that means jobs for the young people.  It 
keeps them at home. 
 
We have 23 rural development corporations set up now and they are . . . in 
fact have accomplished already a great deal of new industry in this 
province.  And a good example would be the Dana radar base that was taken 



 

 

over.  It was closed down, taken over by some municipalities on an RDC 
called Sagehill's RDC.  They made the first fire truck.  They're now making 
fire trucks, making fire trucks, Mr. Chairman, right here in Saskatchewan 
and they're going to be selling them across Canada.  They've already sold a 
few. 
 
They've also been on a national defence program where they're going to make 
fire trucks for the army.  And we have every reason to believe that they 
will get that.  That will be a real asset to that area of jobs, job 
creation. 
 
Focus on inputs are going into there, and I mentioned yesterday I believe, 
making a generic Roundup which will certainly be beneficial to our farmers, 
a cost-saving to our farmers.  And we're involved.  ADF (Agriculture 
Development Fund) and others have been helping fund those people so they 
can bring it forward and have it available for our farmers. 
 
We have done many other things.  We have a couple dehy plants, in fact 
three really, now being looked at in this province and some have already 
been partially funded. 
 
We have a tannery going into Tisdale, Saskatchewan, where we have an Indian 
native band now involved in an RDC program and it's called the Kinistino 
Indian Band.  Chief Albert Scott was at an opening or a signing the other 
day and he's very, very happy and proud to be part of a big community and 
looking at it on a broader scale.  I want to say to him and to his band, 
very progressive thinking, very . . . a lot of foresight and how they can 
build and make their band and the area in the community just a lot better 
place to be and to live.  And it's great to see people with that kind of 
foresight.  I told them that personally and I tell the Legislative Assembly 
that, that that is what the kind of thinking and the opportunities that we 
need out there. 
 
We have all the way from a peola chip plant going in at Kelvington to we 
have eviscerating plant going in that we're funding now.  We've expanded 
the one at Wynyard, as the member well knows from Quill Lakes.  That one 
was expanded here a while ago, dramatically.  They now go through about 
30,000 chickens a day there.  Kentucky Fried Chicken, Mr. Chairman, 
Kentucky Fried Chicken is a major holder in that company.  They are a 
multinational.  Good, good for the area.  Extremely good for the area. 
 
We have a company, a small company set up, and certainly the members would 
know about him.  They make sandwiches now for Federated Co-op.  They 
started just in the basement and they've expanded now and set up a 
reasonably decent manufacturing of sandwiches for Federated Co-op. 
 
We have a furniture board plant going in south.  It's going to be made out 
of flax board and that is well along the way to being built.  We have a 
furniture plant at Cupar . . . or at Dysart, not Cupar . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . That's right, because it is important.  It's people 
working.  It's really important that you have people in the community and 
expanding opportunities there.  And they're looking at another thing right 
there now that is still confidential, but they're looking at an expansion 



 

 

there. 
 
We've been working with Kalium and we've done some pilot projects on it and 
that's in the Wood Mountain RDC.  We've set up a ready-mix plant.  And I've 
got a whole list of them.  I could spend quite a bit of time. 
 
And what I'm saying, Mr. Chairman, is we are doing the small industries, 
the one that will create job opportunities.  The education is also 
available in those rural areas now that wasn't there before.  We have come 
a long ways.  But I'll tell you, Mr. Chairman, we've got a long ways to go 
if we want to really build and restructure rural Saskatchewan, and we have 
to do it. 
 
Times have changed, I said a moment ago, the way we travel, how we do 
things, the way we do things, and the need of our young people.  They 
demand and want a different way of life than some of us in the past have 
needed or wanted.  And that's the way it is and we have to accept that.  
But we also have to help structure that so it'll be there for them.  And 
that is very, very important if we're going to maintain Saskatchewan as we 
know it today and certainly have it here for many years in the future. 
 
I want to just touch a moment or so, and I didn't want to take too long 
here -- I'm sure he's got some questions otherwise -- but I want to touch 
just a little bit . . . He talked about their policy on agriculture.  And 
certainly I alluded yesterday to a moratorium where there . . . and he has 
again said today that they would want a moratorium, and he did say till 
July 1, 1990. 
 
But he put the hedge to it, or with it, by saying that it must be . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Just a moment; let me finish what you said.  
They wanted a moratorium, and he did say July 1, 1990.  But he also said 
that before the moratorium comes off, as I understand it, there must be a 
national farm income program put in place.  Now he said again, July 1 -- 
and that I don't want to misquote him in any way -- 1990, realizing that 
you cannot . . . in two months you couldn't put one in place. 
 
They were in government, Mr. Chairman, for 13 years and I never once saw a 
national farm income plan even proposed by them, not even proposed by them.  
And to put one of these in place . . . 
 
I agree that we need to have a stable income for our farming industry.  And 
whether we have a target price as they have in the United States, 
guaranteed up there for a certain amount of dollars; whether we have a way 
of putting out a guaranteed fixed price.  But I agree on that part. 
 
I totally disagree with a moratorium.  It would break every credit union in 
this province if you put it into place and left it for any length of time.  
I believe it's wrong and I believe we shouldn't do it. 
 
Now I don't disagree with having a target price for our grains.  I don't 
disagree with it so the farmer can plan around what they're going to have 
to grow and how they would grow it and how they would be able to manage 
their farm.  If we did that, I believe it would stabilize our community a 



 

 

great deal.  Now if that is what he's talking about, then I agree with him. 
 
If he's talking about a moratorium and saying a guaranteed income no matter 
how you farm, I say no.  That's not what any farmer needs out there.  They 
need a target price, a price for . . . And yesterday, Mr. Chairman, I told 
them what our policy was and it's in Hansard if he wants to read it. 
 
(1530) 
 
Let me see what else.  Certainly he mentioned about the $500 pay-out from 
the federal government.  I mean, I think we had a unanimous decision of 
this Legislative Assembly to do exactly that.  It's been sent to the 
Minister of Agriculture, and certainly we have conveyed many, many times in 
many, many ways our concern that it's not being paid.  And the Premier has 
been up front in this legislature, saying exactly that. 
 
Farm credit, long-term, reasonable interest rates, well I said that in my 
farm finance tour, when I come back and report.  Certainly we need a 
reasonable interest rate.  I went after that and I went to . . . I went and 
appeared before the Standing Committee on Agriculture, the House of Commons 
Standing Committee on Agriculture, and said exactly that.  And if I 
remember right, there was two or three members from the NDP there, and 
they, at that time, questioned what the interest rates should be, and I 
suggested at that time 8 per cent would be one that the farmers at that 
time could live with, if it was fixed for some long term, so they knew 
exactly where they were going. 
 
So I've made that presentation.  It's public.  Again it's in the standing 
committee report on agriculture from the House of Commons. 
 
With that, Mr. Chairman, I think I answered most of the questions or 
comments that he had, and I'll sit down.  And if he has any other questions 
he'd like to ask me, in particular with the department in general, I would 
sure be pleased to answer them. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I want to move on.  
I saw the obvious omission in respect to the number of farmers that are 
likely to be excluded in respect to seed program.  I saw you try again one 
more time to distort the policy that I introduced to you here as our 
policy.  And clearly and unequivocally, I indicated to you, that if we call 
for a moratorium it would be set for a fixed date, time, for July 1, 1990, 
providing that we would address agriculture and it would be addressed by 
that deadline of restructuring of debt and income stabilization.  So don't 
misrepresent the facts and don't try to twist them. 
 
You didn't address, obviously, whether a moratorium could be imposed by the 
Farm Credit Corporation and the ACS, which is not a financial institution. 
 
But I want to go on in respect to the Rural Development estimates, Mr. 
Minister.  I think in your answer you clearly indicated that what has been 
cast in the budget is what the farmers can expect.  And maybe something 
from the federal government, but we don't know. 
 



 

 

And we're sure that a number of farmers are going to be excluded and I 
think that has to be on your head, Mr. Minister, because we gave you the 
opportunity, and I would give our co-operation, to bring in programs which 
would alleviate the exodus of so many farmers from the land. 
 
But turning directly to the estimates here, I again see the problems that 
the government is having -- and I don't make light of these, Mr. Chairman 
-- in funding programs.  But if you look at revenue sharing grants to the 
RMs they went down in 1987-88, as indicated in the estimates, by almost a 
half a million dollars.  And since then, since '87-88, even though there 
has been significant inflation rate, there has been no increase. 
 
In '86-87 estimates there was, for revenue sharing with all the RMs 
conditional and unconditional grants, there was $48,547,420.  In 1987-88 it 
was reduced to $48,062,000 and that has continued to be the amount in 
revenue sharing. 
 
So in 1985-86 rural revenue sharing stayed the same as it had between 
'84-85, but otherwise revenue-sharing grants to the RMs (rural 
municipalities) has gone up every other year. 
 
And I guess the question in respect to the revenue-sharing item is why the 
drop from '86-87 and then the freeze continuing since then.  And how do you 
expect the RMs with exactly the same budget or the frozen amount of revenue 
sharing to continue to operate and to expand the services in the 
municipalities? 
 
I take a look at, and I'd like you to address those particular items in 
respect to revenue sharing, and we can get into more details, but take a 
look also at the ferry service, after years of steady but small increases 
in funding for the operation of the provincial ferry crossing services and 
44 employees.  Your government began to make cuts in '84-85, and this year 
it's down again. 
 
And we take a look there at the budgetary record in respect to that.  In 
'82-83 there was 44.3 in staffing.  In budget estimate it was 1.405 
million, and then it went up to 1.569 million, and it dropped to 1.131 
million in '89-90, and there's a slight increase this year from 1.131 
million to 1.139 million. 
 
But staffing has been almost cut in half since you've taken over, and the 
funding is a little over two-thirds.  Funding is only two-thirds of what it 
was five years ago, and that is of some concern. 
 
We take a look at another area in the budget, Mr. Minister, and that's the 
road services branch which provides engineering and supervisory services to 
the district engineers and municipalities for all road programs.  Road 
services have been cut significantly in recent years, very significantly.  
If you take a look at the '83-84, you find in respect to staffing there 
were 60.5 person years with a budget of 2. -- almost $3 million -- $2.966 
million. 
 
This year, 1990-91, staffing has decreased to 44.4 and the budget is 



 

 

decreased to 1.943 million.  That's a cut of about $1.2 million since 1983.  
And certainly not only is this not a priority, the provincial highway 
system is clearly not a priority with your government also.  It now appears 
that the grid roads and the farm access and other road services are going 
to be denied the services. 
 
We can take a look at the bridge services branch.  The branch provides 
financial and technical services to rural municipalities and urban centres 
in construction and maintenance of bridge structures.  Bridge services have 
been cut in recent years too, although there's a slight increase this year, 
which I acknowledge.  But it was cut from '83-84 from 293,000-plus to 
281,000 for this year. 
 
Another significant cut was, the RM secretaries association grant was 
discontinued completely in '86-87.  And also in respect to roads on Indian 
reserves, this may be incorporated into the general road construction, but 
in '81 up until '86-87, there was a budget set aside for construction of 
Indian reserve roads, and that specific item has been deleted. 
 
I guess what I would like you to answer in respect to the items that I have 
sort of raised with you, Mr. Minister, is sort of the rationale for 
freezing the operating grants and some of the major cuts that I've alluded 
to. 
 
I may indicate to you that there are a number of articles here.  That cuts 
may mean a rough ride on the roadways, both in respect to the highway cuts 
but it also indicates here that the problems earlier announced, the funding 
levels for other rural programs such as revenue sharing, transportation 
services, municipal economic development and rural development would remain 
at current levels.  And those are some of the concerns that are expressed 
out there. 
 
And not only are the grants, the revenue sharing grants represents about 
60, 62 per cent of the total budget of your department and a very integral 
part.  And I wonder if you can explain at least the rationale and how you 
expect them to be able to operate and continue the increase in services to 
the rural communities with a frozen budget in the areas that I have sort of 
set out? 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Why is the member on his feet? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- I ask permission to introduce some guests, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you, and 
through you to all the members of the House, the University Park 83rd Cubs 
and those with them.  I would like to mention the names of those who are 
supervising, the teachers, etc.  David Claude, Jim Rudack, Delores 
LaBreche, Joyce Sadlemey, Bill Dodge, Brenda Wagman, and Rick Claffey. 
 



 

 

This is a fine group of 24 of them, Mr. Speaker, and it's always a pleasure 
to have Cubs or Scouts or Girl Guides or whoever come into our House and 
have an opportunity to speak with them.  I will have an opportunity shortly 
to explain to them downstairs just what is going on in here.  I'll just say 
very briefly this is what we call estimates, and I'll explain that to you 
when we have a chance to talk in a few minutes. 
 
I'll be joining them for pictures and for drinks, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. 
Chairman, rather.  So I'd ask all members to please join me in welcoming 
them to the House. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: -- Mr. Chairman, I too wish to welcome the entire Cub pack 
and their leaders.  But there is one little guy I have a special welcome 
for.  I know he happens to be a fifth generation Polish boy.  I know too 
that he has a real special interest in the role that the Speaker plays in 
this Assembly, and he gets that from occasionally watching the Assembly on 
television.  So with all due respect to you, Mr. Chairman, and the 
important role that you play, we will have to explain the difference 
between your role and that of the Speaker's. 
 
In our recent budget debate, as I spoke, Mr. Chairman, I referred to the 
great future that this wonderful province of ours has and that it holds for 
my children and for theirs.  I love them all dearly.  And I am proud to 
welcome one of my five grandsons, Nathan Lebioda, who is part of that Cub 
pack, to our Assembly today.  Welcome, Nathan. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Rural Development 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 43 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Mr. Chairman, I'll try to give him an overview.  I think 
the question really was, why holding the line on revenue sharing and how 
does it affect RMs. 
 
We have been holding the line basically on the amount of revenue sharing 
for the last three or four years, in total consultation with SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) executive, and certainly 
with all RM councils.  We have had a lot of discussion with them.  We have 
worked out where a council has had a special problem; we've worked it out 
with them, one on one, to be sure that that problem is looked after.  We 
have made those kind of conditional type of agreements that we have been 
able to do that. 
 
Some of the areas that he mentioned, revenue sharing, we have done things 
with revenue sharing, I believe, that are really, really important.  We 



 

 

know that there was a definite amount or just a set amount of money that we 
had available.  It's something in the neighbourhood of 48 millions of 
dollars.  And what we did with that is we worked with SARM executive and 
many of the RMs.  We asked them, how would you spend it the best way and 
how the most wisely.  And certainly we got a lot of direction from them. 
 
One of the areas they asked us to bring in was the regravel program.  The 
regravel program is a 50-50 cost sharing for those RMs who regraveled the 
designated road systems in the RMs.  And those would be grid, main farm 
access, primary grid, oil or gravel, industrial routes; those kinds of 
roads would be under the designated road system. 
 
(1545) 
 
And it's helped the RMs greatly and been able to help them maintain . . . 
almost every RM has been able to maintain their mill rate at zero or very, 
very close to it over the last four or five years.  Done an excellent job 
along with working with us.  And like I said, where they had a special 
problem, we managed to work that out with them to help them maintain that 
kind of a base. 
 
And I'd like to say thank you to the RMs and to SARM especially for being 
able to give us the kind of direction that I believe is needed if you're 
going to be successful and spend the dollars as wisely as we possibly can. 
 
He asked about, I believe, one thing about ferry services and the number of 
employees. And I don't have the estimates right here in front me or what it 
was until 1982, but I can say this, that the -- I'd better say this 
carefully -- the management that we have out there under the ferry services 
certainly do a good job.  They are out there . . . we have, in some cases, 
there has been some . . . there has, as he knows, there's been one ferry 
service -- three ferry services that has been discontinued, two of them 
because new bridges were put in, and that certainly was important to the 
people because they have access continuous.  The other one was discontinued 
because of very few people using it, and that was up in the North. 
 
The rest of the services, particularly the maintenance has been done, part 
of it, been contracted out by the ferry operator where it needs to be done.  
And it has saved us a great deal of dollars in that area and still give us 
the same quality of service because we've let the ferry operator make those 
kinds of decisions. 
 
In regards to . . . oh, he's talking about just less staff in general.  
Been a lot of things happen in Rural Development.  We've had lands branch 
come into there.  We've had extension services into there.  We've had crop 
insurance where we've incorporated them all in the same office.  We may 
have some less staff, and I don't know if we do or we don't, but a lot of 
that staff is now out in rural Saskatchewan in our rural service centres, 
right where the people are. 
 
And we've done it, I believe, working with the employees.  A lot of times 
an employee requests to go out to there, not because we said they should 
go.  Never once did we move an employee that he didn't or she didn't want 



 

 

to move, and it's been worked out really, really well.  And I want to say 
thank you to the employees because they have been part of that to make it a 
success. 
 
And we may have less, I don't know.  But I'll tell you, we got a lot of 
good people out there, doing a lot more work than they used to have to do 
and they're doing it very, very well.  And I say that sincerely. 
 
I opened a rural service centre in Davidson yesterday and I think just what 
the staff there said.  They'd say, oh, that it's just important for we are 
a part of the community; this is just a great place to work; we're right 
next to the two RMs; we all can work together; it's about time we did that.  
And I think that just says it all. 
 
So I don't know if I missed any of the other comments that he wanted me to 
make in general, but I guess . . . in revenue sharing, like I said, we've 
worked with SARM.  The revenue sharing -- we have held the line but we 
haven't cut it. 
 
We've done other things within that.  In fact, last year under road 
construction, more roads were built last year -- 1,400 kilometres of roads.  
We helped, as a department, build . . . or helped fund, not build, helped 
fund 1,400 kilometres of roads last year.  So a lot of roads were built in 
rural Saskatchewan last year, and I assume there would be a lot more built 
this year. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Well I'm glad to hear, Mr. Minister, that they asked you to 
freeze their revenue sharing.  I doubt very much if that's a fact, but if 
you say so, I will accept that. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to go through a number of positions that SARM had put 
in their resolutions and to get your reaction in respect to them and where 
you stand, representing and working with SARM. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, at their convention last fall, SARM passed a resolution 
calling for a one-year moratorium on farm debt, and as you know, SARM is 
made up of farmers from across the province. And I would think most of 
them, not all, but many of them tend to be the established farmers, pretty 
careful thinking and frugal people.  But they analysed it, and they did ask 
for a moratorium during their annual convention last fall. 
 
And I don't know whether SARM was in fact thinking back to a similar 
position as was out of the very . . . depression in the economy in '69-70 
into '71.  When we formed the government in 1971, one of the actions that 
we took at that time under the Blakeney administration was the family farm 
protection Act that was passed in 1971, which basically was set in place to 
halt the foreclosure or the land seizures and farm assets and equipment as 
well, and to halt the interest charges and payment if a farmer couldn't 
afford it.  It was done for a short period of time, but indeed it was 
enacted, and all hell did not break out when it was instituted during '71. 
 
What I'm saying, and I'm not advocating, but I'm asking you, Mr. Minister, 
here is a very responsible group groping with the problem that they see in 



 

 

rural Saskatchewan. And they came forward, because I talked to councillors 
that attended the convention, and they said it was unanimous; they had no 
dissenting votes in respect to it. At least that's what they related to me 
at that convention. 
 
I want to ask you again, just in respect now to SARM's position of calling 
for a one-year moratorium, have you had further discussions in respect to 
them as to what in fact was behind their thinking in calling for that 
particular action?  And as I say, this is not a fly-by-night group.  This 
is a pretty responsible group of people representing all areas of the 
province.  And they called for the moratorium. 
 
And I was wondering, Mr. Minister, have you had any further discussion with 
them in respect to it?  Were you able to find the reason why they, indeed, 
unanimously passed the resolution calling for a moratorium?  Perhaps, 
seeing similar protection that was afforded in 1971 under the Blakeney 
administration.  So I'd like you to perhaps indicate whether you have any 
further information, and what was your position specifically in respect to 
this resolution? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Mr. Chairman, I was fully aware of the SARM motion last 
fall at their mid-term convention and again at the spring convention this 
spring. 
 
Last fall there was a motion that passed, that was put forward that passed 
a one-year moratorium on debt, and I don't remember how it was worded 
exactly.  This spring there was a motion . . . there was two motions, one 
about a moratorium which lost, and one about which said, therefore be it 
resolved that the office of the Attorney General review all farm 
foreclosure and method of transactions.  And that was carried. 
 
So just so we have it clear what SARM did or did not pass at their 
convention.  Now I don't speak for SARM or their delegates.  I only refer 
to the resolution manuals and what passed and what didn't pass.  So just so 
it's clear. 
 
I don't know . . . First of all, before I get into the last, I want to make 
it clear that I have talked to SARM.  I talk to them at least every two 
weeks, and with the executive I meet with them once a month.  I was out 
last night to a ratepayers' meeting at Calder -- at Rosthern it was at; it 
was the RM of Calder.  It was brought up at that time, the comments from 
the floor, whatever that's worth, was a moratorium.  Don't have one, it 
would just wreck us.  It would do us no favours at all. 
 
When I met with SARM executive, they don't propose to tell me what their 
direction would be to their meetings they're going to be holding in spring.  
Spring meetings, spring district meetings, they're being hold right away.  
But certainly we've had a lot of discussion about it.  They do have some 
concern about what it would do to . . . or a lot of concern, I think it's 
fair to say, what it would do to our local credit unions to access to 
credit; what it would do to the 80 per cent out there who do have access to 
credit, who really could be hurt.  They have a lot of concern about that.  
I don't know how it's going to be addressed, like I say, at their district 



 

 

meetings which I will be attending, so I'll certainly know how they respond 
to that. 
 
I don't know, Mr. Chairman, if . . . and I don't know if the member said or 
not, whether he is saying that we should go forward with the one-year 
moratorium or are we just asking if he's proposing that or not because that 
would be again a concern of mine.  Because I only go . . . because he said 
that they passed it -- they didn't.  I read what they passed. 
 
So I guess in fairness to the member, I'll answer the question this way.  
This government, the Government of Saskatchewan, is not prepared, is not 
prepared to bring in a moratorium.  I believe it would be detrimental, 
detrimental to our farmers out there, the 80 per cent who have access to 
credit, basically as they need it.  You can't do that.  We have to deal 
with the other 20 per cent, and certainly he knows that we have to do that, 
but bringing a moratorium in and putting everybody else in jeopardy and 
putting every small business in this province in jeopardy would not be the 
way to go. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order, order.  Why is the member from Biggar on his feet? 
 
Mr. Baker: -- Mr. Chairman, I was wondering if I could have leave to 
introduce some guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Baker: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd like to introduce today today 41 students 
from Perdue high school; they're grade 11 and 12.  They're accompanied by 
Marilyn Donahue and Joyce Turgeon, their teachers and, I believe, the bus 
driver, Harold Hand.  I would like all members to welcome them, and I hope 
they have a good tour of the building and a safe trip home. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- I'd like to join in bringing greetings to the group of 
students from the Perdue High School, if I may, from this side of the 
House. Perdue High School, I'd like to bring greetings and to say that some 
years ago I served as the student minister in Perdue and happened to meet 
my wife at the Perdue High School.  So I have some very, very fond memories 
of Perdue and the Perdue High School.  So welcome to the legislature, 
welcome to Regina, and have an enjoyable visit. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Rural Development 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 43 
 
Item 1 (continued) 



 

 

 
Mr. Koskie: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, just in respect to 
that question, have you pursued the possibility in respect just to ACS and 
Farm Credit Corporation, the possibility in respect to that portion of the 
debt until such time as restructuring can be done of the moratorium in 
respect to foreclosure actions continuing, that is, in respect to the two 
Crown corporations? 
 
I know there are concerns in respect to the financial institutions, the 
powerful banks that help you get financed in your campaigns.  I know there 
is concern.  And I know there are also concerns in respect to the credit 
unions.  That's not what I'm asking you.  I'm asking you, have you analysed 
and could you comment in respect to the implementation of a moratorium to 
help hard-pressed farmers in respect to the debt that is held by ACS and 
Farm Credit Corporation? 
 
Indeed in 1986, in election year in 1986, the Farm Credit Corporation 
indeed did put on a moratorium.  And I wonder whether you did an analysis 
at that time, whether that was so devastating as what you're saying. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Mr. Chairman, in regards to ACS, the Premier at the SARM 
convention asked them to work with him to bring forward what should be done 
and could be done with the agriculture credit of Saskatchewan.  We're 
waiting for them, and we'll be working with them in regards to what they 
believe how we could restructure or structure ACS to serve the farming 
needs out there. 
 
A moratorium on ACS I'm not sure would be of great benefit to very, very 
few, if any.  I don't know where that would take you.  When FCC (Farm 
Credit Corporation) put it on, and at that time it certainly changed the 
foreclosures, but what it did afterwards was just accelerate them because 
they got further and further behind.  We have to have a way of 
restructuring it, restructuring debt.  A moratorium without a restructuring 
will do absolutely nothing at all to help our farmers out there, and I 
think the member knows that. 
 
(1600) 
 
So what I'm saying . . . and Farm Credit Corporation is certainly a federal 
lending institute and I agree that they can do some things.  One of the 
things they can do, and could do right away, is extend all their leasebacks 
that they have; that they give three-year leasebacks on land that they have 
been given back or taken back, whatever, from three years to six years.  
And they can do that within their legislation and within their regulations 
without changing it. 
 
That would be very easily done, absolutely no more cost to them at all.  I 
think they should do that, like, immediately.  Because as you know and I 
know, come about this fall or next spring, there's going to be . . . some 
of those are going to be up, their three years is going to be up.  I think 
they should give them that extra time.  It should go to 10, but could they 
go to six automatically under their regulations and that would give them 
some benefits. 



 

 

 
ACS, I would like to see what SARM proposes, and the farm organizations 
that's working with SARM, how they would like to see that structured.  If 
that's what their decision was, I'm sure the Premier would give it 
consideration, a lot of consideration.  But I would like to have them come 
forward with their direction on how we should do that. 
 
We do have intergenerational transfer.  We have loan guarantees now, or 
mortgage guarantees not loan guarantees, mortgage guarantees, which would 
let, as I said yesterday, let it transfer from one generation to the next.  
That certainly is there for the retiring farmer who can guarantee his 
principal and set the rate, particularly when it's sold within the family, 
let them set the interest rate at what he or she believed that one can, 
that whoever is taking over the land, can reasonably carry.  And still in 
most cases, in most cases that would allow the farmer to retire very, very, 
in safety knowing that the principal is safe and that's certainly . . . As 
a retiring farmer, if I was doing that, that's what I'd want to know, and 
that would certainly allow me to allow some younger farmer to be into 
there.  So there is an intergenerational mortgage guarantee in place.  It 
has been for almost a year now.  So that has been in place. 
 
In regards to ACS again, I'd like to see what . . . we want to wait till 
SARM comes back and the organizations, of how they would like to see it put 
together, and then we'll deal with it. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Why the House is going to be burnt down before you finish up 
your consultation. 
 
In '87 you went out and marched around and got all the statistics, and the 
crisis was on, and now you're still consulting.  This is the problem that 
we have.  And I agree with you, and totally agree that unless you're going 
to deal with it, that is a restructuring of debt, there is no use talking 
about a moratorium.  And if you're not going to have an income 
stabilization program instead of ad hoc-ery and ad hoc programs, and if 
you're prepared to see the farmers lose their land, then of course, forget 
about it. 
 
You know, you talk about a . . . The thing is, Mr. Minister, I think what 
the federal and the provincial government really have to take a look at, 
and I want to ask in respect to that, and you alluded to the need for the 
restructuring: has any discussions gone on, and at what stage has it gone 
on in respect to the restructuring of debt?  Or is that in the infancy and 
not in the near future, because it seems to me what's happening anyway is 
there's a write-down?  Many of the Farm Credit Corporation is writing down.  
The only thing is that there's no mechanism for those who are losing the 
land to have an opportunity to buy it back at the reduced and the current 
market price, which is probably more realistic in respect to the cost of 
production and the price they receive from their commodities.  So there is 
a restructuring going on. 
 
But what I'm asking you is, is there really developing, and how soon do you 
expect it to be in place, a mechanism of restructuring debt so that if any 
of the farmers who are in deep trouble can in fact have an opportunity to 



 

 

recover?  Could you indicate whether any discussions that you know of, and 
have you been able to advise SARM in respect to what progress is being 
made? 
 
You allude to the term of lease, that is, farmers lose land to farm debt or 
Farm Credit Corporation and/or to a financial institution, increasing the 
term of the lease.  I think that would help and give some security to 
farmers that have been dispossessed of the land.  And that would be useful. 
 
But if it operates as some of the farmers are telling me . . . They get a 
leaseback, but within that lease, and it may be for three years now, from 
the Royal Bank say, they have the option to sell that land any time during 
that term of that lease.  And there's no security, because the guy has lost 
the land.  He's not in a position at that time; he needs some time leasing 
it to try to re-establish himself and an opportunity to purchase.  And so 
that's the problem that many of the farmers are facing. 
 
While I agree with you, if they could get a longer term of lease, it would 
be useful, but I think also the farmers have to be given some security, 
that if they lose their land and if there's a likelihood that they can 
continue farming, that they should be given the longer-term lease. 
 
But they shouldn't be under the constant gun that the bank can suddenly go 
forward and sell that land during that term of that lease and they are not 
in the position to buy.  And so increasing the term of lease wouldn't help 
unless you have the other factor; that the lease will go for that term 
without the threat constantly of being sold.  Are you looking at that 
aspect of it also? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Mr. Chairman, there's been a lot of meetings going on.  
I haven't been to all of them; the member may or may not know, because the 
Associate Minister of Agriculture, the member from Morse, has been 
attending every one of them, and the Premier's been attending a lot of 
them. 
 
I have attended some of them.  They're going on looking at ACS, looking at 
restructuring of debt, working and suggesting to the federal government and 
trying to work with the federal government to bring in some of the things 
that are necessary.  In regards to bank that's . . . all we can do is give 
a directive.  Hopefully, it would be carried out to the federal government 
and what needs to be done. 
 
Again I'd like to say that SARM as part of those negotiations most of the 
organizations involved in the farming industry are certainly involved in 
it.  I think that's about all I could say. 
 
I'm sure when we have Agriculture estimates up, the member from Morse, the 
Associate Minister of Agriculture, has done a great deal of work on it.  
And he'd be more, certainly more in tune with what's been going on in that 
detailed area and could bring a lot more . . . give a lot fuller answers 
than I can here today. 
 
He talked about an income stabilization program and it's been mentioned a 



 

 

few times.  And I guess how you put it together, how you structure it, who 
pays, does the provincial government have to go against and fund it if the 
federal government don't; if so, is that fair to ask us to go against 
national, foreign national treasuries.  I mean, I don't think any province 
or state could do that. 
 
Those are the kind of things that we need federal assistance on if you're 
going to come into that level of a program.  We've had western grain 
stabilization.  It has paid out at times; other times it doesn't pay out 
maybe when it should, but they made changes to it and every time they've 
changed it seems to . . . the next year doesn't fit the situation. 
 
We have crop insurance which is a guaranteed production, and we have 
western grain stabilization which is supposed to be assistance in price or 
helping in the price of the commodity.  So we have price stabilization, we 
have production stabilization in place, and they both don't do the job.  
But as I said yesterday, a lot of money has been put out between those two 
programs into our economy over the last three or four years so we can't 
totally knock them. 
 
But if you talk about an income stabilization program, how it's structured, 
whether it's a target price and that's the income stabilization, who pays, 
what treasury has to pay?  Does provincial treasuries have to go against 
national treasuries, foreign national treasuries?  Those are all questions 
that have to be answered before anybody, I believe, anybody in this 
province or anybody in this legislature, can make a reasonable decision on 
how to do it. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you certainly can analyse the problems, 
and we know them all, and you've done a great job. 
 
But I'll tell you, you sure haven't marched very far forward in respect to 
the problems that exist out there.  We're going to study and we got a 
problem; we got to decide who does it.  And we got two Tory governments, so 
I guess one of them do it, eh?  That's what we should expect at least.  I 
mean your cousins in Ottawa, certainly you should be able to go down and 
discuss this and come with answers. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to turn to another concern of SARM at their mid-March 
convention.  This year the delegates made it, I think, pretty obvious where 
they stand in respect to the question of method of payment, or some people 
call it the Crow benefit. 
 
The SARM convention strongly endorsed the resolution favouring the 
continuation of the present system of paying the $700 million or so 
annually, directly to the railways.  The delegates also voted down the 
resolution proposing a payment to the producers be passed on to the 
railways. 
 
I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, what is the basic position that you have 
taken in respect to this resolution as passed by SARM, indicating that they 
want the Crow benefit paid directly to the railways rather than to the 
producers. 



 

 

 
 DHon. Mr. Hardy: -- Mr. Chairman, we're getting into agricultural 
estimates, but I'll certainly, I'll try one more time here. 
 
Because it is a SARM resolution I will say this: that I think it's been 
said many times in this legislature and certainly outside of this 
legislature that when the farmers of Saskatchewan come to the Government of 
Saskatchewan with certainly a unanimous decision of what they want done, of 
what they want done -- and that's all the associations, not just one -- all 
the associations come forward with what they want done, then I guess the 
Government of Saskatchewan will act that way.  But until such time as you 
have mixed reactions out there, all the way from the Canadian wheat growers 
to SARM, and if you were at the SARM convention, you know that there was a 
mixed vote. 
 
So there is mixed feelings across the floor. And certainly as a government 
we're guided by those because those are the farmers who have to make their 
living and it's part of their living.  So when they come to us and say to 
us . . . at least so we know that it is what at least a great number of the 
farmers want, then we can sit down and work with them towards a solution.  
Otherwise I guess the Crow benefit stays as it is. And that's where it is. 
And we have no intentions of making any changes until such time as we get 
total support or at least nearly total support from our farming 
communities. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Well that's a great position again.  Real direction.  Do 
nothing; sit on your hands. 
 
The other concern that the RM had in respect, in their resolution, as they 
indicated, the SARM convention in March took a strong stand on the method 
of payment, as I indicated, the Crow benefit issue.  And one of the reasons 
that they indicated is because the delegates are also aware that what would 
happen is that their RM road systems, with large hopper bottom semi-trailer 
trucks, would be running over them.  And they know that pay the producer, 
which so many of the Tories support, would mean more rail line abandonment 
and the result; some of the communities dying and closing. 
 
And I guess I wonder if you don't think that it is time you and your 
government told the PC government in Ottawa that you are against a change 
in the method of payment because of the basic concerns that have been 
alluded to.  Or have you done any consultation with your cousins in Ottawa 
in respect to the concerns that the RMs face if indeed you change the 
method of payment: that there would be rail line abandonment; that there 
would be heavy usage of municipal roads, and as a consequence the cost . . 
. the transportation would be transferred over to the supporting of the 
roadways to the RMs. 
 
Have you had any basic discussions in respect, or at least advising the 
concerns that are expressed by representatives of rural Saskatchewan, the 
RM councillors and reeves, that is expressed in so far as the upkeep of 
roads and the further rail line abandonment?  Have those concerns been 
passed on to your brothers and cousins in Ottawa? 
 



 

 

(1615) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Mr. Chairman, in regards to the Crow benefit, or how we 
pay the Crow benefit, certainly I said a few moments ago that it would be 
up to the farmers to decide.  And I just want to make mention, at the SARM 
convention, although it passed to maintain the Crow benefits as they are,  
it was a fairly close vote.  I can't remember what it was, but it was 
something like about 52 or 53 per cent in favour and something like 47 per 
cent against. 
 
So I mean . . . There is mixed out there, is what I'm saying.  It's about 
half and half, and it has been that way.  And until somebody, a group of 
them decide which way they want to go, I don't think it's up to government 
to decide which way they want to go when it affects the farmer.  And we're 
waiting . . . And it's up to them to decide, in certainly larger numbers 
than 52 per cent one way or 47 per cent the other way. 
 
We have done some things . . . Quite a while ago we realized that rail 
abandonment has certainly been taking place, that companies like 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool had been certainly downgrading the amount -- or not 
downgrading -- eliminating the amount of elevators they have around the 
province, the amount of depots they have. 
 
At one time they were up nearly 1,400; they were down around 550 when we 
talked to them in '85 and '86, asked them what their plans were.  They told 
us their plans, which we're certainly not going to . . . they asked us not 
to make public.  But certainly their plans are less and less elevators. 
 
We looked at that and then we looked at how we could redesign our road 
system.  The road system, the grid road system as brought back in the '60s 
was good.  There was nothing wrong with it; it was done for the time. 
 
We realize that now we're getting to A and B trains, that the trucks are 
hauling long distances.  They're not only hauling to the local elevator 10 
miles away -- or most of it's around 20 or 25 miles now -- they're hauling 
to Moose Jaw, which is now owned by the wheat pool, but it was owned by 
Elders; they haul to Weyburn Inland Terminal; they haul beyond, even, to a 
wheat pool or to another company, right past other elevators.  They use big 
trains wherever they get the A and B trains, which is the trucking system 
now. 
 
So the trucking systems went from the old one-tons with a hundred bushels 
of grain on to a semi now hauling 14 or 1,500 bushels of grain. 
 
We knew that so we tried to . . . we went to the RMs, we went to all the 
major service companies and said, what's your plans?  Can you tell us, at 
least give us a general idea? 
 
Then we looked at saying how should we design the road system for tomorrow?  
And we went to every RM in this province with a proposal.  And sometimes 
the RM said, hey, this isn't the way we see our services now.  We see them 
-- they're different, you're not quite right.  We made changes, we continue 
to make changes, because no matter how good you planned it, there will be 



 

 

something that just doesn't fit into the . . . An elevator closes here that 
wasn't anticipated, a service centre leaves from there you didn't 
anticipate, another one is built over on the other corner. 
 
Foam Lake's a good example where we're building other roads into there now.  
The RMs have to because the wheat pool are in the process of building a 
large terminal there.  It's going to need some different road systems.  And 
they've been in to meet with us. 
 
Those are the kind of things we did.  We did the entire province on road 
rationalization, changed the funding, so we put more funding into the 
longer, the heavier anticipated haul routes.  We brought in what we call 
the heavy-haul program. 
 
And we brought that in, and we brought that in, I believe, in 1984.  Since 
1985 we have built 1,053 kilometres of roads, or assisted in building it up 
to 90 per cent.  They're built to primary grid standards, in fact heavier 
than that.  Compaction is put in to take the heavy traffic.  They're built 
wider so there's room to pass on the roads, so you're not squeezing, and it 
prevents accidents. 
 
So we have spent, especially spent on heavy-haul roads, in excess of $7 
million provincial share in just designing those roads to take it to the 
nearest . . . to the service.  And we know that if you've got a major 
centre in Foam Lake, where the wheat pool is building one now, that it 
becomes sort of an artery and all of them lead into the centre like a wheel 
with the spokes out.  So the further you get out, the less the roads may 
have to be to a standard.  And we realize that and try to design our roads 
that way.  So we've done a lot of those things. 
 
We've also worked for the Department of Highways in regards to where they 
come onto the highway system, the plans to upgrade them to meet that 
heavy-haul standard.  So we've done a lot of those things over the last 
three or four years to increase and be aware that many companies are taking 
elevators out on a continuous basis, and we know they're going to truck 
further and further.  And certainly . . . I used the example of the wheat 
pool because they're a very, very aggressive company lately, and they now 
have bought out a terminal in Saskatoon and they will be trucking much of 
their specialty grains to there. 
 
They have bought out Elders in Moose Jaw, and they'll be doing the same 
thing.  They've been doing it already where they have . . . buying the 
grain, going out and picking up the grain, and trucking it to their nearest 
elevator.  They've been doing it with canola now in my area and trucking it 
to Nipawin to the processing plant there.  So they have been doing it 
themselves already, and other companies are doing the same thing. 
 
So it's there; you can't turn back the clock.  So we're trying to prepare 
and make sure that the RMs are in a position to manage the heavy-haul 
that's going to occur on some of the roads, in particular the through roads 
that go right through their municipalities or into their municipalities. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- You know, Mr. Minister, you do a lot of consulting, and I 



 

 

fear that it's really an excuse for inaction.  Your government had no 
problem forging ahead without asking the people, in fact with the 
privatization of SaskPower.  In fact in your own documents you indicated 
that you wouldn't attack and privatize a public corporation, a monopoly 
utility corporation. 
 
Why didn't you consult then?  Now you're consulting as an excuse for 
inaction.  That's really what's happening here. 
 
The federal government, did they consult with the farmers in Saskatchewan 
in respect to taking oats out of . . . under the jurisdiction of the wheat 
board?  Seventy to 75 per cent of the farmers in Saskatchewan voted to 
retain oats under the wheat board, and they marched ahead.  Privatization 
of SaskPower, you had no problem in surging ahead until the people of 
Saskatchewan rallied and said, that's enough.  And you had to back off. 
 
And so now you have as a hidden agenda until a possible another election.  
You listen all right, Mr. Minister.  You only listen when you want to, when 
you don't want to take action to save many of the farms; that's why you're 
consulting. 
 
I want to ask you also, Mr. Minister, another concern with the RMs is the 
issue of tax loss as the result of Indian claim settlements is a concern to 
a number of RMs.  And I want to ask you whether you have looked into that 
concern as expressed by the RM, and can you tell me if your government with 
its special relationship with the federal government, the Mulroney 
government, has it managed to get Ottawa to pay a grant to the RMs to 
replace lost property taxes?  Has there been any progress made in respect 
to that concern of the RMs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, in regards to tax loss, it's always 
a concern to every RM.  I don't think it matters which RM it is.  Some of 
the Indian bands have been looking at how it could be resolved with the 
RMs, but I don't think there's any doubt in anybody's mind that that's a 
federal responsibility, not a provincial responsibility.  And we have been 
discussing with both the Indian bands and with those who are responsible 
for the native FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations), as well as 
the federal government, more than once -- in fact four or five or six 
times.  The federal government would like to off-load it on to either the 
provincial government or the municipalities.  They have suggested such 
things as pay for the first 10 years taxes in advance and then that's it.  
In my view, the RM would take a licking because about the year five when 
you take escalating costs and everything else and assessments and change 
roll-over, they would be getting nothing beyond the first five years.  And 
that land and those RMs and those tax base will be there for a long, long 
time. 
 
So in my view that is not a solution and should not be considered a 
solution.  But it is a federal responsibility.  They have said and haven't 
accepted that, and it's fair to say.  And we've been working with the 
Indian band, the White Bear Indian Band particularly, where they are 
looking at a considerable amount of land, looking at, under the 1976 
formula, has created us some problems.  The agreement there has certainly 



 

 

created some problems with us. 
 
The amount of land that was allocated at that time made available and 
certainly is going to create some problems in regard to settlement of 
Indian land claims.  So we are looking at the tax base.  We've been working 
with and on behalf of the RMs. 
 
In fact I even told the RM -- I can't think of the one out there with the 
White Bear Indian Band -- are taking over some land in it.  I can't think 
of the name of the RM right offhand, but we've been working with . . . I 
was working with them, met with them once or twice to even say that we 
would help them financially, and to either working with the native band and 
the native band and then going to the federal government saying, this is 
your responsibility.  If you're going to put it into reserve status, make 
sure that it remains a tax base for a long . . . and if you move taxes, 
that's fine.  But we need that as a guaranteed income for the future. 
 
Mr.Koskie: -- Mr. Minister, you know, I think what you should do is listen 
to the RM officials a little more.  That's what you should do, Mr. 
Minister.  Because also the RM officials called on your government to 
cancel that birthday celebration.  I wonder who you consulted with when you 
dreamed up, celebrate 85th birthday of Saskatchewan.  Who was your great 
consultation process at that time?  And who dreamed that up and endorsed 
it, Mr. Minister? 
 
Here are the RMs indicating that the Future Corporation cancel that 
program.  And I believe some action due to the pressure of Saskatchewan 
people are in fact bringing this Future Corporation to a halt earlier than 
intended. 
 
I just wonder, Mr. Minister, you talk about being close with the RMs.  Do 
you not take back some of the recommendations and some of the resolutions 
that they passed back to your cabinet colleagues?  Or do you have no 
influence in the direction that they are asking this government to take? 
 
And so I ask you here: who dreamed this gem up and did you consult with the 
RMs, because obviously there was no consultation because they said, quit 
wasting the money and get on and deal with the crisis that's in rural 
Saskatchewan?  And so I ask you in respect to that: the headline says, "RM 
officials call on government to cancel birthday celebration."  I guess I 
ask you whether you can confirm that they asked you to do it, and whether, 
prior to the invention of it, whether they had any input into the creation 
of this here ill-fated Future Corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I won't spend too much time on this, 
but just in regards to the Future Corporation which he was talking about.  
At the SARM convention, on behalf of the Future Corporation, we helped 
fund, through the Future Corporation, estate planning and transfer, 
intergenerational transfer of land done by SARM through a consultant that 
they hired. 
 
And they put together on video -- and that video is available at all rural 
service centres at all RM offices.  And it's put together extremely well.  



 

 

It was put together, I believe, at a cost of 200-and-some thousands of 
dollars by SARM, which the Future Corporation helped fund.  I believe it 
has a lot of benefits to our farmers.  And those that saw it at SARM -- it 
would be about 1,500 delegates were still there, I think . . . themselves 
said it was really well done and would help them greatly in planning their 
own estate planning and also planning for the future for their future 
generations. 
 
Another area that the Future Corporation that just comes to mind that I was 
involved with is at Redvers where we were putting in a flax straw plant.  
They were also funding that in regards to the study of putting it together, 
putting together the plans and all the drawings for that flax straw plant 
that would make board, flax straw board out there -- it's a furniture board 
-- which is going to create about anywheres up to 50 jobs directly in the 
area. 
 
So I know those two come to mind right off.  That it was in fact . . . and 
a lot of the money that I know as sitting and looking through all the 
things where they funded, much of the money went to educational purposes, 
into schools; one went into the science centre down here; quite a bit of 
the money went into the science centre here in Regina.  And I think 
everybody would agree that's one of the finest science centres in this 
country.  Done extremely well.  And I think everybody in this province is 
very proud of it.  So a large amount of the money went into that.  I think 
it was a good expenditure.  Those kinds of things that come to mind right 
off. 
 
So what he calls it is one thing; what it really did, Mr. Chairman, is so 
important.  And it was important because it helped.  Both educational, 
science centre, I can think of estate planning for SARM, I can think of a 
fibre board plant out in Redvers, and I'm sure there's many more if I 
wanted to get the list that were very, very beneficial to our province. 
 
So it had nothing to do with whether a birthday party, as he puts it . . . 
that's what they had back in 1980; they had one, and it was very successful 
at that time.  And that's what we had and I was part of it.  I helped put 
it together, some of the things that happened in our community.  So we did 
have that. 
 
This wasn't this.  This was bringing business and expertise; it was 
bringing job opportunities, Mr. Chairman, to our province. 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- You are right; RMs are wrong.  I agree with you.  Only 37 of 
them here in the Regina district association of rural municipalities passed 
a unanimous resolution asking the government to postpone the spending until 
Saskatchewan centennial of 2005.  At the very least, they say, the 
government should wait until the provincial economy is buoyant.  There's 
other priorities, they're saying.  But they're wrong.  You're right.  Let's 
go on. 
 
Another issue that the RMs raised with you, Mr. Minister, the delegates 



 

 

slammed the GST (goods and services tax) being imposed by your federal 
counterparts.  And they oppose the institution of this here regressive tax, 
the GST, as being implemented against the will of the people of this 
country by the Mulroney government.  And the delegates to the Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities, SARM, joined the long list of those 
organizations opposed to the federal government's proposed goods and 
services tax.  And there's no doubt that this is a regressive tax because 
all pay it, regardless of whether you're rich or poor. 
 
Normally you have a tax system that is fair that those that have, that can 
afford to pay, should be prepared to pay.  But not under the Tory regime.  
They say, let's go the one step closer to Margaret Thatcher, her right-wing 
philosophy that she imposed in Great Britain where she's had riots and is 
about as low in the polls -- not quite as low as the Tories in Ottawa and 
Saskatchewan.  The recent poll, Mr. Chairman, indicate that the federal 
Tories are at 16 per cent, the lowest in recorded history of any governing 
party in the democratic system -- 16 per cent. 
 
But they must march on.  And this government has stood, in spite of the 
fact that organization after organization have opposed the GST, and the 
SARM, the very institution that this minister represents, have literally 
sat by and have condoned and acquiesced and are going to join in with the 
implementation of this very vicious, right-wing, regressive tax that's 
going to be imposed on the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Tories said they are bringing in tax reform, Mr. Minister.  They 
brought it in all right.  They brought it on their philosophy that you tax 
the rich less and you tax the ordinary citizen a heck of a lot more. 
 
I guess this is another concern by a very major agricultural organization 
-- SARM.  And the minister does his dealing with SARM and I wonder whether 
the minister has made the position of the organization that represent all 
of rural Saskatchewan -- SARM -- whether you made representations to your 
federal cousins that were opposed to this tax.  Or are we going to sit and 
let it be imposed against the will of people right across this nation?  You 
should go another step further and put on a head tax or a poll tax like 
Margaret Thatcher did. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister, do you take the resolutions of the delegates to 
SARM seriously?  Do you take them back to your cabinet, to your Premier?  
Do you intend to forward it on to the federal party? 
 
And I ask you, Mr. Minister, you have an obligation to express your support 
against this regressive tax.  And I want to know why your government has 
been essentially silent on it, speaking one thing here and another thing 
when they go down east meeting with the Prime Minister. 
 
But more importantly, have the representations of SARM been made known to 
your cabinet and to the federal counterparts that are imposing this 
regressive tax? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Mr. Chairman, just before I go into the . . . talking 
about the GST, and I'm going to say a few things about it because I don't 



 

 

agree with it either -- totally don't agree with it.  Never did and never 
will. 
 
I want to talk about . . . just a moment about the Future Corporation, and 
I was just asking my officials here if any way we had assisted RMs other 
than through the estate planning.  And I understand that $50,000 was given 
to the RM of Spalding, to the RM of Spalding, I believe, in the member from 
Quill Lakes' riding, to look at a special dust sealing on two miles of 
road, called paraseal, and they're doing a test pilot project out of it.  
So there was $50,000, I know, that come from the Future Corporation that 
directly went into his constituency to help with a road, a test pilot, a 
pilot project on a road in his area. 
 
I also understand that Vis-A-Vis got some for looking at their plans for 
developing the bottling plant which I think was really good for the area, 
and I understand that they also got some dollars there. 
 
So what I'm saying, Mr. Chairman, is that it really was spread around in a 
lot of ways, and I think most of them the member would have to agree, that 
both of those were areas that were important to him and important to all of 
us. 
 
In regards to the GST, the department did a bit of analysis on how it would 
affect municipalities.  And because of the vagueness of knowing or not 
knowing what is all . . . might be available and how it would affect, it 
was hard to say when you just came down to the purchase of equipment.  
Because if they take off the 13 per cent sales tax and add 7 per cent and 
nobody eats up the differences -- I think they may do -- there would 
probably be little or no difference, the cost of them. 
 
But when we looked at GST on road construction, then we really have a 
problem, and that's where our problem shows up for municipalities.  
According to the information available to . . . municipalities that builds 
a road with its own equipment will only pay the GST on supplies used in the 
construction, i.e., gravel, fence posts, etc. 
 
However, a municipality that tenders out the construction of a road will 
pay the GST on the total amount of the contract.  And just think what that 
does to all the municipalities, that most of them do tender it out, or for 
one municipality that's tendering out or doing the work for another 
municipality.  And just realize that's going to be an additional 7 per cent 
cost added directly on the total cost of construction, because services are 
included. 
 
That to us is not right and it can't be there.  And if it does, it just 
increases the cost of road construction in this province by 7 per cent to 
all municipalities -- increases it by 7 per cent.  And that is a great deal 
of increased costs if you bring in the GST. 
 
And that's a cost directly to this provincial government.  And there's no 
way around it because if it comes in we are cost sharing up to 90 per cent 
on all road construction.  So you can just realize what it's going to cost 
us as a government if that happens. 



 

 

 
If you talk about the GST in rural Saskatchewan, you talk about the GST in 
regards to small business, I probably should know as well as anybody what 
it will do to small businesses in rural Saskatchewan and how it would 
affect my small business.  I run two of them.  I've run one for 28 years 
now, and I believe I know business, retail business in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
I had my accountant do an analysis of what it would cost me in my two 
businesses that I operate in the town of Hudson Bay.  He estimated that I 
will have to have an additional $20,000 in carrying money just to carry the 
additional amount of stock that I'm carrying and the roll-over that it 
affects. 
 
Now if you take $20,000 annualized yearly, times it by whatever interest 
rate you want, you know what it's going to cost me as an individual, extra 
above.  Never mind the collection, now when you get the collection.  If you 
talk about cash registers and if anybody in small business, and everybody 
does know in small business, that cash registers don't come cheap.  They 
don't come cheap particularly if they're programmed and computered into 
your product.  And there's not one cash register that I own anyway that can 
be changed over to take both taxes.  So that means you either have to go to 
a new cash register, and I don't know if anybody even makes one now to take 
both taxes.  And that becomes terribly expensive. 
 
Then on top of that you've got all the bookkeeping.  You pay the GST when 
you buy it, you carry it all the way through, all the way through to the 
end and then you've got to deduct as you send it in.  Let me tell you 
something, it'll be a bookkeeper's dream because they will be the 
benefactors from it. 
 
So if you want to ask me, do I agree with the GST?  No, I don't agree with 
the GST.  And I have said it extremely clearly here today and any other 
time.  And if you . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Chairman, I'm 
sure if the member would like to get in on . . . 
 
I'll just conclude by saying this in the GST:  I believe the GST will be a 
great hurt to this province.  I believe the GST can do nothing to benefit 
us individually out here. 
 
And if you look at the GST other than maybe on a half-ton truck, and I 
would like to know what company in the next year won't take up the slack 
before the GST comes in.  And although they'll give you back thirteen and a 
half per cent, the price will go up and we'll all be eat up anyway.  I 
believe that sincerely.  I believe we're going to pay an additional 7 per 
cent on every product that we buy out here because of the GST. 
 
Let me end by saying this: if the GST is going to come, and I don't know 
how you're ever going to stop them from bringing it in, because as you 
know, as you know, they intend to bring it in.  They brought closure in, in 
the House of Commons.  I believe it's going to come, and I don't think 
you're ever going to stop it from coming.  And that doesn't make anybody 
here in this whole province happy. 
 



 

 

If they do that, there should be an obligation to set at least 1 to 2 per 
cent aside for export enhancement for our farm communities, and then rural 
Saskatchewan and all of Saskatchewan.  Because if you set the total amount 
across the country aside, that's 3 to 4 billions of dollars, and our 
farmers and our small business will not only be good, they'll do a lot 
better. 
 
So I believe they have a commitment.  It they're going to bring it in, set 
that aside for export enhancement and let us have for once in a long, long 
time, let us be equal east and west and let us be part of a country I call 
Canada which makes it a great country to live in.  And we can all play a 
major role as Canadians, as consumers across this province and across this 
country to make not only Saskatchewan, not only Manitoba or Alberta, but 
all the Canadian farmers better.  And if they do, our rural communities 
will be there for many, many years to come. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Well boy, the Saskatchewan people must be really convinced 
that you're a fighter.  What a stand you took against that GST.  I'll tell 
you, Mr. Minister, you know, you say what we have to do is some 
modifications.  That's what you said.  And I'm going to tell you, you can't 
make a meat pie out of barn manure.  And you can't make anything good out 
of something that is no good.  And that's your position and that's the 
Premier's position.  That's exactly what you're saying.  It's coming in; 
give up; let 'em go; let 'em have it; and let's start making some 
modifications. 
 
And what a hypocrisy that you stand here and pretend that you're against 
the GST and that you're a small-business man and you know the importance of 
it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Don't give us that rubbish any longer.  We put a motion and 
we asked the House . . . a motion in this House asking the House to endorse 
opposition totally, unanimously, objecting to the imposition of the GST.  
And we could have had that. 
 
But across the way you have your agenda, Mr. Minister, because you quietly 
support it.  That's the problem.  And the people of Saskatchewan know it.  
And the people of Saskatchewan, come the next provincial election, are 
going to know that the GST is part and parcel of your government's 
imposition of it.  And that's what they'll be deciding.  That's hanging on 
your neck, Mr. Minister, and let it not be denied. 
 
Mr. Minister, I challenge you today, or this evening.  I'll bring in a 
resolution, and I'll do it and I'll get one drafted right now.  And you say 
that you're totally and unequivocally opposed to the imposition of the GST.  
Now maybe you have changed your mind, because we tried it previously. 
 
And I'm going to ask you, Mr. Minister, if we introduce in this House right 
now, can we in fact get your unqualified support and leave to introduce an 



 

 

emergency motion with leave, in order that in fact we can indicate to all 
of Canada and to particularly Saskatchewan people, that at last this House 
comes to its senses and are going to give one message, and the message is 
that GST is no good for the people of Canada, is no good for the people of 
Saskatchewan, and it must be stopped. 
 
(1645) 
 
I'm asking you, Mr. Minister, are you prepared to do it?  And I'll tell 
you, I'll do it in the following terms.  I'm going to ask you -- this will 
be what it says, that: 
 

 Moved that this Assembly condemn unqualifiedly the GST and urge the 
Government of Canada to withdraw it because of its impact on rural 
Saskatchewan. 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Here is an opportunity, Mr. Minister, and accordingly I ask 
you: will you give us leave?  In fact what I'm going to move, I'm going to 
move that resolution to see the sincerity of the members opposite in 
whether or not . . . And I'm going to move, seconded by the member from 
Humboldt, Mr. Upshall -- I shouldn't use his name, but I will -- from the 
constituency of Humboldt.  And what I . . . I so move, Mr. Chairman, and 
I'd ask the page to get this to the chairman.  And I'd like the minister to 
join with us in respect to this. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order.  I refer members to page two of the appendix on 
rules: 
 

 That the practice of permitting substantive motions in the Committee of 
the Whole and Committee of Finance be discontinued. (Adopted December 10, 
1980) 

 
So I find the motion not in order.  State your point of order. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Mr. Chairman, I just want to make one point.  I accept what 
you have indicated in respect to the rule, but the House governs as to 
overriding any rule and the House has an opportunity here today, the House 
has . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order, order.  Allow the member to state his point of 
order . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes he did.  Order.  Allow the 
member from Quill Lakes . . . 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the ruling that you have 
given, but I want to make a point that by the unanimous consent of the 
House that we can proceed in respect to the motion.  And all that has to be 
asked is whether or not we can get the consent of the government to 
indicate whether or not they are indeed prepared to support what the 
minister indicated. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 



 

 

 
Mr. Chairman: -- That the point of order is not well taken in committee 
because we're in committee.  We're not in the House.  It can be done in the 
House, but there is a motion, Item 1, before the committee and that's why 
we cannot do it in committee. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, I understand that and I know that the 
members of the House are indeed with unanimous consent can do exactly what 
the committee -- can do exactly what it wants.  And so what I would like . 
. . 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order, order.  There is a motion before the committee that 
has to be dealt with, and it is Item 1 of Rural Development Estimates. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Well, I wonder whether, Mr. Chairman, whether you'd accept 
an amendment to the motion on GST. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order.  An amendment can be made to Item 1 of the Rural 
Development Estimates.  Yes. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Yes, what I want to ask the Minister, then, in light of the 
ruling of the Chair, if the properly worded amendment is prepared then 
along the lines as indicated in the main motion, whether the Minister in 
fact is prepared at this time to give consent to the amended motion, and 
will you be prepared to proceed with unanimous opinion, support of your 
colleagues in respect to the opposition of GST? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order. 
 

 Amendments are allowed in committee but no amendments can be moved which 
are not relevant to the vote under consideration.  Each resolution for a 
vote forms a distinct motion which can only be dealt with by being agreed 
to, reduced, negatived, superseded or withdrawn.  The committee may reduce 
the amount of a vote by the omission or a reduction of the items of 
expenditure of which the vote is composed.  Here the power of the 
committee ceases. 

 
Mr. Koskie: -- We bring it into the House, a motion in respect to it, in 
order to give the members opposite an opportunity to support a motion 
rejecting GST, and what did they do?  They refused leave to discuss it.  
That's what they did.  We come into this House today and the minister says, 
oh, I'm against GST.  And we said, let's join together and indicate it 
together.  Build a consensus, you're talking about. 
 
And you know what they do?  Now they hide it behind the rules again.  Mr. 
Minister, the people of Saskatchewan know that you're being . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order, order.  Why is the member from Biggar on his feet? 
 
Mr. Baker: -- We never refused leave; you ruled that out of order.  We 
never refused leave . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes he did. 



 

 

 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order.  The member's point of order is not well taken.  
The member from Quill Lakes is making reference to rule 39. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- In fact you can go back to sleep there, someone said.  Mr. 
Chairman, I want to indicate to the minister here because I'm talking in 
respect to the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities delegates 
slamming GST.  He's representing rural Saskatchewan, and it's going to 
massively affect small business, going to affect farmers, going to affect 
ordinary people across the province. 
 
And you know what?  He says, oh I'm kind of opposed to it but we can't stop 
it, he said, we'll have to try to fix it.  That's his position. 
 
I'll tell you, Mr. Chairman, just to demonstrate the hypocrisy of the 
opposition, the government side.  This is the resolution that we offered 
before the House recently. It says: 
 

 Before orders of the day, I rise pursuant to rule 39 to move a motion.  I 
shall read the motion, which I shall actually move at the end of my 
comments.  The motion which I would ask for leave to move . . . 

 
And this was what we asked the government to demonstrate in respect to GST: 
 

 That this Assembly condemns the Government of Canada for its proposed 
goods and services tax, which is regressive, unsound, unfair, and which 
will impose unjustifiable financial hardship on the Saskatchewan people. 

 
That was the resolution that we asked the government to join with us, to 
give us leave, and they refused. 
 
People of Saskatchewan will know. But they're opposed to it.  That's what 
the minister of rural affairs says: I'm opposed to it, but we can't stop 
it. 
 
I'd like to ask you, Mr. Minister, what basic steps did you take in respect 
to your portfolio as it affects all of the farmers and small-business men 
that you talk about, that having your accountant take a look at the impact 
on yourself.  I wonder what actions have you taken and what can you table 
in this House in respect to the opposition that you as minister of rural 
Saskatchewan, who should be defending the rights of rural Saskatchewan 
people -- can you file and demonstrate what efforts you took in respect to 
opposing the GST? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Well I don't want to give him a long sermon, so I'll 
just say simply this: as a government and as cabinet, we've had a lot of 
discussion at federal-provincial levels.  We've had the Department of 
Finance has been working for the last six to eight months, practically a 
year, with the federal Department of Finance, telling them the problems 
that we would face if they bring it in.  And that's where we should be 
working with them at it. 
 
We have publicly said, both in this legislature the Premier has said it, 



 

 

and at many, many meetings that in fact it would impose a lot of hardships 
on this province in particular, I laid some of them out. 
 
I'll tell you, what I can say only is that we have been working for the 
last year on many, many things.  And if they bring in the GST and it 
affects our industry in this province that we are putting together, it 
would be detrimental to everyone in this province.  And I'll say that. 
 
I suppose the question we all face is that as you deal with any federal 
government, and there's 10 provincial governments across the province have 
to deal with the federal government, I don't know if any of them had any 
success in regards to getting them to change their minds. 
 
In fact, I would think that we have a lot of members from this province 
sitting in the federal House of Commons, 10 of them being from the 
Opposition, from the NDP, and other than once in a while down there you 
hear the odd grumble, I haven't heard much from them at all. 
 
And I believe that they could . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . no.  And 
if you look through all the House of Commons questions, you would know that 
they haven't put up much of a debate in regards to the GST. 
 
So therefore, Mr. Chairman, I would say that from this province we have 
taken a firm stand.  We have told them unequivocally that we're against it.  
We have told them that to go . . . that it needs to be scrapped, that it 
needs to be . . . whatever is brought in and however they're going to fix 
their taxation in Canada, they need to do two or three things. 
 
One of the things they need to do is bring down the interest rates; two, 
they need to let the dollar fall where it should be; and three, they need 
to reduce the size of the federal bureaucracy before they come to us, 
before they come to us as taxpayers for any additional money.  And we have 
done that at a provincial level and it's time the federal government did it 
too. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Being near 5 o'clock, this committee is recessed until 7 
p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


