





























































Hansard: March 26, 1990


 

 

March 26/90 
EVENING SITTING 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Solomon: -- Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure this evening to introduce to 
you, and to members in this Assembly, approximately 27 cubs and their 
leaders in the Speaker's gallery.  They are from the 80th Walsh Acres cubs 
in my constituency.  The cubs are accompanied by Michael Ryan, Bill Muxlow, 
Kim Senft and Jerry Strecker. 
 
I would like to, on behalf of my colleagues, welcome you here this evening.  
I hope you enjoy your stay.  I look forward, Mr. Speaker, and hon. members, 
to meet with the cubs after a few moments and answer any questions they may 
have.  I hope you have a safe journey home.  Please join with me in 
welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in reply which was 
moved by Mr. Toth and the amendment thereto moved by Mr. Pringle. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: -- I too on behalf of this side of the House welcome our 
young guests to the Assembly and hope that they find their visit here 
enjoyable and informational. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it gave me quite a little bit of a good feeling over the 
dinner break as I returned many calls that I had from several of my 
constituents concerning my earlier remarks on the debate on this throne 
speech to respond. And I should tell you that there were former 
constituents of mine from Regina North, present constituents from Regina 
South, and, of course, many on behalf of my colleague, the Minister of the 
Family.  He and I both share a larger constituency in this city, Mr. 
Speaker, and we have to respond indeed, to the inquiries from all of the 
people of the city of Regina. 
 
And basically what they say to us is that they like and enjoy hearing the 
government's plans.  They enjoy hearing the new ideas and the new direction 
and the new consultation process that we enjoy on this side of the House, 
and how we visit with indeed all of the people from the city of Regina, and 
that they get rather tired of hearing the rhetoric that they are confronted 
with on a regular basis. 
 
The member from Regina Centre talks about the Alamo or Romper Room and that 
kind of thing.  The member from Regina Rosemont, he's on a rhetoric kick 
and his only knowledge appears to be that of Rafferty dam and that's about 
it, whereas my colleagues and I, we have to speak on many topics. 



 

 

 
The member from Regina North, he gets up regularly and speaks only about 
the bus company; he doesn't share any new ideas.  The people . . . My old 
friends in Regina North ask me, doesn't he have any ideas?  I said, I don't 
know. Does he talk to them or anything?  They say, why do I leave?  I still 
live in Regina North.  Unfortunately I'm not satisfied with my 
representation but that's how it works.  Regina North East, I don't know 
his claim.  They say that I sought a safe haven in Regina South, but in the 
meantime it's fine for the member from Regina North East who moved here 
from Humboldt and nothing was said about that.  That quietened them down. 
 
The member from Regina Lakeview, the Health critic . . . I think she's the 
health critic. She used to ask questions; she doesn't any more.  Obviously 
our Minister of Health is doing a great job because those questions aren't 
forthcoming any more.  The member from Regina North West, he has no 
particular emphasis or any particular accomplishments in this legislature 
and they just simply ask what he does and I say, I don't know. 
 
But the Minister of the Family and I share a major responsibility in the 
city of Regina, and as a result when we enter a debate on something as 
important as the throne speech -- the new direction of the government, the 
new ideas of the government -- it takes a rather lengthy time for us to be 
indeed able to tell the people of the city of Regina what our government is 
indeed intending to do. 
 
So when I closed off my remarks just prior to the dinner break, Mr. 
Speaker, I indicated how pleased I was that in my new portfolio as Minister 
of Consumer and Commercial Affairs it would keep me in touch with my 
business community throughout the province . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Excuse me.  The member from Regina North West. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Mr. Speaker, I request leave to introduce another group of 
guests, please. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It's once again my 
pleasure to introduce another group of young people from the constituency 
of Regina North West.  Located in the Speaker's gallery, sir, are some 
Scouts from the Holy Trinity 65th.  I believe there are nine Scouts and a 
couple of their leaders.  The leaders are Gord Zech and Mike McAvoy.  I 
would like to, at this point, extend a warm welcome to each of you, and on 
behalf of my colleagues in this Assembly, I hope that you enjoy the 
proceedings this evening.  I look forward to meeting with you for questions 
and refreshments and discussion after a while and after I meet with the 
other Cubs. 
 
So please join with me this evening to welcome these guests from Regina 
North West. 
 



 

 

Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY (continued) 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think that the idea of these 
young people and their leaders bringing them to the Assembly is excellent, 
and it gives everybody the opportunity to see how their legislature indeed 
operates. And welcome to the Assembly -- I hope you find it informational 
and a lot of fun as well. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: -- But, Mr. Speaker, without being repetitive, I want to 
say again how pleased I am that I will remain in touch with the business 
community throughout the province, and I look forward to my new role. 
 
The demand for the services and programs from our department continues to 
grow, and I think that we can expect that this will continue to be the case 
as the Saskatchewan market-place and our Canadian society, which I had 
described as market based, becomes more complex and continues to change, 
including significant technological changes. 
 
These are indeed difficult economic times.  Governments across Canada have 
been challenged for some years now to do more with less at the national 
level, provincial level, and without question at the local level, Mr. 
Speaker.  This new department of mine has provided an excellent example of 
how governments can indeed search the spectrum and do more with less in a 
number of areas and still continue the same important service that they 
provide. 
 
And basically it's areas that the NDP could never comprehend, could never 
get established, and could never seem to accept.  The idea of 
self-administration, totally unheard of by them; the use of volunteers in 
the delivery of the various programs, totally not acceptable to them; 
co-operative projects that are cost shared with industry and other 
agencies, they always only simply believed in big government. 
 
We plan to do more than this in the next few years.  In the development of 
our education print resources, as I mentioned, we are heightening our 
efforts to attract corporate sponsorship, and all of this always done, Mr. 
Speaker, through extensive consultative process. 
 
I would like to emphasize a truism about my new department.  Every citizen 
of Saskatchewan is of concern to Saskatchewan Consumer and Commercial 
Affairs because every citizen in Saskatchewan is indeed a consumer, and a 
great many of us are also involved in business.  And I certainly look 
forward to my new portfolio. 
 
Earlier in my comments, Mr. Speaker, I briefly touched on my past and why, 



 

 

in my role as an MLA. I've briefly indicated my future and how it would be 
accomplished in my role as an MLA. 
 
And in conclusion I would touch very briefly on our government's plan and 
why Consensus Saskatchewan will take on a very important meaning.  We have 
a strong commitment to rural Saskatchewan and yet at the same time there is 
no question about the strong commitment that we have to our urban people. 
And I think that that has been reflected in many programs that our 
government has offered.  We must continue to protect all of our people and 
provide safety nets that affect everybody. 
 
Recently our Premier spoke to the province about the serious economic 
situation that our province is currently experiencing, and in my opening 
remarks I spoke of challenges. 
 
These challenges include, as I mentioned: the high interest rates to 
protect central Canada's economy; the international grain price wars 
between the Americans and Europe that is brought up daily in question 
period that we're dragged into; climatic conditions in our province, Mr. 
Speaker, more severe than those of the thirties, something well beyond the 
control of this government; the federal budget, that by necessity passed 
large costs on to the provinces; a general reduction in provincial 
government revenues for all sorts of reasons -- reasons that the members 
opposite blow out of proportion; a debt crisis in rural Saskatchewan with a 
genuine threat to even go as far as the planting of this season's crops; 
lower international prices, as I mentioned, for our entire commodity array, 
including potash, uranium and oil -- items well beyond the control, Mr. 
Speaker, of our government -- and yet coupled with all of this, increased 
demands for government spending across all sectors, but particularly in the 
areas of health care, education, and much needed social programs. 
 
This has put the provincial government under tremendous pressures that 
necessitated that some programs that have been for the good of the people 
and have been successful for the province, simply can no longer be 
afforded.  So we had to take responsible measures and make very difficult 
decisions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So,, as the throne speech mentioned: Consensus Saskatchewan.  We know that 
Saskatchewan people want to become involved with the future of their 
economy and they want to become active participants in the process of 
change.  And that's why Saskatchewan consensus is here.  We must expand and 
diversify our economy.  This has been something that we have been talking 
about for years now.  But we need to do that.  No longer can we be so 
dependent on the agricultural community as the base of our economy, because 
now that they have their problems we need long-term solutions to the farm 
crisis. 
 
We just simply, as I mentioned, have to take more advantage of the world 
trading partnerships that are open and available to us.  We simply have to 
take Saskatchewan's presence out into the market-place of this new global 
village.  And without that, without that diversification, Mr. Speaker, 
without that expansion of our economy and without that trade, Saskatchewan 
will not be able to survive and prosper in the manner that we would like it 



 

 

to do. 
 
So that means that in the second pillar, the security and stabilization of 
our communities is of utmost importance.  We must build partnerships with 
the Saskatchewan people and their communities to ensure that this growth 
and that this diversification continues, because it then will ultimately 
lead to the growth and well-being of our people.  We must pursue the 
opportunities to ensure the growth, the protection of our Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
And all of this leads to the final item of responsible and efficient 
management of resources because we must make sound management choices to 
maximize the effectiveness of our resources, and that will be mandatory. 
 
It's so simple, Mr. Speaker, when you take a good idea like Consensus 
Saskatchewan and take it out to the people and let them become involved in 
the good and the welfare of their own future and the future of their 
children and the future of their children's children, that this simply 
happens.  The government, as I mentioned in my opening remarks, Mr. 
Speaker, believes in the strengths of this province and in the strength of 
their people. 
 
This Speech from the Throne highlights and directs a new era.  It takes 
something that we have always done on this side of the House -- the 
consultative process.  It takes that consultative process into new 
dimensions, into new horizons, and it expands it even more.  It is the way 
of the future.  Indeed, it is our future. 
 
There is no question, Mr. Speaker, that I strongly support the speech that 
was so eloquently delivered by Her Honour and moved by my colleague, the 
member from Moosomin.  Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(1915) 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I think it's 
important to note that in the period that the member from Regina South was 
speaking this afternoon and tonight at least four or five more people have 
left this province as a result of that government's policies.  The records 
indicate that people are leaving the province one every 23 to 26 minutes, 
and while he spoke there were at least four or five people who have left 
this province. 
 
It's interesting that the member from Regina South spent the major part of 
his speech attacking the New Democratic Party and New Democratic MLAs and 
defending political patronage.  This is the government that claims it's 
going to listen, Mr. Speaker, and it spent the last couple hours defending 
its patronage appointments of Bob Andrew and Graham Taylor. 
 
And I thought it was very interesting to sit here and watch them justify 
these blatant, horrendous patronage appointments while there are 64,000 
children living in poverty in this province, Mr. Speaker, and there are 



 

 

children lining up at the food banks in unprecedented numbers, while we 
have a $4 billion deficit.  And the member from Regina South defends the 
patronage appointments of Bob Andrew and Graham Taylor, Mr. Speaker.  And 
that's what we've listened to while at least four or five more people have 
left this province during the course of his speech. 
 
Well, we know where he stands.  We know where he stands, Mr. Speaker.  He 
stands with one foot on a banana peel and the other foot in his mouth. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- And I think it's very interesting that we listened to him 
for at least an hour and a half today, Mr. Speaker, and not once did he 
mention the major fiasco in his department for which he's responsible, and 
that's the Principal Trust matter, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And this is a government that's listening when the Ombudsman directly 
pointed the finger at the government and their neglect in managing the 
Principal Trust matter, Mr. Speaker, and urged the government to look at 
compensating depositors with respect to that matter.  And he doesn't 
mention one single word about that fiasco.  Not a word, Mr. Speaker.  And 
yet he said, he had the gall to say, that his department is concerned about 
every citizen in Saskatchewan.  They're not listening to the people, Mr. 
Speaker.  They've never listened to the people.  They aren't listening to 
the people, and they won't listen to the people. 
 
Another very interesting and rather novel comment that was made by the 
member from Regina South was his remarks that the Lieutenant Governor might 
be offended by some of our comments on the throne speech, while I just find 
that totally illogical, Mr. Speaker.  Everyone knows that the government 
writes the throne speech. The Lieutenant Governor delivers it but doesn't 
write it, and is not responsible for the comments.  And I think it's an 
insult to the Lieutenant Governor to suggest that she would be offended by 
anybody linking her to the throne speech, because everybody knows she's not 
responsible for the content of that throne speech.  So I think that's a 
very interesting argument that the member from Regina South made. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, on the day that the throne speech was read, we listened 
to it in the House, and then that evening we adjourned and had a banquet, a 
multicultural banquet. And as a result of that banquet one of the food 
items that were there was a fortune cookie.  And since I like fortune 
cookies, I had a couple. And it's very interesting, Mr. Speaker, that the 
fortune that I pulled out of my fortune cookie read as follows, and I have 
it here, Mr. Speaker, and this is following the throne speech: "Listen not 
to vain words of empty tongue." 
 
Well I thought it was rather appropriate, Mr. Speaker, and really 
summarized the throne speech as ably as any one of us on this side of the 
House could do.  It said, "Listen not to vain words of empty tongue" -- to 
the empty and vain words of the PC government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well it is true that the throne speech shows no leadership and no vision. 
Instead it blames the world, Mr. Speaker.  It blames world problems and 



 

 

world forces for all the problems that we see here in Saskatchewan.  They 
say the $4 billion deficit and the crisis in Saskatchewan is beyond their 
control.  That's what the throne speech says.  The problems in Saskatchewan 
are beyond their control, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well I ask you, was the GigaText affair beyond their control, Mr. Speaker?  
Of course not.  Was Pioneer Trust beyond their control?  Was Principal 
Trust beyond their control, Mr. Speaker?  No.  The Ombudsman has clearly 
indicated that it was within their purview to prevent some of these 
problems.  Was Joytec beyond their control, Mr. Speaker?  No, I think not.  
I understand Joytec has now moved out of this province, and the investment 
that was originally made by the government has been lost.  Was Supercart 
beyond their control, Mr. Speaker?  I ask you, was that beyond their 
control?  I think not.  In fact the Premier, I understand, called a big 
news conference to celebrate the news of Supercart in the original stages 
and was perfectly prepared to take responsibility at that time, but when it 
failed, they say it's all beyond their control.  And that's the line that 
we're hearing from the Tories in the throne speech, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Was their attempt to privatize SaskEnergy, in face of growing opposition 
against privatization, was that beyond their control, Mr. Speaker?  Was 
that attempt beyond their control?  Were they being forced into that?  Was 
the privatization of some 400 dental workers in this province, in such a 
ruthless and heartless fashion, was that beyond their control, Mr. Speaker? 
 
What about the Rafferty-Alameda dam and the environmental problems that we 
are facing with respect to that development and the manner in which they 
forged ahead with that development, regardless of the fact that the people 
of the province of Saskatchewan and the New Democratic opposition was 
telling them that they needed further environmental review and they hadn't 
taken the necessary steps.  Was that beyond their control, Mr. Speaker?  
The fact that they didn't listen to the opposition and the people of the 
province, was that beyond their control?  I think not. 
 
And Cargill, that they're pouring some 370 million into loan guarantees, is 
that beyond their control, Mr. Speaker?  What about their Husky Oil 
investment of some 220 million; is that beyond their control?  Their 
give-away to Peter Pocklington, their sweetheart deal with Weyerhaeuser and 
Peter Pocklington, 480,000 in the case of Peter Pocklington, some 248 
million in the case of Weyerhaeuser; is that beyond their control, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
What about their sanction of Mulroney's free trade agreement, Mr. Speaker?  
The fact that that was supposed to eliminate trade barriers and now we see 
a situation where the Americans are thumbing their nose at Canadians with 
high grain subsidies to American farmers; is that beyond their control?  
The fact that they endorse this free trade agreement, Mr. Speaker; is that 
beyond their control, even though it's a farce?  And the fact that the free 
trade agreement virtually signs away our right to control our resources; 
was that beyond their control to approve that aspect of the free trade 
agreement? 
 
And the GST (goods and services tax) which the Premier was very quick to 



 

 

endorse when it was first brought out, and was actually involved in the 
consultation with respect to the initial stages before the federal 
government proposed it; was that beyond the Premier's control and the PC 
governments' control?  No, they were in favour of this gouge and steal tax, 
Mr. Speaker.  They were in favour of it and they showed support for it, and 
it was only when it became politically unpopular in the province of 
Saskatchewan that they decided to do a flip-flop on the gouge and steal 
tax. 
 
And what about the tax increases that we have seen over the years?  What 
about the things like the flat tax?  Was that beyond their control, the 
flat tax which has caused considerable hardship to Saskatchewan families, 
Mr. Speaker, and which has been increased -- 1986 it was at 1 per cent; 
1987, 1.5; 1988, up to 2 per cent. 
 
What about the gasoline tax increase to 10 cents a litre for unleaded and 
12 cents a litre for leaded?  Was that beyond their control, Mr. Speaker?  
I should think not. 
 
And what about the neglect that poor people and low income people have 
suffered in this province in the last seven to eight years?  What about the 
evidence that shows that we have unprecedented numbers of children living 
in poverty and unprecedented numbers of children lining up at food banks, 
while this government sits on their hands and has done nothing with respect 
to the hunger problem, except in an election year they decide to pay lip 
service to it in the throne speech?  Was that beyond their control, Mr. 
Speaker?  No, I think not. 
 
And what about all the other programs:  the suffering that people went 
through for such a long period of time as a result of health care cut-backs 
and long hospital waiting lists; health care cut-backs by this government 
that created a crisis and a shortage in health care services in the 
province.  So we saw people waiting for a hospital bed, in some cases for 
up to a year for hip replacements while they lived in suffering and their . 
. . particularly older people, Mr. Speaker, who are then rendered immobile 
and it becomes very difficult and painful for them the longer that they are 
unable to walk around easily. And while they sat in their homes and waited 
for hip replacements, this government was cutting and slashing the health 
care budget, Mr. Speaker.  Was that beyond their control?  Was that beyond 
their control?  I think not, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we look at the education in the province of Saskatchewan and the fact 
that education has been so grossly underfunded by this government.  And as 
we see high teacher-student ratios, we see teacher burn-out as a result.  
We see our young people being unable to obtain entrance into technical 
schools and universities because this government has not made education a 
priority.  Well was that beyond their control, Mr. Speaker?  I think not. 
 
And let's look at the waste and mismanagement that has occurred in this 
province as a result of many of their policies.  The waste and 
mismanagement which, incidentally, I even heard the Premier speak to on a 
TV show a few weeks ago, where he said they were going to try and get rid 
of the waste and mismanagement.  So even he acknowledges that there has 



 

 

been some waste and mismanagement, waste and mismanagement that has 
resulted in a $4 billion deficit in this province, Mr. Speaker -- a $4 
billion deficit.  And I think that's atrocious. 
 
And then we have to . . . And what about the patronage that this government 
has engaged in -- the Bob Andrew, Graham Taylor patronage?  The Paul 
Schoenhals, the George Hill, the Paul Rousseau, and so on, Mr. Speaker.  
Are they listening to the people?  I believe that the people would tell 
them that they are disgusted with the blatant patronage that this 
government has engaged in. 
 
Are they listening to the people?  No.  Instead, they went ahead and 
appointed two more of their own -- Bob Andrew and Graham Taylor -- to 
further patronage positions, in the face of public opinion that clearly 
indicated that this government was perceived as being patronage-ridden. 
 
There's no question, Mr. Speaker, that the throne speech does not 
acknowledge -- does not acknowledge -- any PC responsibility for the 
present crisis.  It does not.  In fact, they try to blame it on world 
problems.  Well, Mr. Speaker, the litany of Tory-created problems as a 
result of misguided Tory policies is innumerable.  We could stand here for 
hours and just list one fiasco after the other -- one wrong-headed policy 
decision after the other, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that is what has contributed in large part to the problems that we are 
now facing in Saskatchewan, and to the huge deficit that our families are 
going to have to pay off, to the huge deficit -- $4 billion in this 
province, Mr. Speaker.  That's approximately $4,000 for every man, woman, 
and child in this province.  For a family of four we're talking $16,000, 
$16,000 of debt as a result of their incompetence, Mr. Speaker -- as a 
result of their incompetence.  And they refuse to accept any responsibility 
for that debt and for the crisis they've created, and the hurt, and the 
hurt and the harm that they have caused to Saskatchewan families.  And they 
refuse to accept any responsibility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they talk about the need to have a Consensus Saskatchewan, is 
what they have referred to it -- 100 citizens drawn together to tell them 
what direction this province should be going.  And they're doing this in 
their dying days, Mr. Speaker.  They're doing this in their dying days.  
But we've heard it before.  We've heard on innumerable occasions that 
they're listening to the people, and we know from their record that they 
don't listen.  They go ahead and implement whatever it is their right-wing 
ideology wishes, tells them to implement, and they're not listening to the 
people. 
 
(1930) 
 
This Consensus Saskatchewan that the government is attempting to put 
forward is just another desperate attempt to cling to power by a dying 
government, Mr. Speaker.  They say they are going to the people, but if 
they had been listening all along, Mr. Speaker, they would realize that 
there is a consensus in Saskatchewan on a number of different issues.  They 
would realize that the Saskatchewan consensus is to develop our resources 



 

 

for the benefit of all people in this province, not just for the benefit of 
an e pélite few, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But instead, they've refused to listen to that consensus, to those wishes 
of the people.  They've gone ahead and endorsed the free trade agreement 
that virtually signs away the right to completely control our resources in 
this province.  They wanted to go ahead and privatize SaskEnergy in spite 
of this general consensus, Mr. Speaker, and there's absolutely no question 
that they have not been listening to that general wish of the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The people of the province of Saskatchewan also have a consensus that they 
want universally accessible quality health care.  But what did we see this 
government doing?  We saw this government substantially reduce the 
children's school-based dental -- well, eliminate the school-based dental 
plan and implement it with a privatized dental plan, Mr. Speaker.  And as a 
result, it has reduced access to dental services to people, particularly in 
rural Saskatchewan, but also to children in urban Saskatchewan whose 
parents are unable to take time off work and take their children to the 
dentist, for example.  So, in spite of the fact that there's a Saskatchewan 
consensus that there should be universally accessible health care in this 
province, this government has ignored that consensus. 
 
It decimated the prescription drug plan and it was such a horrendous 
example of how they're not listening to the people and how they don't 
understand what the Saskatchewan consensus is or, in spite of the fact they 
know there's a consensus, they continue on their right wing ideological 
bent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Are the changes . . . the changes they made to the prescription drug plan 
is evidence of this attitude, Mr. Speaker.  We saw people who were unable 
to obtain prescription drugs as a result of their harmful and hurtful 
changes and we still, we still see a situation where people cannot afford 
some of the drugs that they need, Mr. Speaker.  That situation is still 
with us. 
 
And with respect to hospital waiting lists, we've seen in this province 
hospital waiting lists that are totally unprecedented in the history of 
this province because this government refused to listen to the Saskatchewan 
consensus that was that the people of Saskatchewan wanted universally 
accessible health care and they wanted quality health care. 
 
We see an infant mortality rate in Saskatchewan that is amongst the highest 
of anywhere in Canada, Mr. Speaker.  A disgraceful infant mortality rate, 
particularly as a result of socio-economic conditions in northern 
Saskatchewan.  And the Saskatchewan consensus, Mr. Speaker, is that this 
infant mortality rate should be reduced, but what steps has this government 
taken?  It's taken no steps to correct that problem, Mr. Speaker.  In fact, 
there have been cut-backs to health care services in northern Saskatchewan.  
And, Mr. Speaker, they've eliminated the northern food transportation 
subsidy, which brings me to the question of increased tuberculosis in 
northern Saskatchewan, which again is as a result of socio-economic 
conditions and poor nutrition in the North, Mr. Speaker. 



 

 

 
And this government has not listened to the Saskatchewan consensus, that 
all people in Saskatchewan, whether they live in the North or the South or 
the East or the West, are entitled to quality, universally accessible 
health care.  They've chosen to ignore the Saskatchewan consensus on that, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Saskatchewan people also, Mr. Speaker, believe that every family and every 
individual is entitled to adequate housing and adequate nutrition and 
clothing, Mr. Speaker.  But what we've seen in this province as a result of 
Tory policies are unprecedented numbers of families and children and 
individuals living in poverty, Mr. Speaker.  We've seen food banks.  The 
number one industry in this province is food banks these days, as a result 
of their policies, Mr. Speaker.  And they've chosen to ignore that.  All 
these years they've chosen to ignore this problem and implement policies 
that created . . . that made this problem, this problem, even more severe, 
and made it even worse, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They were not listening to the people.  They were not listening to the 
people who were suffering as a result of living in these poor conditions.  
And they were not listening to the rest of the people who were saying, do 
something about it; we don't want to see our brothers and sisters living in 
such degrading circumstances.  But they refused to listen to the 
Saskatchewan consensus, Mr. Speaker.  Now they're saying they're going to 
listen to the people, but we've heard it before.  We don't believe them; we 
know they will not listen, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Saskatchewan consensus with respect to education is that every child is 
entitled to a first-class education.  And the right to education, Mr. 
Speaker, depends on what you've got up here, not what you got down here in 
your pocket.  But this government has chosen to ignore that because there's 
been a move to private vocational schools.  And we have repeatedly said in 
this legislature that they're not regulating these schools -- to the 
detriment of the students, and it is to the detriment of the students that 
they're not regulating these schools, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We feel the students are being short-changed, but instead this government 
continues on with its policy of moving to private vocational schools; it 
continues with its policy of underfunding education generally.  So we have 
a situation in Saskatchewan where we in Saskatchewan have one of the lowest 
per capita spending with respect to education.  We have high teacher-pupil 
ratios, we have young people that cannot get access to universities and 
technical schools.  And I tell you, Mr. Speaker, students and parents and 
citizens across this province have been telling this government repeatedly 
over the last few years that the Saskatchewan consensus is that every child 
and every young adult has a right to an education, Mr. Speaker, has a right 
to quality education.  And this government has not listened to the people 
of this province. 
 
There's a Saskatchewan consensus, Mr. Speaker, that development, economic 
development in this province must be consistent, consistent with our 
environment, and we must not upset the delicate balance in the environment, 
Mr. Speaker.  But what have we seen this government do in spite of that 



 

 

Saskatchewan consensus, in spite of the desire of Saskatchewan people to 
preserve their environment and to sustain their environment?  In spite of 
that we've seen totally, in a bald-faced fashion, the adherence to a $1 
billion Rafferty-Alameda project which undoubtedly has environmental 
consequences, Mr. Speaker.  And they refused, they refused to listen to the 
people, they refused to undertake the necessary studies, and it took a 
court, Mr. Speaker, it took a court to tell them that they were on the 
wrong track.  The people couldn't tell them that; they weren't listening.  
The opposition couldn't tell them that; they weren't listening, Mr. 
Speaker.  And now this government has the gall to come forward in their 
dying days, in one desperate attempt to say that they are going to listen 
to the people of this province.  I doubt it, Mr. Speaker.  They won't be 
listening. 
 
So let's just look at maybe some of the incidences where this Premier and 
this government have indicated that they were going to consult and they 
were going to listen to the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
In the fall of 1982, the Premier announced his brand-new economic 
development board consisting of hand-picked private citizens to advise the 
government; and he personally chose those members, Mr. Speaker, like Will 
Klein of Pioneer Trust.  We got the announcement, but the consultation, Mr. 
Speaker, and listening, just didn't happen. 
 
And then in 1982, the Premier announced an advisory commission on youth -- 
another announcement, but still no real consultation or listening to the 
people of the province.  Instead what we have are unprecedented numbers of 
young people leaving this province today, Mr. Speaker, unprecedented 
numbers -- our future, our young people, leaving this province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Then in the fall of 1985, after the voters expressed an overwhelming 
consensus by rejecting the PC government, the Premier announced he would 
start listening, but that didn't last very long.  In fact, the direct quote 
from the Premier after that particular by-election, Mr. Speaker, was, "It's 
been a message that's been given to me and given to the party, and I'm 
going to take it seriously."  But he didn't listen, Mr. Speaker, he didn't 
listen. 
 
And then we saw the same thing again in October of last year.  Once again 
the Premier appeared to recognize the consensus of the province and 
appeared to acknowledge that it was totally rejecting his policies and his 
politics, so once again he said he would add more cabinet ministers to 
listen. 
 
The health care task force is another example.  They set up a health care 
task force that was to go through this province and listen to the people of 
Saskatchewan.  And in face of that, we see this government proposing an 
integration of hospitals in Saskatoon without even consulting with some of 
the major players with respect to that integration.  They didn't even 
notify their own health care task force that they were going to proceed 
with this very major initiative in Saskatoon.  But they had set up the task 
force to listen to what the people said, but it's another example of their 



 

 

hollow promises of listening and adhering to what the people are saying. 
 
And we see hospitals springing up in Moosomin and Broadview, Mr. Speaker, 
promises of such hospitals.  I'm not suggesting those hospitals may not be 
necessary, but it's being done when the health care task force is saying 
it's going to be coming out with its report.  I understand . . . Well the 
health care task force was supposed to come out with its report in 
December; now I understand it's been postponed to March 31.  I haven't 
heard of a further postponement, so therefore I believe this report is 
going to be coming out very soon. 
 
But we're seeing announcements of hospitals across this province by the PC 
government.  They're not even prepared to wait and see what their task 
force has to say with respect to these issues, or whether it says anything 
with respect to these issues.  And that's an example of Tory listening and 
Tory consulting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And who's responsible?  Who's responsible for these arrogant decisions on 
the part of the PC government, for making decisions in spite of the fact 
that the Saskatchewan consensus is entirely different?  Well I tell you 
it's every single member sitting over there, and the Premier, Mr. Speaker.  
And the Premier quite willingly acknowledges his responsibility.  For 
example, in a newspaper clipping, he said -- out of the Star-Phoenix on 
November 1985 -- the Premier says, with respect to the by-election in 
Regina North East: 
 

 I'm in control of the government and I can make the changes, and believe 
me, I will be listening and responding. 

 
That's what he said in 1985, Mr. Speaker.  "I'm in control," so we know 
that the Premier's in control, Mr. Speaker, and he's making these 
decisions. 
 
He says, in October of 1988 in the Star-Phoenix: 
 

 There are some choices that have to be made that are not always popular in 
everybody's eyes.  The question I always have to ask myself is, 'if you 
don't make these decisions, what did you get elected for?' 

 
So he realizes he's making the decisions.  This is his responsibility, Mr. 
Speaker, the Premier's responsibility. 
 
He says again, in November 1987, and this is quoted from The Globe and 
Mail: 
 

 . . . You're elected to lead.  People want to know that you're tough 
enough and determined enough and courageous enough to do what you believe 
is right.  I'm prepared to stake my role in history (against) anybody 
else. 

 
So he's taking control.  The Premier's responsible for these decisions and 
these policies that hurt the people. 
 



 

 

He says again in the Star-Phoenix, January 3, 1989: 
 

 I'm going to give it all I've got to make the changes I believe people 
want to see . . . 

 
So the Premier's in control, Mr. Speaker.  And there's no question he 
accepts responsibility for these mistakes -- those that he acknowledges -- 
although I rarely heard him acknowledge anything. 
 
And another rather interesting thing that sort of jumped out at me when I 
was going through some of these old newspaper clippings, Mr. Speaker, was 
the fact that this is a government that says they're listening to the 
people; they want to listen to the people and they want to reach a 
Saskatchewan consensus.  But the former member from Indian Head-Wolseley, 
Graham Taylor, had indicated this, Mr. Speaker.  This goes back to March 
20, 1989, again in The Globe and Mail.  He says: 
 

 "We have to change the thinking of Saskatchewan people," privatization 
minister Graham Taylor admits. 

 
We have to change the thinking of Saskatchewan people. 
 
(1945) 
 
Well I believe that's the first honest statement made by the members 
opposite with respect to the question of listening and consensus because I 
think that is what their policies are all about.  They are trying to change 
the Saskatchewan people.  They are trying to force the Saskatchewan people 
into what they believe Saskatchewan should look like, not what the people 
of Saskatchewan want Saskatchewan to look like.  They are going about this 
province attempting to destroy the Saskatchewan consensus and create this 
new world that they envisage, this new right-wing ideological world that 
gives benefits to big business, Mr. Speaker, and forgets about lower income 
and poor families and ordinary families in this province. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Old ideas. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Yes, it's a new world, but my colleague from Prince Albert 
says it's an old idea, and it's old Tory policies once again raising their 
ugly head, Mr. Speaker, policies that are attempted to destroy the 
Saskatchewan consensus and destroy what the Saskatchewan people have built 
up in this province over the decades, Mr. Speaker, that they built up over 
the decades. 
 
We know what these Tories stand for.  We know exactly what they stand for, 
Mr. Speaker, and that is huge give-aways to big corporations, huge 
give-aways to large corporations -- megabucks for megaprojects.  There is 
absolutely no question that that's what this government stands for.  
They're going about attempting to destroy the Saskatchewan consensus 
through policies like privatization, free trade, through their waste and 
mismanagement and the creation of a huge deficit through their patronage 
and corruption, Mr. Speaker. 
 



 

 

Their privatization policies have meant lost jobs for Saskatchewan people.  
All we have to do is look at the privatization of the school-based 
children's dental plan which meant hundreds of lost jobs for Saskatchewan 
people, Mr. Speaker. And I want to point out once again, as I've done in 
this Assembly before, many of those people were women, and I believe that's 
an indication of this government's attitude towards women. 
 
We see the privatization of Saskoil, meaning lay-offs of 25 per cent of its 
work force, and the privatization of SED meant 70 lost jobs in Saskatoon. 
And there's absolutely no question that PC privatization means fewer jobs 
and fewer opportunities for Saskatchewan people, which is one of the 
reasons why we have such a massive out-migration of young people in this 
province today.  So how has privatization, their privatization, affected 
public services, for example, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Well we see rapidly deteriorating highways, highways that are becoming 
impassable in many locations.  We see the elimination of the children's 
dental plan, and we see sharp utility increases as a result of SaskPower 
assets being privatized.  We see privatization of provincial parks, meaning 
fewer services and higher charges to Saskatchewan families.  That's how 
privatization affects public services, and I believe that all these effects 
and policies that are being put into place -- or the effects of these 
policies is against the Saskatchewan consensus, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So who gets control?  Who gets control under PC privatization?  Well 
ownership and control go into the hands of a few private corporations, and 
most often, Mr. Speaker, they're from outside our province, from outside 
our province.  And that's who gets control, and I say that that's against 
Saskatchewan consensus.  I believe that the Saskatchewan people want to 
maintain control of their resources and their utility corporations, Mr. 
Speaker.  They want to maintain control of that.  They don't want the 
control of their corporations and their utility corporations and their 
resources going to out-of-province investors so that the profits leave this 
province to companies such as the Ontario and Quebec companies as a result 
of the privatization of Sask Minerals, Mr. Speaker, as one example. 
 
We see other Tory policies, such as free trade, which is destroying the 
Saskatchewan consensus, and I've elaborated upon that somewhat, Mr. 
Speaker, earlier during my remarks.  I won't go into that in detail at this 
point.  We see Tory policies such as piling up a huge deficit in this 
province, Mr. Speaker, and I believe the Saskatchewan consensus would 
easily be that a PC government has been extravagant and wasteful and that 
its financial mismanagement has caused real hardship for Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
And when we take a look at the deficit and the fact that we are going to 
have to pay this off in the future . . . In fact the Premier himself has 
indicated in Grainews on December 1982 that deficits are just . . . and 
this is a quote, Mr. Speaker, a quote of the Premier's remarks.  "Deficits 
are just a deferred tax that must be paid by future generations."  The 
Premier is acknowledging that this is a deferred tax on our children, Mr. 
Speaker -- $4 billion - 
_ a deferred tax on our children.  That's what that deficit is, Mr. 



 

 

Speaker. 
 
And I believe that the Saskatchewan consensus is that this government is 
responsible for that deficit, that it has created it through the waste and 
mismanagement and corruption that has pervaded this government, Mr. 
Speaker, that it has created it through wrong-headed policies, through the 
implementation of a right-wing ideology, Mr. Speaker, contrary to what the 
people of this province wanted, contrary to what the people of this 
province wanted.  And that's the Saskatchewan consensus, Mr. Speaker. 
 
On the federal scene we see the GST or the gouge and steal tax being 
implemented, which has the tacit approval of the PC government.  There's no 
question about that.  They may speak out against it but they've actually 
participated in the formulation of it, and that's been documented, Mr. 
Speaker.  And now as a result of the mismanagement, federally and 
provincially, of governments by Tories, Mr. Speaker, the people of this 
province and of Canada are having to pay further and ever increasing taxes 
to pay for their incompetence, Mr. Speaker.  And I say that the consensus 
of the people of Saskatchewan is that this is an unfair tax and that this 
government should shape up rather than attempt to put the burden on 
individuals and families in this province. 
 
And in order to promote, in order to promote their right-wing ideology and 
the fact, they want to change the map of Saskatchewan and change the social 
programs in Saskatchewan, change our public utilities, change our health 
care system -- the fact that they're trying to force this on Saskatchewan 
people contrary to what Saskatchewan people believe and want, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And how are they trying to do that?  Well one of the ways that they attempt 
to do that, Mr. Speaker, is the way Graham Taylor had indicated, by trying 
to change the opinion of people.  So we see huge amounts of money being 
poured into advertising, being poured into advertising with respect to 
health care.  One of the largest increases in the health care budget was 
under communications, Mr. Speaker.  And that is largely for the purposes of 
self-serving PC advertising, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we see advertising in all other areas, Mr. Speaker, because, as Graham 
Taylor said, they are going to change the opinion of the public.  That's 
what they're trying to do.  They're not listening to the people; they're 
not looking for a consensus; they're trying to change the consensus.  And 
they're doing it through advertising, they're doing it through trying to 
divide people and pit people against one another, pitting urban people 
against rural people, pitting workers against farmers, pitting people 
against minorities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And they're trying to put down people who are less privileged and people 
who work for the less privileged, like Legal Aid lawyers for example, Mr. 
Speaker.  They attack people who speak out against them, like the Ombudsman 
and the Legislative Counsel and the Provincial Auditor, people who have an 
obligation to say it the way it is.  And when they do say it the way it is, 
when they do point their fingers at the Tory government because it should 
rightfully be pointed at the Tory government, they attack these people, Mr. 
Speaker. 



 

 

 
They've underfunded and cut back to advocacy groups whose very 
responsibility is to be a watch-dog on government and on the legislative 
process, Mr. Speaker.  They are the watch-dog of the people, but they cut 
back on the funding because they don't want to know what the people think.  
They don't want to listen to what our watch-dogs have to say. 
 
They don't want to listen to the directions that people want us to move, 
because if they listen to the people it's going to stand in the way of the 
implementation of their right-wing, extremist ideology, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And now, and now this government has the gall to come forward and say that 
it's going to develop a Saskatchewan consensus, and they're saying this in 
their dying days, Mr. Speaker.  They're saying this in their dying days.  
They know that they are the most unpopular thing in this province, and I 
don't think there's ever been any government in the history of this 
province that has been as unpopular as this government, Mr. Speaker.  They 
know they're in political trouble and they're trying to save their 
political hides, Mr. Speaker.  And they think they're going to fool 
Saskatchewan people by promising a Consensus Saskatchewan of a hundred 
people sitting around the table telling them what to do and then they're 
going to listen. 
 
Well why should Saskatchewan believe them for one single moment when they 
haven't listened on numerous occasions, when they say their job is to 
change the thinking of the people?  Is that what they're going to try and 
do?  Are they going to get these hundred people together and try to change 
their thinking and force them to think along right-wing ideological lines?  
Is that what they're going to do?  Are they going to try and fool these 
hundred people into thinking the way they want them to think?  Because 
they've said that's what their job is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well I tell you, Mr. Speaker, the majority of the people in this province 
don't believe them.  They don't believe they will listen; they don't 
believe that anything is going to come of Consensus Saskatchewan.  What the 
people of this province believe is that if this government is elected 
again, it will privatize SaskPower, it will move to more privatized health 
care, Mr. Speaker, it will privatize more services; it will not reinstitute 
a school-based children's dental plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that's what the people believe.  They don't believe for one 
moment this government is going to listen to the people.  They believe that 
it is headlong bent on its right-wing ideology and that its policies will 
be developed in a fashion to implement that ideology if it should ever be 
re-elected. 
 
And I tell you, Mr. Speaker, that if there is one overwhelming Saskatchewan 
consensus at this point in time, Mr. Speaker, that is that the people of 
this province want an election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- And they want it now, Mr. Speaker.  They want it now.  They 



 

 

don't want it six months from now, they don't want it a year from now, they 
want an election now. 
 
And I've had at least three or four people -- well at least three or four 
people came up to me immediately after the throne speech, and their 
question to me was, Louise, how do we apply to be a part of this consensus, 
because what we're going to tell the Premier and what we're going to tell 
the Tory MLAs is that the Premier should resign; the Premier should resign 
now, and we want an election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- And that, Mr. Speaker, is the Saskatchewan consensus today. 
 
And let's just take a look at how the Tories . . . the Tory tactics with 
respect to implementing their right-wing ideology and, in the process, 
attempting to destroy the Saskatchewan consensus of universal accessible 
quality health care, of publicly owned utilities, of adequate housing and 
employment for all, and an adequate standard of living for all. 
 
Let's just look at the results of the implementation of their policy over 
the last eight years.  What we see is a massive and tragic out-migration of 
young families leaving this province.  We see deep concern within our rural 
communities as they are losing population and young people and businesses, 
Mr. Speaker.  We see a financial crisis in agriculture and unprecedented 
stress and hardship on farm families and on working families, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We see a GigaText fiasco.  We see Joytec, Supercart, Pioneer Trust, 
Principal Trust.  Principal Trust, Mr. Speaker, which the member from 
Regina South didn't even mention, even though he's the minister in charge 
of that department.  Didn't even mention as he went on to justify patronage 
appointments in his government, all after they talked about developing a 
consensus and listening to the people.  He had the audacity to stand in his 
seat, to stand there, Mr. Speaker . . . to stand and say, Mr. Speaker, that 
they were developing a Saskatchewan consensus and that they were listening 
to the people.  And he's refused to listen to the people, and even the 
Ombudsman, with respect to Principal Trust. 
 
(2000) 
 
And the list goes on, the PC record, give-aways and special deals to big 
business and wealthy investors, and I've named a number of them here 
tonight, but hardship and financial stress, Mr. Speaker, for ordinary 
families. 
 
We see health care policies like the decimation of the school-based 
children's dental plan, massive changes to the prescription drug plan, 
hospital waiting lists, underfunding, understaffing, burnt-out nurses, Mr. 
Speaker, people waiting for months and months and months to get needed 
surgery, Mr. Speaker, and the list goes on. 
 
And in education in a rapidly changing world we see a lack of access for 
many children to technical schools and universities, high teacher-student 



 

 

ratios, burnt-out teachers, and general underfunding in the education 
system that is making it very difficult for our teachers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These are the results.  These are just some of the results, but it is a 
very damning record, I would say, Mr. Speaker.  But these are just some of 
the results of Tory policies and the Tories bent on implementing their 
right-wing ideology, and in the process attempting to destroy the 
Saskatchewan consensus in order for them to implement what they believe 
Saskatchewan should be. 
 
Well I say, Mr. Speaker, in conclusion, that it's too late for this 
government; it's too late for this government.  Nobody believes that they 
are interested in developing a Saskatchewan consensus; everyone believes 
that if they are re-elected they will privatize utilities, move to more 
privatization in health care, move to more privatization in schools.  We 
know that's what they'll do if they're re-elected. Regardless of what these 
100 citizens may tell them, they will still implement their ideology, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
In short, the throne speech showed absolutely no leadership.  And I believe 
that the fortune, Mr. Speaker, that I found in that fortune cookie I had 
that night which read, "Listen not to vain words of empty tongue," was a 
very precise statement.  It capsulized the throne speech, and actually I 
couldn't have said it better.  Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swan: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It's my privilege tonight 
to stand to speak in this throne speech debate on behalf of my constituency 
of Rosetown-Elrose.  It's with great pleasure that I do so. 
 
I listened with interest as the member was speaking opposite tonight, and I 
started to feel maybe this lady has a bit of problem, or the hon. member 
had a problem.  You know, as she went through her speech, she seemed to 
repeat everything about three different times during her speech.  Now I 
don't know whether it's a memory problem or what it is, but there's 
something wrong when you have to go over the same thing three or four times 
and forget that you've already mentioned it. 
 
Another area that I think the hon. lady had a great deal of difficulty with 
was with figures.  You know, she indicated to the Assembly that the 
Rafferty-Alameda project cost $1 billion.  Well, Mr. Speaker, I remember 
very well that the cost of the project, Rafferty-Alameda, was 120 million.  
Now there's a considerable difference between those two figures.  
Admittedly, the cost is going to be somewhat higher today because of the 
delays that have been taken due to the actions of the members of the 
opposition and a few of their friends.  I believe, Mr. Speaker, that it 
will be interesting. 
 
I'd like to see this same member go into Estevan and make her speech about 
Rafferty-Alameda.  It would be interesting to watch the reaction of the 
public in Estevan, and I would challenge her to do that some day so that 
the world could see just how she would react.  Well maybe she shouldn't go.  



 

 

It may not be safe; she might be actually harmed physically if she were to 
make those comments there. 
 
She also talked about health-care funding, and the health-care funding in 
this province has increased very rapidly over the last few years, ever 
since our government has been in power.  She spoke of the dental plan being 
taken out of the schools, and yes, we made that change, and I think it's a 
very important change that we made. 
 
I wonder . . . She is a professional person herself, and if somebody is 
looking for a lawyer, would they sooner go to her as a qualified lawyer or 
would they sooner maybe hire the legal secretary?  You know, that's about 
the same comparison that you would have to make to the people who work in 
the school-based dental plan and the actual dental professional who has 
been trained and has practised.  So I think we need to look at some of 
these things. 
 
Many of the people in my constituency would not send their children to the 
school-based dental plan.  And they didn't send them for that very reason, 
that they wanted someone that was fully qualified in the dental profession, 
someone that could provide very high quality service, and for that reason 
many of my constituents did not send their children to the school-based 
plan but rather took them to the dentist in the city. 
 
I think that the program today is working extremely well, and the numbers 
of students who are having their dental plan carried out by a qualified 
dentist today is high and I believe will go even higher as the days 
progress. 
 
The hon. member was also talking about those terrible Tories, and I got a 
kick out of that, Mr. Speaker.  I think that it's important for this lady 
to just listen to the news and see what's happening in the world today.  
You know, if she would just listen to the news and watch what's happening 
in many of the former communist countries of the world, she would begin to 
have a look at what really is happening to people in the socialist 
movement. 
 
One after the other, these socialist governments are falling.  And who is 
being elected in those countries?  Yes, Tory governments, governments that 
are going to be able to meet the needs of those people in an entirely 
different manner than they have been looked after. 
 
So I think the hon. member perhaps should be looking over her shoulder to 
some extent and beware of what's following behind, because you're going to 
see many things happening here that may surprise you as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm very pleased with the throne speech that was presented by 
our Lieutenant Governor.  That throne speech is a document of commitment to 
this province, and a good document it is, one I believe that is going to 
give our province an opportunity to grow and to build.  The same as it has 
been building in the past few years, it's going to continue to grow.  And 
with a little turn in the economic conditions here and in the world, I 
think that the province will grow extremely well. 



 

 

 
The Conference Board of Canada has given our province a good rating and 
indicate that we likely will be one of the fastest growth in the gross 
domestic product this year of any province in Canada.  So as that happens, 
Mr. Speaker, I look forward to seeing things improve here and improve for 
the people right across our province. 
 
In the agricultural field we've had some very difficult years because of 
poor crops and low grain prices.  But we just need a very small turn in 
that area and you will see a change that will liven up the whole province.  
And I believe that most of our people are looking for that change with the 
better moisture conditions that we're facing this spring. 
 
Our government has been providing assistance to many people in our province 
over the last few years, and they protect them from high interest rates on 
their homes.  I dare say that the hon. member who has just spoken likely 
does claim some of that interest protection on her home as most of others 
do.  I think it's extremely important that the people of the province 
realize how much help this government has indeed given. 
 
We have worked very diligently to protect the environment of our province.  
No, we haven't gone and poured concrete to cover up our mistakes; rather we 
have tried to improve the environment in a realistic fashion.  We've taken 
apart some of the old concrete vaults full of poisons that the former 
government had put in place, and have indeed processed those materials, 
cleaned the sites, and left the environment good for the communities. 
 
We've gone to Cluff Lake and processed all of the tailings that were stored 
in the concrete vaults that that government had put in place.  That was an 
improvement that that area has needed for some time.  I believe anyone that 
would go and look at Cluff Lake today and see the difference will realize 
that this government has taken indeed a very good step towards improving 
the environment. 
 
As we look at the development of the new Clean Air Act, and the effect that 
that will have on the environment, I think that every industry across our 
province will now be covered by The Clean Air Act and it will give an 
opportunity for the department to gradually move to clean up the 
smoke-stacks of all of the industries so that our environment is indeed 
protected. 
 
We've moved to build and to improve the health care system in our province.  
One way that we have moved and have made a significant change is in the 
number of nursing home beds and combined facilities that have been built 
since 1982.  And it is bordering on 2,500 nursing home beds that have been 
built since this government came into power. 
 
Now the former government had put on a moratorium, and the Leader of the 
Opposition was the member who wrote the letter that put the moratorium in 
place, that they were not going to build any additional nursing homes.  And 
that letter, I think, is damning evidence against that particular member.  
He had no concern for our seniors and for the needs of those seniors.  And 
at a time when the population of Saskatchewan is ageing rapidly, to put a 



 

 

freeze on the number of nursing home beds that could be built, I think, 
leaves much to be desired. 
 
We also listened to the hon. member saying that we were not funding 
education.  Well I think if you looked at the facts, education budgets have 
increased extremely rapidly over the last eight years, and there have been 
a number of new schools built, a number of increases in salaries for staff.  
When I go out around my constituency, Mr. Speaker, I see some of the finest 
school facilities that you could ever wish to have.  And I also see many 
professional teachers in those class-rooms, doing a first-class job of 
training the young people as they come into our schools.  Mr. Speaker, I'm 
proud of the job that the educational system is doing.  We always work to 
improve it and to see that it's going to do better in the future; but I 
think that we can be justifiably proud of the amount of money that we have 
put in, and indeed, for the quality of the education that is being offered 
to our people. 
 
This government has also moved to put in many protections for farmers 
through these periods when we have suffered international subsidies and 
drought and many difficulties in the agricultural sector.  Our Premier has 
been very effective in his work in dealing with the federal government and 
in dealing with our agricultural budgets here. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I am a farmer and I think that I can speak with some 
firsthand information that many of the farmers in this province can go back 
over the last three years and add up the amount of money that was put in 
their pocket through federal subsidies and provincial assistance and they 
will likely find that the amount of money that they received from those 
programs would equal or exceed the amount of money that they actually 
received from the sale of grain products.  Now that's quite a shock to most 
people, but I believe if they will go and actually add them up, they will 
find that to be the case. 
 
(2015) 
 
I think that we are quite safe in saying, Mr. Speaker, that in our province 
this government has a very deep concern for people, and that's the reason 
that many of these programs have been put in place.  We have a government 
whose strength and wisdom comes from Saskatchewan citizens and a government 
that consults and co-operates with those citizens. 
 
We have listened to people in the cities and in rural communities.  We've 
listened to people in hospital administration, in the school 
administration, in the teaching profession.  We've listened to farmers, 
listened to people in small business.  And as we've listened, we have 
brought in programs that met the needs of many of those people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I speak of the health care side, in my constituency there 
have been new hospitals built, there have been new nursing homes built, and 
there has been hospitals that have just been upgraded to bring them up to 
today's standards.  The hospitals in rural Saskatchewan and in urban 
Saskatchewan are now meeting the needs of most of the people who have 
medical needs.  There's always need to continue to improve -- to improve 



 

 

equipment, to improve facilities, and to improve the educational 
opportunities for our medical professionals.  But I believe that 
Saskatchewan doesn't stand behind any other province in Canada, and in many 
cases is ahead of most provinces in Canada, in the quality of the health 
care that we offer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we provide families with long-term protection against rising 
interest rates.  And this protection has enabled many young Saskatchewan 
families to keep their homes, and some 97,000 home owners have had 
assistance through the mortgage protection plan.  That's a major help to 
people in our province and at a cost to the government of something over 
$102 million. 
 
The government also took the initiative to develop the Saskatchewan Pension 
Plan.  Now this is the first of its kind in Canada -- and I think we may be 
able to go even beyond Canada -- that any government has put in place a 
pension plan that is available to Saskatchewan citizens, that is the 
home-maker, people who are working part time, farmers, other self-employed 
business men, people who formerly had no pension plan.  But today they can 
join the Saskatchewan Pension Plan and indeed are joining in large numbers. 
 
We want all Saskatchewan people to have the protection of a pension plan.  
And as this plan was put into place, we have watched the fund growing. We 
today have a pension plan of something in excess of $73 million and 49,000 
participants. Of that, 40 per cent or more are home-makers. 
 
The first time, and as I go through my constituency and talk to home-makers 
and small business, I hear time and again how much they appreciate the 
opportunity to belong to a pension plan so that they know when retirement 
comes for them that they have a secure future -- very valuable and one that 
all of my citizens appreciate and are taking advantage of. 
 
We now also have a Seniors' Secretariat and a minister who is responsible 
for families and seniors.  This has been a move, Mr. Speaker, that is 
extremely important to many of the families and many of the seniors, to 
have a minister at the cabinet table who will speak out for families and 
who will speak out for seniors and will pay attention to the issues.  Now 
this minister has the opportunity to access funds from other departments 
that had formerly delivered some of these services.  But as he works with 
seniors and with families, the departments are funding the changes in 
program and the needs that this minister is now bringing forward. 
 
I believe that the seniors' heritage program that was implemented a few 
years ago has also provided a considerable amount of financial assistance 
to many of the seniors in our province.  Some 151 million has been provided 
to seniors since 1986 under this program.  More than 70,000 households take 
advantage of the grant each year.  It administers programs like the 
Saskatchewan income plan which provides a monthly income supplement of up 
to $80 to low level income seniors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that's almost 16 million a year in the hands of seniors who 
need it most in this one program alone.  The Seniors' Secretariat supports 
activity centres and services across the province by providing operating 



 

 

capital to almost 450 such organizations, centres which provide a focal 
point for retired persons to enjoy activity and satisfying life-styles.  
And, Mr. Speaker, as I go into a number of these senior centres, I see a 
group of people having perhaps the most fun they have had for many, many 
years.  And the good fellowship and the games and the activities that they 
undertake in these senior centres are likely as good as any medicine that 
most of them could take, and maybe even better in most cases, because they 
have companionship, and at the end of the day they go home happy and have 
had an opportunity to converse with their friends and family within the 
community.  It's a program that I believe is serving our seniors extremely 
well. 
 
Also there's a toll free number that the secretariat operates that is 
accessible to seniors who want information about other programs and 
services.  And, Mr. Speaker, these types of initiatives have made it 
possible for seniors to remain in their communities and to maintain their 
independence.  This is what our elder population has been telling us and 
this is the prime objective of my colleague, the Minister responsible for 
Seniors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are living in a time of very rapid change.  Our way of life 
is placing new stresses on the family.  We recognize that the needs of 
today's families are much different than those families of three decades 
ago.  Today both spouses often work outside the home.  The average family 
size is smaller.  Single parent families are more prevalent and our seniors 
are living longer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has consistently responded to the many and 
diverse needs of the family because we believe that although the structure 
and needs of the family have changed, the family still remains the 
foundation of our society.  That is why this government is now spending 
more on education and health than any other government before it. 
 
Just last year, we allocated in excess of 30 per cent of the provincial 
budget to the Saskatchewan health care -- 30 per cent, Mr. Speaker, or the 
equivalent of $162,000, spent every hour of every day on health care.  Now 
that's a considerable amount of money, and one, I believe, that we need to 
recognize as a fund that is providing the needs of many of our people. 
 
Just to give you an example in my own constituency, in the past year we 
spent $12.9 million on various building projects in the health care field 
within my constituency.  These are in Rosetown, Milden, Kyle, and Dinsmore.  
And those same facilities had an operating budget of 5.78 million.  So, Mr. 
Speaker, I think that speaks well for the Department of Health and the 
government for its concern for the health of our people.  We've opened 
public health offices, chiropody clinics, community therapy clinics, 
special care facilities, and the list can go on and on. 
 
And we've increased the Education budget by 80 per cent since 1982.  Now in 
eight years, to have a budget increase by 80 per cent is exceeding 
considerably the inflation rate for that same period. And, Mr. Speaker, we 
don't have larger numbers of students.  We actually have less students in 
most of the education system than we had in 1980.  So we're providing more 



 

 

funding for less people and I believe, Mr. Speaker, that we're doing a 
better job than has ever been done before. 
 
In my own constituency, there has been 43.8 million in educational 
operating grants, and over 4.8 million in the form of educational capital 
expenditures in the last year -- Mr. Speaker, a very sizeable chunk of 
money, and one that I'm sure is being wisely spent to provide the needs of 
our younger generation as they move through the educational process. 
 
We have significantly enhanced and restructured the Saskatchewan tax 
reduction program to provide tax relief to almost 350,000 individuals and 
families including a special provision for single parents in recognition of 
the difficulties that they face. 
 
In addition, we have implemented sales tax exemptions on electricity for 
homes and farms, exemptions which total over $49.7 million. 
 
We implemented sales tax exemptions on clothing and yard goods under $300, 
totalling some $139.8 million in just this one area.  And, Mr. Speaker, we 
implemented sales tax exemption on children's clothing, which has saved 
Saskatchewan families over $34 million. 
 
To address the need for quality child care, this government introduced the 
child care development plan.  When this plan is complete in 1995, almost 
12,000 child care spaces will be available; 12,000, Mr. Speaker -- a 
tripling of the number of child care spaces since 1980. 
 
Last year a total of 16.5 million was provided for Saskatchewan child care 
to assist lower income working families who are in need of child care 
facilities.  And, Mr. Speaker, we are also looking to extend affordable day 
care to rural families and to families who have children with special 
needs. 
 
Under this government, many new programs and initiatives were designed and 
introduced to help victims of family violence, including safe shelters, 
outreach teams, support services, and family treatment and counselling. 
 
In the past, many people who were legally obliged to make child support 
payments failed to fulfil that responsibility. This left many single parent 
families in a very difficult situation.  We addressed this issue in 1986 
with the introduction of the automatic enforcement of maintenance orders 
program. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we have done much in the area of welfare reform.  Prior 
to 1982, no programs were in place to enable people to move from social 
assistance to self assistance.  But we changed that too, Mr. Speaker.  The 
New Careers Corporation has taken almost 700 people off the welfare rolls 
over the last three years, and given them training and education.  Only 14 
per cent of these have returned to welfare.  The rest of them, Mr. Speaker, 
have gone on to careers in earning a reasonable wage and providing for 
their own families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you meet and talk to people who have had this experience, 



 

 

to see the joy in their eyes and the happiness in the family to think that 
today their family is not on the welfare roll but rather that the head of 
their family is able to go out and earn a living and provide for them -- 
very valuable, I think, in any life, and it takes away much of the stress 
that the family had lived under. 
 
Today we are facing the harsh reality that many Saskatchewan farmers are 
caught with heavy debt loads and with no production options to fall back 
on.  Our government recognizes this, Mr. Speaker, and we have installed a 
safety net of special programs and policies targeted to agriculture.  We 
have paid millions of dollars to Saskatchewan farmers to help them through 
these very difficult times. 
 
(2030) 
 
In 1984 we created the Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan, and 
since that time this program has saved farm families over 327 million in 
interest alone.  Since its creation we have expanded the ACS (Agricultural 
Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan) mandate so that more people can apply, 
and so that more farms are protected.  We have also made it easier for 
young farm families to get started by providing financing for the home 
quarter, first year, start-up costs. 
 
To help farmers better manage their debt problems, we created the 
counselling and assistance for farmers program.  Mr. Speaker, this 
particular program has been invaluable in many operations across our 
province.  We haven't been able to save all the farms -- I guess that will 
never be possible -- but, Mr. Speaker, we have saved many farms, and many 
others are still in the process of being assisted through counselling 
assistance and the other programs. 
 
We are also calling on the federal government for an immediate cash 
injection of $900 million, with the first 400 million to be paid out to 
farmers prior to spring seeding.  And we are also calling on the federal 
government to establish a $1 billion contingency fund to counteract the 
disaster effects of the Euro-American subsidies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is demanding that banks and lending 
institutions take some responsibility to solve the farm cash flow and debt 
crisis.  We're expanding the mandate of the ACS to extend debt refinancing.  
We are implementing loan guarantees for refinancing of existing debt.  We 
are expanding the guaranteed vendor mortgage program to include land held 
by lenders and currently leased to farmers, and we are considering 
legislative changes to reduce farm debt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government's farm programs give farm families the security 
of their home, the security of their home quarter, further understanding of 
their rights and obligations, and puts farmers and their families in a 
stronger position to negotiate for their future. 
 
We have many other highly successful and important programs for families 
that have already been put in place, programs which provide security and 
stability.  However, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that one of the most 



 

 

innovative and forward-looking steps this government has taken in recent 
months was to establish the Saskatchewan Family Foundation and to appoint a 
Minister of the Family to address the concerns of all of Saskatchewan 
families. 
 
This is the first time that government, in the history of Canada, has had a 
Minister of the Family, a minister whose prime responsibility is to work on 
behalf of the family.  And, Mr. Speaker, for the first time we have a 
minister at the cabinet table who is an advocate for both the family and 
for seniors.  For the first time we have a minister whose prime 
responsibility is to develop policies and programs that are specifically 
aimed to help strengthen family relationships. 
 
His goal and the goal of the Family Foundation is to help to empower 
families to be more stable and secure, more self-reliant and more 
productive.  His method of achieving this goal is to consult families 
across Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and since October the minister has been 
very active.  He has met with hundreds of individuals and community leaders 
across this province gathering their ideas and advice, building a consensus 
about the strengths and weaknesses of Saskatchewan families and the policy 
areas the foundation should be examining. 
 
Then based on what he hears, it is up to the Minister of the Family and the 
Family Foundation to look across all government departments to analyse the 
existing programs and policies and to develop new programs that will help 
the families of Saskatchewan reach their full potential. 
 
The other vital aspect of the Family Foundation is the role it plays in 
helping communities stage their family forums.  These forums are community 
efforts.  The only input that the Family Foundation has is helping with 
funding and assistance, finding appropriate speakers and workshop leaders. 
 
These forums are seminars and workshops that address the issues and 
concerns that the community itself identifies.  They are designed and 
planned and staged by community organizations themselves.  Often these 
organizations are made up of individuals in the community who have come 
together for the sole purpose of planning a forum, and then after the event 
is over the committee stays together to continue to work on behalf of the 
families in their home community. 
 
This is the goal of the forums.  They are for education, information, 
community organization, and self-help. And it's working.  More than 23 
forums have been held to date and there will be 150 before this year is 
over.  That is an overwhelming response to a community identified need.  
And by helping to strengthen and build family life in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, we are helping to build and strengthen Saskatchewan communities. 
 
In my view, the formation of the Family Foundation is one of the most 
innovative and important announcements in this Speech from the Throne.  
This new foundation will have very positive and lasting implications for 
families in Saskatchewan, for communities in Saskatchewan, and for the 
province as a whole. 
 



 

 

We are taking leadership in a vital area of social policy and the rest of 
the country is watching.  The Minister of the Family had inquiries from 
governments and opposition parties across Canada, as well as the media.  
They are asking about the structure and the mandate of the foundation and 
are unanimously applauding the Saskatchewan initiative as both timely and 
necessary. 
 
This government recognizes the challenges of building a stronger province.  
Mr. Speaker, this government's economic and social policies are working for 
Saskatchewan people.  These programs have made Saskatchewan a good place to 
live and work and to raise a family. 
 
And I believe that with the help of the newly created Consensus 
Saskatchewan, we will continue to build on these programs and develop new 
strategies that will encourage and assist families to find solutions to 
today's challenges. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would just like to end my remarks by saying that, although 
the process of Consensus Saskatchewan as it was announced in the Speech 
from the Throne is new, the concept of consulting with Saskatchewan people 
has always guided this government. 
 
For example, the Minister of the Family has been consulting and building 
consensus on family issues and concerns since early last fall.  The 
Minister of Finance has been consulting on the budget for months seeking 
public input and feedback, and building a budget which responds to the 
wishes of Saskatchewan people. 
 
Consensus Saskatchewan gives the consultation process a consistent 
framework through which our policies and programs can be built and vetted.  
I congratulate our government for the vision and sensitivity that will make 
this process work.  And I congratulate this government for putting together 
such a positive and relevant throne speech, one that touches every family 
in this province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is with great pleasure that I support the throne 
speech submitted by Her Honour, the Lieutenant Governor. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It gives me a great deal 
of pleasure to be able to rise tonight to speak in this throne speech 
debate.  And I must say it's with a bit of sadness that I rise following 
the member that's just spoke.  As my colleague from Quill Lakes quoted, 
it's probably the swan song for that member, given that . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, order.  One cannot do indirectly what you 
cannot do directly.  I would ask the member not to use other members' 
names. 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I'll change that 
phrase from that particular type of bird to a trumpeter song then, of the 
member from Rosetown, a song anyway.  As the people of Saskatchewan know, 



 

 

that member will not be contesting the next provincial election, and with 
the speculation of a coming election some time within the next 12 to 15 
months one can expect that the member will have risen in this House. 
 
So I think that we can appreciate all the work that that member has done 
for his constituents.  Even though we have disagreed and disagreed mightily 
on a great many issues, I'm quite sure that the member has built some 
respect and has built some confidence in the people of his constituency, 
despite his own political affiliation but due to his own personal 
integrity, and I feel honoured to be able to honour that particular member. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to speak tonight about the throne speech 
in a method . . . in a manner which attempts to analyse what the political 
nature of this particular speech is, this Speech from the Throne.  Because 
like all speeches from the throne, this speech is a political document.  
And I want to characterize the nature of this political document as this.  
It is not a blueprint for the future which this government has put forward, 
rather it is an indictment of the past -- the past eight years of their 
policies, of their political decisions, of the thrust of their economic and 
social policy.  It is an indictment which will be judged by the people of 
Saskatchewan whenever this government gets the courage to put their record 
before the voters of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- And I tell you, Mr. Speaker, the people in my constituency of 
Regina Rosemont, on a daily basis, by the 2's and the 5's and the 10's, ask 
me one question over and over again, and that question is this:  when is 
the next election? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- When is the next election?  We can't wait any more, so when 
is the next election?  Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately this 
throne speech, I believe, gives an indication that the anticipations of the 
member of my constituency, of the people who live in Regina Rosemont -- in 
fact of the people who live across Saskatchewan -- their expectations will 
not be met. 
 
Because the essential core of this throne speech does one thing and one 
thing only, and that is to provide a breathing space, to provide a 
breathing space for this Tory government between their actions of the past, 
which have been rejected in their entirety by the people of Saskatchewan, 
and a phoney attempt to try to put together some kind of rigged-up vision 
for tomorrow, something which does not spring from political conviction, 
something which does not spring from political leadership, but something 
which springs only from a cynical, manipulative attempt to buy the voters 
of Saskatchewan whenever they get up the nerve to call the next election. 
 
So this throne speech which talks about, we need time to build a consensus, 
is nothing more than a political ploy to try to put some temporality, to 



 

 

try to put some time between the time of the next election and the time of 
the dark days of Saskatchewan ruled over by that Tory cabinet and that Tory 
caucus, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That's what this throne speech is about -- pure and simple politics -- and 
any attempt by any of the members opposite to try to play this throne 
speech up as some kind of non-partisan, non-political event, has not the 
credibility of any of the geese which wander through Wascana Centre here in 
Regina, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(2045) 
 
Because I want to speak for a minute about the record of this government, 
the record of this government and their credibility to put the new face on 
the old gorilla, to put the new face on the old gorilla, a face which 
nobody believes, Mr. Speaker, a face which nobody believes because they 
have seen in the past the true face of that kind of gorilla which has 
ravaged the lives of the people of Saskatchewan for eight long and dark and 
dreary years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and what does that new face say?  That new face says, well 
we're going to listen to people, we're going to try to build a consensus, 
and we're creating this Consensus Saskatchewan, some kind of phoney boloney 
Consensus Saskatchewan that will somehow solve the problems that the people 
of this province have been plunged into by their political decisions, some 
kind of consensus which is nothing more than a cynical political trick.  
Because the record, Mr. Speaker, the record of this government speaks for 
itself.  Let's look at some of the issues which this government supposedly 
dealt with and ask yourself whether or not they attempted to reach a 
consensus with the majority of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Let's look at the question of free trade, Mr. Speaker.  Let's look at the 
question of free trade.  Did this government attempt to reach a consensus, 
a consensus opinion with the people of this province around the question of 
free trade?  Well now, some people say no, some people say no.  I say no, 
but if we look at the record, what do we see? 
 
Well, this government sent up a little travelling road show with one of the 
top civil servants in the province, Mr. Wakabayashi, sent them out around 
the province, listening to certain groups in this province -- not the 
people but certain selected groups which were invited to put forward their 
opinions.  The government took that input into its own little cabinet and 
its own little committee and said, well it looks like free trade is a good 
thing -- despite the fact, Mr. Speaker, despite the fact that the 
overwhelming majority of people in Saskatchewan opposed the free trade 
agreement then, oppose the free trade agreement now, and more importantly 
registered their consensus against the free trade agreement by electing 10 
New Democratic Party members of Parliament to Ottawa to stand up and fight 
Brian Mulroney around the question of the free trade agreement.  That was 
the consensus of the people of Saskatchewan on the issue of free trade. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- And let's look, Mr. Speaker, at one of the most serious 
political problems facing our country, Canada, and that's the question of 
the Meech Lake agreement.  In New Brunswick, Mr. Speaker, before the 
legislature ratified the Meech Lake agreement -- which they still haven't 
done, which is still not in the cards -- but before they took a step into 
the future with all the unknown gravity that that particular constitutional 
document has, they went out to the people of New Brunswick and said, tell 
us what you think about Meech Lake.  Tell us what you think about a new 
constitutional arrangement for Canada.  Tell us what you think about the 
items that are listed, and how they impact on you and your family and the 
daily life of your community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that New Brunswick is different, historically and 
culturally, from Saskatchewan with a large, large minority francophone 
population, as well as an anglophone majority.  And Meech Lake had a 
particular importance in that context.  But did this government here in 
Saskatchewan, given the gravity of that constitutional accord, go and seek 
consensus of the people of Saskatchewan?  The answer to that is no. 
 
Were they like the province of Manitoba, in which the Conservative 
government in Manitoba said, wait a minute, this Meech Lake thing has all 
kinds of implications for the future; it's got all kinds of implications 
for the way that people are going to live in the year 2000 and beyond; 
we're not going to go and jump holus-bolus into this constitutional accord 
without consulting with the people of the province. 
 
And so they held public hearings.  And so they went out and they solicited 
input from people across Manitoba.  And as a result of that input, you find 
the government of Manitoba taking a position on Meech Lake which doesn't 
jeopardize the very unity of this country, which doesn't throw into 
question the very cultural and historical background of this country, but 
takes a position that says, wait a minute, just wait a minute here.  This 
Meech Lake has so much import for the future of our country that we're not 
going to jump into Brian Mulroney's back pocket the way that the Premier of 
this province jumped into Brian Mulroney's back province -- the first 
province in Canada, outside Quebec, to ratify the accord. 
 
Did the Premier of Saskatchewan consult with Saskatchewan people on the 
question of Meech Lake?  The answer to that, Mr. Speaker, is no, he did 
not.  That's the record of consultation on this, perhaps the greatest 
constitutional crisis in the history of our country.  The Premier did not 
even go to the people on that question.  That's how much this government 
really wants to consult.  That's how much this government really wants to 
trust the opinions of the people of Saskatchewan.  So much for consensus, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now on the question of privatization, Mr. Speaker, let's look at the record 
of this government on the record of privatization.  Did this government go 
out and try to reach consultation, try to build a consensus around the 
question of economic development and the privatization of our assets, of 
things which belong to all the people of Saskatchewan?  Did they try to 
develop that kind of consensus, Mr. Speaker?  What is the answer to that 
question?  The answer to that is no. 



 

 

 
When the government last year attempted to ram through the privatization of 
SaskPower, did the Premier go out and ask the opinion of people in this 
province before they introduced into the legislature that Bill which would 
turn over, turn over SaskPower to the bond dealers and the stock market 
speculators, not only of Saskatchewan but across North America?  Did he do 
that?  Did he reach that kind of consultation, that kind of consensus?  No, 
he did not. 
 
In fact what he did, Mr. Speaker -- and the record is very clear on this 
subject -- not only did he not consult with the people of Saskatchewan on 
the privatization of SaskPower. He broke his word; he broke his word on the 
question of privatizing any utilities.  Prior to the last election, 
Conservative cabinet minister after Conservative cabinet minister went 
around this province saying, no we won't do it; no we're not going to sell 
off any of those utilities; that's just an NDP scare tactic.  That's what 
they said.  That's what they said, including the Premier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, so much for NDP scare tactics.  Perhaps the Premier does not 
understand that the people of Saskatchewan know and trust and respect the 
New Democratic Party's political judgement when it comes to analysing the 
character of this Conservative government. 
 
Because what happened, Mr. Speaker, as you well know, that when they tried 
to force the privatization of SaskPower through this legislature, we went 
to the people.  We went out and consulted.  For 17 days we said, hang on 
here -- you don't have the right to do it; you don't have the moral 
authority to do it or the political mandate to do it; and you don't have 
the consensus to do it.  We went out and we consulted with the people of 
this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what was the consensus which was reached after that consultation?  We 
all know.  We all know it was loud and it was clear.  The people of 
Saskatchewan opposed the moves of that Tory government on the question of 
the privatization of SaskPower. 
 
Let's look at a few more of these issues.  Did this government consult with 
the people of Saskatchewan when they did away with the school-based dental 
program?  Did they go out and ask the dental workers?  Did they go out and 
ask the parents whose children were receiving the best preventative dental 
care treatment in North America?  Did they?  No, they didn't.  No, they 
didn't go, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But who did they consult?  They consulted with the dentists in a back room 
in a hotel, and ended up in court, like the Minister of Health has just had 
to go through, a court experience, conspiring behind the backs of 
Saskatchewan people as they demolished the school-based dental program. 
 
That's the difference between this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, and that 
side of the House.  Whereas they conspire to pull the wool over the eyes of 
Saskatchewan people, we went and consulted with Saskatchewan people, and 
the consensus is this: they, the people of Saskatchewan, want the 
reintroduction of the school-based dental plan.  That's the real consensus 



 

 

on dental care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
 DMr. Lyons: -- Mr. Speaker, there is a long, long list. And I'm not going 
to take much time on each of the items, but just to remind, just to remind 
you, sir, of the kind of lack of consensus building around major economic 
moves that this government didn't do, that this government didn't do -- in 
fact, not only didn't do it, but it attempted to, in the last election, 
shield their real intentions from the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
They didn't consult over the privatization of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan -- not one bit of consultation -- throwing away the assets of 
the major potash producer on a world scale.  Not one mention of consensus, 
not one mention of consultation -- a bare year ago, less than one year ago, 
Mr. Speaker.  No talk of consensus, just privatize off the potash 
corporation. 
 
Sask Minerals.  Did they seek consensus on Sask Minerals when they gave 
away a company which showed a profit each and every year of its existence 
-- profit which helped to pay for roads and hospitals and schools, for the 
kind of social programs that we're all proud of here in Saskatchewan?  Did 
they try to reach consensus?  Did they consult on selling off Sask 
Minerals?  No, they didn't. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they wouldn't even share the details of that sale here in the 
legislature.  They wouldn't even put the nature of that sale open to public 
scrutiny.  That's how much, less than a year ago, they believed in 
consensus.  That's how much they believed in consultation. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, the list goes on.  Despite the stated aims of 
the government that they weren't going to privatize anything more, after 
they got their political toes and fingers burnt over the SaskEnergy, 
SaskPower fiasco, they pulled back.  The Premier himself went on television 
and said whoa, we're ahead of the people on this; we're way ahead of the 
people; we're not going to do it any more; we're not going to privatize 
anything more. 
 
But what do we read in the paper barely a month ago?  Here's the government 
out privatizing a Crown corporation called Agdevco, the agricultural 
development corporation. 
 
And what's interesting about this, Mr. Speaker, is that the agricultural 
development corporation represents one of the international, publicly owned 
trading lifelines which can supply outlets for commodities, services, and 
goods produced here in Saskatchewan by Saskatchewan farmers and by 
Saskatchewan manufacturers to develop a trading strategy around the world. 
 
This in a time when the Premier talks about the economic trade wars which 
are breaking out around us, this government goes ahead and turns and throws 
away one of the mechanisms by which at least we would have a modicum of 
control in terms of economic development in this province in the 
agricultural sector.  This despite the fact that they're saying, we're not 



 

 

going to privatize any more; we're learned our lesson; we're not 
privatizing nothing here any more.  Right? 
 
No wonder, Mr. Speaker, no wonder this government has got no credibility on 
the question of its honesty and on the question of its consensus building 
or on the question of anything else for that matter. 
 
Did this government seek consensus and consultation when they privatized 
the Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation, Mr. Speaker?  No, no, not 
that one.  Now, Mr. Speaker, leaving aside the question of uranium and its 
development for a moment, the Sask Mining Development Corporation also had 
control over $1 billion of gold reserves in this province -- $1 billion of 
gold here in Saskatchewan; gold which was owned by the people of 
Saskatchewan; gold reserves that were scattered throughout the mineral belt 
north of La Ronge; gold which private companies are now in the process of 
developing; gold -- $1 billion worth of gold, Mr. Speaker -- which could 
have gone a long way to paying the debt down in this province. 
 
(2100) 
 
And what did they do?  They turned it over, they turned it over to the 
private sector, they turned it over to the private sector without asking 
the permission or the consultation or the consensus of people here in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And Weyerhaeuser, we can use the example of Weyerhaeuser.  Did the 
government go to the people in northern Saskatchewan and seek a consensus 
when they gave to Weyerhaeuser, one of the major and richest American 
multinational corporations in the pulp and paper industry, access and 
control over Saskatchewan forests?  Did they ask the people in northern 
Saskatchewan if it was okay if they gave it away?  Did they try to get a 
consensus?  Did they try to get some consultation?  Not a bit.  Once again, 
Mr. Speaker, behind the backs of the people of Saskatchewan, they gave away 
our natural resources without any consultation and without any attempt to 
build a consensus around that issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the record of this government on consensus building, on 
consultation, speaks for itself, and the people of Saskatchewan will not be 
taken in by any kind of phoney boloney Consensus Saskatchewan, ConSask, as 
it's come to be known, any kind of those political manoeuvres.  The people 
of this province are cynical enough as it comes to politicians, Mr. 
Speaker.  When you take a government which has no credibility on any issues 
and you try to build a cynical political manoeuvre on that lack of 
credibility, I tell you it is a recipe for disaster for the Conservative 
Party and it won't even buy them the political breathing space that they 
hope to buy between now and the next election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there's another issue that requires examining in terms of 
consultation and consensus, and that's the goods and services tax.  I want 
to again pose the question to you, Mr. Speaker, to your government.  Did 
this government go and try to build consensus around the goods and services 
tax issue that faces all Saskatchewan consumers and all Saskatchewan 
farmers and all Saskatchewan small-business people, all Saskatchewan 



 

 

working people?  Did they try to build that kind of consensus?  No, they 
didn't. 
 
For 18 months they negotiated behind closed doors to work the deal out with 
Michael Wilson.  The former minister of Finance was in Ottawa, his 
officials were in Ottawa, working behind those closed doors with Michael 
Wilson, in its usual secretive manner, to try to reach a consensus -- not 
with the people of this province, but with their political friends in 
Ottawa. 
 
No wonder nobody believes their sudden flip-flop on the GST -- one day 
we're for it; whoops, nobody else is; hey, I guess we're agin' it. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Then they're for it again. 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Then they're for it again.  And now they may be agin' it, but 
they don't know for sure, because they want to see all the details. 
 
And that may be somewhat of a sarcastic method of putting what I am sure 
were long and involved and detailed and complex negotiations, but on the 
political level I think it reflects fairly accurately what the polls are 
saying.  Because they looked at their pollsters and the pollsters told 
them, get off this pro-GST thing and you'd better come out with a position 
against it or you're going to be stuck at 17 or 19 per cent, the same way 
the federal Conservatives are stuck at 17 and 19 per cent because of their 
attempt to ram this unfair grab-and-smash tax down the throats of the 
people of this province. 
 
And you know, right now, Mr. Speaker, they say, you can't say that any 
more.  The NDP can't say we're not against it because we're against it.  So 
I say to the government, if that's true, where are you?  Where are you in 
terms of negotiating with the federal government?  Where's the Minister of 
Finance? 
 
If they were truly opposed to the goods and services tax, Mr. Speaker, this 
Conservative government would get up on its hind legs and say to Brian 
Mulroney, we're not going to collect the tax in Saskatchewan.  Saskatchewan 
is going to be a GST-free zone.  We're going to stand up for the people of 
this province and say, this is an unfair tax; don't you try to impose it on 
us because we're not going to go along with it. 
 
That's what a government with guts, that's what a government that was 
concerned about the economic future of this province, that wasn't in the 
hip pocket of Brian Mulroney would do.  They would stand up and declare 
Saskatchewan a GST-free zone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that's political leadership, and I tell you something right 
now. That would have the full support and compliance and consensus of all 
people in Saskatchewan because that's political leadership and that's what 
those people were elected for to exercise. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- Mr. Speaker, there's a long list of items that this 
government has not reached consensus with the people of Saskatchewan on. 
And that's reflected in the polls that this government takes on an almost 
weekly basis to try to dig themselves out of the pit that they found 
themselves in, this morass, this mud hole that keeps climbing higher and 
higher and higher on their political figures.  They know, this government 
knows that it's in deep political trouble. 
 
But there's one thing that I want to say that I agree with the Premier of 
this province on, just as I agree with the Leader of the Opposition, the 
member from Saskatoon Riversdale on, who coined the phrase first in the 
political lexicon of this province.  And that is that Saskatchewan stands 
at a crossroads.  We stand at a historical juncture which will have 
implications as to the decisions we take far beyond our political futures, 
far beyond the political futures of the opposition or the government, but 
will have repercussions on our children and our children's children and 
their children, far in the future.  Because that decision, that decision 
fundamentally revolves around this question:  which road are we going to 
take into the future? 
 
And I ask the people here in the legislature and out there, who may be 
watching on television, to visualize it like this.  There's a signpost at 
the crossroads.  One road leads off to the right; the other road leads off 
to the left. 
 
And on that signpost pointing off to the right are written these signs:  
off to the right, more of the same; off to the right, more patronage; off 
to the right, more Bob Andrew appointments; off to the right, more Graham 
Taylor greed, grabbing the unjustified severance package which he put in 
his pocket as he went off to Hong Kong.  Off to the right more repression 
of democratic rights, like Mr. Valiaho who, involved in the hearing 
impaired school, was suspended because he opposed the policies of this 
government, along with many, many other fine civil servants in this 
province who have suffered at the hands of that kind of politics of fear.  
That's what you find off to the right.  Off to the right, more 
privatization; off to the right, more poverty. 
 
Off to the right goes that road; off to the right goes that road which 
leads down to more food banks, and more child hunger, more people on less 
social service, fewer jobs.  Off to the right goes the road to a greater 
out-migration as our young people leave this province.  That's what the 
road and the future that goes off to the right, because at the end of that 
road off to the right, even though it may be dark and gloomy, even though 
it may be filled with the kind of political fog which this throne speech 
represents, you can hear, you can hear the cynical phrases of the 
Conservative Party and its cabinet and its back-benchers trying to lure 
people down that.  And they're going to try to lure them with an 
agricultural strip-tease which I'll talk about in a minute. 
 
But off to the right the fundamental signposts that the people of 
Saskatchewan will have to decide, off to the right -- do you want more of 
the same?  Do you want eight more or four more years like the last eight 
years?  If you do, people of Saskatchewan, you just follow that road with 



 

 

the Premier of this province and the Conservatives of this province and 
take that road off to the right, because you will have at some point in the 
future, and whether it's short or whether it's long time in the future, you 
will get that chance. 
 
Now what's the other signpost say on that crossroads that we all face, Mr. 
Speaker?  Off to the right, more of the same.  Off to the left, off to the 
left down that road where the birds are singing; off to the left where the 
new day is coming; off to the left where there's a bright light of social 
justice; off to the left where there's a new day of economic prosperity; 
off to the left where the bright torch of Saskatchewan's pioneering spirit 
puts forward the beacon of economic justice for all North America; off to 
the left the voters of this province will have a chance to go down to that 
road.  Because down that road, Mr. Speaker, down that road are my 
colleagues of the New Democratic Party, the Leader of the Opposition, the 
member from Riversdale, and all those New Democrats who will be occupying 
the seats on that side of the legislature after the next election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Because, Mr. Speaker, the signposts that point down that road 
to the left, this is what's on them: there's honesty in government; we 
won't lie to you.  We won't lie to you.  We'll tell you the truth about 
what's going on when you take that road down to the left. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- There's going to be a signpost on that road, a signpost that 
says prosperity for all, prosperity for all.  There's going to be jobs for 
young people.  There's going to be kind of economic development that fits 
in with the traditions and history of this province.  There is going to be 
the kind of unleashing of creative spirit of all the people of 
Saskatchewan, of the working people, of the farmers, of the small-business 
people who will come together in a grand alliance, marching down that road 
to the left, because the people of this province have a consensus that they 
want to build a prosperous Saskatchewan, and they know the last eight years 
have done exactly the opposite. 
 
So off to the left, says the signpost, comes the road to prosperity.  No 
more dishonestly in government.  No more STC's (Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company), no more Joytecs, no more Supercarts, Mr. Speaker, going down that 
road to the left.  There's going to be honesty in government.  No more 
GigaText down that road to the left. 
 
And on another signpost pointing out there, there will be, Mr. Speaker, 
there will be a reflection.  There will be the sounds of the winds of 
change which are sweeping across the world, those winds of change which the 
people of eastern Europe, which the people of El Salvador, which the people 
of Chile are expressing with their feet and with their actions, tearing 
down on the one hands in eastern Europe, the Stalinist bureaucracy which 
has strangled the ideals of socialism, and in Latin America and other 
repressive right-wing conservative dictatorships who have strangled the 
right of freedom and democracy and the right for social justice. 



 

 

 
Because that wind that's blowing is going to blow through Saskatchewan.  
And as my colleague, the member for Saskatoon Eastview, has recently put 
forward in a paper for democratic reform, that's just the opening, that's 
just the beginning of the new day.  That's just the first guide-post on an 
open and democratic and popular and participatory government in which the 
people of Saskatchewan will have their say in how we build a consensus 
which brings prosperity, which brings honesty, and which brings that new 
day to this province. 
 
Because that wind is blowing down the road to the left, Mr. Speaker.  And 
on the signposts it says economic planning -- economic planning.  Now that 
is a very strange notion, I know, for members of the government opposite, 
because the members of the government opposite fundamentally don't believe 
in economic planning. 
 
(2115) 
 
The core of Conservative economic philosophy is this:  let the market rule, 
laissez-faire, let the market rule; we can't do anything anyway because we 
believe in letting the market rule.  And for eight years in this province 
they've let the market rule.  They've let the market rule.  We've seen 
what's happened economically in this province.  We've seen what's happened 
with free trade and with jobs and with prosperity.  We're finding out now 
what's happening with hog plants shut down in Saskatoon. 
 
Yesterday I got a phone call from the Wynyard area, from a worker who works 
in the Plains Poultry plant up there.  And the rumour in that plant is 
they're going to shut down the Plains Poultry plant because they're going 
to get inundated with poultry products from the United States and that the 
250 workers in the Wynyard Plains Poultry plant are going to be thrown out 
of their jobs. 
 
But according to the government that sits opposite, Mr. Speaker, that's 
okay because it's just letting the market rule.  That's what's on the 
signposts leading to the right down that road. 
 
On the other hand, we've got one that says economic planning, because we 
believe in economic planning. We believe that you can put public capital 
and private capital together in the appropriate mixes to develop a plan for 
economic diversification, to develop a plan for economic development, to 
develop a plan for that kind of dynamic economic progress that we all need 
so desperately here in Saskatchewan. 
 
But it doesn't come by leaving it to the market-place. It doesn't come by 
opening up the doors of the province to be raped and pillaged by the 
transnational corporation.  It doesn't come through that kind of economic 
philosophy.  It comes through the same kind of thing which built economic 
prosperity to Saskatchewan in the past, and that is a simple little sign 
that says, economic planning. 
 
Because that's what we believe in, and that's what separates us from that 
side of the House.  They believe in letting the market rule; we believe in 



 

 

letting the people rule for the production of goods and services, for the 
betterment of people, not just to fill the bottom line of the transnational 
corporations. 
 
So there'll be a new day coming down that road to the left, Mr. Speaker.  
And there's a new day dawning, and on that signpost it's going to have 
economic planning, because the people of Saskatchewan expect their 
governments to show the kind of political leadership which will build that 
kind of prosperity in this province which requires economic planning. 
 
And we're going to have an education for the future down that road, down 
that crossroad that the Premier and the Leader of Opposition have both 
talked about.  There's going to be education for the future that's going to 
involve teachers, that's going to involve parents, that will involve the 
students, particularly at the higher levels. 
 
We're going to expand the good programs that we built in the past, and 
we're going to develop new and innovative programs -- new and innovative 
programs which are going to fit not only the needs for development here in 
Saskatchewan but for the development of Saskatchewan children as citizens 
of the global village.  Because that's the kind of vision that we have for 
education, not people to be trained as robots to serve in the assembly 
lines, whether it's a video screen assembly line, or whether it's just an 
ordinary old-fashioned assembly line of the transnational corporations.  We 
want to develop citizens of the world so that graduates from Saskatchewan 
high schools and technical schools and university are respected once again 
in the global community because they know how to unleash their own human 
potential, because they'll know how to channel their creativity to solve 
the problems either here in the province, or wherever they may be in the 
world, to try to build the kind of better world. 
 
Because that's going to be the goal of education when the people of this 
province march down that road to the left, that road that leads to the new 
day coming.  I tell you, Mr. Speaker, I tell you there's going to be a 
great day coming for education here in Saskatchewan, here in Saskatchewan, 
as soon as this government calls the election. 
 
I can say the same thing regarding health care, and the kind of 
innovations, and the kind of future of health care -- the kind of new 
health care model -- outlined in, I must admit, general form, basic form by 
my colleague, the member from Regina Lakeview, the opposition critic for 
health. 
 
And as she has begun to develop the outline to the people of Saskatchewan, 
we find there is an incredible response to the development of the new model 
of health care in Saskatchewan which involves communities, which involves 
patients, which involves families in determining the kind of health care 
needs; not an imposed structure put down through a health care bureaucracy 
which does not respond to the needs of people in Saskatchewan, but a 
community-based model of health care in which the patients are important, 
in which preventive medicine is important, in which the kind of structures 
that the citizens have control over in terms of determining the direction 
of their own health care becomes important.  And that's another part of our 



 

 

vision.  That's another part of the new day that's coming for this 
province.  That's another part.  That's another part for the kind of health 
care which meets the needs of the 21st century and beyond. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I could go into all other areas which the provincial 
government has a responsibility for, and talk about our vision and the new 
day that's coming. 
 
I could talk about the new day that's coming for the environment.  I could 
talk about the new day that's coming for the protection of the very land, 
the very soil, the very air that we breath and the very water that we 
drink, and having it safe and passed on generation unto generation -- 
passed on safe so that mothers in this province won't worry about the 
health care of their children, so that consumers won't have to worry every 
time they open a package and wonder whether what they're eating is poison 
or is hurting them. Or whether farmers who are out there on the land, 
forced to put pesticides, forced to put herbicides, insecticides in order 
to maintain a falling level of productive capabilities, that they wont' 
have to worry every time every spring comes, every seeding time comes, 
every spraying time comes, whether or not next year they're going to 
develop a cancer because of the unsafe use of those kind of chemicals.  
That's the kind of new day we're talking about -- a new day for the people 
of this province and environmental protection. 
 
Like I say, I could go on and on and on in terms of hunger, in terms of 
racism.  One of the major problems that we are going to face as a 
government, Mr. Speaker, after the next election will be, how do we build 
tolerance back in this society.  How are we going to put together the kind 
of reconciliation to develop the kind of broad societal consensus that 
Saskatchewan is a place for all people, regardless of their religion, 
regardless of their ethnic origin, regardless of their mode of dress, 
regardless of their sexual orientation, regardless of their differences. 
 
We want to built a society of diversity and tolerance that builds on the 
strength of the individual person in this province no matter what 
ethnocultural group, no matter what particular orientation these people 
have culturally, economically, terms of history.  We know that the strength 
of any culture and any people is the respect, the ultimate respect for the 
individual for their human rights. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- And, Mr. Speaker, we are going to build that as part of our 
new day.  That's the kind of society that I got into politics to try to 
work towards. 
 
And we're not going to fool around with that question, because when you're 
confronted with a cancer in a society -- and racism is the kind of cancer 
which led to the barbarism of 1933 and 1934 and 1935 in Nazi Germany and in 
Austria and where it grew around the world to make one people a master race 
and the other less than human -- we're not going to allow that kind of 
cancer to grow. 
 



 

 

And we're going to lead a political fight in educating people of the need 
to respect each other as human beings and to love one another, Mr. Speaker, 
because that's what it's all about.  If we're going to build the kind of 
society that we want to build, ultimately it comes down to respect and to 
love each of us as we love ourselves. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that's political leadership, and that hasn't been shown 
and that hasn't been the way and that hasn't been the guiding light 
provided by the government opposite.  In fact, Mr. Speaker, just the 
opposite.  But I'm not going to speak about that. I don't want to speak 
about their divide and rule tactics -- not on that issue. 
 
But I want to speak about their divide and rule tactics when it comes to 
agriculture.  I want to speak about the agricultural strip-tease act that 
the Premier of the province is presently engaging in.  What I mean by that, 
Mr. Speaker, is: there's 500 million out there and now you see it and now 
you don't.  And maybe Mr. Mazankowski's going to give it if I'm real tough 
about him, and maybe Mr. Mazankowski won't.  Oh my, I'd better go to 
Ottawa, or I'd better go and make another 4 o'clock in the morning phone 
call, or I'd better get a couple of guys from Manitoba and Alberta in here 
and we're going to act tough and try to wrest that $500 million out. 
 
That's cynical manipulation of the political process.  You know, Mr. 
Speaker, there's not a farm family in Saskatchewan that believes that kind 
of rough-tough, big Mr. Premier guy act.  Because they know the money's 
there; they know there's $500 million there for farm families.  They're 
worried about saving their farms.  They're worried about getting the 
seeding in this year.  They're not worried about Grant Devine's political, 
-- excuse me, Mr. Speaker, -- the Premier's, the Premier's political 
manipulation and political game playing with the future of farm families in 
this province, they don't want their futures tampered with in this cynical 
way, Mr. Speaker.  They don't want it. 
 
So why doesn't the Premier and the government come clean and put forward 
their program for agriculture, hopefully in the budget, but hopefully they 
can trigger the payment because we know Mr. Mazankowski in Ottawa has given 
the Premier the timing to trigger the payments.  That's common knowledge 
around Saskatchewan.  We know that Mr. Mazankowski, in order to try and buy 
the next election for this floundering government has said, okay, Mr. 
Premier, whenever you're set to trigger those payments, and whatever little 
scenario you want to work out before you trigger those payments, that's 
okay with me.  You just go ahead because you got the 500 million here.  
Right?  We know you got the 500 million.  He said it; he's talked about it 
being in reserve.  So why doesn't he come clean and stop playing politics.  
If they were interested in not playing politics as they claim to be in the 
throne speech, they'd make the announcement tomorrow that yes, there's $500 
million there from the federal government and that's great. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, that's great.  We say that's great.  We know 
farm families need that cash injection from the federal government.  But I 
can tell you what the farm people around Swift Current were telling me the 
other day when I was down there, Mr. Speaker.  The farm people around the 
Swift Current area were saying to me, the cash is fine, but let's get rid 



 

 

of Mr. Premier.  Right, Mr. Premier.  You can imagine, Mr. Speaker, what 
word rhymes with fine and how the last name of the Premier fits into that.  
Okay.  That's what those farm people were saying.  They know the cash is 
coming.  They want the cash.  The cash is fine.  Let's get rid of the PC 
government so we get an honest government back in Regina that won't play 
political games with our future.  That's what the farm people across this 
province are saying, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, another aspect of the political manipulation that the 
government is involved in.  They talk about, well we're going to go out 
with Consensus Saskatchewan and develop an economic strategy for this 
province.  Well how many members of the back bench of the Tories know, Mr. 
Speaker, that two months ago the cabinet commissioned Peat Marwick and 
company, commissioned Peat Marwick and company to go out and devise an 
economic development strategy for Saskatchewan?  How many members of the 
back bench happen to know that little piece? 
 
Now does that sound like building consensus?  Does that sound like building 
consensus?  No -- another little bit of political manipulation.  Here they 
already have hired, at no doubt great expense to the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan, Peat Marwick to develop an economic development strategy on 
the one hand, yet they send up this thing called Consensus Saskatchewan to 
do exactly the same thing.  Because the government knows perfectly well 
that Consensus Saskatchewan is nothing more than a con game, but they're so 
bereft of ideas, and their own Tory philosophy of let the market rule has 
gone so badly down the tubes that now they hire a firm of chartered 
accountants to try to figure out they are going to get out of the mess in 
terms of economic development.  Nothing more, Mr. Speaker, nothing more 
than political manipulation and cynicism. 
 
(2130) 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I don't believe it will work.  I don't believe it will 
work because I think that there has been an event that comes with every 
government during whatever political reign, and that event is the breaking 
of trust, and that took place last year around the question of SaskEnergy.  
And it's like this, Mr. Speaker, it's like this.  You know you can suffer a 
sprain in your back and you'll recover.  And you can suffer pulled 
ligaments in your back and you'll recover.  And you may even suffer a 
herniated disc or a squished lumbar section and you'll recover.  But when 
you break your back, when you break the spinal cord, when you sever that 
relationship, when you sever that relationship you're not going to recover.  
And that's what's happened with this Government of Saskatchewan.  They've 
severed the relationship of trust that all governments need in order to 
survive politically in order to maintain their own political credibility 
and their own trust with the people that they are elected to govern.  
They've severed that relationship, Mr. Speaker.  The people of Saskatchewan 
don't believe them any more.  They don't believe them any more, and why 
should they?  I've just outlined the reasons I think why they shouldn't 
trust this government and why they should take the Speech from the Throne 
for exactly what it is -- a political document meant to buy time. 
 
But I say this, Mr. Speaker, the day of reckoning is coming, and whether 



 

 

it's short or whether it's long, it's coming.  And the people of 
Saskatchewan know it's coming.  So to the people of Saskatchewan I say, 
hold on.  Hold on to the faith.  Don't let despair, don't let cynicism, 
don't let a total lack of hope overcome you and your family; don't worry.  
Not a question of don't worry, be happy, because we know these aren't happy 
times.  But don't worry, because you know there's going to be a new day 
coming. 
 
There's going to be a new day coming for Saskatchewan.  There's going to be 
a new government in this province.  There's going to be a new vision; 
there's going to be a new plan.  There's going to be a whole new century 
opening up and it's going to be led by the Leader of the Opposition, the 
member from Saskatoon Riversdale, and my colleagues from New Democratic 
Party caucus. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm voting against the throne speech.   I'm 
voting for the future.  And I want an election, and my constituents want an 
election, and we on this side of the House say to you, build that 
consensus.  Call the election, and let's get on with building the new 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's a pleasure for me to rise 
this evening and speak in this legislature on Her Honour's throne speech.  
I believe that we forget many times the freedom we have in this province 
and in this country -- in the great country we have and the great province 
that we have.  Many times we just take for granted many of these freedoms 
that people in eastern Europe are now trying to achieve.  To these 
countries and to those who try to make their area, themselves, a very 
select majority in free elections, in free governments, it's a very giant 
step forward.  And it shows all of us that in the 1990s, changes can and 
will happen. 
 
I was listening a moment ago to the member from Rosemont who I believe made 
a real honest statement.  He said, when you look into the future, Mr. 
Speaker, which road will you take?  Will you take the left road or will you 
take the right road?  And he went on to say some of the things that he 
believed to the right and some of the things he believed to the left.  Well 
in many countries in Europe, particularly in Europe, they're taking the 
right road now because the left road has not been successful. 
 
And when he says, the right road, and he says, more of the same, and that's 
true.  When you stay with any political party, you usually have more of the 
same.  You have development, you have industry, you have diversification, 
you have building our communities, you have value adding to our products, 
and on those kind of strengths such as the Cargill fertilizer plant, where 
you take a raw product as natural gas, turn into a fertilizer that our 
farmers can use. 



 

 

 
Mr. Speaker, the upgrader -- we take our heavy oils and build on that, 
building value added, building jobs, building opportunities.  We take the 
Weyerhaeusers where they put a pulp and paper mill in, extended the line -- 
many, many jobs; value adding jobs to our area.  The upgrader that's 
coming, Husky at Lloydminster, the same thing.  And the Millar Western mill 
at Meadow Lake -- jobs, opportunity, environmentally safe.  That's 
building; that's to the right, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you can go to the left, and we had the left.  And there's lots of good 
things about the left, I'm sure.  But it does give you more government; it 
does give you more Crown corporations.  They don't believe in trade with 
United States, and certainly 85 per cent of our trade goes to there.  In 
fact, they believe, Mr. Speaker, in everything that eastern Europeans are 
now trying to rid themselves of.  And, Mr. Speaker, that is to the left.  
And that's why I am to the right, because I believe in opportunities for 
people in this province and for building. 
 
I want to talk on a few things, but I want to mention a few things about 
agriculture and this province's commitment over the last -- since 1985 to 
1990, or 1989 inclusive -- the money that has been spent by this province 
behind our farmers to help them get through some very, very difficult 
times. 
 
And I'm just going to list a few of them off: the Canadian crop drought 
assistance program, Saskatchewan share $115 million; Saskatchewan Water 
Corporation supply program, $34 million; the farm purchase program, the  
rebates, $95 million; the counselling assistance for farmers, $30 million; 
the farmers' oil royalty rebate, $80 million; Livestock Investment Tax 
Credit, $36 million; the ACS capital loans interest subsidy, Mr. Speaker, 
$16 million; the production loan intra-subsidy, $73 million; the Livestock 
Cash Advance intra-subsidy, $74 million; the irrigation assistance, $22 
million; the provincial stabilization, $122 million; the livestock facility 
tax credit, $11 million.  There's others, there are many things like the 
well drilling assistance, total up to $86 million; the green feed program 
under the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance, $10 million, and the Livestock 
Drought Program which was cost-shared by the federal government of $18 
million. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, through Canada-Saskatchewan Crop Insurance since 1985 
to 1989 inclusive, one billion two hundred and forty-four million dollars 
has been paid out to Saskatchewan producers, Mr. Speaker, that is putting a 
lot of money to help our farmers in very difficult times. 
 
I want to speak a little bit about two or three other things I believe are 
very, very important.  And I want to talk first about the changes that are 
happening, and I want to talk about the environment, and I want to talk 
about Saskatchewan crop insurance and rural development, and a little bit 
about Kelsey-Tisdale constituency which I've had the pleasure to represent 
for over nine years now. 
 
Changes, Mr. Speaker, come in many ways.  Changes are going to come in the 
way we farm, in the way we grow our farm products, and the way we market 



 

 

them.  Changes to our community structures . . . and we've all seen that 
out there where rebuilding of our communities, the structure there that's 
going to be needed to do that.  Changes in how our communities, both rural 
and urban, and how they must work together because today I believe, Mr. 
Speaker, that there's no longer a rural community or an urban community out 
there in Saskatchewan, other than the major cities.  They're all just rural 
communities because everybody in every town that I lived, the farmers . . . 
everybody goes to the same . . . in many cases the same church, the same 
curling rink, same skating rink.  They take part in the same type of 
activities because they are a community.  And that's been growing more and 
more.  I'll speak as I go through about some of the things that I see 
happening there. 
 
Changes in how we address the environment, and I think that's been 
mentioned certainly before, and I heard the member from Rosemont talk about 
the environment.  Changes to what the government role will be as we see the 
world as it is.  The government, not owners, but they've got to be 
facilitators bringing industry and jobs to their part of the world. 
 
I want to just talk a moment or two about the environment and some of the 
things that I . . . certainly as I'm concerned as a conservationalist I 
make . . . In my area I'm very much involved with the wildlife federation.  
This winter we were feeding deer all winter.  I give much towards that 
because I believe in those things that are natural out there and you should 
build on them. 
 
But I want to talk a little bit about our water system, particularly about 
the Millar Western pulp mill that's going at Meadow Lake and the value that 
will do to our province. 
 
About 20 years ago -- you can go back as many as you want -- and I can 
remember not that many years ago when they allowed sewage lagoons to be 
just dumped into our river systems.  Pulp mills were built and the effluent 
was just dumped into the nearest waterways they had.  Today I believe, Mr. 
Speaker, that has changed.  That's not acceptable any more. 
 
When we look at the Millar Western pulp mill at Meadow Lake creating 
hundreds of jobs during construction and after many hundreds of jobs, and 
here in Saskatchewan I believe that we have become a first in protecting 
our environment, a first in Canada, in fact a first in all the world when 
you look at the pulp mill industry.  This new pulp mill will have no 
discharge.  Just think of that, Mr. Speaker, the first pulp mill in the 
world that will not discharge into our water systems.  And I believe we all 
know why, because we do not want to see our water systems polluted.  The 
Saskatchewan River certainly has had a lot of problems in it over the 
years, and if we'd have dumped into that it would have created some more.  
We cannot add to this now or in the future. 
 
This new technology is the way of the future and again Saskatchewan is 
first.  And to my colleague, the Minister of the Environment, who must 
approve all of these types of industries, I believe a job very well done.  
Mr. Speaker, we've had two large new industries approved in this province 
in the last three months, both discharge free.  I believe that is 



 

 

protecting our environment and creating jobs for Saskatchewan people.  And 
that, Mr. Speaker, is building for our future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to spend a few minutes on three other areas that I 
mentioned just a moment ago.  One of them is Saskatchewan crop insurance, 
one is rural development, and the other is Kelsey, my constituency of 
Kelsey-Tisdale.  First I wanted to spend a few moments on Saskatchewan crop 
insurance, the largest crop insurance in Canada and probably one of the 
largest ones in the world.  Mr. Speaker, it serves the needs of some 
60,000-odd farmers; 50,000 farmers used it last year.  Fifty thousand 
farmers last year along with the federal government paid about $260 million 
in premiums and collected back, because of some droughts, over 400 millions 
of dollars.  But it is there as a protection against loss and not as a 
guarantee of income. 
 
Saskatchewan grain producers face significant production losses in 1989 in 
many regions.  Large areas in the south-east, central and west-central 
areas had yields significantly below average.  In addition, 1989 
represented the second and third or more years of drought for those same 
farmers. 
 
On average, Saskatchewan produced a near normal crop of 18.7 million tonnes 
in 1989 in terms of total production.  However, this production was 
achieved by near record seeded areas.  All of these major grains, oil seeds 
and special crop yielded below average, while provincially canola and 
sunflower yielded below 1988's average.  The only areas which yielded near 
above average in 1989 were in the north-west, north-east and south-east.  
Crops yielded less than half of average in the south . . . I'm sorry -- 
south-west before, and south-east. 
 
In areas of central Saskatchewan and along the Alberta border in the 
west-central Saskatchewan, two-thirds of the 299 municipalities had two 
consecutive years below average yields, and 15 per cent had three 
consecutive years below average yield.  Many producers are being provided 
with only reduced crop insurance coverage due to continued drought.  
Although changes were made to crop insurance to limit downward adjustments 
coverage due to claims, many producers are still facing reduced coverage. 
 
Over 80 per cent of Saskatchewan producers had crop insurance coverage 
totalling $1.9 billion in 1989.  Indemnities, including multi-year disaster 
benefits, are estimated to total almost $450 million for 1989 crop loss.  
The multi-year disaster benefits expected to make payments to 30 per cent 
of the municipalities.  And certainly, Mr. Speaker, I think that in itself 
says the size and the structure of the Saskatchewan crop insurance. 
 
(2145) 
 
Last fall, about a year ago almost, we went out and covered . . . went 
around the province and had 13 meetings with producer groups and producers 
around the province at open forum meetings where we asked them what they 
felt needed . . . changes needed to be made to crop insurance.  Some of the 
areas they addressed was the livestock feed insurance plan.  They wanted to 
be able to have farm gate service, and they wanted some other changes made 



 

 

to crop insurance. 
 
I'm just going to mention some of the ones that we have done so far for 
1990, with the rest coming in 1991. 
 
Under the livestock feed insurance program, last year we just had an area 
base.  In other words, you were in four municipalities and if you qualified 
you got the same all the way across.  Fair to some, too good to others, and 
not right to some.  This year we've changed it.  They're using the area 
base for calculation and individual claims.  So if you have a claim, you'll 
file for it individually, so you'll have individual coverage under forage 
insurance livestock feed. 
 
We used the agrologist under rural development and the records of the 
producers this year to set a better level for crop insurance coverage for 
livestock feed programs.  We are working towards individual coverages for 
all our all-risk crop and all our grain crops.  Eighty per cent of the 
farmers to date that have taken out their grain or livestock feed have went 
under individual coverage, so more than 80 per cent will be under 
individual coverage this year. 
 
We brought in an agent system, Mr. Speaker -- called it farm gate service.  
We have many, many changes to crop insurance.  There's many things the 
farmers didn't know, like how much it was going to cost them, what was 
available to me, how would it work in my overall system, and that's what 
the agent is there to do, to work with that farmer to see if he or she . . 
. what they need and how much they need and how it would protect them and 
how it would best serve their interests. 
 
We also wanted to make sure that we had an estimate of what the crops would 
be.  In other words, we called a field estimate.  That gives us better 
management control of what's out there.  We'll know what to expect; we'll 
know when to expect if there is a problem coming; the farmer will know if 
he's in a crop loss position; we'll know if he's in it.  It can be 
adjusted.  Many things can be done either to salvage his feed or to work it 
down or to leave it, which will be the decision of the farmer.  So it gives 
the farmer better -- certainly gives us, as crop insurance -- better 
management position. 
 
He'll do a report on production, which means they will go out and talk to 
the farmer, how much yield there was.  That'll all go on computer.  It'll 
be available to the farmer, a good sales item if some day down the road he 
or she wants to sell their farm.  Certainly for us it gives us a total 
record of production, and it will be advantageous for us if they have a 
claim the following year, and for them.  We will have the claims this year. 
 
Last year we started paying the claims for hail loss, 75 per cent less your 
premiums, directly with the claims office, 32 of them around the province.  
This year you'll be able to get your entire claim paid, less your premiums, 
directly at the claims centre.  They no longer have to come out of 
Melville.  So that will be a new service.  We kept in place the three price 
options for all grains, which allows the farmer to select whatever is best 
for their needs. 



 

 

 
We allowed this year for the first time, and I believe that it's been 
recognized, to allow organic crop production to be insured.  I believe it 
has some opportunities for the future.  Many people are concerned about the 
food they eat, and there are some farmers now who are looking seriously at 
organic farming.  In fact we had a seminar held in Hudson Bay about two 
weeks ago, and I was surprised.  About 40 farmers came out to look at 
organic farming to see how it would fit into their farming practices and 
what would be the value to them.  And it was of interest to note that the 
organic foods brought about one and a half times what the natural farmer . 
. . way we've normally farmed in the past.  In fact canola last year, if 
it's organic canola, sold for about $11 a bushel. 
 
We also will allow new crops in very quickly.  Before, it took three or 
four years to get a new crop registered, and now if it's registered it can 
be accepted under crop insurance.  We estimate this year that there will be 
about 50,000 producers who will take crop insurance and that will exceed 
almost $2.5 billion in coverage.  Mr. Speaker, that is coverage and 
insurance for our farmers, protection for our farmers when they're 
certainly going to need it. 
 
Second, Mr. Speaker, I would like to talk a little bit about rural 
development.  We spent a great deal of time certainly on many areas of 
rural development since 1985.  Rural development, I believe, has a role to 
play in working with Saskatchewan rural people -- that means towns, 
villages, hamlets, and RMs -- to diversify and restructure their 
communities, at the same maintaining the roads and services that we as 
rural folks have always known and needed.  Working with these people has 
always been a pleasure for me.  As a former reeve, I've always enjoyed to 
be able to work with people in rural Saskatchewan.  Even in tough times, 
rural people are builders.  The pioneer spirit that brought their 
forefathers to this province and this country remains, and a challenge to 
them is nothing new. 
 
And I am just going to speak a little about what we've done in rural 
development, in structuring the opportunity to build out there in rural 
Saskatchewan.  We've been at it for about four years now, setting a 
structure in place that can do a lot to build and restructure rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there's about 10 steps that I am just going to go through. 
 
In 1985, we commissioned, or the government commissioned, the gentleman 
from the university of Saskatoon, called Mr. Jake Brown.  He did a report 
on rural strategy, and certainly if anybody has attended any strat 
meetings, you've seen Mr. Brown at many of them, very, very much concerned 
about rural Saskatchewan, what was happening out there, and identified for 
everybody what needs to be done as he saw it.  So we had a rural strategy 
that he brought and initiated for us to take a look at. 
 
We started about four years ago working with the RMs, saying, to have a 
rural strategy, you have to redo your road systems.  How do you redo your 
road systems to fit into the needs of what's going to be there in the 



 

 

future? 
 
So we met with the wheat pools and the UGGs (United Grain Growers) and the 
co-ops, and any of the major service sector people who may use and would be 
servicing rural Saskatchewan.  And we said to them, what's your future 
plans?  What kind of roads are you going to need?  Then we worked with both 
SARM and then with each individual rural municipality and with 
municipalities joining each other to say, how shall we restructure the road 
system to meet the needs of the future?  What was done in the past was 
good, but we had to rebuild for the future. 
 
That was done.  Its been all put into place, and certainly changes will be 
made as we go along, but the basic structure is there now.  The heavy-haul 
roads, the primary grids, the primary, all-surface, resorts service roads, 
the grid roads, the main farm access. 
 
About the same time we started looking at saying, how can we get 
municipalities working together, urban and rural?  We had what we call the 
economic development committees working in urban centres but mostly on 
retail, bringing retail business to their communities.  So we decided at 
that time that maybe that we could put together what we called the rural 
development corporation concept.  That's four municipalities, four or more 
working together to create and implement, develop and diversification for 
their particular area, one of which must be, at least one must be a rural 
municipality, but it could be all rural municipalities or all but one in 
the urban. 
 
Then a little later we decided that we should have something for those 
boards to work with, so we put together, through the Saskatchewan Research 
Council, had put together over the last two years, we called CORA.  It's a 
catalogue of opportunities for rural areas.  It's 1,400 opportunities in 
manufacturing and processing, job related, value added, giving an 
individual idea of what sort of a market, expenses, feasibility, and what 
particular business, how they might go about it. 
 
It takes it all the way down.  It's a basic outline of 1,400 different 
opportunities as Saskatchewan Research Council saw might fit out there some 
place in rural Saskatchewan. And we put them together.  They're on our 
computer service in all our rural service centres now.  And you can get 
them there and you can take a look at them.  There's many things that might 
fit out there into rural Saskatchewan.  If they don't, something close to 
it may well do that. 
 
Then we decided, Mr. Speaker, that we should have a network to deliver all 
this system and the people who are out there.  We had four branches of 
government all over, four or five sometimes in one town or one small city, 
but none of them really working together.  So we brought them all under 
what we call the rural service network, some four branches of government 
coming together with extension services, lands branch, rural development, 
and Saskatchewan Crop Insurance, all serving the same farmer, all serving 
the same communities, all serving the same needs, working together under 
one branch or one building, really working well, Mr. Speaker.  In fact, I 
have a lot of requests from many, many communities for a rural service 



 

 

centre. 
 
Then at the same time we decided, there used to be the ag boards out there 
and we decided we should have . . . if they're going to be boards, they 
should look at development diversification.  So they were changed to what 
they call the ADD (agricultural development and diversification) boards -- 
same district, but different kind of profile on them.  We asked them to put 
on people who would look at development and diversification.  We looked at 
people who would look at the farming industry, so a combination of them.  
That's been put into place. 
 
At the same time, Mr. Speaker, some other things were going on in other 
departments.  The individual line service -- the only province, and only 
state, I believe, in the North American continent, that will have 
individual line service to every farmer and every resident in this province 
by the end of 1991.  That, Mr. Speaker, is very, very important if we're 
looking at the computer network that's needed to deliver the programs out 
there and to make it available, the information that's needed. 
 
The rural natural gas network that we've been putting into our farms and 
into our small towns and villages.  You cannot have, Mr. Speaker, in a 
country like ours, in a province like ours where it's very, very cool, and 
sort of cold, I guess you could always say, we need heat, we need cheap 
fuel for heat.  And you certainly need cheap fuel for energy to bring 
manufacturing and processing there.  So our rural natural gas distribution 
systems, our individual line service -- two major components of what's 
needed to bring industry and development to rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Along with that, Mr. Speaker, we have now the SCAN (Saskatchewan 
Communications Advanced Network) network.  It's televised university 
education right into your community.  In other words, you'll be able to get 
university, and can get now university classes right in your own town.  
Important, Mr. Speaker.  A lot of students would like to take their first 
year at home and to see where they'd like to go, whether it's Arts and 
Science.  And it gives them those opportunities that never was available to 
many, many of us here, in fact never was available to any of us here except 
in the major centres. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have . . . also put in place was many ways to finance this 
development diversification.  Under SEDCO they had the small business loans 
association for small business, up to $5,000 administered by a rural 
development corporation or a local committee of a town, or like an EDC 
(Export Development Corporation), but mainly under the rural development 
corporation where most of them were being administered.  They can give up 
to $5,000 at whatever interest rate they wish because they get it 
interest-free from SEDCO.  And it's to build their community, to get the 
small industry in their community, build their town, maintain the viability 
of their community. 
 
SEDCO also have what they call a participating loan, up to $300,000 
available to those for industries, interest-free for the first five years, 
into your community.  Put an industry in your community. 
 



 

 

The Western Diversification Fund, available to every community out there 
now, and certainly we're getting good co-operation from the federal 
government in getting funding to help bring industry and development to the 
areas. 
 
Through the rural capital grant program under the Department of Rural 
Development, I announced three industries that were going into the 
province, the first three, because it just come in place at the first of 
the year, at the SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) 
convention.  Since then there's seven more have been approved and we have 
about 60 applications submitted for industries into small town rural 
Saskatchewan driven and decided by the local people.  Mr. Speaker, that is 
building rural Saskatchewan. 
 
In fact just yesterday, a couple of days ago we approved a grant to the 
rural development corporation to a plant that's going into Kelvington -- 
you've heard a lot of talk about it -- a peola chip plant.  They're 
building the first pilot project there and they're starting on it right 
now, using the rural development grant money as initial start-up money to 
get it going. 
 
When it is going it takes peas from the local area, canola from the local 
area and if anybody's tasted them -- many of you have -- it just makes a 
very, very fine chip, a real opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to build on what we 
have out there that's naturally ours and to diversify, creating jobs to 
keep our young people at home. 
 
I want to just mention a few other areas that we're looking at in 
diversification under the Department of Rural Development.  We're looking 
at Crown land diversification.  There's land out there that's owned by the 
provincial government that isn't really farm land, it isn't really 
protected under the wildlife habitat, but it can have some opportunities 
for tourism, for development that would lead to jobs related to the area. 
 
And we're looking at that -- working with the RMs (rural municipalities), 
working with the towns, working with the wildlife federation.  We're doing 
it very carefully, very slowly so it fits all those needs, at the same time 
protecting our environment. 
 
We're looking at further decentralization of rural development.  As you 
know, we have 52 offices we'll have around the province when we're done 
with rural service network. And certainly some more can be through 
different ways created out there where they're needed.  And there's been 
about eight communities come to me who feel that they're left out because 
they're too far to drive, and those certainly we'll be looking at. 
 
We're identifying industries that could fit into a community, and we're 
doing that, Mr. Speaker, with many communities out there.  Another area 
we're looking at, expanded tourism, I mentioned a minute ago.  And one 
other area I think is really interesting, we're looking at the shelter belt 
expansion.  There's many, many opportunities to look under save our soils 
program.  And we've lost a lot of soils to wind erosions, and we're looking 
at the shelter-belt program, how we can fit that into protecting our 



 

 

environment, creating opportunities -- and certainly shelter-belts are 
very, very important there. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  It being 10 o'clock the House stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 2 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10 p.m. 
 


