





























































Hansard: April 05, 1990


 

 

April 5/90 
 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 

Standing Committee on Crown Corporations 
 
Clerk Assistant: -- Mr. Gardner from the Standing Committee on Crown 
Corporations presents the fourth report to the said committee which is as 
follows: 
 

 Since the committee's last report on May 30, 1989, your committee held 14 
meetings during the third session of the 21st legislature.  The committee 
completed consideration of the following reports of corporations:  
Agricultural Credit Corporation, 1987-88; Municipal Financing Corporation, 
1988; New Careers Corporation, 1986-87; New Careers Corporation, 1987-88; 
Saskatchewan Development Fund, 1988; Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation, 
1987-88; Saskatchewan Minerals, 1988; Saskatchewan Transportation Company, 
1987-88; Saskatchewan Water Corporation, 1988; Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
Corporation, 1987-88; Saskatchewan Forest Products Corporation, 1987-88; 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation, 1988; Saskatchewan Government Printing 
Company, 1988. 

 
Mr. Gardner: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member from Regina 
North West: 
 

 That the fourth report of the Standing Committee on Crown Corporations be 
now concurred in. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm very pleased to introduce some guests to 
you, and through you, this afternoon.  I would like to introduce Danielle 
Woodward.  She's the president of the student union in Regina.  As far as I 
know, she's the first Indian person across Canada to be elected president 
of a student union at a university. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- I would also like to introduce Patsy Desjarlais, Malcolm 
Andrews, and Lyle Morriseau who are also part of the student council for 
the Saskatchewan Indian Federated College.  And I would like all guests . . 
. and before I start I would like to also welcome them in my own language, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 



 

 

I would now ask all the members to kindly accept them, please. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to 
you, and to other members of the Assembly, His Excellency Peter Palangyo, 
the High Commissioner to Canada for Tanzania.  His Excellency is on a 
familiarization tour of western Canada, and while in Saskatchewan he'll be 
meeting with the government, with university and private sector officials. 
 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, has an annual exported amount of about $1 
million worth of red spring wheat to our friends in Tanzania, and I hope 
His Excellency will discover many other avenues for trade while he is on 
tour here in Saskatchewan. 
 
I know our government is very anxious to develop a mutually beneficial 
trade project with him, and would you please join with me in welcoming His 
Excellency to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, allow me to introduce to you, and through you to 
members of this Assembly, a dozen men and women from across this province 
who provide leadership across the province and are involved in ADD 
(Agriculture, Development and Diversification) boards. 
 
I'd like just to mention the names of the individuals, who are here, who 
are in for a meeting and are attending question period this afternoon: 
David Acaster from North Battleford; Bob Carruthurs from Biggar; Mrs. Carol 
Carson from Melfort; Mrs. Margaret Cline from Allan; Raymond Cooper from 
Laporte; Osborne Craig from Carrot River; Barry Harris from North Portal; 
Dale Leflar from Bengough; David Nederhoff from Rouleau; Les Potter from 
Gull Lake; Murray Westby, Watrous; and John Burns, Wynyard.  We welcome 
you, and I'd ask the members to join me in extending a welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Saxinger: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'd like to 
introduce to you, and through you to the members of this Assembly, a group 
of students from Domremy -- 18 grade 7, 8 and 9.  They are accompanied by 
Ronald Tessier and Charlotte Kuhn.  They are seated in your gallery.  They 
are here to learn something about the parliamentary procedure.  I will meet 
with them at 1:30 for pictures and refreshments, and I would ask all the 
members to please help me welcome the students. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Gerich: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too would like to welcome 
the High Commissioner to Saskatchewan.  We lunched together at noon and we 
talked about some of the problems in Europe and Africa, and we had quite a 
discussion.  I'm sure, too, that he's enjoying our pristine air here in 
Canada and our Saskatchewan hospitality. 
 



 

 

I'm also sure that he's going to enjoy the entertaining and probably 
interesting question period that we have today.  Thank you, sir. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too would like to welcome the 
guests that the member from Moosomin introduced.  I have the pleasure of 
having two of my constituents, Mrs. Klein and Mr. Westby, who are very 
familiar with the agricultural problems and are very active in their 
respective communities in helping to develop and solve some of the problems 
that we have in agriculture.  So I'd again like all members to welcome them 
here. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to introduce four 
people to the Assembly here today who are a part of the town of Morse.  
They are the mayor, Doug Wilson, and councillors Joyce Adamson and Jack 
Weppler and Lorne Nicholson. 
 
They are known in Morse as a curling town and they have won two provincial 
titles there.  One was the girls high school title and the mixed title, and 
they had the honour of having Miss . . . the little girl that does the . . 
. her name is Patty Long, and she is the abilities council Tammy from the 
community of Morse.  And I want you to join with me in welcoming them to 
the Assembly here today. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Charges Laid Against Indian Students 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct my question to the 
Minister of Justice.  Mr. Minister, about a year ago your department laid 
26 charges to a group of students protesting the federal government attack 
on the treaty Indian right to education.  Similar charges were dropped in 
other provinces because Indians, like any other citizens, have the 
democratic right of protest.  Why do you continue to persecute the 
students, and why don't you stand up and support these students and drop 
those charges? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I'll phrase my response carefully because that may be the 
first time in the history of this legislature that a member of this 
Assembly has asked formally for the Minister of Justice to interfere and 
drop criminal charges.  I do not intend to interfere with the operation, 
Mr. Speaker, of the justice system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, another question.  Every time in this 



 

 

legislature we speak about issues pertaining to Indian people, this 
government always makes excuses to do absolutely nothing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Are you trying to tell me, Mr. Minister, that the right to 
free speech and assembly in this province is to be denied to people who 
support the right of Indian students to get a sound education?  Is that 
what you're trying to tell me, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- What I am trying to make clear to the hon. member, that 
prosecutions will be handled by the public prosecutor's office in this 
government, as they always have.  And they will be dealt with in that 
manner. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, one more question.  Mr. Minister, other 
provinces have stood by their students right across Canada.  Why is it that 
you will not stand up in this province to support the rights of Indian 
students? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- My response, Mr. Speaker, has nothing to do with the 
rights of anyone.  My response is that the Office of the Attorney General 
does not interfere with the prosecutions, Mr. Speaker.  That is precisely 
what I have said and that's . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The hon. 
member is saying from his seat that that's not true.  In fact, Mr. Speaker, 
I would challenge him to prove otherwise because we do not interfere with 
the prosecution.  That is a principle, Mr. Speaker, that I have upheld in 
this House, that this government has upheld, Mr. Speaker. And they will 
make the decisions as to whether charges should be laid or not, Mr. 
Speaker, and how they should be proceeded with -- not the politicians.  And 
that is proper in our system of government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Assistance to STC Officials on Trial 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have a question to the minister 
responsible for Saskatchewan Transportation Company.  Mr. Minister, on CBC 
(Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) radio this morning it was reported that 
William Sheetz, lawyer for Darrell Lowry, stated that there are currently 
negotiations ongoing between STC (Saskatchewan Transportation Company) and 
the two Texas defendants about what STC may do to help them. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you confirm that such negotiations are ongoing, tell us 
how long they've been under way, who is doing the negotiations, and what 
items are being negotiated? 
 



 

 

Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, I could tell the hon. member and tell the 
public that there has been a request from both of the defendants in the 
trial that the member refers to for STC to look at ways in which they could 
help them.  But I can tell the hon. member and tell the House today that 
there are no negotiations ongoing. 
 
Mr. Trew: -- New question to the same minister, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, 
the people of Saskatchewan are no longer inclined to take your word on 
anything surrounding STC.  Your government's credibility is being put to 
the test here, sir, and as you demonstrated earlier this very week, your 
word to Saskatchewan people is not worth very much. 
 
I have a quote from the Star-Phoenix of Monday, February 19 I'd like to 
read to you, sir, and it is your quote.  And I quote: 
 

 I don't think it's Eagle or STC that's under investigation here, from 
anything I can find out.  It's four individuals who decided to act in a 
personal way (McLeod said). 

 
That being the case, Mr. Minister, what possible motive would STC have for 
negotiating with their lawyers to help them out with money or in any other 
way? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- I've just said, Mr. Speaker, that there have been 
requests from the two people; there are no negotiations.  The member's 
other diatribe about whether or not my word is believed or isn't, and so 
on, I don't think is relevant to what the case in question is. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- I'd like to ask the Premier a question flowing from this 
same CBC interview, asking him a question as the head of government.  In 
this story, Mr. Sheetz is quoted as repeating his allegation that political 
considerations are behind the lack of charges laid in Canada. 
 
The report says: 
 

 He says the provincial government is stalling on a decision about whether 
to charge Castle and Lowry in Canada.  He thinks the fact that 
Saskatchewan is in an election year makes it tempting for government 
politicians here to continue stalling.  And Sheetz himself said, if a 
politician doesn't have to make a hard choice, then it is much easier not 
to make that decision in an election year. 

 
Mr. Premier, the question that flows from this is: how could any government 
believe that its political considerations are more important than the 
administration of justice?  Surely you would agree that no government can 
compromise our legal system in such a manner. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to indicate in no uncertain 
terms that the American lawyer making such allegations does not know what 
he's talking about, Mr. Speaker.  And that type of publicity may work in 
the American system, but it's not proper in the Canadian system.  And I can 
assure the hon. member and the people of this province that there is a 
police investigation, I understand, going on.  It's going on freely and 
without being fettered in any way, shape, or form. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- I've a question, a new question for the minister 
responsible for the STC, and the question is this.  He says that there were 
requests from the lawyers . . . or from the defendants in Texas to enter 
into discussions.  And I'd like the minister to tell the House what the 
defendants or their lawyers requested of the Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- As I understand it, the requests from the two 
defendants were for holiday pay, which they believed were coming to them 
based on service in the past, to be paid out to them.  I believe that's 
what the requests were. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- A new question, this one I think to the Minister of 
Justice, although I'd prefer that the Premier answer it as the head of 
government.  We all know in this House that Mr. Justice Brownridge has 
absolutely no authority under the legislation under which he was appointed 
to call for the Ernst and Young report to be kept secret.  It is not part 
of his powers under The Public Inquiries Act and it should not supersede a 
commitment made by a minister of the Crown, since his inquiry is only 
quasi-judicial or semi-judicial. 
 
Is it not true, Mr. Minister, that in fact the government found this 
request very easy to agree to despite the minister's commitment and despite 
your obligation in this matter, because as Mr. Sheetz said this morning, 
out of sight, out of mind. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Again, Mr. Speaker, what publicity the American lawyer 
and the games he wants to play are something that may work in the American 
system and may be practised in the American system, but that's obviously 
his call. 
 
There's also kind of a principle of practice, I believe, that the louder 
one protests, the weaker the case.  However, that applies in the American 
system. 
 
I suggest to the hon. member that I understand that the minister 
responsible for STC received a request.  On the one hand, the NDP ask that 
there be no interference.  And then on the other hand, they want us to . . 
. don't want us to honour the request of the inquirer. 



 

 

 
Now again, if the request is made, I believe it is proper, it is proper . . 
. you cannot have it both ways.  You cannot have it both ways, Mr. Speaker.  
The request came from the inquirer and the request is going to be honoured, 
I understand. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Study on STC Financial Affairs 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- A new question, Mr. Speaker, to the same minister.  You 
speak of practices, Mr. Minister.  Surely it is an established practice in 
this province, and in all democracies, that when a minister makes a 
commitment to make a report public, he will in fact make the report public. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Now when the judicial inquiry was established, Mr. 
Minister, by you, you said the criteria for the commission, the terms of 
reference was to investigate allegations made in Dallas as to misconduct 
surrounding STC, and that was the basis on which you framed the terms of 
reference, the allegations that were made in Texas. 
 
Now we have more allegations from Dallas.  This time of a more serious 
nature that your government is interfering with the pursuit of justice for 
solely political purposes.  That's the allegation coming from the lawyer 
for one of the defendants.  Since such allegations were the basis of the 
inquiry . . . the terms of reference for the inquiry in the first place, 
will you now agree to expand the terms of reference of the inquiry to 
investigate this specific question of whether or not any such political 
interference is occurring? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I believe I already answered that, Mr. Speaker, that it 
may be in the American system of justice that lawyers and the politicians 
would interfere with the practice and do it for political reasons, that's 
not the case in Canada, I suggest to the hon. member, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the hon. members shake their head over that.  I have already indicated 
today, Mr. Speaker, that the police investigation is ongoing in the normal 
course.  And, Mr. Speaker, I suggest that that lawyer in the United States 
by suggesting that our police forces and our criminal justice system can be 
manipulated like that, Mr. Speaker, is an insult not only to the police 
forces and our judicial system, but it's an insult to the criminal justice 
system of this country, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Holiday Pay Due to STC Officials 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- My first question is very short and straightforward is to 
the minister in charge of STC.  The minister acknowledged that there had 



 

 

been discussions between STC and the two defendants in Dallas, Texas.  You 
said that holiday pay had been requested.  I would ask the minister now, 
Mr. Speaker: has that holiday pay been issued, and if so, in what amount 
was the holiday pay issued to those two individuals? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- I can say to the House that it has not been issued, and 
there's no decision made as to what amount is owing to them or if in fact 
it's owing to them.  Those decisions are . . . we have sought legal advice 
as to how -- the board has when I say we -- the board of STC has sought 
legal advice as to how this deal should be dealt with. 
 

Trial of STC Officials in Texas 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- New question, Mr. Speaker.  I would want to direct my 
question to the Premier.  Although the Minister of Justice can question our 
motives, we want you to know, Mr. Premier, that we want two things. We want 
accountability from your government, and we want justice to be served in 
this case. 
 
On the CBC radio program this morning, I quote from that program, Sheetz 
says another possibility for government stalling here is that potentially 
embarrassing material might emerge during the Texas bus trial. 
 
I would ask you for your assurance here this afternoon, Mr. Premier, that 
will you give us your commitment that any cabinet ministers, government 
officials, STC officials or board members, or officials of the Progressive 
Conservative Party that are subpoenaed for defence or for prosecution will 
travel to Dallas, Texas to give testimony; and furthermore, any documents 
that are subpoenaed, whether they be cabinet documents or not, will those 
documents also be passed on to the trial in Dallas, Texas, Mr. Premier? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I will give the assurance that the law will be obeyed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Premier, we want justice to be served as well.  That's 
why we ask your commitment as the highest authority in the government of 
the province of Saskatchewan that if subpoenas are served on individuals, 
regardless of whether they're cabinet ministers or officials within your 
government, or if documents are subpoenaed, that you give us your assurance 
here this afternoon, as the highest authority of the Executive Council, 
that those persons or documents will be sent to Dallas so that justice can 
be served in that Dallas court-house as well, Mr. Premier. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- As Minister of Justice and as Attorney General, Mr. 
Speaker, as has been the case under this government, the law will be 
obeyed.  And I hope that the hon. member will also ensure that should 



 

 

subpoenas be issued against members of the opposition, etc., that they will 
attend. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- The process for question period has usually been, Mr. 
Speaker, that we ask the questions.  But in answer to the question of the 
Minister of Justice, if anyone's subpoenaed from this side of the House to 
appear in a Dallas court-house, we would be there. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Question and answer between hon. members is 
not permitted during question period.  The normal course of events is that 
the opposition asks, the government side answers.  And I believe that in 
the best interests of question period we stick to that procedure. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Question to the Premier, Mr. Speaker.   
 DMr. Premier, I think it's incumbent on you to clear this air of scandal 
that surrounds your government, to give us your personal assurance -- not 
the assurance of the Minister of Justice in him saying that justice will be 
served - 
_ that you will obey the law.  We want your commitment as the most 
honourable individual in this Assembly, as leader of the Executive Council, 
that you will provide every assistance requested by the Dallas court-house, 
by the prosecution, or by the defendants, so that fair trials and justice 
can be served in the United States of America on this scandal that 
surrounds your government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Obviously, Mr. Speaker, the New Democratic Party has in 
its blatant inability to understand or grasp the difficulties of 
agriculture and its obvious attempts to avoid dealing with the agricultural 
crisis and unwillingness to talk about it, Mr. Speaker, are trying to paint 
this in the most dramatic political terms. 
 
Obviously, Mr. Speaker, the questions today had a political bent as opposed 
to any real concern about, one, justice, or two, the law, Mr. Speaker.  The 
law will be obeyed, Mr. Speaker.  This government has obeyed the law.  And, 
Mr. Speaker, I find it interesting, on the one hand they want charges 
dropped, and on the other hand they're concerned about the law. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- New question.  And you, Mr. Minister, find it far too easy 
to charge Indian people in Saskatchewan, but not to co-operate with the 
justice system of your own officials. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- I would turn my final question to the Government House 
Leader, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, you were ultimately in charge of STC at 
the time that this allegation of bribery and conspiracy to bribe was going 
on.  We want to ask you as the minister in charge at that time, you as an 



 

 

individual minister, if you are subpoenaed or you have documents that are 
to be subpoenaed to the Dallas trial that's going to take place starting on 
June 4, do you give us your assurance that you would make yourself 
available to the Dallas court-house, and that you would comply with any 
subpoena that was issued, either by the prosecution or the defence? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Mr. Speaker, I have now answered, I believe on three or 
four occasions today . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I would once more draw to the attention of 
the hon. members to allow the minister to continue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Mr. Speaker, I have reiterated, I believe four times 
today, that the law will be obeyed by the government.  I do also restate, 
Mr. Speaker, that today while farmers are hurting, losing their land, in 
serious difficulty, the NDP, Mr. Speaker, refuse to ask one question of 
agriculture today, and today they ask us to drop charges on the one hand 
and go after cabinet ministers on the other, Mr. Speaker.  They don't care 
about justice or the law, they're only concerned about politics, like they 
were with the farmers the other day, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Lay-off Notices at Intercontinental Packers 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of Trade.  Mr. 
Minister, Intercontinental Packers in Saskatoon has announced that lay-off 
notices have been given to another 100-plus employees.  These notices, Mr. 
Minister, as you know, have been due because of the slow-down in the 
market-place. 
 
Mr. Minister, I am hoping that you have a better understanding or better 
grasp of the issue than the Premier had when we last asked him the question 
on this issue.  And he stated that countervail duties and protectionist 
U.S. legislation has nothing to do with the free trade agreement. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question to you is this.  Will you repudiate today the 
provisions of the free trade agreement which allow the U.S. to continue to 
bring trade restricting actions, such as the hog countervail which is doing 
such damage, such serious damage to the hog industry in Saskatchewan today?  
Will you ask, or will you repudiate those countervail duties as they 
pertain to the free . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Speaker, I am pleased that the hon. member 
understands that red meat consumption in North America is down, and that 
affects our red meat industry in Canada as it affects the United States. 
 



 

 

But it is impossible to imagine that in solution to a trade problem you 
would try to abolish a trade agreement and go to no trade at all to solve 
the problem.  It's unimaginable that you would not want to have a trade 
agreement. 
 
We have a trade agreement.  It has a dispute settlement mechanism.  That 
can be used to our advantage.  Before the agreement we had no document that 
said we were entitled to trade with the United States. 
 
And what the members opposite advocate is that we tear up that document and 
go to no trade at all.  That's impossible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Minister, I would request that you read the free trade 
agreement, because if you were supporting the stand of the Premier here 
today, you are not supporting the industries here in Saskatchewan as you 
said the free trade agreement would do.  You said it would open up the 
markets, and it has not done that. 
 
Mr. Minister, today, for example, the countervail is before the so-called 
dispute settling mechanism.  It is before that.  Mr. Minister, if it has 
nothing to do with the free trade agreement, then why should it be 
adjudicated through the free trade agreement process.  Why should it be 
done? 
 
Mr. Minister, if the dispute settlement mechanism finds against 
Saskatchewan and its producers and rules that the U.S. can continue to 
impose any trade laws it wishes, then will you today finally admit, will 
you finally admit that the agreement has done nothing to open up free trade 
borders to Canadian producers here in Saskatchewan, particularly? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Speaker, the free trade agreement is opening up 
markets, maybe not as fast as we would like them to be opened, but it is 
opening markets.  Countervail is a different matter entirely.  Countervail 
refers not to the tariff but refers to the subsidies that might be paid and 
the dumping laws which Canada still maintains and which the United States 
still maintains. 
 
Members opposite can't seem to understand.  I mean, that's understandable 
that they can't understand.  They don't understand markets.  They don't 
understand trade.  But they can't seem to understand that the trade 
agreement is an attempt to make things better, and they want to destroy 
that and make things worse.  It makes no sense. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on a Point of Order 
 



 

 

The Speaker: -- Before orders of the day, if the hon. members have nothing 
to raise . . . Before orders of the day then, I would like to bring down my 
ruling as pertaining to yesterday's events. 
 
Yesterday, before orders of the day, a point of order was raised by the 
member for Regina Elphinstone concerning a question put to the Premier by 
the member for Wilkie.  In stating his point of order, the member for 
Regina Elphinstone claimed the question to be out of order on the grounds 
that the matter raised was not within the administrative competence of the 
government.  The member also felt the question might be irregular on other 
grounds and asked me, and I quote: 
 

 . . . for a number of reasons, this question was not in order, and I'd 
like you to check the verbatim from today's question period and make a 
ruling . . . 

 
I have had a chance to review the verbatim and I now rule on the whole 
matter, which quite frankly caused considerable disruption in question 
period. 
 
Before making a point of the actual question asked by the member for 
Wilkie, I am going to deal with a misunderstanding that certain members 
have in connection to oral question period.  This matter certainly 
contributed to the disruption that occurred yesterday and caused my 
intervention.  The issue is the permissibility of government private 
members asking questions during oral question period.  For all members, I'm 
going to reiterate the practice of this House.  On July 30, 1987 a point of 
order was raised to make the claim that question period was not the 
appropriate forum for government members to ask questions.  I ruled on 
August 6, 1987, that although the number of questions is always firmly 
weighted in the opposition's favour, government private members have the 
same right as opposition members to ask questions.  This is, of course, 
supported by precedents of this House. 
 
I quote what the Speaker ruled on December 9, 1975, in this regard: 
 

 I would agree that Government private members infrequently ask questions 
during the oral question period but under the practices of this Assembly, 
it is the right of any private Member to ask oral questions . . . 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. 
 
It might be worthwhile for members to note that between the beginning of 
this legislature in 1986 and the beginning of the present session, there 
have been 3,658 questions asked in oral question period of which only eight 
have been put by government members.  There is no call for members to get 
upset by an occasional question by government private members.  I 
reiterate, not only does the member have the right to put his question but 
he also has the right to be heard without interference. 
 
I now turn to the actual question asked by the member for Wilkie.  It is 



 

 

true, as the member for Regina Elphinstone pointed out, that questions must 
be within the administrative competence of the government.  I quote 
Beauchesne's Parliamentary Rules and Forms, 6th edition, section 409, 
paragraph 6, p. 121: 
 

 A question must be within the administrative competence of the Government.  
The Minister to whom the question is directed is responsible to the House 
for his or her present Ministry and not for any decisions taken in a 
previous portfolio. 

 
I also want to draw to the attention of the House and to the member for 
Regina Centre, the breadth of our own rule which does indeed deal with oral 
questions, which reads as follows: 
 

 Written questions may be placed on the Order Paper, or oral questions may 
be asked seeking information from Ministers of the Crown relating to 
public affairs, and to other Members relating to any bill, motion or other 
public matter connected with the business of the Assembly in which such 
Members may be concerned, but in putting any such question or in replying 
to the same, no argument or opinion shall be offered, nor any facts 
stated, except so far as may be necessary to explain the same, and in 
answering any such question, the matter to which the same refers shall not 
be debated. 

 
Our rule then, broadly provides for oral questions to ministers relating to 
public affairs. 
 
The member for Wilkie asked the Premier in his capacity as Minister of 
Agriculture, to explain the government's position on production loans and 
on a moratorium on farm foreclosures, and I quote from Hansard of April 4, 
page 458: 
 

 Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of Agriculture, the Premier, 
and it relates to the government's position on the production loan and on 
the moratorium on farm foreclosures, Mr. Speaker. 

 
 It is my understanding that the National Farmers Union, supported by the 

Leader of the Opposition, have advocated an indefinite moratorium on farm 
foreclosures, and that members of the opposition have openly advocated 
writing off any outstanding money owned under the production loan program, 
Mr. Speaker. 

 
 Could the Premier please explain the implications of such a moratorium? 
 

It is clear that the Premier has no opportunity in question period to 
answer questions in explanation of the policies of any non-governmental 
organization.  However in this case, I find that while the NFU (National 
Farmers Union) position was referred to in the preamble, it was not the nub 
of the question.  The question, as I could interpret from the verbatim, 
involved the government's own position on production loans and a 
foreclosure moratorium. 
 
These issues, I should think, are within the administrative competence of 



 

 

the government and also are clearly within the area of public affairs for 
which the minister is responsible.  In fact, in previous question periods 
these issues have been discussed. 
 
On March 20, 1990, the member for Quill Lakes in essence asked for the 
government's position on a moratorium in his call for a moratorium on legal 
claims against farmers.  At that time it was generally agreed that the 
prospect of a moratorium was within the administrative competence of the 
government.  As for production loans, they have been discussed many times 
in question period. 
 
Therefore, having had a chance to review the record, I rule that the 
question of the member for Wilkie was in order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth that the Assembly resolve itself into the Committee of 
Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It's a pleasure for 
me today to rejoin the budget speech.  And as I was saying yesterday, Mr. 
Speaker, when the clock ran out at 5 o'clock, I believe that this budget is 
very appropriate for the times in Saskatchewan.  I believe this budget that 
begins with a belt tightening, that begins with efficiency measures within 
the government itself, including government cabinet ministers, including 
civil servants, including advertising and travel and those types of things, 
I believe that a budget that begins with -- that begins with -- in-house 
efficiency measures is what the public of Saskatchewan today is asking for. 
 
I believe a budget that has been developed in mass consultation with the 
public of Saskatchewan is what the public of Saskatchewan want today.  I 
believe that a budget today, Mr. Speaker, that concentrates on the priority 
areas of health, education, agriculture, and diversification is what the 
people are asking for in the province of Saskatchewan today. 
 
I furthermore, Mr. Speaker, want to make the case to you today that another 
priority area is that which falls under my jurisdiction, that being the 
Department of Environment and Public Safety. 
 
It's been my pleasure, Mr. Speaker, in the short few months since I was 
appointed to the Department of the Environment, to take a keen interest in 
an area that is gathering both regional, provincial, national, and 
international attention, and that is this great big thing called the 



 

 

environment, Mr. Speaker.  It is a massive area of subject. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there are a great deal of areas that we could talk about 
today with respect to the environment.  And, Mr. Speaker, I want to key in, 
I want to key in on some of the priority areas within the Department of the 
Environment and some of the initiatives that we will be undertaking this 
year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those people who paid attention to the budget address by the 
Minister of Finance will note that there were some 21 government 
departments or agencies that were either frozen or had their budgets 
reduced. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the taxpayers of the province of Saskatchewan have spoken loud 
and clear.  Government must restrain spending.  Government must be 
accountable to the people.  But there is an area, Mr. Speaker, within the 
budget of Saskatchewan in this fiscal year that did receive an increase, 
and I make the case to you today, Mr. Speaker, an increase appropriately 
made, Mr. Speaker, an increase of some 2.9 per cent. 
 
Some may say, well, that's not enough money.  Some may say it's too much.  
Mr. Speaker, I feel, after having given this budget considerable attention 
over the last number of months, that an increase in this budget of some 2.9 
per cent is appropriate for the times.  We could spend more, Mr. Speaker, 
but 2.9 per cent is nothing to sneeze at. 
 
I make the further case to you, Mr. Speaker, that there is something 
brand-new, brand-new, brought to you, Mr. Speaker, under this current 
administration -- a fund with respect to funding environmental initiatives 
that was never there before, a fund that was never heard of before, Mr. 
Speaker, never designed by anyone else, but a brand-new fund put in place 
by this current administration, Mr. Speaker, with respect to some key 
environmental initiatives. 
 
And I speak to you, Mr. Speaker, of the Environmental Protection Fund.  And 
I want to key in on the Environmental Protection Fund, Mr. Speaker, making 
note, making note that the expenditures with respect to the protection of 
our environment in this fiscal year as compared to what was spent last year 
out of the environmental fund are more than three times. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, in addition to the regular budget in and for the 
province of Saskatchewan, we have an Environmental Protection Fund that 
will be keying in on certain projects, that will be spending in excess of 
$3 million this year in some very important areas.  And I make the case to 
you, Mr. Speaker, that there is real dollars going to work for the 
environment and proof positive of a sincere commitment to the environment 
for Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, what are some of those areas?  What are 



 

 

some of those areas, Mr. Speaker?  I'd like to touch on one of them.  It's 
probably one of the most talked-about initiatives across this country and 
indeed across North America.  People in cities and towns and villages are 
asking about recycling.  Mr. Speaker, these people are asking what can we 
do as individuals?  What can we do as a municipality for recycling?  Why 
can't we have a blue box system here in Saskatchewan like there are in some 
other jurisdictions? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this was committed to last year in the budget address, 
last year in the throne speech.  I believe that a wise, prudent, cautious 
government and a responsible government would have taken precisely the same 
action that we have, and that is, Mr. Speaker, to be extremely careful and 
cautious and not jump into a blue box system.  I would quote to you 
examples all across the country of jurisdictions that have jumped into a 
blue box system, put the cart before the horse, and have experienced some 
great difficulties, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of those jurisdictions is the big city of Toronto.  Toronto has said 
that, in retrospect, they may perhaps have moved too quickly.  Mr. Speaker, 
we in Saskatchewan want to do things that are protecting the environment, 
that have to do with recycling.  But, Mr. Speaker, we want to do them 
right.  We want to do them correctly.  We want to do them appropriately.  
We want to use our taxpayers' dollars judiciously. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the reason that we have taken a cautious approach with 
the blue box system and have announced earlier this year that there will be 
a pilot project, not a massive project in the province of Saskatchewan but 
a pilot project to test this blue box system and to learn the pros and the 
cons and the advantages and the disadvantages and work out the bugs, if you 
want to use a common phrase that's used in this province, Mr. Speaker, work 
out some of the bugs of this program. 
 
I have a great deal of faith, Mr. Speaker, in the municipal leaders in 
Saskatchewan who will analyse this project, who will work with government, 
who will work with industry, who will help us develop a model, Mr. Speaker, 
that will be the model for the 1990s. 
 
Now it may not come as quick as some may want, Mr. Speaker, but most 
fair-minded reasonable people say, yes, take a cautious approach with that 
blue box.  It's a lot of money.  It's a good program, but do it right.  
Don't repeat the mistakes.  Don't repeat the mistakes of others, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
That particular project has been allocated some $750,000 or thereabouts.  I 
want to reiterate here again, Mr. Speaker, that it is a cautious approach.  
I want to reiterate that we must be careful and not make the mistakes of 
others, but I believe that Saskatchewan can have and will have a successful 
blue box pilot program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I look to that fund, and there is also about three-quarters of 
a billion dollars that has been put into the Saskatchewan Wetlands 
Conservation Corporation.  Here again, Mr. Speaker, something brand-new for 
the province of Saskatchewan, something initiated by this government, 



 

 

something that an awful lot of the wildlife people around the province, 
environmentalists, ecologists and others are saying, yes indeed, there is 
money that is wisely spent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to commend the former minister of Parks and Renewable 
Resources for his efforts towards this initiative.  I want to commend the 
current Minister of Parks and Renewable Resources who is most dedicated to 
this program, who works hand in hand, day in and day out, with such 
organizations as Ducks Unlimited, with such organizations as the 
Saskatchewan wildlife association, these types of groups, Mr. Speaker, that 
can provide absolutely tremendous advice to us in areas such as this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk again about something else that the 
Environmental Protection Fund has allowed us to do.  It has allowed us some 
$350,000 that will be spent on the management of biomedical and hazardous 
wastes.  Here is a big area, Mr. Speaker; one of them is a specialized area 
that has to do with biomedical wastes. 
 
What do we do with these highly specialized, highly contagious, highly 
dangerous wastes that come out of our hospitals and out of our nursing 
homes and out of our other health care institutions?  How do we manage 
these wastes, Mr. Speaker?  We're all familiar here today, Mr. Speaker; 
there's no sense hiding the fact that this deadly disease they call AIDS 
(acquired immune deficiency syndrome) is in Saskatchewan, not in mass 
numbers, but is in Saskatchewan.  Other deadly, contagious diseases are in 
Saskatchewan and our hospital administrators and other health-care 
professionals are dealing on a day-to-day basis with the question: how do 
we handle these specialized, highly contagious, dangerous medical wastes. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this government is committed to finding answers to those 
questions, and therefore we have allocated sums of money towards a study on 
how best to manage biomedical wastes. 
 
Same dollars, Mr. Speaker, will be allocated to the whole area of hazardous 
wastes.  There's many unanswered questions out there, Mr. Speaker, and if 
you will excuse me, I don't have all of the answers today.  But, Mr. 
Speaker, I have the commitment to put the right people in place, to consult 
correctly with the people of Saskatchewan, and I have confidence that we 
will come up with a correct plan for the province of Saskatchewan with 
respect to the management of hazardous wastes. 
 
Some of those questions, Mr. Speaker: should we have a hazardous waste 
facility here in Saskatchewan similar to what they have in Alberta?  Should 
that system be duplicated?  Should we spend 35 to $40 million on the same 
type of facility, or shall we, Mr. Speaker, regionalize and share that 
facility with the province of Alberta, as an example, and build a different 
type of a hazardous waste facility here in Saskatchewan? 
 
I think those are very, very good questions, Mr. Speaker.  I believe that 
the moneys allocated in this budget will go a long ways to answering many 
of those questions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'd like to talk to you today as well about another program 



 

 

that's coming out of the Environmental Protection Fund, and that is half a 
million dollars for the creation of the Saskatchewan Youth Environmental 
Corps.  If there is a segment of society, if there was one segment that I 
had to pick out, Mr. Speaker, that was key, that was key to environmental 
issues in this province and in this country, that is the youth, Mr. 
Speaker, the young people in Saskatchewan, the future of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And those young people, Mr. Speaker, I have a great deal of respect for.  
They have more knowledge and more interest and more sincere desire to learn 
more about and do more about the environment, Mr. Speaker, I think, than 
any other segment, and I say in fact that they are leading society. 
 
You could walk into the schools today, Mr. Speaker, and talk to some of the 
young people today.  They are light-years ahead of many of the rest of us.  
They have plans, Mr. Speaker.  They have ideas.  They have creativity.  
They have imagination and they have dedication.  And I believe, Mr. 
Speaker, that by funding to the tune of one-half million dollars out of 
this Environmental Protection Fund, that we are committing dollars and 
investing dollars in a very, very good place that should not be open to 
question by -- I don't think even the opposition, even the career critics 
that sit across the way, Mr. Speaker, I would ask for their sincere, 
genuine comments on establishing an environmental youth corps.  I will 
debate anyone any place if they would say having an environmental youth 
corps in the province of Saskatchewan is not a good idea. 
 
What are some of the things these young people can do?  Well, Mr. Speaker, 
the answer to that question is endless -- is absolutely endless, Mr. 
Speaker.  There are so many things that must be done in the province of 
Saskatchewan -- things to do with reforestation, planting of trees, 
renewable resource technicians, Mr. Speaker.  Cleaning up Saskatchewan.  We 
have beautiful canoe routes, as an example, in northern Saskatchewan.  I am 
led to believe, Mr. Speaker, that some of those canoe routes where they 
portage between routes have considerable mess there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, young people want to help clean up Saskatchewan.  Young people 
want to be responsible when it comes to the environment, and I have every 
confidence that our young people will be extremely excited to become part 
of the environmental youth corps. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'd like to now turn to another initiative within the 
department's budget, Mr. Speaker, and that is the creation of an 
enforcement unit within the Department of the Environment.  I believe, Mr. 
Speaker, that our department is . . . it's not that old a department; it is 
not nearly as old as some of the established departments within government.  
I speak of such things as Health and perhaps Urban Affairs or rural 
affairs.  Department of the Environment, to my memory, was established in, 
oh, 1971 or 1972 or thereabouts.  And I do give credit to the opposition; 
when they were in government they did form the Department of the 
Environment, and they set up a good structure that was appropriate for the 
times. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, times have changed.  Times have changed, Mr. Speaker, 



 

 

and today the environment is so high on the people's agenda, is so 
important, Mr. Speaker, that we are taking a whole look at the Department 
of the Environment and saying, well maybe it's time for a review of the 
organization there.  Maybe it's time to repriorize some of the activities 
in the Department of the Environment. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we've got some good people over there in the Department 
of the Environment.  We have some top scientific people, administrative 
people, research people, policy people.  We have good people, Mr. Speaker, 
but we must, on behalf of Saskatchewan taxpayers and on behalf of the 
environment, make certain that we are making the absolute best use of those 
people and put in their priorities in the right place. 
 
One of those priorities, Mr. Speaker, is the creation of an enforcement 
unit within the Department of the Environment.  You will know, over the 
past few years under the Progressive Conservative administration, that many 
laws, many rules, many regulations have been changed.  We have, frankly, 
got much tougher and much more demanding with environmental law in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I quote to you an example of some of the increase in potential fines for 
people who wilfully neglect the laws of the land when they come to the 
environment.  And those laws, Mr. Speaker, today say that if you break the 
law, the potential or the outside limit may be as much as, as much as a 
million dollars in fines or three years in jail. 
 
Now that's pretty tough talk, Mr. Speaker, but I believe that it is 
appropriate for today.  It is appropriate for the environment, and I 
believe that when you've got those laws, they must be enforceable.  They 
must be enforced. And we are setting up, within the Department of the 
Environment, an enforcement unit that will go a long ways to making sure 
that the laws of the land, as they pertain to the environment, are upheld 
within this province. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, that other provinces have done similar.  I say, Mr. 
Speaker, that we want to be wise about this as well, and learn from the 
lessons of other provinces -- learn what other provinces have over the past 
number of years in change in the organization of their department and 
making sure that their departments have their priorities in the right 
place. 
 
I'd like to talk to you, as well, Mr. Speaker, about another area, another 
area that we will be making changes on.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is the 
whole area of the environmental assessment process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Environmental Assessment Act was passed, I believe, some . 
. . about 10 years ago.  I think it was 1980 or thereabouts.  It was a good 
Act.  I give members opposite credit.  It certainly was a good Act.  It was 
appropriate for the times.  It perhaps did not, did not look down the road 
to the future as well as it might have.  But in fairness, I say there were 
many of us back 10 years ago that should have been paying more close 
attention to the environment, and today many shake their heads and say, why 
didn't we think of these things years ago? 



 

 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we are examining that legislation, and I am committing 
today, Mr. Speaker, to a massive overhaul of the whole environmental 
assessment process.  And, Mr. Speaker, I will commit to you today, I will 
commit to the opposition, I will commit to the people of Saskatchewan that 
there will be an excellent process in place.  And, Mr. Speaker, there will 
be widespread consultation of a number of groups.  A number of groups will 
be consulted on just how do we make the rules more clear, more fair, less 
open to discretion by one or two people? 
 
(1500) 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I feel that environmentalists, I feel that people such 
as the Saskatchewan Environmental Society, people like that -- and I only 
use that society as an example; there are many environmental groups out in 
Saskatchewan today, and good ones and good people and knowledgeable people 
and interested people -- I believe that people like that should be 
appointed to a commission to review this whole process.  I believe, Mr. 
Speaker, that we must have some of the best legal minds in the province set 
to work to designing a new assessment process.  And, Mr. Speaker, of course 
we must have business and industry represented on a panel that will change 
this whole environmental assessment process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that's a pretty good mix when you once again say, 
let's have someone very knowledgeable about the environment, someone very 
knowledgeable about the law, and someone very knowledgeable about business 
and all the problems associated with developing business in an 
environmentally sustainable manner.  And, Mr. Speaker, that to me is what 
it is all about, having a balance between the environment and the economy.  
The two are not mutually exclusive, Mr. Speaker.  They are moulded together 
just as my left and right arm are today.  Mr. Speaker, the environment and 
the economy must be viewed together in an environmentally sustainable 
developed respect. 
 
I have confidence, Mr. Speaker, in these Saskatchewan men and women who we 
will be appointing to conduct widespread mass consultation on the whole 
issue of our environmental assessment process.  And, Mr. Speaker, we will 
soon have a good, fair, and reasonable process in place -- one that is not 
so open to question, one that is not so open to discretion, one that does 
not have so many grey areas instead of black or white areas. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I'll use the example of the Rafferty dam as a good 
example.  To me, Mr. Speaker, certainly there were some environmental 
considerations, some environmental considerations, but overshadowed greatly 
by the whole subject of process, the whole subject of rules and regulations 
and interpretations, subject to judges now interpreting one way or the 
other. 
 
I don't believe that's fair to environmental people who are concerned about 
the environment, or fair to business.  I believe that better systems can be 
put in place.  Every jurisdiction across the entire country is wrestling 
with the whole subject of process, Mr. Speaker.  And once again I have 
confidence and trust and faith in Saskatchewan people that we will have a 



 

 

good system in place, and I hereby commit that to you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I also want to talk about a concept, Mr. Speaker, that is not in the budget 
but one that I will be pursuing and am in the midst of pursuing, together 
with the round table on the environment and the economy, together with 
representatives from the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, and 
that is, Mr. Speaker, the concept of a Saskatchewan environmentally 
friendly community program. 
 
That is, in short, a challenge to all Saskatchewan communities to become 
more environmentally conscious, to become . . . to do what you can in your 
own community to make your community more environmentally sound.  And there 
are hundreds and thousands of ideas that individuals and municipalities and 
towns and villages, projects that these individuals and municipalities can 
undertake to make their home area, and in fact their house, more 
environmentally acceptable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people today in Saskatchewan are . . . there's so much 
knowledge out there, but they are hungry for it and starving for more 
information.  How can we as individuals become involved?  How can I as an 
individual make my own personal, sincere contribution to the environment? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to, I want to assist communities, and I want to 
assist individuals in brainstorming and developing ideas and think-tanks in 
ways in which individuals can contribute.  There may be those, Mr. Speaker, 
who say that the entire responsibility, entire weight of the environment 
must be on government shoulders.  I say no to that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You talk to Saskatchewan people, at least the ones that I've been talking 
to.  They say yes, government, you must provide leadership; you must 
provide leadership when it comes to the environment, but I as an 
individual, I as an individual want to play my part. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I and the opposition may disagree on this -- I hope not; 
I hope not -- I hope members opposite will stand in their place and say 
yes, we recognize that; and here are some suggestions, here are some real 
suggestions on how you as minister can help Saskatchewan people become more 
involved and make their own contributions to the environment. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I feel that a program such as the Saskatchewan 
environmentally friendly community program will do just that, and I look 
forward to the day when I can announce that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk to you about something else.  I feel that as a 
leader in the environmental field that I would be remiss, that I would be 
mistaken, I would not be doing my job if I didn't, before asking the public 
to become more involved, if I didn't ensure that government, this 
government, was setting an example when it comes to the environment.  And, 
Mr. Speaker, I commit to you today that you will see in the very near 
future some government initiatives.  And I call that leading by example, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I am talking about using more recycled paper within the Government of 



 

 

Saskatchewan.  I am talking, Mr. Speaker, about even perhaps a blue box 
system right here in this very Chamber.  I am talking about, Mr. Speaker, 
in our automobiles, in our cars and trucks that are run by government, I am 
talking about perhaps we should start using some recycled oil.  I am 
talking about such things as perhaps we can recycle our toner boats, or 
whatever they are, in photocopying machines. 
 
Hundreds of examples, Mr. Speaker.  And I commit to you today that this 
government will lead by example, and in the near future I will be making 
announcements with respect to just that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to talk about another program 
that is in this budget.  And I'm talking about the agricultural chemical 
collection program.  That program will be launched and started on April 16, 
just a couple of Mondays from now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know from first-hand experience, members from all across 
rural Saskatchewan on the government side of the House know that in many 
farmers' sheds and barns and granaries and different buildings there is 
unused, unneeded, and potentially dangerous pesticides or insecticides or 
herbicides or dangerous chemicals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, farmers of Saskatchewan have said to me and said to the 
government: what do we do with all these pails of chemicals?  We want to 
play our part as individuals to help clean up the environment.  How can we 
do this, Mr. Government? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I say to you that this government has responded.  This 
government has responded, I feel, very appropriately with the announcement 
of the agricultural chemical collection program, whereby the government 
will take the lead, travel all across Saskatchewan with a mobile unit, and 
on given days, given days, announce to the rural people that they can bring 
in their unused chemicals.  And the government, the government, without 
cost nor charge to the individual, will take those chemicals and 
successfully collect them, inventory them, and dispose . . . store them, 
and ultimately dispose of them. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, that there is true co-operation.  There is true 
co-operation between end users, being the farmers, and the government of 
the day, co-operating with respect to cleaning up the environment.  Mr. 
Speaker, I believe that that program will be extremely well received by 
people all across Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, there are a number of other things that 
this government will be doing with respect to the air and the water and the 
soil and the forests and the land and the resources that we have to ensure 
that we develop our economy, but we develop it in an environmentally 
sensitive and sustainable manner. 
 



 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's not an easy task.  This is probably the most difficult 
task that I have ever had personally, to manage this big thing called the 
environment, to ensure that Saskatchewan people and the Saskatchewan 
government and Saskatchewan institutions and industries play their part in 
the protecting of the environment.  It's an enormous task, Mr. Speaker; it 
is not easy. 
 
But I submit to you, Mr. Speaker, there are answers, there are solutions, 
and this government today is working towards many of them.  This government 
has a plan for the future, Mr. Speaker.  I believe that Consensus 
Saskatchewan can play a tremendous role in assisting us in finding some of 
those answers. 
 
How do we develop industries?  How do we develop more industries like Fripp 
Fibre Forms, I'll use as a good example -- right back home, next door to 
me, Tisdale, Saskatchewan.  Here is an industry that takes our paper, our 
newspaper and other papers, and compresses that paper and takes it through 
a process and makes egg cartons out of it -- egg cartons and other products 
-- and successfully builds and markets those products across Canada and 
indeed into the United States, across North America. 
 
If that ever was a sustainable type of an industry, it would as good 
example as I can think of, Mr. Speaker.  Something that makes use of our 
paper and ultimately turns it into an end product that is reusable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we as a society must continue to reduce the amount of garbage.  
We must do that by recycling, by reducing, by recovery, by all sorts of 
different means, Mr. Speaker.  It's my job and my commitment to work with 
Saskatchewan people to do just that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are other programs that we'll be announcing over time, 
and it's my pleasure to work with the round table on the environment and 
the economy -- a group of men and women from across Saskatchewan, highly 
trained, highly educated, highly dedicated people who are all grappling 
with this thing we call the environment to advise government on a 
conservation strategy.  For the long-run good of this province, we must 
have a good conservation strategy that deals with land and water and trees 
and forests and the air, and all of these types of issues.  That round 
table is working hard, Mr. Speaker, to come up with answers. 
 
That round table is also working on education projects.  How can we better 
educate our young people and our society in these changing times to be more 
environmentally conscious?  That round table will have answers for this 
government, it will have answers on a provincial basis, and I thank them 
for all their work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that round table is also looking at many demonstration 
projects across Saskatchewan and holding them up as good examples of 
environmentally sound, sound projects.  And we've got a number of them, Mr. 
Speaker, that we look at day in and day out.  And we in Saskatchewan are 
concerned about the environment, and we have the projects to prove that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is technology that is changing every day, technology 



 

 

from all around the world that can help us better manage that environment.  
And, Mr. Speaker, that is why I've also committed within this budget to 
preparing a catalogue or doing a study and getting all of these different 
technologies that may apply here in Saskatchewan into focus, into a 
listing, so people in Saskatchewan can come and say, yes, I can make use of 
that technology in my home town.  You will see more and more of that, Mr. 
Speaker, where we learn from the technologies all around the world how they 
can be applied here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
There are other things, Mr. Speaker, that I could talk about.  I could 
talk, as well, about the announcement within this budget of an annual state 
of the environment report, something I'm personally very excited about, Mr. 
Speaker -- having a report available to all the people in Saskatchewan just 
telling us what is the state of our economy. 
 
I am here to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that in relative terms, vis-a-vis the 
rest of the world, compared to many other jurisdictions we in Saskatchewan 
have an environment that we can all walk any place in the world with our 
head held high and say: I am from Saskatchewan; that is a land of clean air 
and clear water and good soil and a pristine environment.  And I invite 
you, wherever you may be at all across this planet, to come home to 
Saskatchewan and have a look at a fine, fine example of a good environment 
here in the province of Saskatchewan.  We could walk any place with that, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I'm not telling you that we don't have problems here in Saskatchewan.  I'm 
not here to say that there aren't some industries that are unnecessarily 
polluting our rivers and discharging what should not be discharged into the 
environment, but I'm saying overall, we've got a pretty darn good 
environment, Mr. Speaker.  And it's my commitment to you today to protect 
and preserve that environment so that the future generations can walk just 
as tall and as proud and hold their head just as high as we do today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- And, Mr. Speaker, by having an annual report, an 
objective report, that people can look at and say, yes, this year we're 
doing a little better here and a little worse there, I think that's an 
important step, Mr. Speaker.  Members opposite, I hope, would agree with 
that. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, that a few years ago such indices as gross national 
product and gross domestic product and those types of things were not well 
understood by the masses of people -- CPI, consumer price index, the rates 
of inflation.  But today they're household words. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I submit to you that by issuing a state of the 
environment report, by helping to educate the people in Saskatchewan more 
about just how our environment is doing, that in years to come people will 
be quoting environmental indices, just like the consumer price index, that 
will tell you how good the air is here, how good the water is, and all 
those types of things.  And I believe that report is a very good first 
step. 



 

 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(1515) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to also say that there will 
be some legislation this session coming forth with respect to such things 
as the ozone layer.  And Mr. Speaker, I do want to commend members opposite 
for their, at least, for their intent in bringing forth a Bill that is very 
similar to ours.  There are some fundamental differences, but I think the 
main point, the main point that I make is the intent to play a part in a 
non-partisan way of protecting the environment, of protecting with respect 
the ozone layer, is a good one, Mr. Speaker, and I hope we can keep it on 
that level. 
 
I look forward, Mr. Speaker, to laying both of the Bills before this 
Assembly, having a very good debate, and perhaps some formal or informal 
meetings with members opposite to examine the pros and the cons of each 
approach -- somewhat different, similar in intent, but somewhat different 
-- and coming up with an unified position, a consensus if you like, Mr. 
Speaker, on how we can best protect the ozone layer and, Mr. Speaker, that 
legislation will pass this session in this legislature, and I have no 
question about that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- I think, Mr. Speaker, I shall leave it at that for 
today.  I know other members want to get in and speak, but I just once 
again commit to you that protection of our environment is no simple matter.  
It's complex.  It's important.  It requires dedication and sincerity, a lot 
of hard work. 
 
It is a changing world, Mr. Speaker, and I pledge to you, and I pledge to 
the people of Saskatchewan, that I will work with all the fervour that I 
can command to do my part in playing a leading role in protecting and 
preserving the wonderful environment that we in Saskatchewan have today. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  That was very nicely said. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the conclusion of my remarks today to this budget speech, 
I'm going to be moving a motion, seconded by the member from Regina 
Elphinstone.  And it will read this way: 
 

 That all the words after the word "that" be deleted and the following 
substituted therefor: 

 
 this Assembly regrets that the provincial budget has shown a total lack of 

vision and direction and an abdication of leadership on the part of the 
provincial government in dealing with the immediate crisis in the 



 

 

agricultural economy, in promoting community-based economic development, 
in controlling the enormous accumulated deficit, in protecting 
Saskatchewan families and seniors, and in providing economic opportunities 
and jobs for Saskatchewan people. 

 
That is our amendment to the motion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: -- I will move it at the conclusion of my remarks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government said in its throne speech that the world has 
declared economic war on Saskatchewan.  Those are strong words, Mr. 
Speaker, and I can't help but realize that for eight long years the PC 
government opposite are the ones who have declared war on the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: -- And this budget, Mr. Speaker, continues that economic 
warfare.  The Minister of Finance says we are at a crossroads and that it 
is a time of hope but also a time of distress.  And I have no doubt, Mr. 
Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, Order.  I have to ask the hon. members to allow the 
member from Saskatoon Centre to present her remarks to the Legislative 
Assembly without undue interference. 
 
Ms. Smart: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I was saying that the 
Minister of Finance, in his budget address, had said that we are at a 
crossroads and that it is a time of hope but it is also a time of distress.  
And I have no doubt that there is hope in the cold hearts of this Tory 
government that they and their big business buddies will have another year 
and maybe even another term in office to rape and pillage the people of 
Saskatchewan for their own greedy ends. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a corrupt government.  It's a government of scoundrels 
and it's a government that, with this budget, has fired another round of 
ammunition at the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
It is a time of economic warfare, and it is indeed a time of distress for 
the people of Saskatchewan.  And if you want to find Consensus 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, you will find it on this issue across the 
province. 
 
This budget debate is a serious matter.  We are talking about the 
hard-earned tax dollars that belong to the people of this province.  It is 
their money which has been taken from them in trust and that it will be 
spent wisely, Mr. Speaker.  And instead this government opposite robs the 
people for their own political and their financial gains. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I've been going around this province speaking in smaller 
communities and I've been speaking in constituencies in Saskatoon.  And I 



 

 

know that the people's money is precious to them.  They work hard for it.  
But to the government opposite this money is to be squandered as if it was 
paper monopoly money, Mr. Speaker.  They value it as much as they valued 
the potash mines which they called holes in the ground, Mr. Speaker, as if 
they had no value.  And the working people of this province, Mr. Speaker, 
contribute a great deal of money to this provincial treasury, and it is 
that money that we're discussing in this budget speech. 
 
Low income families with two children, with an income of $25,000, pay the 
second highest personal income tax in Canada, Mr. Speaker.  So they don't 
have $25,000 to spend on housing and clothing and food.  Their tax is taken 
out of that money before they see it.  And middle income families with a 
$40,000 income pay the highest personal income tax in Canada. 
 
And I have to ask, when I see the actions of this government opposite, if 
they have any idea what this means to the people of Saskatchewan.  And I 
say no, they do not.  If they understood the heavy burden that tax 
increases put on our people, they would be screaming in protest against 
this budget.  And they would be screaming in protest also against the PC 
federal government's proposed goods and services tax -- a tax which is 
being rammed through right this minute in the House of Commons, Mr. 
Speaker, as I speak here today.  And what have they done about this tax?  
They've done nothing, absolutely nothing.  And I'll have more to say about 
this in a minute. 
 
They say nothing about the goods and services tax, and  
 Dthey don't value the people's money because to this government our tax 
dollars can be mismanaged.  They think they can get away with more and more 
robbery, inflicting more and more pain on the working people of this 
province. 
 
The deficit, as many of my colleagues have pointed out, is appalling.  And 
this is the Tory government's ninth deficit budget, straight nine years of 
deficits.  And in 1990-91 they're forecasting a deficit of $363 million. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, makes a cumulative PC budget deficit, brings it to 
$4.36 billion, or $4,360 of debt for every man, woman, and child in this 
province.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is economic war on the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: -- This budget brings our annual interest payments on this 
deficit to $493 million of the taxpayers money, of the money out of the 
pockets of the working people of Saskatchewan; taken from the people to pay 
the banks and the other lending institutions -- $493 million. 
 
And that means, Mr. Speaker, that the people of Saskatchewan are paying 
more than $1.35 million per day just for the interest charges.  And that 
comes to $56,000 every hour, Mr. Speaker, every hour.  And I say that 
$56,000 could go a long way towards helping those many working families who 
earn $25,000 a year and are paying the second highest personal income tax 
in Canada. 



 

 

 
They pay that tax to this PC government opposite for the benefit of all the 
people in this province, for highways, for health care, for education and 
social programs, and this PC government throws their money away on interest 
charges.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is economic warfare on the people of 
Saskatchewan in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, compare that $56,000 per hour to the $740,000 in this budget 
which has been designated to help feed the hungry children in this 
province.  My colleagues have pointed out that this $740,000 is not even 
evident in the budget estimates.  Apparently it's buried somewhere in the 
Department of Social Services; we can't even find where it is. 
 
And I ask if the 64,000 children in this province estimated to be living in 
poverty, will be able to find it. Or is this government playing another 
shell game -- now you see it, now you don't; 64,000 children in poverty and 
$740,00 to help them.  That works out, Mr. Speaker, to 3 cents per child 
per day, $1 per child per month, $12 per hungry child per year, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Contrast that with the $56,000 per hour of interest charges on our deficit, 
and you see that this is an immoral and an obscene government and an 
obscene budget and is brought forward by a PC government which has betrayed 
the good people of Saskatchewan, and has plundered the provincial treasury 
to their own ends. 
 
The government's commitment to Cargill, the largest private grain company 
in the world with total sales last year of more that $3 billion, the 
government's commitment is 500 times bigger than its commitment to hungry 
children -- 500 times bigger.  That's economic warfare on the people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget contains a combined interest of $56 million in 
personal income tax and sales tax revenue, and that's taxes borne by 
individuals.  It contains a combined increase of $2 million in corporate 
income tax and corporate capital tax revenue, and that's taxes borne by the 
corporations.  Contrast that, Mr. Speaker, $56 million from the working 
people of Saskatchewan and $2 million from the corporations. 
 
Thirty-four per cent of the total revenues in this budget come from the 
working people and the seniors in this province, and 6 per cent of the 
total revenues come from the corporations. And that, Mr. Speaker, is 
economic warfare on the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: -- Mr. Speaker, there's even more bad financial decisions in 
this budget.  There's a revenue item of $310 million from our Crown 
corporations, which is a very substantial increase over the $200 million in 
last year's budget. 
 
And it's obvious that this PC government is bleeding the Crown corporations 
by selling off assets and drawing down retained earnings.  And this leaves 



 

 

even less financial resources for the corporations which were built, and 
I'm emphasizing the word "built," by the people of Saskatchewan through our 
public enterprise, and our co-operative spirit. 
 
If you want to value enterprise in this province, you value that public 
enterprise because it's by working together that the people of 
Saskatchewan, by pooling their resources, have built up the institutions 
and the programs that we had in this province before the PC government 
started ripping it apart, before they declared economic warfare on the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget indicates that the PC government plans to borrow 
$1.9 billion, including borrowing for Crown corporations.  And this again 
is a very significant increase over last year's estimates of total 
borrowing, which was $1.1 billion.  So that means that at the end of 
1990-91, the total debt of the province will be $13.3 billion. 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you compare that with the average income of the working 
people in Saskatchewan, it's mind-boggling.  It's mind-boggling.  And the 
people of Saskatchewan are shuddering when they hear these figures, and 
they realize the burden that this government is putting on their backs. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan have told me, as I've been talking with them 
around the province, that they can't bear this kind of economic burden.  
And they can't bear any more of this PC government's financial 
mismanagement and corrupt government. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan have indeed had enough.  In fact, they've told 
me they've had more than enough.  And I say, Mr. Speaker, that this 
government should call an election and let the people show them their 
consensus.  Enough is enough. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: -- And it is indeed time for New Democrats, in co-operation with 
the voters of Saskatchewan, to show this government what they think by 
throwing them out of office.  This government is a disaster and it doesn't 
deserve the opportunity to do more damage than it already has. 
 
Everywhere people are telling me, and telling my colleagues, that this Tory 
government has got to go.  No one can trust what they say and everyone 
suspects what they do, Mr. Speaker.  This PC government talks out of both 
sides of its mouth and continues to try to bamboozle the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I feel that they don't really want to govern this province; they just 
want to play war games.  Mr. Speaker, they want to play these war games and 
they also want to play tiddly-winks. 
 
And I call it tiddly-winks because I couldn't believe my eyes when I read 
an article from The Saskatchewan Valley News reporting on a Tory roast beef 



 

 

dinner in the town of Warman in the constituency of Rosthern.  This is a 
report of remarks made by the Premier of this province, the Premier who has 
tried to tell us that the whole world is creating economic warfare on the 
people of Saskatchewan.  When he's talking to his Tory friends in the 
constituency of Rosthern at a roast beef dinner, this Premier who's been 
all huffing and puffing angry with the farmers of Saskatchewan, when they 
tried to tell him how much they were hurting, and how serious their debt 
problems are, and the one who said in his throne speech that the whole 
world has declared economic warfare on Saskatchewan, as I've said already.  
What did the Premier say to his Tory friends at the roast beef dinner?  He 
said, "the problem here is tiddly-winks."  And that's a quote, March 1 from 
The Saskatchewan Valley News.  "The problems are tiddly-winks."  And I 
couldn't believe that when I read it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The budget says that under the leadership of the Premier, this government 
will work with the people of Saskatchewan to enhance our Saskatchewan way 
of life, stabilize our communities, build our economy and manage our 
resources. 
 
That's what the government says in its budget speech, and behind our backs 
the Premier is calling our problems tiddly-winks.  And the Minister of 
Finance is laughing at this, Mr. Speaker.  Tiddly-winks is a simple, 
child's game.  Tiddly-winks is a child's game, Mr. Speaker.  And I suggest 
that the Premier should call an election, so that he and the government 
members opposite can go off and play tiddly-winks full time and leave the 
governing of this province to our leader and our New Democratic caucus.  
Mr. Speaker, I assure you that we do not see the province's problems as 
tiddly-winks. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to turn to an important area of the budget which 
hasn't yet been dealt with in detail and which is most deserving of 
attention.  And that is how this and other budgets supported by PC 
governments have been treating our senior citizens.  PC governments in both 
Regina and Ottawa continue to give lip-service to seniors and then bring 
forward budgetary measures which hurt them very badly. 
 
Since the early days of this PC government, when property tax rebates were 
cancelled, and the early days of the Tory government in Ottawa when 
attempts were made to de-index pensions, these two governments have 
demonstrated time and time again that they have no understanding of the 
situation for seniors, any more than they understand what it's like for a 
family living on $25,000 a year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many, many seniors are struggling to get by on fixed incomes 
in a world where costs are rising and rising rapidly.  Heat, water, 
electricity, housing and numerous other essentials are becoming more and 
more expensive.  And I believe that the government members opposite don't 
really care about this at all.  They haven't demonstrated any concern about 
the seniors having to bear these extra costs.  In fact I have seen more and 
more the Tory government moving in the direction of charging seniors for 
these services, and of looking for entrepreneurial ways to take more money, 
more of the disposable income from the seniors. 
 



 

 

And for the seniors then the task of trying to survive is not eased by Tory 
governments.  They have become part of the problem rather than part of the 
solution.  Mr. Speaker, the federal government started things rolling last 
year with its claw-back provisions for pensions, claw-backs which the 
Finance minister, Michael Wilson, said would not be collected and which the 
minister for revenue says is going to be collected.  So the seniors don't 
know where they're at with the Tory government in Ottawa.  But they know 
that they're going to end up paying a 3 per cent tax which is not charged 
to corporations or to wealthy citizens. 
 
And right now, Mr. Speaker, the federal PC government, as I've said, is 
following up that tax to the seniors with the goods and services tax.  And 
the impact of that tax on seniors has been well documented, but I want to 
spend a little time talking about that. 
 
In the budget speech the Minister of Finance said about the goods and 
services tax, this.  He said the goods and services tax is unacceptable.  
That's what he said -- unacceptable.  A little squeak from the Minister of 
Finance, while a tax is going through that's going to devastate this 
province.  It's going to devastate the people of Saskatchewan, particularly 
people on low and fixed incomes, particularly seniors.  And this government 
opposite, the minister responsible for seniors has said nothing about the 
goods and services tax.  And the Minister of Finance has said very little.  
Oh he says he's gone out to the axe the tax meetings and he's said, oh it's 
not a very good tax.  The Premier has said it's too complicated to 
administer, but he's not particularly opposed to the tax itself.  This tax 
is another gouge on the people of Saskatchewan.  It's another tax that 
doesn't respect the struggles that people have, to make ends meet on low 
and fixed incomes. 
 
It's a horribly regressive and unfair tax.  And if the members of the 
Conservative government opposite were opposed to this tax, they would be 
saying a lot more and doing a lot more to encourage the opposition of this 
province, so that the federal government can hear loud and clear that we 
don't want that tax. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: -- It's interesting, Mr. Speaker, that for . . . Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that for 18 months, while the white paper was going forward and up 
for discussion, this government opposite was not saying anything to oppose 
the goods and services tax.  And in an open letter from the Hon. Bill 
McKnight to the provincial Finance minister, he said this on the position 
of the provincial government regarding the goods and services tax: 
 

 May I also remind you that we engaged in extensive discussions with all 10 
provinces for 18 months after the release of the white paper.  In fact 
these discussions made an important contribution to our own work on the 
design of the goods and services tax. 

 
An Hon. Member: -- You helped design it. 
 
Ms. Smart: -- Yes, you helped to design the goods and services tax.  And 



 

 

you let out a little squeak in the budget address that says the goods and 
services tax is unacceptable.  It's way more than unacceptable.  It's 
totally devastating to the province.  And neither the federal government 
nor . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Hitting a little nerve over there, a little nerve. 
 
Ms. Smart: -- Little nerve.  Neither the federal government nor the 
provincial government have released any comprehensive analysis showing the 
overall impact of the goods and services tax on Saskatchewan.  They haven't 
done any homework on the effect of this tax. 
 
They remind me of people who just want to say that they hope things are 
going to get better, while everything is going down the drain.  And they 
have the responsibility and they have the resources to do good economic 
analysis, which would show the effect of this tax on Saskatchewan.  If they 
were really opposed to the goods and services tax, you'd think they'd want 
to document the negative impacts of this tax for the public and for the 
federal government. 
 
And so the question is, what are they hiding?  What are they trying to 
protect?  We've done studies, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on the goods and services 
tax that it shows that it will impose a heavy burden on the province.  And 
that will include $234 million per year in extra taxes going to Ottawa -- 
$31 million per year in extra provincial sales tax. 
 
Because the sales tax will come in on top of the federal tax, and so 
they're really . . . on those goods that have the provincial sales tax, 
we're facing a fourteen and a half per cent increase.  Three hundred and 
fifty-four million dollars per year in added cost to consumers would be 
caused by a 3 per cent increase in inflation, and many independent studies 
have said that inflation can go up as high as 3 per cent. 
 
Now that, Mr. Speaker, is an extra $6.19 million out of the pockets of 
Saskatchewan people, or one million, seven hundred and . . . thousand 
dollars a day.  That's a lot of money from people who earn $25,000 a year 
-- the second highest level of personal income tax in Canada, the group 
that makes that money. 
 
It may be hard for the people opposite, who tend to represent a wealthier 
class of people, to imagine that there are people in this province living 
on that low a gross income.  But there are many people living on that 
amount of money.  And many of those people are being hurt by the goods and 
services tax, and by the other ways in which this government is mismanaging 
their precious money. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I've spoken a bit more about the goods and services 
tax.  I also want to get back to talking some more about seniors generally, 
and this budget and how it affects them.  I pointed out that seniors are 
trying to get by on fixed incomes in a world which is growing more and more 
expensive.  And the government opposite is continuing to attack our seniors 
with the budget of last week. 
 



 

 

For example, while the budget for the Seniors' Secretariat increased by 2.3 
per cent, that is lower than the rate of inflation and it must be judged as 
a cut of 2 per cent.  But that's not the whole story, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
because when you look at the budget, you see that these increases go to a 
cabinet minister for salary, and payments to departmental staff. 
 
And that the money allocated for the heritage grant program, which is a 
program recognized as a right of our senior citizens on lower incomes, and 
the money allocated for services to seniors for the various programs that 
the seniors themselves have wanted to see in this province, those two 
budgets, the heritage grant and the services to seniors, remain unchanged 
in the face of inflation reaching 5 per cent.  And the amount of money 
budgeted for payments to seniors under the Saskatchewan income plan has 
increased only slightly. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, perhaps I have to remind you that the Saskatchewan 
income plan is the program devised to help the seniors who are living on 
the very basic old age security and guaranteed income supplement from the 
federal government. 
 
(1545) 
 
We in Saskatchewan have put in place the Saskatchewan income plan and it 
has been increased only slightly for seniors, who are facing extremely high 
costs of essential services which I've mentioned already: heat, light, 
water, housing  
_- all going up -- clothing, food, and seniors struggling on fixed incomes 
without the money to pay for these increases. 
 
And when the goods and services tax comes in, people will be charging the 
seniors goods and services tax on all sorts of services-- for home repairs, 
for home maintenance, for postage stamps, for funeral services, for 
restaurant meals, for anything that might be of any benefit in giving 
seniors a better quality of life.  The goods and services tax is going to 
be sticking them in their pocket-books, and this government has been 
stabbing them in the back. 
 
What the government increases in the secretariat, Seniors' Secretariat, 
translates to, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is just more money for bureaucracy, but 
not for services to people and to the seniors.  And that's a pattern that 
has been in place with this government and it continues to be in place with 
this government, particularly when dealing with seniors and people on low 
incomes.  Plenty of money for the bureaucracy, all the cabinet ministers 
that you have opposite, all the associate ministers you have opposite, all 
the legislative secretaries you have opposite, and one back bench MLA.  And 
the seniors in this province are hurting badly, and the working people are 
hurting badly. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in Health there was an increase of 9.5 per cent for 
home care services.  But that's not very impressive to the people who are 
concerned about home care and to the seniors who need it.  Last year there 
was a 13.5 per cent increase in home care; this year it's 9.5 per cent. 
 



 

 

And home care has had to cut back on the services it offers to seniors.  
It's only still between 2 and 3 per cent of the total health care budget, 
while all the research shows that if you would increase the home care and 
give the seniors quality of care in their homes, you wouldn't have to be 
building so many nursing homes and putting so many people in institutions.  
You could have better services for the seniors in their homes, and you 
could help them with their snow removal and with their cleaning and with 
the other tasks that they need, their home repairs, and give them the 
quality of life and the health care that they deserve. 
 
But no.  This is an area where the PC government opposite sees the 
opportunity for business entrepreneurs to get involved and, to provide 
those services to seniors at a higher charge because they'll have to make a 
profit, and they will also have to charge the goods and services tax.  So 
there'll be many seniors who won't be able to afford it. 
 
Dr. Robert Murray, who's head of the government's own commission on the 
health care directions, said that the commission is disappointed that more 
money was not put into home care.  We were saying that when we were 
government that we wanted to step up home care.  Now the government, the 
Tory government's own director of the health care commission is saying home 
care should be increased.  The seniors are saying it all across this 
province.  So they will be very disappointed to learn that it's still such 
a small percentage of the budget. 
 
And lots of seniors are talking to me about the very rich environment 
that's being created in the hospitals in terms of the construction work, in 
terms of the drapes and the rugs and the furniture, but there's no staff in 
the hospitals to help them with their situation, Mr. Speaker.  And I was 
appalled the other day, when I was visiting a family, to hear what they 
experienced in a hospital in Saskatoon when their father was hospitalized 
with a stroke. 
 
This man was in his 70's, very fine chap who knew still what was going on 
around him, and he was told by the nurses that if he had to go to the 
wash-room he would have to wet himself and they would change him later 
because they didn't have time to do it.  Those are appalling conditions in 
the hospitals, Mr. Speaker, and there should be more staff to take care of 
the seniors in their old age when they have illnesses that hospitalize 
them.  They should not be treated like that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: -- In a way that's more economic warfare, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and it's social warfare.  The Conservative government has really made life 
miserable for a great many people. 
 
And the seniors, like everyone else, will also be paying the new taxes 
created by this so-called no-tax budget.  Those who drive will have to pay 
in the area of 70 to $100 a year in the gas tax which is now not rebated.  
And since most of them live in their own homes, they're also going to be 
facing increased property taxes.  Provincial government has transferred the 
tax burden to local governments by freezing the revenue-sharing pool that's 



 

 

available to the municipalities, and by providing an inadequate grant for 
the schools.  And to make up for these cuts, the local governments will 
have no choice but to increase property taxes or cut the services which 
benefit seniors and working people. 
 
Taking your example from the Tory government in Ottawa which passed on the 
cost to the province, you've passed them on to the municipalities.  And 
they will have to pass them on to the backs of the people whose interests I 
want to represent in this legislature, and whose concerns I have listened 
to in great detail, and many times since we've met here in this legislature 
last year. 
 
It's really unfortunate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that seniors who live in the 
cities can probably expect an end to subsidized transit because they've cut 
the provincial grants to municipal transit authorities, and that will mean 
that they will have to probably end their subsidized program. 
 
I wonder if any of the members opposite have ever tried to get around in a 
city without a car.  I wonder how many of them use the public bus.  I use 
the public bus quite often in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, and I actually had 
someone comment to me the other day that they were surprised to see that an 
MLA would be riding on the public bus.  Well I ride the public bus and I 
value that transportation. 
 
And I ride the provincial public bus too, between Saskatoon and Regina.  I 
ride it quite often.  That's a good service.  That's a good service too, 
and it's service that we should preserve and we should value.  It's a 
service where many people who use it are obviously people on low incomes. 
 
I think you should try riding the public transit and see if you don't find 
people on it who haven't any time to . . . who haven't any opportunity to 
drive their own cars or to own their own cars. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I've said many times in this legislature that it's the 
seniors who have built up this province, who have spent their lives paying 
for the schools, the highways, and the parks.  And now when they should be 
enjoying the fruits of their labours, the government tells them they must 
reach into their limited incomes and start paying for them all over again. 
 
The budget for the highways has been cut, Mr. Speaker.  And it's 
interesting to me when I'm riding the bus, I'm meeting seniors who are 
telling me that they no longer drive the highway from Saskatoon to Regina 
because they keep thinking there's something wrong with their car, that 
they've got a flat tire or something.  They pull over to the side; they 
look at their car; nothing is wrong with the car.  It's the highways that 
are falling apart in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: -- And that's economic warfare in Saskatchewan. 
 
Many people have commented on the fact that the Conservative government's 
deficit is a tax on our children, but I think it's equally important that 



 

 

we remember that its current policies are a tax on our seniors. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, order.  I'd ask members on both sides of the 
House to allow the member for Saskatoon Centre to make her comments. 
 
Ms. Smart: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know that the seniors are concerned 
about what's been happening in the province.  And I had a letter from the 
Premier the other day regarding this ConSask that he's developing.  He's 
writing to request my advice on which individuals I think would be suitable 
candidates to serve on Consensus Saskatchewan.  He's wanting me to 
recommend someone who would make up a membership of serious-minded 
individuals, respected in their local communities. 
 
Well, Mr. Premier, you want my advice?  I've certainly given you some in 
this speech here, some of the issues that have been raised and some of the 
concerns people have.  I suggest that you get out there and oppose that 
goods and services tax as strongly as we can do it in this . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: -- There's a campaign on now, Mr. Premier, and government 
members opposite -- but it's a campaign by the Canadian Labour Congress and 
the pro-Canada network.  And you who want consensus in this province will 
throw up your hands and say, oh, you can't have anything to do with the 
Canadian Labour Congress because that's labour, right?  That's what you'll 
do. 
 
You won't join this campaign that's on right now, this campaign for fair 
taxes.  They're collecting ballots all around the province.  And you could 
do a lot to help stop this goods and services tax if you wanted to go with 
the consensus of Saskatchewan.  Because the consensus of Saskatchewan is 
that this is a rotten tax and that this is a rotten budget on the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: -- If the Premier requests my advice, I would like to take the 
opportunity to read to him and to the government members opposite just one 
letter that I received when I sent out a news-letter asking for people to 
let me know what their concerns were.  This was a news-letter to my 
constituents.  And this is one person speaking from Saskatoon Centre 
constituency, who said this.  She's a senior. 
 

 Dear Anne: I used to be so proud of my province.  Having lived through the 
1930s and the war, I was so happy with the progress we made.  It seemed to 
me we were so sensible in the way we chose our leaders, people who really 
cared and did their very best to make our lives happier and more secure.  
And because we trusted them, we got so we trusted and cared more about 
ourselves and our neighbours. 

 
 I never thought I would sit and let some of our people be homeless and 

hungry, that we would pass our people by when they were hurting, that we 
would tolerate food banks and school lunches and people sleeping in Loraas 



 

 

bins.  But here we are, back to dog-eat-dog like the 1930s. 
 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is economic warfare in the province of Saskatchewan 
-- dog-eat-dog like the 1930s. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Will the member state his point of order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- Mr. Speaker, as the minister for seniors I would like a 
copy of that letter tabled so I can phone the . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, order. 
 
The member does not have to table the letter. 
 
Ms. Smart: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, if the minister responsible for seniors 
hasn't heard from seniors yet, believe me, I will go out and invite them to 
let him know exactly what they think about what this government's been 
doing with this province.  And you call an election, and they can tell you 
what they think about what you've been doing in this province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I said at the beginning of my speech that at the end of 
it I would be moving: 
 

 That this Assembly regrets that the provincial budget has shown a total 
lack of vision and direction and an abdication of leadership on the part 
of the provincial government in dealing with the immediate crisis in the 
agricultural economy, in promoting community-based economic development, 
in controlling the enormous accumulated deficit, in protecting 
Saskatchewan families and seniors and in providing economic opportunities 
and jobs for Saskatchewan people. 

 
I'm pleased to move this amendment, seconded by the member from Regina 
Elphinstone. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is an honour and a pleasure 
for me to have this opportunity to enter into the debate in reply to the 
budget address of March 29, 1990. 
 
First, I want to take this opportunity to sincerely congratulate the 
Minister of Finance for his budget, the first Saskatchewan budget for the 
1990s. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the provincial government's budget truly reflects the ideas, 
the comments and the suggestions of Saskatchewan people.  The Minister of 
Finance took a great deal of time, great deal of care to travel across 



 

 

Saskatchewan and listen to the people.  The budget clearly reflects the 
powerful nature of building this province through a consensus.  The people 
of Saskatchewan were integral partners in the development of the budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the budget was achieved through consensus with the people, a 
consensus through common sense.  It was achieved through priority setting, 
priorities which were determined by the people themselves.  A consensus of 
common sense, Mr. Speaker, and that was delivered here on budget night by 
the Minister of Finance. 
 
The budget reflects as well the continuing commitment of this government to 
work with the people of Saskatchewan through a partnership, a partnership 
built on a shared vision for this province, a partnership built on shared 
beliefs and shared ideals to protect and to build.  Mr. Speaker, the budget 
reflects a responsibility that governments have, governments everywhere 
have. 
 
Saskatchewan is a province that is a government for the people elected by 
the people, Mr. Speaker.  Government must foster productivity, and the 
people told us that.  The government should not stifle productivity.  The 
government must help provide opportunity, not smother it, Mr. Speaker.  The 
government must work with the people, not over them, and must stand with 
the people, Mr. Speaker, as a result of the consensus. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is what this budget is all about.  It's about protecting 
people from circumstances beyond their control.  It's about protecting 
people against high interest rates.  It's about diversifying their 
communities.  It's about building, and it's about opportunity for youth, 
opportunity for rural people, and opportunity for those in urban 
environments. 
 
This budget clearly responds to the needs of Saskatchewan people.  It 
reflects what can be achieved through the strength and the character of 
Saskatchewan people and their willingness and desire to work together with 
co-operatives, private sector, farmers, small businesses, people in 
universities and academic worlds, people of all walks of life and all 
demographic backgrounds.  Mr. Speaker, this budget is about people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, this budget is about the people.  It's 
about the strength of this province which is the strength of the young 
people.  And I believe that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Yes, Saskatchewan currently does face some difficulties, but with deep 
courage and common sense, the people, the Saskatchewan people stand 
together to lift this province above turbulent waters.  It is our duty as 
their servants to labour on their behalf, to listen to their concerns, and 
to implement true public policy, policy that is reflected of the public 
wishes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance has done just that.  He's asked them 
about their courage and determination and co-operation, and they said that 



 

 

these are the values which the parents and the grandparents of the people 
of this province brought to Saskatchewan.  And it's upon those values which 
they toiled so greatly to build a home of freedom here for you and for me 
and for our children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all four of my grandparents were immigrants.  They came here 
in search of freedom and opportunity.  They came here because of the 
opportunity to build a home and a life for their family.  They came here to 
work and to be part of building this province through co-operation with 
their neighbours and with their friends and with other Canadians. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they had a vision for this province, and if they were here 
today I know what they would say.  They would tell you that with their 
everlasting faith in God, the opportunities of the future are in this land 
of Saskatchewan.  They recognize the richness of this province, but they 
also recognize that even though the opportunities are here to be captured, 
those opportunities do not come without challenge. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if Saskatchewan is to realize the opportunities of the future 
and if Saskatchewan is to realize the opportunities of this blessed land, 
then we must accept that our lives and the lives of our children will 
change and continue to change in dramatic ways, and that change will bring 
forth untold challenge but indeed opportunity. 
 
This budget is about opportunity.  The future will hold a place for our 
children.  And the pace of change, which will be unprecedented in the 
future, will be managed by the people of Saskatchewan because they are not 
afraid of change, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that will present us, this change, with new and demanding 
challenges.  We must be prepared to manage that change, and we are.  Today, 
as I speak, change is occurring around the world.  We are living at a  
 Dtime when the history is being compressed.  Change that once took 
centuries is now accomplished within days, weeks, and indeed months.  
Modern communications have rendered geographical distance virtually 
irrelevant.  Ideas and information can be moved across boundaries in the 
flash of a second.  Opportunities are occurring at an increasing pace. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with the innovative ideas and measures contained within the 
provincial budget, Saskatchewan is going to be ready to capture those 
opportunities.  People have said they do not want any tax increases, Mr. 
Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, they've said they do not want tax increases, and the 
people of Saskatchewan have said they want increased spending on high 
priorities such as health and such as education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the budget for health care in the province of Saskatchewan has 
increased almost 10 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Now any way you describe that, that's a commitment.  
The Minister of Finance, with a very, very large budget, has said that he 
will provide almost a 10 per cent increase in health care.  That health 



 

 

care budget now totals $1.5 billion in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The province of Saskatchewan now spends over $172,000 per hour on health 
care for the people of this province.  And that is for seniors, that is for 
children, that's rehabilitation, that's base hospitals, that is for new 
facilities, new technology, rural people as well as urban, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The province of Saskatchewan now spends $4.1 million per day on health 
care.  We now spend $1,500 per person in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, and that is over twice as much that was being spent when we took 
office in 1982. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- I just share with you, Mr. Speaker, the fact that the 
people have said to us: please make health care a significant priority.  We 
have made it a priority, Mr. Speaker, in this budget, and we've increased 
spending almost 10 per cent.  And now we have over doubled the spending in 
health care since 1982. 
 
Mr. Speaker, any way you look at it, that is a commitment.  That's priority 
setting through consensus with the people. 
 
At the public conducted meetings by the Minister of Finance, more and more 
people spoke about education than any other issue.  People know that in the 
face of change, education is the key to our children's future and the 
future of our communities and for the province.  Mr. Speaker, that is why 
I'm very pleased to see that the Minister of Finance has a 5.6 per cent 
increase in education in this budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- The provincial budget for education now totals $888 
million, Mr. Speaker.  That represents almost one-fifth of our total 
spending for 1990-91.  It is more than the combined revenues from corporate 
taxes, fuel taxes, and resource royalties.  It represents an expenditure of 
over $2,600 for every elementary and secondary school student and $8,500 
for every university student in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is commitment.  The people of Saskatchewan said make 
health a commitment -- a 10 per cent increase; make education a commitment 
-- a 5.6 per cent increase.  Mr. Speaker, you see a commitment in both 
those categories. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, as Minister of Agriculture, I am very 
pleased as well with the very strong commitment this government has made to 
farm families in the province in this budget.  You and I knew that 
Saskatchewan farm families would rather have fair access to markets, at 
reasonable prices, than they would any government subsidies.  They want a 
fair price, a price for their grain that is determined not by the size of a 
nation's treasury but by the quality of the product that they produce. 



 

 

 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan farmers want a chance to compete fairly.  And we 
produce excellent products, Mr. Speaker, some of the finest quality meat, 
oil seed, and grain products that you would find any place in the world. 
 
Obviously, given the current global subsidy wars in agriculture, that 
opportunity for fair competition in agriculture is not going to happen 
today or tomorrow.  It will need our attention; it will need our money; it 
will need our commitment.  Mr. Speaker, that's why we must continue to 
stand with farmers and their families and their communities, today more 
than ever. 
 
In response to this situation, our government announced the Saskatchewan 
spring seeding program, Mr. Speaker, to help farmers put in the crop, which 
offers $525 million in seed operating loans at ten and three-quarters per 
cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- That's farmers, and farm leaders have responded 
positively to the $525 million Saskatchewan seeding program by saying that 
it is a good initiative, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I personally have met with farm groups on many occasions.  They've endorsed 
the resolution of this House that said we should have $500 million from the 
federal government.  They've endorsed the fact that we're prepared to help 
put a spring seeding program in.  The resolution of this House, that has 
the support of the opposition and members on this side of the House, have 
said that we should have a spring seeding program, Mr. Speaker, and that 
the federal government should be there to help us with the price and with 
the exchange rate and interest rates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well, to the $525 million program, I'm happy to point out 
and happy to recognize the fact that the Minister of Finance is going to 
spend $380 million in cash for farmers this year. 
 
The Canadian crop drought assistance program will be $18 million.  The 
agriculture credit corporation interest subsidies, and this is particularly 
because of high interest rates, is another $52 million in cash.  Tripartite 
stabilization premiums, $9 million; feed grain assistance program, costing 
the treasury $10 million; counselling and assistance for farmers, another 
$14 million; and Mr. Speaker, livestock investment and facilities tax 
credits, 12 million; individual irrigation assistance, 1 million; farm 
purchase program interest rebates, $10 million;  Crop insurance provincial 
costs alone, Mr. Speaker, this year, $43 million; and tax exemptions for 
farm fuel, $110 million in cash for farmers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- The ACS (Agricultural Credit Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) production loan program extension, because we put a billion 
dollars out there already, Mr. Speaker, is $82 million, and the livestock 
cash advance at zero per cent interest rates for farmers will cost $19 



 

 

million for a total of $380 million cash, Mr. Speaker, as well as the $525 
million dollars in low interest loans. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- I'm also a very strong supporter, as is the Minister of 
Finance, of diversifying Saskatchewan, along with working with farmers in 
rural communities.  Farmers have told us and rural community leaders have 
told us to help diversify and develop our local economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we look at communities, they want to diversify.  But 
they've said to us, along with farmers, they want to be able to build with 
their own money, with the backing of the province of Saskatchewan.  In this 
budget you will see community development bonds.  And people are 
increasingly advising me and the ministers that they are very, very 
interested in, and want to explore the possibilities of building their 
communities with their money, with community development bonds backed by 
the province.  Not borrowing money, Mr. Speaker, but using their money, 
backed by the province, to diversify process and manufacturing. 
 
I will say, Mr. Speaker, that if any idea has caught on in the province of 
Saskatchewan, it is after years and years and literally decades, that we 
can't live with wheat alone.  From time to time people have recognized that 
the price may go down, crops mightn't be as good, because of agricultural 
production and particularly the weather. We need to diversify and broaden 
our horizons.  For years and years and years people has asked the 
government to help facilitate diversification.  Well, Mr. Speaker, I'm 
happy to see in this budget, that kind of facilitating example and 
leadership with Community Development Bonds. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Our government, in partnership with the private sector 
and co-operatives, has been working very, very hard to increase the level 
of processing and manufacturing, to add value to our products here at home. 
 
Let me just give you some examples, Mr. Speaker.  We have an inventory of 
$6 billion in significant projects in progress that are planned, and in 
progress now over the next five years.  Six billion dollars in 
diversification projects from small towns and villages. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we were just at the indEX '90 program, and we have 20,000 
people are going to go through the show that's in Regina as I speak right 
now, in the next three days.  Twenty thousand people in processing, 
manufacturing, and looking at diversification in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
These small projects and large projects include small-business ventures.  
It includes uranium, gold-mining development, construction of ammonia, 
ethynol, and meat processing plants, the development of Saskatchewan . . . 
and I point out, Mr. Speaker, Canada's second heavy oil upgrader, because 



 

 

the first one was built here with the co-op sector right in the city of 
Regina.  Local government processing plants, capital programs, new 
university and hospital facilities, as well as brand-new recreation 
facilities.  Mr. Speaker, $6 billion in diversification projects, and 
that's the tip of the iceberg across the province of Saskatchewan that can 
be financed with Community Development Bonds.  In addition, we have 
telecommunication networks, power, and irrigation projects on top. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are leaders in agriculture, natural resources, and 
knowledge-based industries such as communications and biotechnology, plus 
our drive towards diversification is a major part of our growing economic 
strength. 
 
Mr. Speaker, protection for families, protection for their homes -- and I'm 
very happy to point out that the Minister of Finance has locked in the ten 
and three-quarters for families here -- diversification, and new 
opportunities. That's what Saskatchewan people are telling us about.  They 
want to see us protect the farm, help farmers in difficult times; they want 
to see us protect the home, diversify the communities and have health and 
education as priorities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me say in closing, as the Minister of Finance went across 
the province of Saskatchewan, those five priorities were very, very key.  
On top of that, they said, Mr. Minister of Finance, don't raise the taxes.  
Mr. Speaker, he pulled it off.  We have got protection of the family farm, 
protection of the home, diversifying communities, and in fact, health and 
education expenditures that will lead any jurisdiction in the country.  
That's what Saskatchewan's budget is about in 1990-91. 
 
I therefore, Mr. Speaker, will strongly be supporting the budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the opportunity to become 
involved in the debate on the budget speech and the amendment that was put 
forward by the member from Idylwyld in Saskatoon. And in my speech that I'm 
going to be delivering here, I want to refer to both the amendment and the 
budget, and to do it simultaneously, or in conjunction with one another. 
 
But I want to say the amendment that was moved, I think is very 
appropriate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because it deals with the budget in terms 
of the lack of vision and leadership that is being provided by the 
government at the present time.  I want to say that in the budget itself . 
. . and I only want to spend a few moments on the actual technical part of 
the budget because I want to spend a fair bit of time on agriculture, some 
time on privatization, and some on what has been called Consensus 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Premier has just referred to the fact that his budget didn't increase 
the taxes for the people of the province, and I want to say nothing could 
be further from the truth.  But that shouldn't surprise us given the kind 
of words he was uttering yesterday about the programs of other political 
parties and farm organizations here in the province of Saskatchewan. 



 

 

 
If you turn to page 28 of the budget, you'll find that on the column of 
provincial income tax, people in Saskatchewan pay the highest level of 
provincial tax anywhere in Canada.  So it's true -- that wasn't increased 
this budget.  But why does it have to be, when it's the highest in Canada 
already, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
 
I want to say that if you then turn to some other economic indicators in 
this budget, the budget document that the minister tabled in the House, 
turn, for example, to housing starts in the province of Saskatchewan, which 
are a true indicator of economic development.  It's not my word or the 
Premier's word; it's the document, the facts that count. 
 
What you find is housing starts in 1989 were 1,900 or the lowest level in 
many, many years.  In fact, the lowest level since the last time we had a 
right wing government in this province, back in the late 1960s. 
 
There's a few other shocking examples or numbers in this budget.  I want to 
indicate that on page 51, where the debt of the province is indicated.  
That is, Mr. Speaker, the amount of money that we would have if we sold off 
all the assets in the province. 
 
Now, when we left office in 1982, that number would have been in excess of 
$1 billion.  If you had sold off all the assets of the province, there 
would have been in the bank over $1 billion. 
 
Well I want to say today that the Premier who just spoke has taken this 
province, not to a balance sheet of 2 billion or 3 billion, but to a 
negative position, and these are their numbers of $3.4 billion owing if we 
sold every asset we own -- the power company, the potash corporation -- 
every asset we own.  If we sold it all, we would owe the banks and trust 
companies $3.4 billion. 
 
And the Minister of Finance has the audacity to stand in this House and say 
that he's turned it around, that he has somehow turned around the economy 
of the province.  I say, even more shocking, Mr. Speaker, is if you turn to 
page 56 in the budget document and look at the total debt of the province 
-- That is all of the debt owed by the Consolidated Fund and the Crown 
corporations -- that number now stands at $13.2 billion -- can you imagine 
that? -- $13.2 billion owed by the people of the province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to look back to what the estimate was last year, 
$12 billion.  That means the minister is running up the deficit not, as he 
has indicated, some $400 million but has going up this year alone $1.2 
billion.  Now can you image that?  At a time when they're selling off the 
assets of the province, selling off the potash corporation, they're saying 
in the Consolidated Fund they're running up the deficit in the area of $400 
million.  That would mean they must be running up the debt in the Crown 
corporations sector $800 million this year. 
 
Now I say that's shocking.  At a time when this government says that it's 
working its way out of debt, that they drive up the deficit of the province 
$1.2 billion in one year.  Now this is the government that indicated when 



 

 

we were in government that we were hiding the debt in the Crown 
corporations.  Can you imagine that?  And yet this year, while they're 
selling off major parts of the economy in terms of the Crown corporations, 
the debt in the Crown corporations sector and the Consolidated Fund is 
going up by $1.2 billion. 
 
Well I say this budget is a farce.  It shows a total lack of vision and 
lack of leadership, and I think that what is called for here is an election 
to turn the province of Saskatchewan around. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well you may ask, Mr. Speaker, why is this happening?  
Why is the deficit in the province standing at $13 billion?  Why is the 
debt in this province growing faster than any other province in Canada, 
faster per capita than any other province in Canada, when in 1982 we had no 
debt?  On the balance sheet that Bob Andrew signed when he became the 
minister of Finance, it showed a surplus of $139 million, Mr. Speaker, a 
surplus.  And since that time we have had nine successive deficit budgets. 
 
Now does anyone know what the total interest on that debt has been since 
these people have taken over?  Is it 500 million or a billion?  I say that 
the interest paid on debt in the eight years these people have been in 
power is $2 billion.  If you add up the interest that has been paid by the 
people of the province, it's $2 billion. 
 
I say that's shocking, disgusting.  And can you imagine what could be done 
today in Saskatchewan in terms of economic development if that $2 billion 
had stayed here in the province rather than going to the lending 
institutions that the member from Weyburn is getting to know so well in New 
York and in London and in Germany.  I say that the way this province is 
being run is, in my words, a sham, and it has put the province in shambles 
economically.  And I say this government is not fit to manage the affairs 
of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, we've heard a lot about consensus.  And 
the Premier in his words just a few moments ago talked about consensus.  
And he talks about getting a hundred people together to come to visit him 
in the legislature, or in Regina, and that he is going to appoint them. 
 
Now that makes me wonder about the process, Mr. Speaker, because it's not 
very many years ago the process was is that the government in power or the 
opposition party would have a membership.  And they would get together once 
a year and plan the proposed legislation or the policy that that party 
would implement. 
 
Or you would use your back-benchers.  You would go to the member from Arm 
River and ask him what the issues were in rural Saskatchewan.  Or you would 
go to your legislative secretaries, the higher-paid group of elected people 
in the government, and ask them for their opinion.  Or cabinet ministers or 
the thousands of people that work and are paid for by this government. 



 

 

 
Many people are asking why the Premier is doing an end run on the 
Conservative Party.  Why isn't the policy that is proposed by the 
Conservative Party the basis of the legislation that comes through this 
legislature? 
 
Well I think I know, and I think I know why a few months before the 
election the Premier does not want to deal with the policy of the 
Conservative Party. 
 
I have a headline here from the Star-Phoenix, dated December 22, 1987, 
about policy that the Premier is trying to hide.  The headline is, "Health 
premiums favoured by Tories."  This is the real agenda of the Conservative 
Party.  And I want to quote from this article that says: 
 

 A motion to reintroduce health care premiums, which were eliminated about 
15 years ago, was passed at the Saskatchewan Progressive Conservative 
Party convention last month, it was announced on Monday. 

 
Well I say, Mr. Speaker, that these are the reasons that Consensus 
Saskatchewan is being set up -- to do an end run on the policies of the 
Conservative Party.  I want to say to you that another clipping coming out 
of Saskatoon that talks about medicare premiums and a motion being passed 
by the Tories from Moose Jaw, the two ridings in Moose Jaw, and we remember 
that.  Well I say that Consensus Saskatchewan, if it were to work, could 
have worked yesterday and the days leading up to the Premier losing his 
temper with the farmers of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well I want to say to the member from Rosthern that 
what really happened is a group of farmers decided they were going to come 
to the legislature to visit their elected officials.  And in a democracy, 
at least I hope it's still an opportunity for people to come and lobby 
elected officials; this is what they do.  They brought their families; the 
galleries were full.  They had their teen-age sons and daughters.  They 
came in half-ton trucks and cars to visit their Premier because, Mr. 
Speaker, they had seen ads on TV and they had seen the Premier tell 
everyone that he in fact had a permit book that he was a farmer.  He said, 
come on and see us. 
 
Now I would not have been surprised if the farmers would have come here 
angry.  If they had brought picket signs, that wouldn't have surprised me.  
But they didn't.  They came here quietly to meet with the elected officials 
of this province.  And they got together in small groups, and I met with a 
small group of six in a crowded office and we talked about the issues 
facing farmers. 
 
And these people were concerned, not only about themselves but about their 
neighbours and their community, and they had ideas of how the problem could 
be solved.  And they said what is needed obviously is some restructuring of 
the debt, the $6 billion in debt.  They talked about a moratorium on 
foreclosures until the debt issue was dealt with.  And they talked about 



 

 

the fact that the Premier of this province, the Minister of Agriculture, 
had a great deal to do with foreclosures because he's the minister 
responsible for the ag credit corporation here in Saskatchewan. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Let's not get into that or we'll have to . . . 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well we'll get into it all right.  The member from 
Rosthern will know full well that his dirty tricks in the last session . . 
. that his dirty tricks in the last session simply don't work. 
 
(1630) 
 
So they come here to meet this Premier, to meet this Premier who is 
supposed to understand the needs of farmers.  Even more than that, even 
more than that, the Premier had said to the farmers that he understood 
foreclosures -- that even he had lost land. 
 
And in the Edmonton Journal, I want to quote: 
 

 Even the Conservative Premier Grant Devine, a grain farmer with a Ph.D. in 
agricultural economics, has lost three quarter sections (64 hectare) 
parcel of land because of his debt problem. 

 
He's told the world about his problem.  So the farmers thought this man 
would understand them when they came to the legislature.  They said, look, 
Mr. Premier, we want to meet with you because you will understand what it's 
like to be up against the wall. 
 
So they meet and they lay out their strategy.  And what does the Premier 
do?  Does he join hands with the farmers like he mentioned in his throne 
speech he would do with Weyerhaeuser and Cargill?  What does he do?  He 
blows a fuse; he gets mad; he attacks the farmers.  He says that they're 
not doing what is in the best interest of farmers. 
 
Well the farmers talked to us after that big blow-up, Mr. Member from 
Rosthern.  He talked to us.  The farmers said this about the Premier, that 
they had come here quietly to deal with the problem of farm debt and farm 
foreclosure.  They sat down with the members of the legislature.  But do 
you know what they said, Mr. Speaker?  They said the Premier had insulted 
them and attacked them. 
 
And one of them took me aside, a farmer from Wadena.  He was about 74 years 
old, and he told me the story of how their farm, in the last eight years, 
has got into financial trouble.  He had six quarters of land.  He had a son 
who had returned from Calgary, had worked in the oil patch but had wanted 
to farm.  They had taken out a loan to buy three quarters of land to bring 
the size of their farm up to nine or 10 quarters. 
 
But they didn't have enough income to meet the debt, and they have now lost 
that three quarters of land.  But the three quarters of land that they lost 
wasn't enough to cover their debt.  And they're now still making payments 
on the six quarters of land that had been free of debt before this 
government came to power. 



 

 

 
And this individual who was 74 years old told me that he and his wife are 
taking $150 a month out of their pension to help make payments on the farm 
to save it. 
 
Now these are the kind of stories that the farmers were telling us.  They 
didn't expect the Premier to attack them.  They expected him to at least 
listen -- even if he couldn't help, at least to have the decency to listen. 
 
Well I want to say to you that many of the farmers when they left met a 
different Premier than they knew about before they had come to Regina. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- They now realize that the farmer from Albert Street 
who says that he lost three quarters of land, if he lost that land, he 
didn't lose it because he couldn't make the payments.  That's one thing.  
He didn't lose it because he was up against the wall like the 74-year-old 
farmer and his son and daughter-in-law.  He lost it, if he did, out of 
convenience, because he didn't want to make the payments.  It's not that he 
couldn't afford to. 
 
No one can tell me that the Premier, making $100,000 a year . . . that 
means almost a million dollars as Premier since he took over eight years 
ago.  If you tried to tell me that a farmer, given an extra million dollars 
from the government in pay, couldn't make payments on his farm, the farmers 
no longer believe you people.  They simply don't believe it. 
 
And I want to say to you that one farmer mentioned to me on his way out, he 
said, I'll believe Grant Devine has a problem with farm debt when I see the 
bulldozers closing in the swimming pool in his backyard in his Albert 
Street home.  That's what they said. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- I bring to the hon. member's attention that hon. member's 
names are not to be used, except from direct quotes of newspapers, books, 
that sort of an article. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to say as well that 
the farmers, when they came to meet with the Premier, had expected to get a 
good reception.  And I think they deserve that, as any members of the 
public do when they come to meet with elected officials, whether it's the 
Leader of the Opposition or the Deputy Premier. 
 
This is another thing the farmers were saying as they went to the office of 
the Deputy Premier and they wanted to get a meeting set up.   But the staff 
of the Deputy Premier said the Deputy Premier was going to be in the House 
-- too busy.  And they went back to her office and they then were told that 
there was going to be a vote coming up in the House. 
 
Now I don't know of any vote that was coming up in the House yesterday, 
because during the budget debate it's very, very clear that the vote on the 



 

 

budget debate will come at 9:30 tonight. 
 
Well I'm not sure about the information sources, but if it came to 
believing the government or the farmers, I'll tell you I'll believe the 
farmers every time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Now, Mr. Speaker, what made the Premier blow up?  Was 
it that the farmers were attacking him, or did they have picket signs 
parading outside?  None of that.  The time that he blew up was when he was 
handed an invitation to a reception to review what had happened here in the 
Assembly or here in the building yesterday. 
 
And what was the problem with that?  Well the problem was is that the 
auditorium at the SGEU building had been rented for this small reception.  
The Premier looked at the invitation, saw SGEU, and blew his stack.  Now 
why did he do that?  Why would a man, a Premier of his stature, blow his 
top when he read an invitation that had SGEU (Saskatchewan Government 
Employees' Union) written on it.  All I can say, it's lucky they didn't 
rent the Catholic church basement over at Sacred Heart.  He would be 
attacking the Catholic priest there.  I say the man has really lost it on 
the issue of unions and working people and farmers. 
 
It's not even that he's opposed to the SGEU, because my information is that 
he attended a meeting there himself two weeks ago.  So it can't be the 
building.  He was there.  He didn't catch anything.  Why is he so upset 
when the farmers invited him to come to a meeting at a place where he had 
attended a meeting two weeks ago?  What is it? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- The optics. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well it may be the optics, but I think it's more than 
that.  I think what the Premier is doing, clearly, is worrying about 
working people in the city and farmers holding hands to work out the 
problems of Saskatchewan.  That's the issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- It's got little or nothing to do with union people, 
working people, farmers, the place of the meeting.  What the Premier is 
seeing is the possibility of the people of Saskatchewan -- business, 
labour, organized and unorganized, farmers, professional people -- getting 
together to solve the economic problems of Saskatchewan.  That's what he's 
worried about. 
 
Now why is that?  Well, Mr. Speaker, I think we all know, and the people of 
Saskatchewan know, that the way that this government has operated is by 
divide and rule, by dividing the people of Saskatchewan -- working people 
against farmers; native against non-native; welfare recipients against 
non-welfare recipients; seniors against non-seniors; those would collect 
from the government in one program against those who don't. 
 



 

 

That's why the Premier wants to set up Consensus Saskatchewan which is 
tightly controlled by the government.  They want to have Consensus 
Saskatchewan because then they hold the meeting, they control the agenda, 
and they produce the press release that will come out after the meetings.  
That's what Consensus Saskatchewan is all about.  It's called control -- 
control of people. 
 
Now all of this posturing in the House by the members opposite about 
ripping down the walls of East Germany and ripping down the walls of 
communism flies in the face of what they are doing in terms of democracy 
here in the province of Saskatchewan.  They're building walls around 
various groups of people, building walls around the very people who it will 
take to take us out of the $13 billion in debt and get us back on track.  
That's what's happening. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, none of us are opposed to the ripping 
down of walls that control people, whether it's in Chile where radical 
right-wing governments have established themselves by attacking and 
overthrowing governments that were legitimately elected . . . I'll never 
forget the day back in September of 1973 when the Pinochet government was 
set up by attacking, bombing the offices of the then governor, Salvador 
Allende. 
 
A right-wing government was set up by attacking and killing the elected 
officials of that country.  And the same thing . . . I'm not saying that 
right-wingers, extreme right-wingers are any worse than the communists who 
were doing the same thing or accused of doing the same thing in East 
Germany.  What I'm saying is that whether it's in South Africa or the 
Philippines or Chile or East Germany, what we don't want to establish in 
Saskatchewan is governments that will tie the hands of people, that will 
build walls around people and attack them when they come to visit their 
elected officials.  That, Mr. Speaker, should not be allowed and should not 
happen in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about the 
agricultural program that was dealt with by the Premier in a very 
inadequate way yesterday.  Members will remember a few weeks ago when we 
passed a motion unanimously here in the Assembly.  The motion was passed.  
There were six main points.  And we got the Premier of the day, the 
Minister of Agriculture, to go to Ottawa to negotiate the deal based on the 
motion that we had passed. 
 
There were six main points, and I just want to go through this and see how 
we made out, having the Premier of the province go to Ottawa to negotiate a 
deal for us. 
 
First we had called for an immediate announcement of an injection of 900 
million to Saskatchewan farm families: 500 million to be paid out prior to 
seeding, and the balance of 400 million paid in late fall.  Well how did we 



 

 

make out on that one?  Well what the Premier announced a few days ago was 
that the federal government would not pay 900 million, but 200 million, 
about 200 million to Saskatchewan, but only if the province matched it.  
So, Mr. Speaker, on that one we may have some money coming, but then again 
we may not, and we'll have to wait and see. 
 
Then we talked about and voted in favour of establishment of a billion 
dollar contingency fund to counteract the disastrous effect of the grain 
prices caused by international grain subsidy war.  Well there was no 
mention of that when he came back.  On that one, the Premier would have to 
get a failing mark. 
 
Then he was going to bring all possible pressures and resources to bear on 
the United States and Europe to achieve an early resolution of the 
international price war.  No mention of that coming out of the Ottawa 
meeting. 
 
And he was going to apply its constitutional authority over banks and 
lending institutions to achieve a lasting solution to the current national 
farm debt crisis.  That's basically what the farmers were here to talk 
about yesterday, to find out how he had made out on that.  Well maybe 
that's why he was so angry, because he failed on that one as well. 
 
The fifth was to instruct the Farm Credit Corporation to rewrite mortgage 
values at realistic land prices, to be accompanied by a reasonable 
repayment schedule.  Nothing there.  Failed again. 
 
And the sixth point -- make a greater commitment to the federal resources . 
. . to the current review and the implementation of a long-term stability 
program in agriculture.  And there again, I think it's fair to say that the 
Premier failed as well. 
 
So I say to you, what are the farmers of the province supposed to expect?  
We come here.  We pass motions.  The farmers try to meet with the Premier 
and all we get is a temper tantrum from the Premier, the member from 
Estevan. 
 
Well I say to you that the thousands of farmers we're losing at the present 
time, Mr. Speaker, should come as no surprise given the fact that the 
Premier of this province, before he became an elected member, talked many 
times about how Saskatchewan should be run in terms of agriculture. 
 
He talked about high through-put elevators.  He talked about innovative 
ideas in terms of new grain handling systems.  He talked about the 
inefficiency of farmers.  He talked about getting rid of the Crow rate so 
that a much more streamlined grain handling system could come into place.  
And so why would anyone be expected that a Premier who talked about 
changing Saskatchewan, and he's still changing it today, because he talked 
about it, why would anyone be surprised that the Premier would be changing 
the look of rural Saskatchewan. 
 
(1645) 
 



 

 

And I want to quote from the much quoted article Marketing Boards: Economic 
or Social Policy?.  And here it says, and there's a picture of Dr. D.G. 
Devine, professor of agricultural economics, University of Saskatchewan,  
Business Review 1977.  Now this is old but it has a great deal of relevance 
to the present because it is a prediction that is coming true.  And it's 
not happening by accident, it's happening by design.  Well I'll tell you . 
. . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Now we have a debate going on back and forth 
across the floor.  I'm not sure that that's the proper procedure.  I'd like 
to bring it to the attention of the members and ask them to proceed with 
the debate and refrain from interrupting. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I want to quote from this article that seems to upset 
the member for Weyburn, the Minister of Finance, a great deal because he 
doesn't want to hear what his Premier has said in the past.  And I wish the 
member would stay and listen to it because I think it would be very, very 
revealing. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The hon. member also knows that he's not to 
refer to the presence or absence of members.  If an hon. member leaves, 
it's not his prerogative to bring that to the attention of the House. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes, I want to apologize for referring to the fact 
that the minister was leaving. 
 
But I want to quote from this article in which the now Premier is quoted as 
saying: 
 

 Realizing that most of our food is produced by less than 20 per cent of 
the farmers, who tend be good business men as well as producers, society 
may not wish to support higher food prices or producer security so that 
the non-productive 80 per cent of the farm population can live in the 
country at a profit. 

 
Now in 1977, the Premier then thought that 80 per cent of the farmers were 
non-productive.  That's when things were booming.  That's when people were 
returning to Saskatchewan instead of the 55 or 60,000 who have left in the 
last five years.  That's at a time when things were booming.  The Premier 
then thought 80 per cent of the farmers were inefficient and should leave 
the land. 
 
Well I say to you that a Premier who believes that, it's no surprise that 
in 1990 we find ourselves with a major crisis in agriculture that is not 
being dealt with by the government of the day.  They simply don't believe 
in it. 
 
I want to say that our party has a clear idea of what should be done with 
the farm crisis.  We've announced it on February 26 and again a few days 
ago in Ottawa at a press conference, and it's clear what we believe should 
happen. 
 
First of all, we've been calling for a $500 million payment before spring 



 

 

seeding.  Secondly, we called for a moratorium on Saskatchewan farm 
foreclosures until at least July 1, 1990 -- not five years as the Premier 
and the Deputy Premier were talking about yesterday, but until July 1, 
1990. 
 
And why July 1?  Because by that day we say that the federal and provincial 
governments should set a deadline of July 1, 1990 by which time to develop 
a national consensus with farm groups and financial institutions on a plan 
to restructure the farm debt.  That would mean that farmers who owe a great 
deal of money would have their debt reviewed. 
 
And let's use the example, if a farmer had a loan outstanding on a quarter 
of land at $60,000, if the land was valued at $30,000, why would you 
repossess that land, take it away from the farmer, put it on the market, 
and sell it to a much larger farmer for $30,000?  Who gains?  What's the 
point?  Doesn't make any sense. 
 
So why not have a restructuring of debt that would restructure the debt and 
leave the land in the hand of the farmer who's been picking the rocks, 
cultivating and seeding it.  But that's not what these people are doing. 
 
Ag credit corporation, the Premier's own agency, is driving thousands of 
farmers off the land.  If he believed in it, if he believed in it he'd have 
a chat with himself and call off his lawyers and quit foreclosing on 
farmers.  That's what he would do.  He'd sit right down and lean over to 
himself and say, Grant, don't do it any more.  Don't foreclose. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  I'm just going to once more bring to the hon. 
member's attention not to use the names of other hon. members in his 
debate. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The next point that we believe, Mr. Speaker, that 
should be taken into consideration and brought to fruition is that the 
federal and provincial governments set a deadline of July 1, 1990 to 
develop a national farm income stabilization program which would guarantee 
production and price shortfalls on delivery. 
 
Now what could that mean?  Well during the federal election we indicated 
that a federal government should set up a program that would guarantee, 
that would guarantee the price on the first 8,000 bushels of production for 
every farmer in Saskatchewan at the U.S. target price.  Now at the present 
time that would be about $6 a bushel -- $6 a bushel for 8,000 bushels.  
That would be guaranteed. 
 
Now the member from Weyburn, who usually deals in deficits, probably 
doesn't understand that this would put farmers into a position of being in 
the black.  But it would be a guaranteed income in terms of the amount of 
grain and the price. 
 
And if the minister would like to come to my office, we could sit down and 
I could lay this out in more detail, and maybe he could take it to his 
cabinet and we could have some consensus on what is needed. 
 



 

 

Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The final point, Mr. Speaker, that I would argue we 
should look at is introducing a land transfer program that would 
intergenerationally transfer the land from one generation to the other.  
Now the member from Weyburn yells, land bank, from his seat.  I can tell 
you one thing, that most farmers in Saskatchewan today, given the option of 
what they're dealing with by that minister of foreclosures, would much 
rather have a land transfer system than what they are doing, of foreclosing 
and driving farmers off the land. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that very clearly . . 
. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to say that the final point is a 
land transfer program.  It could take many ways of handling this.  
Discussions have gone on with the co-operative movement, the federated 
co-op, the credit union system, the Sask Wheat Pool are very interested in 
intergenerational transfer.  And the member from Morse will know that 
because he has met with them to talk about this kind of a program that 
would transfer land from one generation to another. 
 
So I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that there are solutions to the problem, 
there are solutions to the problem.  But what is lacking here is the 
leadership, the leadership and the strength of will to commit a government 
to do these kind of things that would bring the farmers out of the plight 
they're in. 
 
But what I can say that yesterday we saw here in the legislature one of the 
worst displays, yesterday and the day before, of a Premier attacking the 
farmers of the province.  I never thought I would see the day. 
 
But what we do know now is that the Premier does not understand what it's 
like to be up against the wall, to be a farmer losing his land, even though 
he tries to play that card at every turn; that he doesn't understand what 
it's like to be driven off his land.  Because we now know the Premier is 
the Premier who lives on Albert Street in one of the biggest houses in 
Regina, with a swimming pool, and the $100,000 a year job. 
 
That's what the farmers are saying, that's what they're saying.  They drove 
by his house after they left here to have a look at it.  And I say again, 
the line used that stuck in my mind was the farmer who said that they will 
believe Grant Devine has a problem with income when they see . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Now this is several times now that I've 
brought . . . order!  I'd ask the Minister of Justice to come to order . . 
.  or the Minister of Finance, and the member from Regina Centre.  I would 
like to once more, after several times now, draw to the attention of the 
hon. member that he's not to use other members' names, and I would like to 



 

 

ask him to apologize on this occasion. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I appreciate that.  When I get talking 
about agriculture, I often forget to use the minister's title, and I intend 
to do that for the rest of this speech.  I really will try to do that. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I'm also going to ask you for an apology. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I do apologize. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I want to spend just a few moments before 
5 o'clock talking about the people of Elphinstone, if I can have the 
attention of the Deputy Premier.  I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that in the 
constituency of Elphinstone, the biggest issue, the biggest issue in my 
constituency, is not bankruptcy; the biggest issue in Elphinstone is food 
on the table. 
 
I want to say to you, in my constituency, which is in the inner city of 
Regina, downtown bordered by the two railway tracks on the north and south 
and by Albert Street on the east, that the biggest issue is food.  And the 
members opposite yell and holler from their seat because they don't want to 
hear about it.  But I say the people of Elphinstone, and of Regina, they 
are worried and concerned about food. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was at one of the schools in Regina Elphinstone the other 
day, and they were telling me . . .  the teachers were telling me that the 
biggest single issue is not the size of classes, is not the lack of text 
books or library books, but the biggest problem teachers have in the 
schools of the inner city of Regina is children coming to school hungry.  
It's the biggest single issue. 
 
Now I am pleased, in a way, that the government is trying to come to grips 
with this -- trying to come to grips with this.  I want to say that the 
$740,000 that has been allocated to feed the hungry children, although it 
is a start, is a pittance. 
 
Now did they announce that they would reinstate the program that helped 
subsidize food for northern Saskatchewan, that they took away back in 1982?  
Did they do that?  They still keep in place the subsidy on booze for 
northern Saskatchewan but they take away the subsidy for northern children 
for milk and bread, for northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Now if you were to take that money that used to be there and take it off of 
what they're providing, you then end up with about $300,000 extra over what 
had been there in 1982.  But let's leave that as it is. 
 
What does this money mean?  If you don't allow any for administration, 
nothing for administration of the program, and just buy food for children, 
you're talking about $12 a year per child, or about a buck a month.  Now I 
say, Mr. Speaker, these children will have to save up for two months to buy 
a sandwich -- at least two months to buy a sandwich.  Now that is not a 
program.  That is simply not a program to feed the hungry children. 
 



 

 

And I know the minister of families is trying, and I know it may not be his 
fault.  He may not have the sway in cabinet to get hot food programs in the 
schools. 
 
But I say to the Minister of Finance that he should be ashamed to promote a 
program that will give one sandwich every two months to the hungry 
children, and call it a program.  That simply isn't adequate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to turn for a few moments to the 
issue of privatization, one of the great, exciting themes of this 
government in the last budget.  Now isn't it interesting, Mr. Speaker, that 
not once in the document this year is that word mentioned.  Not once. 
 
Now you remember, Mr. Speaker, how many times it was mentioned during the 
last session, how the government was going to solve all the economic 
problems simply by bringing in privatization.  And it was mentioned 
hundreds of times by the members in the government benches -- hundreds of 
times.  Public participation or privatization.  They started using public 
participation, then they changed to privatization, and now they've changed 
to nothing.  They've backed off. 
 
But have they really?  I have here a document called "1990 International 
Privatization Congress."  And who's in this little magazine?  Well, first 
of all, the invitation comes from the Premier of the province. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The hon. member is using the document as an 
exhibit.  He may use it to quote from but not as an exhibit. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well I want to quote from this document, and I want to 
read the invitation from the Premier of the province.  It starts out, 
Premier of Saskatchewan: 
 

 As Premier of Saskatchewan I am pleased to invite you to the 1990 
International Privatization Congress in Saskatoon. 

 
And it goes on to say: 
 

 I invite you to come to Saskatchewan to continue the dialogue on the 
merits of privatization, and to share your nation's experience in that 
area.  See you in 1990. 

 
Now I want to say that in this . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  It being 5 p.m., the House stands recessed 
until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


