





























































Hansard: May 16, 1990


 

 

May 16/90 
 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Johnson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  In the west gallery we have 51 
students from East School in Esterhazy visiting with us today.  They're 
grade 4 and 5, and I think I said there's 51 in number.  Their teachers 
today with them are Darrell Paprosky and Mrs. Alisa Leidl; chaperons Mrs. 
Angie Tochor, Mrs. Carol Anchelenko, Mrs. Jackie Koskie, Mrs. Judy Fig.  
With them I see their bus driver up there, if there's only one of them, is 
B. Stevens from Esterhazy. 
 
And while they're all kind of special, Mr. Speaker, there's one little lady 
I'd like to point out to you.  She's my granddaughter, Jennifer Johnson.  
She's in the crowd.  I just hope they have a safe trip back home, and I'll 
meet with you at 3 o'clock this afternoon.  And just help me wish them a 
safe trip home this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to introduce to you and to 
members of the legislature, 43 grade 6 students from St. Mark's School in 
Saskatoon.  They are sitting in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They're accompanied by their teachers, Arley Olson and Ralph Dauk.  
Chaperons accompanying them today are Mrs. Marlene Brotzel, Mrs Liz Fay, 
Mr. John Epp, Mrs. Karen Gusikoski, Mrs. Paula Healey, and Mrs. Del Frari, 
and their driver Mr. Bartel. 
 
I'll be seeing them at 3 o'clock for pictures and refreshments, and I'd 
like members of the House to join me in welcoming these students to the 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tusa: -- I also would like to make an introduction this afternoon.  
I would like to introduce to the members of the House several members from 
Newfoundland and they're from their House of Assembly.  They are members of 
the Standing Committee on Privileges and Elections and are here visiting 
today to study Saskatchewan's television system. 
 
Included in the party are the following:  Mr. Danny Dumaresque, the 
chairman of the committee and member for the district of Eagle River; Mr. 
James Hodder, vice-chairman of the committee and member for the district of 
Port au Port; Mr. Charles Power, member for the district of Ferryland; Mr. 
Aubrey Gover, member for the district of Bonavista South; Mr. Walter Noel, 
member for the district of Pleasantville.  Accompanying the committee is 
the Clerk to the committee, Ms. Elizabeth Murphy. 



 

 

 
I'd like to ask my colleagues to welcome here to the Legislative Assembly 
this afternoon our guests from Newfoundland. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Federal Financial Aid for Farmers 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my question 
today in the absence of the Minister of Agriculture is to the Associate 
Minister of Agriculture, and it pertains to newspaper reports in the 
Saskatoon Star-Phoenix and the Regina Leader-Post about this never-ending 
saga -- unfortunately they describe it that way -- about the $500 million 
cash promised by the government opposite on March 19, 1990 in the Speech 
from the Throne, but yet not delivered. 
 
My question to the Associate Minister of Agriculture is this: when the 
ministers of Agriculture for western Canada, according to this newspaper 
report, met yesterday the only advice they could give to the farmers was 
that they should not yet spend the money which they don't have -- if I 
might say, some very obvious advice -- Mr. Minister, is this the end result 
of all the work that you and the ministers of Agriculture can come up with 
after waiting for two months plus from the commitment in the Speech from 
the Throne?  Is that the best that the western ministers of Agriculture and 
your government can come up with for hard-pressed, cash-starved farmers -- 
namely, don't spend the money because you haven't got it yet? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, I think I want to point out two items in 
the remarks that I want to make in addressing this question.  One is that 
the groups of producers that we have met with have said that we should, in 
this negotiation, not blink with the federal government, and that's what 
we're doing; we're following their direction.  And the second thing is that 
we are probably getting closer today than we were two months ago. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the Associate 
Minister of Agriculture.  Mr. Speaker, the associate minister said in his 
answer that what the producers are saying is that the government opposite 
should not blink, were his words used, in the negotiations with his pals in 
Ottawa, Mr. Mulroney.  But I wonder whether or not the Minister of 
Agriculture indicates that while he is not prepared to blink but he might 
be prepared to wink, because the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix and the Regina 
Leader-Post report, and I quote the following from today's Leader-Post: 
 

 The Prairie provinces have agreed in principle to share the cost of a 
$1-billion farm aid program with the federal government, federal 
Agriculture Minister Don Mazankowski said Tuesday. 

 



 

 

 Provincial agriculture ministers "have gone back to their cabinets to see 
to what extent they can support cost sharing," Mazankowski said . . . 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that's today's statement by the federal Minister of 
Agriculture, the deputy minister . . . Prime Minister of Canada, your 
colleague politically.  It looks like you're not prepared to blink, but it 
looks like you might be prepared to wink.  Is it true that cost-sharing is 
now on the table, and if so how much of the program is the Government of 
Saskatchewan prepared to cost share? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, in outlining the format for these 
negotiations with the federal government we discussed with the various 
groups in the province of Saskatchewan how we should handle this.  And they 
told us that clearly a historic pattern that has developed over the past 
five or six years are what we should follow in looking for a better than 
1:1 ratio, which the federal government now wants to have.  And that's what 
we're looking for and that's what they're encouraging us to negotiate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the Associate 
Minister of Agriculture, and I might say, Mr. Speaker, to the members of 
the House, this is a radical departure from the position taken heretofore 
by the Premier and the Minister of Agriculture, by the government opposite, 
who have taken the position heretofore, Mr. Speaker, that the provincial 
government would not blink, to use his words, one penny on a cost-sharing 
proposal; that they don't like it in principle.  And the Associate Minister 
of Agriculture now says that it's a question of how much is the 
cost-sharing? 
 
My question therefore to the associate minister is this: is it correct that 
you're telling the House today that the Government of Saskatchewan is 
prepared to pony up a portion of that $500 million so badly needed by the 
farmers of Saskatchewan?  If so, how much are we being asked to pony up?  
And for goodness' sake, can you tell the farmers when the agreement can be 
arrived at so that they can get this money which you people promised over 
two months ago but have not yet delivered? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, I think that one of the things that we 
want to point out to the people here and to those that are watching is that 
we have discussed this on an ongoing basis with the various organizations 
-- Sask Wheat Pool, UGGs (United Grain Growers Limited), pork producers, 
livestock producers, the Canadian . . . western Canadian wheat growers.  
All of them have been in room 218, Mr. Speaker, and we have dealt with them 
formally three times in the last two months, and we will continue to do 
that. 
 
And addressing their concern to the federal government, they said to us 
that what we do when we set up a precedent of dealing with a ratio of more 



 

 

than 8:1, or a reduced ratio of 8:1 -- let's say 4:1 or 3:1 -- we 
jeopardize all of the other programs that we have in relation to the 
federal government.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is clearly what they want to 
know about and we will tell them about as we go through our negotiations 
and our discussions with them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question for the Associate 
Minister of Agriculture, which I think you can answer very simply. 
 
Mr. Minister, for months now your Premier and your government has been 
taking the position publicly that Regina would not be contributing, that it 
was a wrong principle, that Regina has contributed enough, you say, to 
agriculture.  I would dispute with that, but none the less that's the 
position that you're taking. 
 
Now you're saying that Regina is in effect agreeing to a cost-sharing 
principle.  The only issue now is the extent to which the cost-sharing is 
being debated about.  Is that correct or not?  And if it is correct, I want 
to know exactly how much the province of Saskatchewan is prepared to put on 
the table. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Well I want to point out two things, Mr. Speaker, that 
we have always said.  We do not agree with a 1:1 ratio as outlined by the 
federal government.  That's point number one.  We have always said that. 
 
The second point I want to make is that historically we have dealt with 
this concern and subsidy to the grain production in the province on an 8:1 
ratio, and we will continue to discuss that with the federal government.  
And that's where the tough part in the negotiation comes in. 
 
And we have asked these organizations to lend us their support.  And we 
have even had the city of Regina give us a resolution from their city 
council, indicating that they were behind the Premier in developing that 
kind of a policy.  And I think that's right. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question for the Associate 
Minister of Agriculture.  And I say to the minister that you are misleading 
the House -- with the greatest of respect -- and the farmers of the 
province of Saskatchewan, by that statement.  Because the resolution before 
this House and the statements made by your Premier and by you, sir, up to 
now have been that we're not to blink.  We're not even to wink. 
 
And if there's not going to be any money coming from Regina for this 
federal program, which you say is an Ottawa responsibility of $500 million, 
you're telling us something entirely differently today -- entirely 
differently.  And I want to know the dollar sums that are involved.  Give 
us the answer to that. 



 

 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, when the Premier and Mr. Mazankowski 
reach an agreement on this and we finalize that, we will notify the House.  
I just want to remind the House and the farmers of Saskatchewan that I have 
farmed in a Liberal administration and I have farmed in an NDP and a Tory; 
and I'll tell you, Tory is better. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I wish the Associate Minister of Agriculture 
would answer the question for a change.  But if he says that Tory is 
better, than I would say to the hon. minister, the Associate Minister of 
Agriculture, he hasn't been out in his farm riding enough lately because 
he'd know that's not true. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Spring Seeding Loan Program 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- You should go back home and listen to farmers for awhile. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the Associate Minister of 
Agriculture.  We're told that just a little over 3,000 applicants have been 
approved for the provincial government's spring seeding loan program -- the 
guaranteed loan program announced at budget time.  And that's a relatively 
low number, given the number of farmers which are hurting and hurting so 
badly out there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how many farmers are being denied the right to fill out the 
application for spring seeding at the commercial institutions when they 
arrive there, or by the ACS (Agricultural Credit Corporation of 
Saskatchewan), or by both? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, I just want to inform this Assembly that 
I live in my constituency and I go back there every weekend, and I do that 
on a regular basis because I live there . . . (inaudible interjection) . . 
. That's right, I live there.  They phone me on the weekends and everything 
like that. 
 
I want to point out to the second observation that the Leader of the 
Opposition made.  We have had 4,700 people qualify immediately on the 
spring seeding program.  We have had 1,325 that were referred back to the 
process that we outlined earlier, and 849 of them have been accepted, 
bringing that total to 5,550.  And 13 cancelled it on their own and 223 out 
of the 6,000 have been denied.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is for a total of 
$77 million in 16 days. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have one last new question to the Associate 
Minister of Agriculture.  I must confess at the outset that I might not 
have caught his figures, and if I do the minister will obviously correct 
me.  But is he telling the House that of approximately 5,550 farmers who 
have qualified for spring seeding loan guarantee, that only 849 have been 
accepted?  Is that the figure? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- No. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- All right.  Mr. Speaker, I've obviously got the numbers 
wrong.  I wait to be clarified by the Associate Minister of Agriculture.  
I'd like to know exactly what . . . Mr. Speaker, I cannot hear myself ask 
the question, and I want to ask it specifically of the Associate Minister 
of Agriculture.  I want you to give us the . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The hon. members are not giving the Leader 
of the Opposition the opportunity to put the question.  I am now asking 
them, on his behalf, to allow him to put the question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it's 
obviously clear that when the cat's away the mice will play back there and 
all those radicals on the Conservative benches have got to be controlled a 
little bit. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- I want the Associate Minister of Agriculture to give us the 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Member from Meadow Lake and the Minister of 
Finance. . . or Justice -- I'm sorry to the Minister of Finance -- the 
Minister of Justice, would you allow the Leader of the Opposition once more 
to put his question? 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I shall try once again 
and ask the Conservative caucus to contain their -- how shall I describe 
it? -- enthusiasm. 
 
I want the Minister of Agriculture to give us the exact numbers, if he will 
again, for the House.  And in specifically when doing so would he answer 
this aspect of the question, another aspect: is it correct that there is a 
lengthy credit report to be filled out by each potential applicant farmer?  
We're advised something in the order of 36 pages which takes into account 
all of the financial positions of the farmers involved before processing; 
and if so, on whose instruction is this detailed information being sought? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that 6,000 
people have applied for the spring seeding loan for $77 million; 223 have 
not qualified in 16 days.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is done this way: they 



 

 

are phoning on a two page application form filled out by the banks or the 
credit unions to the head office, a number is received, and the majority of 
those -- upwards of 4,500 -- received within five minutes their notice that 
they had been approved for the application. 
 

Saskatchewan Commission on Directions in Health Care 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 
Minister of Health, and it has to do with one of the recommendations of the 
Murray commission to limit medicare coverage for chiropractic services.  
Now, Mr. Minister, this only hurts the sick and elderly, and we want to 
know whether you endorse this recommendation? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, that recommendation is being treated by 
the government the same as all of the recommendations of the Murray 
commission, which are that people will have their say about the commission.  
The chiropractors, as the member's pointed out, have obviously had their 
say now.  The chiropractors believe that it would not be the right course 
of action to take; that course which is outlined by the Murray commission. 
 
We have not made the decision on that basis, and we have not made any 
decisions as it relates to the recommendations of the Murray commission 
because, as Dr. Murray has said himself, he looks at the entire commission 
report as all of the pieces of a puzzle.  And to pull one page out or one 
recommendation out, as the member and some of her colleagues have done over 
the past few days, is not the appropriate way to deal with a very complex 
report. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Minister, the people of Saskatchewan have told you time 
and time again that they do not want to see chiropractic services limited.  
In fact there was a petition tabled in this House, with thousands of names 
on it to that effect.  You tried it once before, Mr. Minister, and now your 
commission is recommending it yet again.  Now where do you stand --  with 
the wishes of the people or with your commission? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, it's very difficult for that member to 
understand, it's very, very difficult . . . it's seemingly difficult for 
her to understand that it's not an either/or.  It's not the commission 
versus the people or the NDP versus the commission or the commission versus 
the NDP or versus the government, whatever. 
 
The commission report, Mr. Speaker, is a very large blueprint for the 
delivery of health care services over a long time into the future.  That 
was the premise upon which it was commissioned in the first place.  That's 
the premise upon which all of the commissioners dealt with it as they went 
out across the province for a couple of years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the hon. member will stand again and pull out one page, as I 
say, that being the recommendations as it relates to chiropractic services, 



 

 

and talk about the people who are in chronic need of chiropractic service 
over a period of time, and attempt -- and I just say an attempt, because 
she says, when will you begin to listen to the people of Saskatchewan.  
When will that member quit, when will she stop attempting to scare certain 
segments of the people of Saskatchewan and especially those most 
vulnerable?  Why will she continue to try to scare people with the old 
mediscare tactic of the NDP? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Minister, there's good reason why we're scared over 
here.  That minister and his government privatized the school-based dental 
plan in Saskatchewan.  They met with Oliver Letwin just weeks after Britain 
moved to a more privatized health care system.   The people said they 
didn't want chiropractic services deinsured, and now the minister's own 
commission is recommending what he tried to do months ago.  There's good 
reason for us being scared, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- This is an attack on the fundamental principles of medicare, 
that health care should be universally accessible.  And in view of that 
fact, Mr. Minister, where do you stand on this matter?  Why are you 
waffling on this, Mr. Minister?  Do you stand up for the principles of 
medicare, or are you going to privatize chiropractic services by 
transferring the cost to the sick and the elderly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, the day that the hon. member -- and if I 
was to say that the chiropractic services would be such, or would be as 
they are outlined in the Murray commission -- would be the day for the 
member to get so carried away. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that's not the case.  I have never said that, nor has any 
member of this government.  Mr. Speaker, that member ruled the Murray 
commission . . . she rejected the Murray commission report, a very thick 
report for the people of Saskatchewan.  She rejected it out of hand from 
the very outset.  That's on the record.  That member, the hand-picked 
spokesman of the New Democratic Party said the Murray commission report, 
very comprehensive report, is rejected out of hand. 
 
And now she comes in to the House and other places across the province and 
picks this little recommendation and that recommendation out and says, 
these recommendations decide today which way they will be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one more point.  The member has made the point several times.  
And they talk about privatizing of the school-based dental program or of 
the dental delivery services to children.  Mr. Speaker, you tell me and can 
anyone tell me what is the difference between the government paying 
dentists on behalf of citizens who receive services and paying physicians 
on behalf of citizens who receive services?  And how can they characterize 
dental services as privatized if they don't characterize medical services 



 

 

as being privatized?  I would like one member over there to be able to 
answer that question, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Population Loss 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Speaker, I direct my question to the minister responsible 
for employment and the economy.  Mr. Speaker, the human tragedy continues, 
and the minister will know that government figures released today indicate 
that last month 2,218 more people left Saskatchewan than arrived in our 
province, bringing the total this year so far, in just four months of this 
year, Mr. Minister, to a net loss of 7,654 of our people. 
 
Mr. Minister, you will also be acutely aware of the fact that over half of 
those people who have left the province, well over half are between the 
ages of 15 and 34 -- the young people of Saskatchewan who have left looking 
for employment and education.  Mr. Minister, I suggest that if your 
government is not a part of the solution, then clearly it is part of the 
problem. 
 
And I ask you, sir, I ask you: if you will finally acknowledge today, will 
you finally acknowledge today that your government's commitment to 
piratization over the past several years and your confused priorities are a 
major part of the problem for people of Saskatchewan today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Speaker, what does the member opposite know about 
the price of wheat?  Nothing.  He doesn't know that the price of wheat is 
down.  He doesn't know that the price of wheat is connected to the future 
of this province.  He doesn't have any policy to solve that problem.  
Instead of freer trade, he wants no trade at all.  And in addition to that, 
Mr. Speaker, he doesn't acknowledge that this province must be diversified.  
The investment dealers of Canada state in their report in brief: 
 

 In recent years, the province's economic base has diversified 
significantly.  Manufacturing investment as a share of total business 
investment has risen dramatically, from an average of about 3.5 per cent 
in the first half of the 1980's to 18 percent in the past three years. 

 
At least we have some policies and are trying, Mr. Speaker.  He has no 
policies and is only criticizing, and criticism will not solve our 
problems. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Speaker, new question to the same minister.  Mr. 
Minister, you guys give diversification a bad name.  Under your government, 
diversification is rapidly becoming the D-word along with privatization, 
your P-word over there.  Mr. Minister, in your budget this year you have 
not done a thing to help, and your betrayal of Saskatchewan families, 
particularly young people, continue to be absolutely devastating to 
communities all across Saskatchewan. 
 



 

 

And I ask you, sir, I ask you, when will the rhetoric end?  When will the 
words quit being the solution, and when will you get on with a new plan to 
start building a future for the people of the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite should go to Biggar 
and ask the Univision employees if it's a bad thing for them to buy their 
company with the help of this government.  He should go down in downtown 
Regina, look up at the Saskoil head office going up, and ask the workers 
working up there if it's a bad idea for them to be employed building the 
head office for a new expanded company that was privatized. 
 
He should go and open his eyes and talk to the people of Saskatchewan and 
tell them that he is opposed to the jobs they are working on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Speaker, a new question to the same minister.  Mr. 
Minister, you will be well aware that in 1989 there was only one province 
in all of Canada that suffered a shrinking labour force.  It was not 
Newfoundland.  That province was Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister, and your 
government is to be condemned for that performance in the province of  
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- That's the bottom line. You got all kinds of money for wining 
and dining in your fancy offices, ranging from SIAST (Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology) to PCS (Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, Inc.), while the young people of Saskatchewan are leaving 
this province to look for jobs and education.  The member for Yorkton made 
that very point in this House yesterday. 
 
And I ask you, sir, I ask you when you will assume some responsibility for 
bringing an end to this human tragedy in Saskatchewan today.  When will the 
new plan begin so that there is some hope for the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are slow learners.  
I realized that in the '70s when I quit that party.  They still don't know 
the price of wheat.  They still haven't, even after we told them just five 
minutes ago what the price of wheat is, they still don't know what the 
problem is. 
 
They still don't know that the Biggar malt plant is owned 50 per cent by an 
American company, 50 per cent by the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, is expanding 
production.  They are opposed, I suppose, to the American company owning 
half of the plant.  I suppose they are opposed to the new jobs.  They're 
opposed to the sale of our barley to the world as malt.  They're opposed to 
value added. 



 

 

 
What do they stand for?  I've heard all that rhetoric.  I heard it when I 
was a little boy when they indoctrinated me in their schools.  I heard it 
when I went to university, Mr. Speaker.  I heard that kind of language.  
There is nothing new from those people in the last 15 years.  The world is 
changing and they are only getting older but not wiser. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
Bill No. 19 -- An Act respecting the Promotion, Development, Control and 
Regulation of the Production and Marketing of Agricultural Products and 
Certain  D 

Amendments to Certain Acts resulting from the enactment of this Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am please to rise today to 
move second reading of The Agri-Food Act.  Mr. Speaker, it's a pleasure for 
me to speak to this Bill which enables and encourages greater producer 
involvement in the development and diversification of the agriculture and 
food industries of Saskatchewan. 
 
The agri-food Bill contains a number of important advances which will 
encourage the development and diversification of agriculture and food 
industries in Saskatchewan. 
 
This legislation provides for a wider variety of development agencies to 
meet needs that producers themselves have identified based on the successful 
experience of some producer groups.  It consolidates, Mr. Speaker, The 
Natural Products Marketing Act and The Cattle Marketing Deductions Act into 
one piece of legislation and clearly separates the legislative requirements 
for development agencies from the requirements for compulsory marketing 
boards. 
 
The powers of marketing boards will continue undiminished under this new 
enabling legislation.  Mr. Speaker, over the past several years we have all 
seen the very effective advertising and information campaigns carried out by 
groups such as beef and egg producers and milk producers.  Financed by 
producer check-offs, these groups have been able to conduct research which 
responds to changing consumer tastes prompted by diet and life-style 
concerns. 
 
Because these producers have been involved in the marketing decisions 
affecting their products and because they have financial resources to 
promote their products in a way that appeals to changing consumer tastes, 
they have been successful in the market-place. 
 
It is this government's intention through this legislation to build on that 
success by providing new opportunities for the establishment of development 



 

 

boards and development commissions with the power to operate producer 
check-off funds for purposes such as research, industry promotion, and 
market development. 
 
In both cases the regulations concerning the establishment of development 
boards and development commissions will be enhanced so that the wishes of 
the producers will be more accurately reflected when new boards or 
commissions are established. 
 
For example, commissions under this new legislation will continue to be 
voluntary in nature but may also be administered as producer-elected 
commissions under the new legislation.  Development boards will be similar 
to those established agencies in that a producer vote is required prior to 
their establishment. 
 
Also The Natural Products Marketing Act requires that the government 
establish a board if 60 per cent of voting producers vote in favour to 
establish one.  Under the new agri-food Bill the government will have the 
discretion to set minimum voter return required for a vote to be considered 
representative of the entire group. 
 
There are some significant improvements contained in the legislation which I 
want to bring to the attention of the House.  The name of the council will 
be changed from the Natural Products Marketing Council to the agriculture 
products marketing and development council.  This reflects, Mr. Speaker, the 
wider scope of the agri-food Bill, the importance of the development of new 
markets for Saskatchewan agriculture production, and the economic benefit of 
more diversified value-added food processing in our province. 
 
In order to avoid any conflict of interest for the council, the government 
may appoint separate committees to hear appeals from people with complaints 
about any agency established under this legislation. 
 
In summary, Mr. Speaker, this agri-food Bill provides Saskatchewan 
agriculture producers with new opportunities for involvement in the 
development of markets for their products through:  number one, decision 
making, a decision-making process; and through possible financial support 
for research, market development, and promotion of their industry. 
 
The agri-food Bill leaves the way open for producers to establish a wide 
variety of development agencies according to what they have perceived the 
market-place to demand.  The agri-food Bill also facilitates greater 
involvement by producers and others in the diversification and development 
of agriculture and food industries. 
 
For these reasons, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to bring forward this Bill and 
ask all members to support it.  And therefore I move second reading of The 
Agri-Food Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you.  I'm sure members opposite, when an 
agricultural Bill is called, look for a stirring speech from this side.  I'm 



 

 

sure it is me that they would expect to hear it from. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Actually, Mr. Speaker . . . I see I have an audience of 
farm members over there who recognize an expert when they see one.  Actually 
our critic on agricultural matters, who is indeed an expert, is absent from 
the Assembly today on government business, and I am going to beg leave to 
adjourn the debate until he's back and able to deal with it. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 24 -- An Act to amend The Municipal Revenue Sharing Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 
reading of Bill No. 24, The Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 1990. 
 
As all members will know The Municipal Revenue Sharing Act establishes the 
level of provincial operating assistance to be allocated to both urban and 
rural municipalities.  Accordingly this amendment gives legal effect to . . 
. (inaudible) . . . in the government's 1990-91 budget. 
 
As we enter this new decade all residents of Saskatchewan know that we are 
facing severe economic challenges that have been brought on by continued 
difficulties in the farm and the resource sectors.  In spite of the economic 
difficulties, the government remains committed to retaining the concept of 
revenue-sharing with the province's municipalities.  Revenue-sharing 
allocations to urban and rural municipalities, Mr. Speaker, will total over 
$115 million in 1990-91, evidence of the provincial government's continued 
support for municipalities across Saskatchewan.  I urge all members to 
support this Bill so that payments to municipalities can be undertaken in a 
prompt manner. 
 
Accordingly I move second reading of Bill No. 24, The Municipal Revenue 
Sharing Amendment Act, 1990. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I rise today to 
oppose the Bill before us.  And I rise to oppose the Bill because it 
continues what I consider to be and what most people involved in local 
government consider to be a shoddy treatment of urban and rural 
municipalities by this PC government. 
 
This Bill proposes to freeze the amount of revenue-sharing available for 
both urban and rural municipalities -- freeze, Mr. Speaker, no increase; to 
keep it at the same level as last year. 
 
Now the minister talked about the government facing severe economic 
difficulties, and that is the rationale for why the government is proposing 
to freeze the amount of money to both urban and rural municipalities.  I'd 
like for a moment to examine that particular claim, Mr. Speaker.  And I'd 
like to point out that the real reason that we are freezing revenue-sharing 



 

 

to both urban and rural municipalities is because of the government's own 
fiscal mismanagement over the years. 
 
The government seems to be taking the position that since 1982 when they 
were elected, we have had nothing but severe economic difficulties; that 
since 1982 we have had acute, protracted economic difficulties.  And that is 
the reason why the government, each and every year that they have been in 
office, each and every year have run a deficit, a budgetary deficit -- a 
budgetary deficit that now approaches $5 billion. 
 
(1445) 
 
One doesn't need to figure very far that this government is very close to 
bankrupt and doesn't have the money that it once had to turn over to other 
levels of government or to fund services and programs as are necessary in 
Saskatchewan.  This government is near to bankrupt. 
 
But to say in the context of this Bill that the reason that we are freezing 
because of economic difficulties, to me suggesting that their excuse since 
1982 is that every year they have had economic difficulties.  And that just 
simply is not the truth, simply not the truth, Mr. Speaker.  It's fiscal 
mismanagement.  Nothing but, nothing less, nothing more -- fiscal 
mismanagement.  These people wouldn't know how to run a popcorn stand even 
if you gave them a bunch of cash to start with. 
 
I'd like to just look at one particular indices, one relevant indices of 
fiscal management in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, to underline the point that 
I'm making.  And I'd like to look at some resource industry statistics.  And 
I want to refer members to the April, 1990 issue of Sask Trends Monitor 
which, as you know, is a publication that publishes statistics about 
Saskatchewan. 
 
In this particular article of Sask Trends Monitor, Mr. Speaker, the editor 
says, and I quote him -- and I want to quote and pay careful attention to 
this because it's very relevant to the topic under discussion.  And I quote: 
 

 Partly because of the way production taxes and royalties are structured 
and partly because of the government's policy, the revenue to the 
provincial government has been falling throughout this period.  In 1981 
and 1982, one out of every three dollars of sales was flowing to the 
provincial treasury.  By 1989, the proportion had dropped to about 12 %.  
The reduction is almost exclusively in oil royalties and taxes which fell 
from 65 % of sales in 1981 to 15 per cent in 1989. 

 
 The combination of a smaller government share of a declining revenue base 

has had a dramatic impact on the provincial treasury.  Even with the 
declining prices, had the royalty and taxation level remained at their 
earlier levels, the current provincial debt of $4 billion would simply not 
exist. 

 
The editor is saying that had this government had a different fiscal policy 
towards resource revenues in Saskatchewan, we would not have the accumulated 
deficit that we have now.  We would be able to find the adequate money for 



 

 

health care, we would find the money for education, and surely we would find 
the money for local government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So when the minister talks about severe economic difficulties, he is 
misleading the people of Saskatchewan.  He is saying that that's the whole 
reason that they don't have the money.  The reason they don't have the money 
is because they decided a long time ago to give breaks to the oil companies 
and to find revenues elsewhere, in this case local government, Mr. Speaker.  
That's the answer, that's the reason. 
 
The other reason, Mr. Speaker, that I'd just quickly like to point to is 
that the government has been impacted, has been impacted by a reduction in 
revenues from the federal government.  The federal government, in its budget 
this year, decided to cut, cut its transfers to provinces.  What has this 
province's answer been?  This province's answer has been to shift that 
burden now to local government, to shift that burden to urban and rural 
municipalities. 
 
The Minister of Finance in his budget address said, and I quote him:  "We 
could have followed the Government of Canada's example and shifted our 
fiscal problem onto others".  He goes on to say later:  "We recognize that 
shifting costs from one government to another does nothing to relieve the 
burden on taxpayers."  And how right he was, Mr. Speaker, how right he was. 
 
But that's exactly what he's doing.  He and the Premier castigated the 
federal government for transferring the burden onto provinces, and they said 
we will never do such a thing.  That's what they said, but that's what the 
province is doing. 
 
I think that if you look, Mr. Speaker, at the fact that inflation this year 
is projected to be at about 4.7 per cent, that is to say, the cost of 
municipalities everywhere will be increasing by about that level of 
magnitude.  But to then freeze revenue-sharing represents an actual 
decrease, represents a cut, a cut in help for municipalities.  That's what 
it means.  It means that they have to do more with less from the provincial 
government. 
 
And it means that the provincial government, contrary to what the Premier, 
contrary to what the Minister of Finance has said, are in fact shifting the 
burden.  Off-loading is the buzz-word they like to use; off-loading the 
burden onto municipalities, Mr. Speaker.  They're dumping, they're dumping 
their problems and dumping their fiscal mismanagement onto the backs of 
urban municipalities. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I wouldn't necessarily be saying these things, I wouldn't 
necessarily be so critical, and I might even be inclined to support the Bill 
before us if this were a measure, an isolated measure in the context of many 
years.  If over the years the government opposite had been generous to urban 
and rural municipalities, if they had, say for example, kept pace with the 
rate of inflation, had they recognized the real cost of running 
municipalities and had attempted to meet that over the years, then in the 
context of all that history, Mr. Speaker, had they done that, a one-year 
freeze I don't think is something that one would want to promote 



 

 

necessarily, but it's not necessarily something that one would want to 
oppose either.  You know, it might be a recognition of some momentary fiscal 
difficulties. 
 
But that is not the history in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  That is not the 
recent history and that is not the record of this PC government.  This PC 
government has an abysmal record, an abysmal record when it comes to making 
sure that municipalities are provided with their fair share of resource 
revenues with which to meet their services and programs, to pay for their 
services and programs. 
 
I want to just review that history, Mr. Speaker, just review that.  In 1984 
and '85, and the Minister of Finance can laugh about this.  He can laugh 
about this, Mr. Speaker, but I tell you that the people of Saskatchewan have 
the last laugh on this.  But in 1984 and '85 urban revenue-sharing, the 
amount that was set aside was $65,171,700.  That was the amount. 
 
In '85-86 this same amount was budgeted.  There was no increase.  The amount 
was frozen at the level of the previous year, notwithstanding the fact that 
inflation in Saskatchewan that year increased by 3.6 per cent.  So we have a 
case of municipal costs going up, but the government deciding in 1984 and 
'85, deciding to freeze the amount of urban revenue-sharing. 
 
The next year, '86-87, there was a 3 per cent increase in the amount of 
urban revenue-sharing -- a 3 per cent increase.  Inflation that year, Mr. 
Speaker, ran at 3.1 per cent. 
 
Now the members opposite are saying, well isn't that wonderful; didn't we do 
good that year.  I just want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that significant 
about that year, about '86-87, was that it was an election year, Mr. 
Speaker.  It was an election year and they wanted to open up the coffers so 
that they could get re-elected.  So they gave a 3 per cent increase. 
 
Was that something, that increase, that generosity, was that something that 
was followed in ensuing years, Mr. Speaker?  No so. Not so.  We looked at 
the following year of '87-88, we had for the first time in Saskatchewan 
history an absolute cut, an absolute cut in the amount of urban 
revenue-sharing.  It went from 67 million to to 66 million -- a cut at a 
time that inflation was running at 4.9 per cent. And again the Minister of 
Finance laughs -- laughs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The following year, '88-89, there is a less than 1 per cent increase in 
revenue-sharing for urban municipalities, even though the inflation rate was 
running at 5.7 per cent.  Again municipalities were being short-changed, 
short-changed by a provincial government that was mismanaging their own 
fiscal situation. 
 
Last year, Mr. Speaker, '89-90, again the amount of revenue-sharing was 
frozen, held at the level of the previous year, the level of '88-89.  Also 
this year of course the Bill before us proposes to freeze it again at the 
level of two years ago.  And this time the minister says it's a case of 
severe economic difficulties, to use the words that he uses in his remarks. 
 



 

 

Our opposition, Mr. Speaker, is just not based on the history of this 
government, based on the record of the PC government -- a record of freezes 
and cuts and, in one case, a negligible increase.  It's also based on the 
fact that there have been other cuts this year to urban municipalities.  You 
will know, Mr. Speaker, that this government cut out transit assistance 
grants which affect cities in this province; that this is an amount of money 
that is no longer available to those municipalities to help them pay for 
urban transit.  And that reflects a real cut. 
 
So again, contrary to what the Minister of Finance had to say in his budget 
speech, contrary to the harsh words that the Premier had at the time for 
Ottawa about . . . that Ottawa was choosing to off-load its fiscal 
difficulties onto the backs of the provinces, this provincial government, 
this PC government, has off-loaded its fiscal problems onto the backs of 
local government; in this case, urban and rural municipalities. 
 
I might point out, Mr. Speaker, even as the minister did not point out in 
his remarks, that the government also significantly has decided to reduce 
the amount of money available for capital construction to urban 
municipalities from $12.5 million to $8.5 million.  It was only last year 
with a great deal of hullabaloo that the government announced that it was 
reinstituting the capital grants program for urban municipalities and that 
it would be $12.5 million each year for a period of six years, for a total 
of $75 million. 
 
Last year the amount that was spent was closer to seven and a half million 
dollars.  This year they're projecting to spend $8.5 million.  So, Mr. 
Speaker, promises one day and a real sorry track record the next day.  And 
that's the other reason that we oppose, Mr. Speaker, this particular Bill 
because it's done in the context of other cuts to urban municipalities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, urban municipalities, the group that I'm most familiar with 
simply cannot carry on, carry on to provide services at the level that 
taxpayers are demanding in Saskatchewan and to carry on these services while 
holding the line on taxes.  For a number of years they were able to 
withstand the shock treatment, the radical treatment of the PC government 
when it came to revenue-sharing.  But I think the accrued effect over the 
years is such that municipalities are now having to increase their taxes so 
as to be able to continue to provide a very minimal level of service. 
 
Municipalities are not talking, Mr. Speaker, about improving services, 
providing more for their property taxpayers.  The whole mind-set is to be 
able to continue to provide minimal services for their taxpayers, to provide 
minimal programs for their citizens, and to be able to do that without 
increasing property taxes because they recognize that the property tax is 
not the fairest tax in the land. 
 
But I fear, Mr. Speaker, that the net effect of the government's policies 
over the years is now such that municipalities, urban municipalities are 
having to increase taxes to continue to provide a minimal level of services. 
 
I point out as a case in point, Mr. Speaker, that Regina, which last year 
was able to hold the line on taxes, this year is projecting a 2.87 per cent 



 

 

increase in the municipal portion of the local tax.  Saskatoon is proposing 
a 6 per cent increase in taxation this year.  And I'm sure that the story 
will be the same in other municipalities across Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am especially troubled, especially troubled by the net impact 
of this Bill on the poorer communities in Saskatchewan.  And lest anyone 
forget, Mr. Speaker, we do have a situation where we have wealthier 
communities and we have poorer communities.  Some communities have a very 
healthy assessment base.  They have a rich assessment base by virtue of all 
the businesses that they have, where others have a very small assessment 
base. 
 
And the higher the assessment base, the lower you are able to keep the mill 
rate.  The lower the rate will be for the property taxpayers in that 
particular municipality, the less they have to charge themselves to provide 
services and programs. 
 
And we have municipalities that are in the midst of trading areas, 
especially in some of our rural districts, that have the healthy assessment 
base and therefore are able to withstand far more than some other 
municipalities the impact of the provincial government's actions of reducing 
revenue-sharing. 
 
There are other municipalities that do not serve as much of a trading area 
and therefore will not have as much of a business sector, therefore will not 
have as much of an assessment base from which to draw.  Those municipalities 
over the years have been especially affected, not only this year, but over 
the years by the government's actions. 
 
Part of the revenue-sharing, Mr. Speaker, is intended to equalize the load, 
to equalize the property tax load between poorer and richer municipalities.  
It's intended to ensure that property taxpayers, no matter where they live 
in Saskatchewan, will have access to roughly the same level of services and 
programs at about the same cost, recognizing that if they want to go beyond 
a certain level, that they'll have to pay.  But it's intended to ensure that 
basic services and programs will be available to all property taxpayers in 
Saskatchewan at roughly the same cost. 
 
And that's why part of the revenue-sharing pool that we have is set aside 
for something called a foundation grant which is intended to equalize that.  
And it works basically, Mr. Speaker, by providing to those municipalities 
that have a low assessment base, a higher proportion or higher portion of 
revenue-sharing than it might for a similar municipality with a high 
assessment base; saying to the one municipality, you have far more of a 
local assessment base, far more business to tax, therefore the amount of 
revenue-sharing provided through this foundation grant will not be as much 
as it might be to another municipality that doesn't have the assessment 
base. 
 
(1500) 
 
I think a good example of that might be the town of Warman, for one, Mr. 
Speaker.  The town of Warman, if you look in the municipal directory, Mr. 



 

 

Speaker -- a copy of which was sent to you by the Minister of Urban Affairs 
and a copy of which was sent to all members of the Legislative Assembly -- 
if you look in that municipal directory at the town of Warman, you will see 
that the amount of the assessment base or the amount of assessment is 
significantly less than it is for I think the town of Unity or Wilkie, which 
is on the same page, has the same population, I think roughly around 2,500, 
roughly the same population.  But in the one case a community -- Unity or 
Wilkie, I forget which -- has a much greater business sector, a much higher 
assessment base as compared to Warman which has a very limited assessment 
base because of its proximity to Saskatoon -- the people go to Saskatoon to 
do their shopping.  Therefore it doesn't have the assessment base.  
Therefore in order to provide the same level of services, the mill rate has 
to be much higher in Warman than it might be in other municipalities, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The foundation grant was intended to equalize that.  In 1986 the Local 
Government Finance Commission in their final report to the Legislative 
Assembly to the government said that the amount of the foundation grant 
needed to be increased by $17 million at that time so that the objective of 
full equalization among communities in Saskatchewan might be realized.  That 
was their recommendation. 
 
Since that time, as I've explained, Mr. Speaker, we've had a history of 
freezes, of cuts, of negligible increases, certainly not addressing the 
objective that was stated by the Local Government Finance Commission.  
Certainly not addressing an objective that we share on this side of the 
House and I think that all fair-minded people of Saskatchewan would share, 
Mr. Speaker -- obviously not by the PC government.  But then again it's been 
said that this is not a fair-minded government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the PC government record of cuts, freezes, negligible increases 
means that equalization is not being achieved.  And I would just point out 
as an aside, Mr. Speaker, that this is particularly, particularly a problem 
for bedroom communities in Saskatchewan.  Bedroom communities because of 
definition have a much lower assessment base than might be the case for 
other municipalities with a similar population, therefore having to exact 
much higher, much higher property taxes or a much higher mill rate in order 
to raise the same amount of money to provide services and programs. 
 
And I say shame, shame, Mr. Speaker, on the member from Qu'Appelle-Lumsden, 
shame on the member from Rosthern for not having once stood in their place 
in this House to address this anomaly, to once say that the situation as we 
have developing as result of the government's initiatives is disadvantaging 
a number of communities in their constituencies.  Not once have they stood 
in this House to say enough is enough.  Not once have they stood in this 
House to say . . . for example has the Minister of Justice, the member for 
Qu'Appelle-Lumsden, stood up and said that the town of Pilot Butte and other 
towns in my constituency are being extremely disadvantaged by a government 
that is continuing to ignore the fact that we do not have full equalization 
among municipalities in Saskatchewan, and therefore the government's action 
is beginning to impact heavily on towns such as Pilot Butte. 
 
We're having, Mr. Speaker, or we are exacerbating, we are exacerbating the 



 

 

disparity between rich and poor municipalities when we continue to freeze, 
when we continue to cut, or we continue to ignore the recommendations of the 
Local Government Finance Commission. 
 
That is the situation in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and I say shame on the 
government.  And I say shame on the member from Qu'Appelle-Lumsden and shame 
on the member for Rosthern for not having once stood in their place in this 
Assembly to address this very grave problem for towns and villages in the 
areas that they represent, which are the hardest hit of all, the hardest hit 
of all municipalities in Saskatchewan, by this government's record of 
freezing funds for municipalities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this whole issue of revenue-sharing is not a mere dispute 
between levels of government.  This is not a mere dispute between local 
government and the provincial government as to who gets a greater share of 
the pie.  This matter of revenue-sharing can be translated very directly 
into the impact it has on taxpayers in Saskatchewan, and in this case on 
property taxpayers. 
 
It stands to reason, Mr. Speaker, that if as a provincial jurisdiction you 
choose to get less from resource companies and you choose to exact or to put 
a greater burden on municipalities, that ultimately property taxpayers will 
have to end up paying more to provide or to realize the services that they 
need, than need be the case. 
 
The relationship between property taxes on the one hand, and ability to pay 
on the other hand, is a very tenuous relationship at best, Mr. Speaker.  In 
fact many would say that it's a spurious relationship.  That there is no 
relationship.  And if there is a relationship, it's because it's a 
happenstance or a chance, as opposed to being a strong, positive 
relationship between the taxes that you pay and your ability to pay. 
 
We illustrated that a couple of years ago and we've continued to illustrate 
that over the years, Mr. Speaker, by pointing to the Minister of Urban 
Affairs at the time, and pointing out that based on what we knew about his 
income, based on his income from the Legislative Assembly, a known source, a 
matter of public record, and looking at the property taxes that he was being 
asked to pay on his very considerable residence in the city of Regina, we 
discovered that he was paying 3.4 per cent of his known income -- 3.4 per 
cent of his known income for property taxes. 
 
And we contrasted this with an elderly widow in my constituency living on 
probably what is one of the smaller urban lots in Regina and in all of 
Saskatchewan, living in a very poor area of the city, living in a very 
modest house, a very modest house, and probably paying as little as you can 
when it comes to property taxes in Regina.  We discovered that based on her 
known income she was paying 5.9 per cent of her known income for property 
taxes.  And this is a remarkable contrast, a remarkable contrast, Mr. 
Speaker, that we have those who are well able to pay, pay much less -- pay 
much less -- of their income for property taxes, and I would submit, I would 
submit, Mr. Speaker, is the ideological reason behind or the ideological 
reason why the PC government continues to off-load the tax burden from the 
provincial tax resources on to the property tax base in Saskatchewan because 



 

 

they have shown over the years, they have shown over the years, that they 
want to tax the poor and give benefits to the rich. 
 
This is a kind of a reverse Robin Hood psychology that they have.  If we tax 
the poor and provide incentives to the rich that somehow life is going to be 
better for all of us, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now this is not a philosophy that I have shared over the years, but it 
certainly is a philosophy that the members opposite, the PC government, 
demonstrated over the years.  And I think that taxpayers know, know with 
some certainty now, that they have no friend in the PC government because PC 
governments mean a greater reliance on the property tax; it means a lesser 
reliance on resource revenues. 
 
This is the government, Mr. Speaker, that has chosen -- it's a matter of 
choice -- has chosen to take less from oil companies over the years and to 
put a greater burden on property taxpayers over the years, a matter of 
choice. 
 
Conservative government is always very fond of talking about freedom of 
choice, and they've certainly had a freedom of choice when it came to fiscal 
policy in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and their choice has been to take less 
from the wealthy oil companies and to put more on the poor property 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I think the figures in the Local Government Finance Commission final 
report of 1986 bear me out, Mr. Speaker.  In that report they point out that 
in 1985 net property taxes in Saskatchewan had risen to where they were the 
third highest in Canada.  And net property taxes, I mean the average 
property tax load, the average property tax load, less any property 
improvement grants such as we had, or tax abatements such as is the case in 
many other provinces, to arrive at a net figure, and that figure has put us 
in 1985 in third place in all of Canada. 
 
And that is the reason that we oppose this Bill. The Bill before us purports 
to continue that trend, purports to continue a trend of putting a greater 
burden on property taxpayers while letting all companies go scot-free.  We 
say that's wrong, Mr. Speaker.  We say it's wrong to freeze the amount of 
money to municipalities, and that is why we oppose this Bill.  We oppose 
this continuation of a shoddy treatment for local government and in 
particular, urban and rural municipalities in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government opposite is a lame duck government that really 
doesn't know where it's going any more.  It's a government that feels that 
it's so buffeted by the economic extremes and by the economic realities of 
the world that they have no more answers about where to go in Saskatchewan.  
And it's one of the reasons that they've come up with this Consensus 
Saskatchewan where they're going to ask 100 people to . . . 99 now, Mr. 
Speaker.  They're going to ask these 99 people to give us advice as to where 
we should go. 
 
In fact the Minister of Finance says that, I'm going to take this whole 
cumulative deficit, just nearly $5 billion.  I don't have any answers any 



 

 

more.  I don't know what to do.  It's been given to me by the previous 
Finance ministers.  Then I've run up my own this year, but I don't know what 
to do any more.  I'm going to give it to this Consensus Saskatchewan and 
they can tell me how to get out of this mess.  That's what the Minister of 
Finance is saying. 
 
The Health minister is saying, well, we've got a number of very clear-cut 
recommendations here from the Murray commission on health, but I don't know 
what to do, Mr. Speaker, I don't know what to do.  I'm going to give it to 
this Consensus Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the Minister of Finance and if the government wants to know 
what to do, I suggest to them, I suggest to them a very simple thing: that 
they sit down, that they sit down with the thousands of men and women in 
Saskatchewan who run our urban and rural municipalities, to sit down with 
them and learn from them how it is that they can continue to provide 
services while holding the line that they have on taxation without incurring 
any deficit. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Perhaps then, Mr. Speaker, perhaps then they might get 
the wisdom that they need to know, where it is that we need to go as a 
province.  Perhaps then they might get some idea of leadership that is 
required in Saskatchewan to get us out of the mess that we're in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the problems we have in society will not be resolved by turning 
to this group or that group.  Leadership needs to be defined so that the 
people of Saskatchewan know where we're going and know that the problems 
that we have can be resolved. 
 
Mr. Speaker, by simply transferring the problems we have onto others, we are 
not solving the problem; we are simply transferring it.  That's all, and 
that's what's been done by this Bill before us, and I guess it's almost a 
case of out of sight, out of mind. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is no solution at all.  And I can tell you, in the next 
election the people of Saskatchewan will also have a different solution in 
mind.  Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 9 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. 
Mr. Klein that Bill No. 9 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Housing 



 

 

Corporation Act be now read a second time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee of 
the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
(1515) 

Bill No. 10 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. 
Mr. Hodgins that Bill No. 10 -- An Act respecting the Manufacture, Sale, 
Use, Consumption, Collection, Storage, Recycling and Disposal of 
Ozone-depleting Substances and Products be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I want to first of all 
say that there are two sides to this  
 Dparticular piece of legislation concerning ozone here in Saskatchewan.  
The one side of the coin is to commend the government for its actions in 
introducing this legislation.  This is important legislation that needs to 
be taken care of. 
 
But the other side of the coin is to point out that this legislation was 
promised one full year ago in the Speech from the Throne in 1989.  So in 
other words we have a situation here of very important legislation being 
introduced, but being introduced after a really inordinate delay and long 
after the government's own proclamation indicated that it would be 
introduced.  And I think this is not by accident; I think that it shows 
very clearly the ineptitude and the lack of substantive commitment on the 
part of the government when it comes to environmental matters such as ozone 
protection. 
 
The facts show that this government really does not take environmental 
protection seriously.  The federal-provincial ministers of Energy met last 
month to discuss reductions of carbon dioxide here in Canada and announced 
that the reduction targets or levels were premature and that they would not 
really be taking substantive action to act on CO D22 and our provincial 
Minister of the Environment is part of this conspiracy to slow down action 
on environmental protection measures. 
 
I also want to point out for the Saskatchewan public that when it comes to 
reducing oil usage which contributes to global warming and the greenhouse 
effect, this most recent provincial budget eliminated $1.8 million for 
urban transportation.  There is now from the Government of Saskatchewan no 
money for urban transportation in Saskatchewan -- hardly a measure that 
assists in the amelioration of the greenhouse effect. 
 
This same budget that was introduced two months ago, cuts money for energy 
research and particularly for alternate energy research and conservation 
projects here in Saskatchewan, and follows on the heels of provincial 
budgets that have continued to do the same. 
 
One more example, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  This budget cuts back money from the 
department of science and technology.  And the Minister of Finance can say 
what he likes, but this department of science and technology that was 



 

 

hailed four or five short years ago as being one of the most important 
departments in the whole of the provincial government, introducing a whole 
new age of government and responsiveness for the future, this department in 
fact has been eliminated. 
 
And little does this do when it comes to scientific matters like depletion 
of the ozone layer and other environmental matters.  And in fact the 
Saskatchewan Research Council's budget has also been cut in this most 
recent budget. 
 
Now it wouldn't be just so bad if there were cut-backs in fiscal 
allocations in the budget for science and technology and environmental 
matters.  But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to point out that in this most 
recent budget we have still been waiting for action from the provincial 
government. 
 
I mentioned a few minutes ago that this very piece of legislation to 
protect the ozone layer was talked about a year ago and only introduced 
this session, this year.  I also want to point out that there are other 
pieces of legislation and other government initiatives that have been 
talked about but have not been materialized over the last year. 
 
And I think particularly of a study of the greenhouse effect that was 
announced in the Challenges and Opportunities (Saskatchewan) document that 
accompanied the government budget a year ago, announcing that this 
government "will undertake a research study on the impact of the greenhouse 
effect on Saskatchewan to develop a plan of action to mitigate any negative 
effects." 
 
And that was announced back in the spring of '89, and have we seen any 
action undertaken on that greenhouse study? 
 
Well I've done some investigations, and I have to report that basically 
nothing has been done.  I have correspondence from the office of the 
Minister of the Environment, relative to the climate change study.  This 
correspondence is dated March 5, and it goes on to say that "I expect that 
the study will be undertaken in the very near future" -- this, after the 
government announced a full year ago that the study would be undertaken. 
 
Right now, the government claims that it has undertaken consultation with 
various government departments, extensive consultation with the 
Saskatchewan Research Council to put together terms of reference and a 
proposal for this research.  But after a year of having been introduced or 
announced, still has nothing to show for it.  Such is the record when it 
comes to environmental protection. 
 
The Toxicology Research Centre in Saskatoon is subject to the same kind of 
delay.  A year ago it was promised that there would be increased funding 
for the Toxicology Research Centre at the University of Saskatchewan.  And 
it was within days -- literally days -- of the most recent provincial 
budget being announced that the toxicology centre finally saw the $200,000 
that had been promised a year earlier.  And they didn't know until those 
very days before this most recent budget was introduced whether they would 



 

 

see that money or not, even though it had been promised by the provincial 
government. 
 
And I can also talk, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about an environmental trace 
organics lab that was talked about, talked about a year ago in the 
Challenges and Opportunities document that I referred to earlier that 
accompanied last year's provincial budget, and nothing has happened there 
either.  They're still doing a study and nothing has materialized. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as important as this legislation is for the 
province of Saskatchewan and for future generations for the world community 
to protect the ozone layer, what we see is a real problem right here in 
Saskatchewan in terms of the duplicity of the government when it comes to 
acting on its own self-professed initiatives. 
 
And I say then in conclusion, what is needed is a concerted, integrated 
approach to the problems of air quality and pollution so that over the next 
10 to 20 years we can have strategies in place that will actually be 
reducing the use of chlorofluorocarbons which are ozone depleting; that can 
reduce sulphur and nitrogen emissions from our power plants and our 
transportation systems; that we can have initiatives from the University of 
Saskatchewan for energy conservation and energy efficiency so that we can 
break some of our reliance on fossil fuels and move to renewable energy 
sources, environmentally friendly energy sources; that we adopt a four-part 
strategy here in Saskatchewan for dealing with air quality and air 
pollution control that would: one, control stationary source emissions from 
power plants and the like; two, that would reduce vehicular emissions from 
automobiles and buses. 
 
This means that we have to look at supporting public transportation.  
Transportation remains one of the largest sources of nitrogen oxide, 
volatile organic carbon emissions, and carbon monoxide emissions.  We 
certainly have to do something there. 
 
Three, we have to look at long-term planning, not only for transportation 
but for power production and conservation.  We certainly need to look at 
new technologies and renewable energy technologies.  And four, we basically 
need to do a lot of research. 
 
And maybe I should add one more thing.  When the government talks about 
introducing environmental measures, it should act on them and not delay as 
it has in the case of this ozone depletion legislation -- having talked 
about it a year ago, promised it a year ago, and acted on it only now.  
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I want to simply add 
a few brief remarks to this Bill because of some long-standing interest 
I've had in the area of the environment, and particularly in the matter of 
depletion of our ozone layer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say at the outset that it has been a commitment of 



 

 

mine -- I guess a commitment made to myself more than anyone -- that if and 
when the government opposite moved in a direction that I thought was 
appropriate or right that I would not be afraid to say that publicly.  I 
haven't had many opportunities, Mr. Speaker, to do that, but this is one.  
This is one, Mr. Speaker, where I feel in fact that this legislation now 
before the House, legislation to protect the ozone layer of our earth, is 
in fact a move in the right direction, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have some specific concerns with this piece of legislation.  I share the 
concern of my colleague who just spoke about the long delay in bringing 
this legislation forth -- commitments made a year ago and only now do we 
see the legislation.  I have a very specific concern about the way the 
regulatory process is outlined in this piece of legislation and I'll want 
to say just a word about that. 
 
But the fact does remain, Mr. Speaker, that this piece of legislation, in 
my view, is a move in the right direction, and I want to say that up front. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this legislation does indicate somewhat of a major shift of 
position on the part of the government opposite.  It was about two years 
ago now, Mr. Speaker, that I spent about an hour in this House with the 
then minister of the Environment, discussing this subject.  And I asked at 
that time if he had any specific proposals that he might want to advance in 
regard to protecting the ozone layer.  I asked at that time about the 
possibility of legislation. 
 
And at that time, the minister of the Environment, much to my surprise, was 
not willing even to admit that a significant problem existed or that the 
evidence existed to indicate that protection could be achieved through 
legislation.  And you can review the Hansard on that, Mr. Speaker.  That 
was just two years ago that we had the minister of the Environment of the 
government opposite indicating that he was not sure that there was a 
problem, indicating that he was not willing to move legislatively to reach 
even the Montreal Convention of a 50 per cent depletion in the ozone layer. 
 
And now these two years later, we do have legislation from the same 
government.  And so I point that out, Mr. Speaker.  I point out that we 
have seen somewhat of a conversion of this government on this specific 
issue of depletion of the ozone layer.  And again I say, Mr. Minister, I am 
happy to see that change and happy to see this piece of legislation before 
us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you will know that in this session, in this sitting of the 
legislature, that the first Bill to be presented in this sitting was 
presented by my colleague, the member from Regina North East, presenting a 
Bill to protect the ozone layer.  It was Bill No. 1 in this session.  And 
then somewhat later in the session the government introduced their Bill, 
and of course were then willing to let Bill No. 1 simply stand as we debate 
the government's Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say just a word about why I believe this is 
important legislation to the people of Saskatchewan.  As you will know, 
sir, the ozone layer serves as a protective blanket around our globe.  It 



 

 

serves primarily, from the point of view of human health and animal and 
plant health, as a screen for the ultraviolet rays, the harmful ultraviolet 
rays that will come from the sun. 
 
You will also be aware, Mr. Speaker, that it has I think now been 
conclusively shown that certain chemical substances -- CFCs 
(chlorofluorocarbon) primarily -- which we use to our benefit, Mr. Speaker, 
as they are released into the atmosphere have caused the deterioration of 
the ozone layer.  And with that deterioration has come an increase in the 
number of ultraviolet rays reaching the surface of the earth, and with the 
consequences on human and animal and plant health. 
 
(1530) 
 
The very specific concern that I'm sure we all share, Mr. Speaker, is the 
effect of the depletion of the ozone layer and therefore the presence of 
higher concentration of ultraviolet rays as it affects human health.   And 
that is shown primarily, Mr. Speaker -- and again I think the evidence is 
now conclusive -- that has shown in a dramatic increase in incidence of 
skin cancer. 
 
I have available with me today, Mr. Speaker, the statistics regarding skin 
cancers in our own province of Saskatchewan.  My figures unfortunately most 
recently only come to 1987, and they are listed from 1970 to 1987.  And, 
Mr. Speaker, these figures show a shocking, a shocking increase in the 
incidence of skin cancer in our province. 
 
If I may, Mr. Speaker, in . . . and these were statistics provided to me by 
the Canadian Saskatchewan Cancer Foundation.  Mr. Speaker, in 1970-72, the 
incidence of skin cancer in that two-year period among the female residents 
of our province was 1,082; among male citizens of our province, 1,565. 
 
Mr. Speaker, by 1985, 1987, those figures had risen dramatically.  Among 
the female population of our province the incidence if skin cancer had 
risen to 1,972.  That's from 1,082 to 1,972 in the time between 1970 and 
1985-87.  Among the male population of our province the incidence had risen 
from 1,565 in the '70-72 period to 2,755 in the years '85 to '87. 
 
Obviously, Mr. Speaker, we are a people who spend a great deal of our time 
under the sun, many of our people involved in agriculture, and we live, Mr. 
Speaker, in a sunny province. 
 
The growing incidence of skin cancer in our province needs to give all 
members of this House concern.  And I believe it to be conclusively shown 
now that the depletion of the ozone layer and the introduction of the more 
harmful ultraviolet rays into our environment in fact can be shown to have 
been at least partially responsible for this increase in skin cancer.  So, 
Mr. Speaker, that's primarily why I am pleased to support the direction 
that this particular Bill takes us in. 
 
I want to identify a concern, Mr. Speaker, before I sit down, a concern 
about the Bill in its current form.  Obviously, Mr. Speaker, the chemicals 
that are involved in this Bill are chemicals that we use in all of our 



 

 

daily lives and we use them to our benefit, primarily in our province, in 
refrigeration and air conditioning.  And if we are to achieve the goals set 
out in the legislation, that before the turn of the century that we will 
have reduced the use of these chemicals in our province by some 85 per 
cent, that will mean elimination, in some cases, of those chemicals.  It 
will obviously mean disposal in some cases, and it will mean we will need 
to be actively pursuing a replacement for those chemicals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to my knowledge there are no appropriate disposal facilities 
currently existing in our province, and to my knowledge there is very 
little being done in our province, at least, in the area of research and 
development. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this piece of legislation needs corresponding work to be going 
along in a parallel basis, to be looking towards the time when we want to 
be disposing of these ozone-depleting chemicals and disposing of them in a 
safe and environmentally friendly way.  We need also to be parallel with 
this legislation, seriously moving in the area of research and development, 
which my colleague, only moments ago, pointed out. 
 
There is also, sir, obviously a concern being felt in our province by 
small-business people, who are in the small-business area of refrigeration 
and air-conditioning, and they see this legislation and they have concerns 
on how they are going to involve themselves in the change-over. 
 
And this is where my very specific concern comes about this Bill, Mr. 
Speaker.  And I know we can't be too specific at this point in the debate 
and I'm sure these questions will be raised in Committee of the Whole, but 
I do want to point out, Mr. Speaker, a significant difference between the 
Bill presented by the member for Regina North East and the Bill, which is 
now before the House, presented by the government. 
 
The member for Regina North East proposed in his proposed legislation that 
when the regulations are being written -- and of course, you and I both 
know that it's through the regulations that the Bill will have its effect 
-- the member from Regina North East proposed in his Bill that when those 
regulations are being written that there should be as wide as possible a 
consultation with those who will be affected by the changes in this 
legislation.  And sir, if I could just quote you that passage from Bill No. 
1.  In that Bill, the provision was that: 
 

 Except in circumstances that are considered by the Lieutenant Governor in 
Council to be an emergency, the Lieutenant Governor in Council shall seek 
advice and recommendations from the public on any proposed regulation or 
on any proposed amendment to a regulation made under this Act. 

 
Bill No. 1 would have insisted that the cabinet of the province must, shall 
consult, seek advice and recommendations from the people of Saskatchewan 
prior to making the recommendations for the elimination or the reduction of 
ozone-depleting chemicals. 
 
Now in the Bill currently before us, Mr. Speaker, no such provision exists 
and such provision which would require the cabinet of the day to seek that 



 

 

kind of consultation, advice and recommendation from the public of 
Saskatchewan exists in the current Bill.  It simply reads, and again I 
quote: 
 

 For the purpose of carrying out this Act according to its intent, the 
Lieutenant Governor in Council may make regulations. 

 
So, sir, I see this as a major and significant drawback about the current 
piece of legislation before us, that it does not require, very specifically 
require, the government of the day to seek the advice and the consultation 
and the recommendations of Saskatchewan people as we go about, as we go 
about, this important task of reducing the level of ozone-depleting 
chemicals in use in our society, sir.  And I am confident that those 
questions will be raised and will be asked in Committee of the Whole. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to conclude again by saying simply that I support 
entirely the direction being undertaken by the government in this regard.  
We will hope that this legislation can be strengthened and improved before 
it has finally passed this House. 
 
And I would want to say also that whether it be we as individuals when we 
act as individuals to protect and enhance the environment of which we are a 
part, whether it be on our farms or in our businesses or in our factories, 
when we take steps to protect and enhance our environment, or when we as 
legislators, when we as a society through legislation or through common 
goal, act to protect and enhance our environment, we are doing something, 
sir, not simply for ourselves, but for our children and for generations who 
are yet unborn, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And of all of the many things that we do in this Assembly, surely this must 
be one of the most important.  When we can act in our day and age to 
protect and enhance the environment, not just for ourselves but for our 
children and for generations yet unborn, then, Mr. Speaker, I submit that 
we can take some satisfaction in what we do and that we can, when our short 
time in this process is over, we can know that somebody, some day, some 
time down the road will look back upon us and upon what we're attempting to 
do, even if it is very small, and look back with some gratitude on what 
we've done. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I do look forward to the opportunity when this Bill comes 
to committee stage to put some . . . to join with my colleagues to putting 
some questions perhaps to the minister and seeking to strengthen the Bill, 
which I am sure all members in this House will consider important and 
worthwhile. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It's a pleasure for 
me to enter into this debate and close this debate in fact after a . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The hon. member has indicated that he is 



 

 

about to close debate.  It is my responsibility now to inform all hon. 
members that if they wish to enter the debate they must do so now.  
Otherwise, I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, as I was saying, it's a pleasure to close 
this debate on a subject that I feel is of great importance to the people 
of Saskatchewan and indeed, Mr. Speaker, to the people of the world. 
 
The subject that we are dealing with here, as has been mentioned, Mr. 
Speaker, is the protection of our environment.  It is the protection of the 
health and well-being and safety of Saskatchewan residents.  And what it 
deals with, Mr. Speaker, is Saskatchewan's contribution to a global planet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are but trustees of this earth, and it is incumbent upon 
all of us, and especially incumbent upon legislatures and this province, to 
play our part in protecting our environment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the ozone layer is up there about 25 or 50 kilometres into the 
earth's atmosphere.  Mr. Speaker, when that ozone layer is not protected, 
the chances and the probabilities of ultraviolet rays coming through the 
ozone layer increase.  Mr. Speaker, research to date has shown that there 
is cause to be concerned, that there are weak spots or holes or frailties, 
if you like, in this ozone layer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is this caused by?  It's caused by man.  It's caused by 
man-made chemicals.  And, Mr. Speaker, we're dealing here with a solution 
to a problem that we have all, as people on this planet, contributed to. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the specific chemicals of ozone depletion are items such as 
CFCs and halons.  In everyday language what we're talking about, Mr. 
Speaker, are things like the freon in your air conditioners, freon in 
refrigeration units.  We're talking about propellants in fire extinguishers 
-- halons, they call them, Mr. Speaker.  And what this legislation does is 
manage those ozone-depleting substances.  In fact what it does is phase 
out, and the eventual elimination of these ozone-depleting substances will 
be a reality in short order. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased that hon. members from the NDP have agreed in 
principle with this piece of legislation.  Mr. Speaker, I believe this goes 
far beyond any political rhetoric or any partisanship, and I commend the 
members opposite for their fundamental agreement with this Bill. 
 
They have chastised the government for being somewhat tardy in introducing 
this legislation.  And, Mr. Speaker, the only argument that I can make is 
that, as always is the case, we want to make sure that when we introduce 
legislation in this House that it is done correctly, that it is right, Mr. 
Speaker, it's been done carefully and cautiously and that common sense is 
the rule that will apply.  I say, Mr. Speaker, in this particular piece of 
legislation, it will stand those tests of common sense and practicality and 
reality. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I believe that the people of Saskatchewan will say yes to 
this Bill.  They will say yes to protecting the environment and they will 



 

 

say yes to Saskatchewan people playing a part in a world-wide commitment to 
help manage our ozone layer.  Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people, at the 
conclusion of this piece of legislation, will be able to walk tall and 
stand proud that they in fact are playing a part in the protection of a 
very important resource and protecting human lives and protecting our 
environment.  And, Mr. Speaker, I say the people of Saskatchewan will be 
very, very happy to see this piece of legislation passed. 
 
I thank you, Mr. Speaker, and with that I close debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee 
of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
(1545) 
 

Bill No. 2 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the 
Hon. Mr. Martin that Bill No. 2 -- An Act respecting Family and Community 
Services be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I appreciate the 
opportunity to rise again today to make a few comments on this Bill.  I'll 
be fairly brief, Mr. Speaker, in that there are some other members who want 
to speak to the Bill.  But I would like to make just a few comments if I 
could. 
 
This Bill of course gives the minister the power, the Minister of the 
Family, to do what he can do to strengthen families, to do what he can do 
to foster the healthy development in children, to provide local services 
and supports to families and communities.  And, Mr. Speaker, it allows the 
minister to evaluate the impact of the government's social and economic 
policies on families and communities. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there's certainly nothing wrong with that mandate.  I 
think the mandate is fine.  In fact I would suggest that all the ministers 
of the Crown should be approaching their responsibilities from that 
perspective as to whether or not the policies and programs of their 
department impact positively or negatively on families.  And certainly the 
Minister of Education, the Minister of Health, and the Minister of Social 
Services should give particular attention to those areas. 
 
So I'm certainly not concerned about the mandate, although there are some 
parts of the mandate regarding research and consultative services and what 
not that I will want to question the minister on later, Mr. Speaker, 
because I want to have a clear picture as to just what he has in mind with 
regard to some of those provisions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'd like to say first of all that the idea and the notion of 
supporting families and community building is something that everyone in 
this House I'm sure would support.  It's something that we on this side of 



 

 

the House endorse whole-heartedly, and I would say that in the many years 
in which we were the government, working with Saskatchewan people, we did a 
pretty good job of supporting families and community building. 
 
And the concern I have, Mr. Speaker, with the policies over the last eight 
years has been a departure from what we would call the Saskatchewan way, 
which has been a way of governments working with the people around the 
province, working with various groups to support families and provide a 
certain level of security and to provide opportunities and to provide some 
hope, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We've seen a departure where we've seen a province, we've seen a government 
basically tear down rather than build -- tear down the health care system, 
tear down the assets that have been built up over many years by the men and 
women of Saskatchewan.  And you tear down the social safety network and to 
privatize many of the important economic enterprises that had worked very 
well in this province over many years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we've seen the record of this government has been one of tearing down 
communities.  It's been one of eroding supports to families rather than 
ensuring and providing supports to families, Mr. Speaker.  And that's a 
concern I have -- not about the legislation of the Bill, but about the 
record of the government.  Mr. Speaker, we've seen an incredible erosion of 
family support agencies at a very time when in fact what is needed is a 
strengthening of those agencies to be supportive to families who are 
experiencing new levels of stress. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now we're distinguished across Canada today as having now the 
highest rate of family poverty in all of Canada.  When this Minister of the 
Family was set up in his portfolio we had the second highest rate of family 
poverty in Canada.  He's been in his place now for seven months and we have 
the highest rate of family poverty in all of Canada.  So that's been his 
impact, Mr. Speaker.  As the Minister of the Family, we've gone from second 
highest rate of family poverty to now the highest rate. 
 
And clearly, that's a sign to the people of Saskatchewan that this minister 
who is responsible to make sure that children grow and develop and 
flourish, to make sure that families are supported and get the services 
they need, the fact that we have the highest rate of family poverty to me 
is a sign that this minister isn't doing his job in monitoring the impact 
of government programs on families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fact that the numbers of children using food banks, having 
to rely on food banks, continues to go up around the province today during 
the tenure of this Minister of the Family is an indication to me that the 
Minister of the Family is not taking his colleagues to task to make sure 
that children have enough to eat. 
 
We saw $740,000 identified in the budget for hungry children to fight 
hunger in the province of Saskatchewan.  With 64,000 children living in 
families below the poverty line, with some 22,000 children having to rely 
on the resources of the food banks in the province last year, the 
government identifies $740,000 -- half of it, by the way, which is 



 

 

refundable from the federal government.  So it's really only half of that 
that they're willing to put up.  They're only willing to put up half the 
amount of money from the province that Chuck Childers gets per year for 
running the potash corporation, to feed hungry children. 
 
Now that's the impact of this Minister of the Family on this government; 
that's his input into the budget -- half of $740,000.  Well, Mr. Speaker, 
it's very hard for one to be optimistic that this minister is going to have 
any impact on the economic and social policies of this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many other things that are trends that have not 
changed since this Minister of the Family was put in place seven months 
ago.  We have set new record levels of family bankruptcy, small-business 
bankruptcy, personal bankruptcies over the last three years.  And 1990, to 
this point in 1990 we're up 27 per cent over last year, Mr. Speaker, which 
was a record.  So no doubt we are going to have a record again, a record 
high level of small-business and personal bankruptcies in 1990 as we kick 
into this new decade, at a time when we have a Minister of the Family who's 
asking for a mandate to in fact ensure that this kind of thing doesn't 
happen. 
 
We saw today from my colleague from Moose Jaw North has identified through 
the government's own statistics that this year alone we've had a net 
out-migration of 7,654 people leaving the province.  Basically we're on the 
same trend as we were last year, which was the second highest outflow of 
people in the history of this province, or since records have been kept. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, 2,218 people, as my colleague from Moose Jaw North said, 
over half of those under the age of 34, have left the province in the month 
after the budget came down.  And little wonder.  We lost a million dollars 
in job-creation programs for young people.  We've got quotas on 
universities.  We've got now another tuition fee increase at both 
universities that's been announced. 
 
This government is leaving people of the province no choice but to leave, 
Mr. Speaker.  And the proof of course is in whether or not the people are 
leaving or whether they're staying.  Well they're leaving in numbers that 
are at a pace equivalent to last year, which was the second highest level 
since records have been kept. 
 
Unemployment, Mr. Speaker, has not changed since the Minister of the Family 
has been established some seven months ago.  We've still got 9 per cent, 17 
per cent for young people. 
 
Farm stress.  We've had more government initiated farm foreclosures and 
legal actions since this minister came about.  Mr. Speaker, we've had eight 
years.  This government's had eight years to bring some income 
stabilization to the family farm to deal with the issue of farm debt, a 
land transfer program.  They've had five years where they've overlapped 
with the federal government which is also Tory.  You would think that would 
be the ideal circumstance of a provincial party and a federal party of the 
same political stripe to move ahead.  And, Mr. Speaker, we've seen the farm 
crisis worsen, not get better. 



 

 

 
Mr. Speaker, in terms of the youth unemployment, we've had $7.5 million cut 
since 1986-87 in opportunities for young students.  Mr. Speaker, that 
happened to be the year of the election -- $7.5 million cut in the last 
three years at a time when our young people simply can't find summer jobs.  
This government's made municipalities ineligible to participate in that 
program.  They can't find summer jobs, and then they can't get back into 
university because the tuition fees have gone up and they've cut back on 
student loans, Mr. Speaker.  They are forcing families and young people to 
leave the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many other things I could say, but we've still seen 
new taxes in the last budget despite the government saying that there were 
no new taxes.  We've seen a continued shifting to the local level of 
taxation, the highest level of taxation per capita in the entire country.  
We've got the highest debt load per capita in the entire country.  It was 
the lowest when this government took over, Mr. Speaker. 
 
All of these indicators, all of the financial indicators, the economic and 
the social indicators are going the wrong way.  Mr. Speaker, they're going 
in a negative direction and this Minister of the Family has made no impact 
on that whatsoever. 
 
So he doesn't just need a mandate, Mr. Speaker.  He needs to understand the 
problems that are facing Saskatchewan families, and then he needs to get 
his colleagues to help him deal with those problems, and he has not been 
successful.  All of these things, all of these indicators have meant more 
pressure on families.  They've meant lost security of families and lost 
opportunities.  Mr. Speaker, we continue to basically export our future in 
our young people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the throne speech contained no plan to deal with the economic 
problems facing our province.  The budget speech did not.  I might mention 
a couple more things about the budget.  We saw with native employment, 
native youth employment being some 85 per cent in northern Saskatchewan, 
what did they do?  They cut native training programs by 7.1 per cent. 
 
The crisis in rural Saskatchewan and the kind of farm support that families 
need, they cut $2 million from Rural Development, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The child-care freeze, basically they have not in the eight years they've 
been in power, they've not increased the day-care subsidies one bit.  They 
have not helped to develop the child-care policies in rural Saskatchewan 
that are badly needed at seeding times and at harvesting times.  Many 
women's groups and others from across Saskatchewan, farm . . . rural groups 
have told us that this is a great need.  This government has not addressed 
that problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they continue, despite having $740,000 a year for Chuck 
Childers, they continue . . . they still haven't divvied out that $740,000 
to feed hungry kids, that 3 cents a day that they've allocated in the 
budget to feed hungry kids.  The Minister of the Family has not even found 
a way to give that out yet.  And I suspect that he's embarrassed about that 



 

 

amount and that's why he's dragging his feet.  Or maybe he can't get 
through his cabinet spending that $740,000 on hungry kids. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- More likely the latter, Bob. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- As my colleague from Saskatoon says, more likely the 
latter, and it likely is.  But 3 cents a day, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The minister has indicated that he's been travelling around the province 
meeting with groups.  Well he's been travelling around the province meeting 
with groups, but the feedback I get, Mr. Speaker, from his visits -- like 
North Battleford last week where he met with a group of seniors -- the 
feedback I get is that this minister is basically a cheer-leader for the 
government. 
 
This Minister of the Family, he's a nice fellow -- people say that -- but 
he doesn't understand the problems that people are experiencing.  They find 
him patronizing; they find that he offends them; they find that he's got a 
rich man's view of poverty. 
 
Mr. Speaker, rather than listening, which is what people want him to do -- 
and I say this with respect -- rather than listening, which is what people 
want him to do, he tells them the way it is.  He tells them that we know 
best and we're doing this and that for you.  They want him to listen. 
 
Now this is what women's groups tell me.  This is what the seniors report 
from his meeting last week with them in North Battleford, is that this 
minister doesn't listen to them when they meet.  Sure, he's meeting with 
lots of groups, but he doesn't listen.  And this is . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . well this is what he says.  Basically what these groups 
are saying is that they find that offensive. 
 
But they also find it characteristic of most cabinet ministers in this 
government.  They find it characteristic of the way the Premier operates 
when a group of farmers come and he won't meet with them, or when a group 
of senior citizens come who lost a lot of their money.  Only through 
embarrassment will cabinet ministers of this government meet with the 
seniors around Principal Trust.  Only when they were embarrassed would they 
would meet with people on Monday, small-business people from Saskatoon.  
And this is some support to families; this is some support to families. 
 
(1600) 
 
So there's an attitude problem here with this government.  This 
legislation, while certainly I don't oppose it -- there's nothing wrong 
with their mandate -- but this mandate is not going to make families in 
Saskatchewan feel supported.  It's not going to make communities in 
Saskatchewan feel supported. 
 
This is a government that has supported deregulation.  They've supported 
free trade.  They've supported privatization -- big megaprojects that take 
money away from small-business people and family support programs.  This 
mandate is going to do nothing to make those changes, Mr. Speaker. 



 

 

 
What is needed by this government is a change in attitude.  The solution 
that this Minister of the Family proposed when he spoke on this Bill -- and 
he doesn't realize it, but it was offensive to people who are hungry and 
starving and who don't have any employment, who have to leave the province 
-- he said, well all you have to do is go for a walk with your kids.  All 
you have to do is spend a bit of time with your children.  All you have to 
do is know a little bit more about nutrition, take some parenting classes. 
 
Well there's nothing wrong with those things.  All of us want more time to 
walk with our children, Mr. Speaker, but the situation in Saskatchewan 
today is that many families are more concerned about feeding their kids.  
They're more concerned about paying the bills, which they can't do because 
this government has squandered money to the point where we spend $500 
million a year just to service the debt, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Minister of the Family does not understand the 
relationship between poverty, cuts to employment programs, cuts to 
recreation programs, and then social problems.  He does not understand the 
relationships between those things. 
 
Now that was clearer when he was speaking.  And that's what people tell me, 
Mr. Speaker, across the province.  They don't feel understood by this 
government.  The Minister of the Family brings no new enlightenment to this 
analysis by the government. 
 
Fifty years ago we had a Tory government; we had high numbers of hungry 
people and hungry families.  Fifty years later, today, we've got the 
highest rate of family poverty in all of Canada.  We've got bulging food 
banks and we've got hungry kids, Mr. Speaker.  And that's the legacy of the 
Tory government, whether it's in Saskatchewan or Britain or in United 
States.  There's a few winners -- lots of money for your friends.  But the 
masses of people, families, growing poorer, and two-tier education and 
two-tier health care, not support to families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, families in Saskatchewan, young people in Saskatchewan have 
little reason to feel hopeful just by this legislation.  They've had in 
seven months, in seven months I cannot think of a specific constructive 
program that this minister has introduced.  He certainly has not taken any 
serious analysis to the direction that the government's going in, in terms 
of their programs.  Otherwise the indicators wouldn't be getting worse; 
they would start to be turning around if the government was serious. 
 
One can only conclude that with this Bill, setting up this expensive 
ministry which now they're 20 cabinet ministers, one can only conclude that 
this is a public relations initiative, Mr. Speaker -- that it's a public 
relations initiative.  I hope that I'm wrong.  The biggest test of course 
is whether or not the poverty rate is going to go down, whether or not the 
young people are going to stay back in Saskatchewan.  And there's little 
reason to suggest that anything has changed, but in fact has gotten worse 
under the overseeing of this Minister of the Family. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I've got some colleagues who want to make some important 



 

 

comments on this Bill.  I've got many questions that -- I will tell the 
minister right now -- I'm going to be asking him about.  And, as I say, I 
support the mandate.  I support supporting families and building 
communities, but the record of this government has been one of tearing down 
and taking away supports from families and driving people out of the 
province.  And for that, Mr. Speaker, they are going to be held 
accountable. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I rise today to 
take part in the debate on Bill No. 2.  And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to 
indicate to the minister that this is a very powerful Bill that we have 
before us today -- Bill No. 2, An Act respecting Family and Community 
Services. 
 
And I just want to quote some of the items that are contained in this Bill, 
just to indicate just how powerful a Bill that we have before us: 
 

 The minister may do any thing that the minister considers advisable to 
promote the growth and development of services and resources designed to: 

 
 (a) strengthen families; 
 
 (b) foster the healthy development of 

children; or 
 
 (c) provide local services and support 

to families. 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker and Mr. Minister, when you take a look at that, that 
indicates that this Bill is very powerful -- the development of new 
services that promote and support family life. 
 
And then it goes over here, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 
 

 recommend policy directions for the integration and co-ordination of 
methods to improve and strengthen (the) family . . . 

 
So when you look at that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that he has the powers to 
"recommend policy directions for the integration and co-ordination of 
methods to improve and strengthen (the) family," and I say to you, Mr. 
Minister, that gives you some very large powers. 
 
And then you also have within that Bill, the ability to "evaluate the 
impact of government economic and social policies on all Saskatchewan 
families."  Now the minister, he can go down to his office and he can take 
a look at the policies of this government and the way that the government 
is going, and he can evaluate the impact of the government on economic and 
social policies of this province, and he can also recommend, to cabinet, 
changes in direction that would solve the problems that we're facing in 
this province. 
 



 

 

And what does that partnership really mean, Mr. Deputy Speaker?  Well, it 
means that you want to strengthen the families in our province.  We want to 
strengthen the families.  We want to strengthen our towns.  And of course 
when you strengthen families and you strengthen your towns and you have 
them all working in the same direction, and that takes us to the most 
important resource that we have, and that is our children.  And that most 
certainly creates a partnership that we should all be working towards -- 
for the children. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we as New Democrats, we support 
a healthy partnership between government, and we support a healthy 
partnership between families and towns and villages and cities in 
Saskatchewan.  And that's the only way that it can be successful, if you 
have governments and communities all working together and then that creates 
a solid family background so that the province can prosper. 
 
And we had that, we had that partnership when we were the government in 
this province.  We created that partnership and that good feeling by 
providing a good health system and a good economy.  We had an unemployment 
rate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of less than 3 per cent when the New Democrats 
were in power.  And this created a healthy community and it created a 
healthy partnership between the communities and between the families.  And 
you have to have that. 
 
If you take families in this province that are faced with large burdens -- 
unemployment, the debt load that the province is carrying right now -- and 
that all reflects back onto the family.  And that does not create a good 
partnership.  Our policy as New Democrats, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was always 
to create that atmosphere and to make sure that we had a healthy situation 
between the families and the communities. 
 
What we see taking place in Saskatchewan right now is that safety net has 
been tore down, and we do not have that healthy partnership that we had 
prior to 1982 when the Conservatives took over.  And what has created that, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
 
Well I say to you, sir, that that has been created through policies of the 
government that the minister is in charge of, and as I indicated before, 
that this minister has the strength and has the ways and means now, with 
this legislation when it goes through, to change the type of policies that 
created what I consider is a poor atmosphere out in Saskatchewan right now.  
And what has created that?  Well when you brought in the drug plan, you 
eliminated the dental plan and you have large taxes and that is what 
creates problems for our communities.  And that's what's tearing down the 
safety net in the communities that we have and that's what's making it hard 
for families and their children. 
 
As I indicated before, all these policies are policies that I say will not 
strengthen the family units, will not create a healthy partnership between 
families and communities -- and it is policies like taxes, when families 
are hit with those taxes.  And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you came to power 
in 1982, one of the policies of your government was, and a promise was, to 
eliminate the 5 per cent sales tax that we had in this province.  And now 



 

 

rather than eliminating that tax, you have put that tax up to 7 per cent 
and that's hard on families and it's hard on children. 
 
And I want to say that the same applies to the new GST (goods and services 
tax) tax that's coming.  That is not building up our communities and that 
is most certainly hard on families and the children of those families.  And 
that GST tax, the provincial government here has to take responsibility for 
that because they negotiated the GST with the federal Conservatives and it 
is a tax that was put in by the provinces and the federal government.  This 
government was a party to that and so they have to take responsibility and 
that is what's tearing down the families. 
 
I want to now turn, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the North and in particular to 
my constituency, and I want to say that we had built up a very healthy 
family partnership in northern Saskatchewan under the New Democrats.  And 
we did that, we created that partnership by going in and indicating to the 
citizens of northern Saskatchewan that there was a problem, talking to the 
communities and letting them know that we were there to listen and to solve 
those problems. 
 
And what we did when we went in there and as the government, we built 
hospitals and we built new schools and we provided jobs and there was 
training and there was an infrastructure that was put into northern 
Saskatchewan, sewer and water that most of the families in northern 
Saskatchewan did not have.  And you, sir, in your constituency and in 
southern Saskatchewan took those services for granted. 
 
And this is what builds up a community, and this is what creates a healthy 
partnership between governments and families.  And this is where children 
can feel secure.  And we did this to reinforce that security.  And we 
realized that in northern Saskatchewan there was a very high cost of living 
and you needed special programs in order to create a healthy atmosphere 
between the family and the community and government.  And that is the only 
way that you can be successful. 
 
We take a look now up there in northern Saskatchewan, and that is just not 
happening.  We have a tremendous out-migration, not only in southern 
Saskatchewan, but we have an out-migration of our young men and women in 
northern Saskatchewan.  And this is tearing down that partnership that we 
all should be working towards. 
 
(1615) 
 
Welfare jobs, part-time jobs, people on welfare -- and I just want to give 
you some examples and some examples for the member opposite that they have 
to take a serious look at, not only in Saskatchewan, but specifically in 
northern Saskatchewan where the cost of living is so high, and it is very 
hard to keep that family unit together when the family or the father would 
be working on a part-time job or welfare job.  There are so many of those 
jobs being created. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in all sincerity, that these 
part-time welfare jobs that they pay the minimum wage for 20 weeks and at 



 

 

the end of the 20 weeks then they can apply for UIC (Unemployment Insurance 
Commission), and after the UIC runs out then they can go back to 4.50 an 
hour jobs.  Or if they are on welfare or on UIC, you get up in the morning 
and you don't have a job to go to and you just don't have the type of an 
income that you should have in order to provide the type of an education 
that they all want and they all richly deserve for their families.  And 
this breaks down the family unit. 
 
So I say to the minister, with this type of a Bill, you have the powers to 
assess what is happening with these types of programs.  You have the powers 
when this Bill is given Royal Assent to be able to say to your colleagues 
that look it, it's time that we started to provide full-time jobs and 
well-paying jobs, not these part-time welfare jobs that pay the minimum 
wage and for only 20 weeks.  It's time to take a serious look at that.  And 
I ask you, Mr. Minister, in all sincerity to bring this to your colleague's 
attention and start putting some of that money into permanent jobs and 
permanent construction or development of our province. 
 
When you have part-time jobs or you're on welfare, it creates that 
atmosphere of poverty.  And I say to you, Mr. Minister, that poverty breeds 
poverty.  And that is something that we have to solve in this province, and 
that is the poverty of our families.  Because there's just no two ways 
about it, it creates a sense of hopelessness in such a rich province that 
we just . . . we cannot tolerate that. 
 
Another thing that I think that creates poverty and creates that sense of 
hopelessness is when you see individuals and families who are looking to 
get their children into a good educational system, to make sure that they 
can get to university or they can get out to secondary schools or get into 
the trades, and they just don't have the funds to do that because they are 
on a fixed income and they're living in an area -- and I'm speaking 
specifically right now of northern Saskatchewan.  But it doesn't just apply 
to northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  It applies to the farming 
communities and the cities of this province. 
 
I was into a small town in southern Saskatchewan here about three weeks ago 
and I saw just what the economic situation that we have in this province 
was doing to that community.  I saw that 60 per cent of the farmers in that 
rural municipality had gone out of business.  There was only 40 per cent of 
those farmers left. 
 
So that affected the community and it affected those families.  It affected 
the school.  Talking to the town councillors indicated, and I asked them 
how many building permits they had issued this year and there was none.  
They're not building any houses.  As a matter of fact, there're so many 
houses vacant that it creates that situation.  And all those families 
suffer when these situations take place. 
 
I just happened to be there the day that one of the largest businesses in 
the community was going out of business, and they were selling everything.  
And you talk to people, and they have that feeling of hopelessness. 
 
And when I talk about the North and then I talk about the South, I think 



 

 

that in the North we have a major problem up there and we have to tackle 
it.  And in the South we have a major problem, and I think that is the 
farming issue.  Somehow we have to bring back that farm economy because if 
we don't bring back the farm economy, then the towns surrounding those 
farming communities are going to also collapse. 
 
So we have to find a solution, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I know you will 
understand that, being a farmer yourself, that we have to make sure and 
work out some sort of a program that will bring the farming community back 
to life in this province so that the rest of the province will also spring 
back to life and that spin-off will go back into northern Saskatchewan. 
 
But I was saying what tears down that family unit is to see individuals 
especially in northern Saskatchewan, who want to get ahead, they want their 
children to get ahead, and they should have that opportunity.  But there's 
just not the money there and not the development. 
 
And to enforce that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one has to take a look at the 
unemployment in northern Saskatchewan which is very high, and then you take 
a look at the part-time jobs are being created and that is taking place.  
We had the case of 45 individuals who had been working for two years, and 
three weeks before they were supposed to go back to work -- a month ago -- 
were told that their jobs had disappeared. 
 
That is what breaks down the family unit, when you have policies such as 
that and then again you have policies that will throw hundreds of millions 
and billions of dollars into large corporations like Cargill, Peter 
Pocklington, Weyerhaeuser.  And I say that the people of Saskatchewan and 
the families who are suffering, they see that policy, they see that you 
have money for these large corporations, and they know what is taking 
place. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Minister, you have a Bill before this House, Bill No. 
2 -- An Act respecting Family and Community Services, and it is a Bill that 
gives you a lot of power.  And I would ask you to take a serious look at 
the policies of your government and try and solve some of the problems that 
we have in our communities and cities in Saskatchewan so that we can create 
a healthy partnership between all the families and the rest of 
Saskatchewan.  I think this Bill gives you that power, and I urge you, Mr. 
Minister, to take a look at and take serious the remarks that I made here 
today and use the powers within this Bill to make this a better province 
for our families. 
 
And I know you're sincere in your job, Mr. Minister.  And I sincerely wish 
you well because we have a very serious situation in the province.  There's 
family breakdowns, family violence, abuse of drugs.  It is just a human 
disaster that we have out there.  Suicides that are taking place, and up in 
my area it's happening on a regular basis.  And somehow we have to put a 
stop to this. 
 
And I say that, Mr. Minister, you have to redirect the moneys that are 
going into the large corporations so that we can bring back a healthy 
partnership in this province.  Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 



 

 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I too want to add a few 
words to the commentary on this Bill No. 2, An Act respecting Family and 
Community Services, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  There's scarcely a family or 
community in Saskatchewan that hasn't been touched by many of the negative 
effects of this government's actions over the years, whether it has to do 
with taxation policy, whether it has to do with privatization, whether it 
has to do with the rise of food banks, and so forth, the privatization of 
health care with the elimination of the school-based dental plan and the 
prescription drug program. 
 
More recently though, in the last couple of years, as a result of all of 
these actions, there's scarcely been a family in Saskatchewan that hasn't 
been touched by out-migration, where we have a virtual hemorrhaging of 
Saskatchewan families leaving the province, being broken up where some 
members of the family leave the province and some members stay. 
 
I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for example, of a family that I talked to a 
couple of months ago as I was going door to door in my constituency in 
Saskatoon, who talked of the struggle they're going through to determine 
whether they should leave Saskatchewan after the wife has just lost her job 
or whether they should tough it out, stick with high mortgage payments, and 
hope for something better to come about here in the province.  So what it 
really boiled down to was the decision with a new child in the family 
whether they would have to leave Saskatchewan and . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, order.  I'd ask members on both sides of the 
House to allow the member for Saskatoon Sutherland to make his comments.  
Order.  Is the member for Saskatoon University interfering with the Chair? 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  The member from 
Lloydminster talks about me being a minister of the cloth, and I say I know 
a fair bit more about what's happening to Saskatchewan families than he 
does. 
 
And I want to say to that minister, that member opposite, that I know 
personally, farm families, one particular family that is in the area that I 
serve in my pastoral charge, a particular family where the wife has told 
me, asked me, do you know what it's like to have your husband go out to the 
hog barn to do the chores and not know whether he's going to come back 
alive, whether you'll ever see him again, because they're losing the farm.  
And you ask me to tell the truth, and I'll tell you the truth.  That's 
exactly what farm families are experiencing these days.  Farm wives are 
dealing with husbands who are under stress and ready to commit suicide. 
 
And I'll tell the truth again.  I was at the Bruno graduation a week ago, 
Mr Deputy Speaker -- and the members opposite are laughing but I'll tell 
the truth; I'm a man of the cloth.  I was at the Bruno graduation a week 
ago and I had an individual come up to me after the graduation program 
ceremonies and told me the truth about the increase in the number of 
farmers in his area who were purchasing guns.  At this time of the year, 



 

 

that isn't to go deer hunting.  This man had tears in his eyes, a farmer of 
about 55 years of age, as he talked about his neighbours buying guns 
because of the farm stress that they're under. 
 
Therein, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a real mission for this particular Minister 
of the Family, a real agenda if he's to do something to meet the real needs 
of Saskatchewan people. 
 
And this particular piece of legislation really gives the Minister of the 
Family wide-ranging responsibility and authority to deal with a whole range 
of different programs under his ministry.  To provide consultative 
services, to do research, to establish and maintain effective 
communication, and to develop policies and programs to meet the needs of 
Saskatchewan families, including, I note, almost the last item to be 
mentioned -- to evaluate the impact of government economic and social 
policies on all Saskatchewan families. 
 
Now if the Minister of the Family here in Saskatchewan were to do that, if 
he were to evaluate the impact of government economic and social policies 
on all Saskatchewan families, he would indeed be doing the people of 
Saskatchewan and in fact the Government of  
 DSaskatchewan a great service, because it's precisely the failed economic 
and social policies of the government that are causing Saskatchewan people 
to flee. 
 
And just today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we learned that there were 2,218 more 
people leaving the province of Saskatchewan than had moved in this past 
month, for a four-month total of 7,654 people having left the province 
since the beginning of the year.  This is a human tragedy, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that affects virtually every Saskatchewan family.  There's 
scarcely a person in the province who doesn't know someone who has been 
forced to leave.  And this really is because there is no long-term view, no 
long-term plan for economic development in the province. 
 
(1630) 
 
The present government has essentially been throwing money at problems and 
has now gone broke, their resources having been exhausted.  And I note that 
just this past month the Sask Trends Monitor analysed the Saskatchewan 
resource industries through the '80s to the present time and noted that the 
resource policy of the PC government has had a very pronounced effect on 
the provincial deficit.  And I quote from this study of Sask Trends 
Monitor: 
 

 Even with the declining prices (in the resource sector), had the royalty 
and taxation levels remained at their earlier levels, the current 
provincial debt of $4 billion would simply not exist. 

 
Now therein is an economic reason for the human tragedy that we've been 
seeing.  No long-term view of things, more of a knee-jerk reaction to 
problems -- a political reaction to problems, a reliance on the polls that 
ill serves ordinary Saskatchewan people. 
 



 

 

And I had, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a constituent really lay their finger on 
this problem of the provincial government in a letter that was written to 
the Premier and shared with me by copy last month.  This particular 
constituent from the Sutherland constituency wrote the Premier about his 
arbitrary decision, announced on TV Monday, March 5 to cut the home 
improvement grants for Saskatchewan people. 
 
It goes on to talk about how the arbitrary nature of this decision doesn't 
allow individual families to plan their lives and actually creates problems 
for them, this particular constituent, in terms of the sale of their new 
house. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Give us a name. 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- The Minister of Consumer Affairs wants the name.  I'll do 
better than that; I'll give him a copy of the letter if he would like that.  
Not that we can trust this particular minister to listen.  He certainly 
hasn't listened to the concerns of other Saskatchewan people when it's come 
to the concerns of the depositors in Principal Trust, or when it comes to 
this particular minister listening to the concerns of Saskatchewan families 
when it comes to new home warranty protection, as he was questioned about a 
couple of months ago. 
 
I want to quote just in closing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, from this letter from 
this constituent, because I think it's very important to give voice to what 
ordinary Saskatchewan people have to say.  She writes: 
 

 Presently we are now faced with a decision of great importance -- to walk 
away from our mortgage and leave it in the hands of the bank or to 
continue to live there as it sits now and pray that we will win a lottery. 

 
 Moving out of province is also an option that has been considered, 

starting over again.  This means leaving the province where we were born 
and raised. 

 
Now isn't that a sad commentary on life in Saskatchewan when people have to 
hope or pray that they can win a lottery to survive economically? 
 
This particular constituent goes on to say: 
 

 Saskatchewan is fast becoming a ghost province.  Instead of having 10 
provinces, Canada will eventually only have nine if things continue the 
way they are going.  If the population in Saskatchewan continues to 
decline, there won't be a Saskatchewan to govern.  I think this is 
something that should be thought about!!!!! 

 
And that's the end of the letter from my constituent to the Premier.  I 
haven't a copy of the Premier's response yet, but I think it points to the 
devastating effect that this lack of economic planning, this lack of any 
long-term vision beyond political polls really leads to. 
 
And I say then, that when it comes to this particular piece of legislation, 
enabling the Minister of the Family to deal in a very wide-sweeping, broad 



 

 

manner with family and community life, the mandate of this legislation 
really means nothing unless the man or the woman who is the minister does 
something. 
 
And to date we have a Minister of the Family who's been minister for some 
seven months now and has really done nothing other than to utter pious 
platitudes about the government's agenda for families or to announce that 
there is $750,000 for hungry children of Saskatchewan, failing to point out 
that only half of that money comes from the provincial government, that 
even as a whole that $750,000 would only amount to 3 cents a day for hungry 
children in Saskatchewan -- the 64,000 hungry children. 
 
That's the kind of Minister of the Family we have.  And that's why, as good 
as this particular legislation is, it's not going to make any difference 
unless and until we get people into the office of government who are as 
good as the Saskatchewan families that they're called to serve and to 
minister to. 
 
So with that I'd like to conclude my remarks, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on this 
Bill 2.  Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I want to make a few 
remarks about this Bill, and I want to direct them directly to the 
minister.  And I'm pleased that the minister has been here diligently 
listening to what has been said because the minister has a tremendous job 
in front of him, placed before him, and a tremendous onus that's been 
placed on him by this government and his members, the members opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to tell the minister flat out that I believe he's being 
used by this government.  I believe he is being used by the Premier of this 
province and by the front-benchers; that he's being set up as a decoy with 
this department; that there is no way that he can accomplish everything 
that he would probably like to accomplish by being given a title and an 
office, and no money, no budget, nothing else to work with. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, that what is happening here is that this minister 
is being used to divert attention from all of the problems that are 
affecting families and affecting every citizen in Saskatchewan 
economically, which then turns into personal and family problems.  It's 
been inflicted as a result of the policies of this government, and it's 
rather sad to have to say to you, Mr. Minister, that I believe you are 
being used as a decoy. 
 
It's also sad that you haven't recognized that that's what's happened 
because in the end, what's going to happen, Mr. Minister, because it's 
almost impossible for you to succeed in the task that has been placed 
before you, you are going to be held responsible for the continuing decline 
of what's happening in this province and as a result you will not only . . 
. the finger is going to switch and instead of being used as a decoy to 
decoy and divert attention, you will then become the mark of those in the 
inner cabinet and you will be tossed out in disgrace. 



 

 

 
You will become the victim.  You will become the victim, Mr. Minister, 
against your own better judgement and against everything you might try.  
Because, Mr. Minister, the task before you is virtually impossible with all 
the baggage that you have to carry with you, with the rest of these people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will back that up by some remarks in a few minutes.  But I 
want to, before I do that, I want to identify and I want to place on the 
table, on the record, that I strongly believe, as every member on this side 
certainly believes, the importance of the family and the family structure 
in our society.  We believe in that; we believe in that dearly.  We live it 
day by day. 
 
The family, I believe, is very important from the aspect of a societal 
point of view and also from the individual point of view of any individual 
and his or her well-being.  Just to expand on that concept somewhat, Mr. 
Speaker, we know that anybody that lives in a society, and in any society 
we have family structures, which in our case in Saskatchewan, the basic has 
been what has been referred to as a nuclear family, where the support of 
the parents to their children is basic to our society. 
 
In some parts of our province and in some neighbourhoods this support is 
not always available from the traditional nuclear family but is given by 
the extended family, by those in the neighbourhood, by cousins, by uncles.  
And, Mr. Speaker, when that support is unavailable, then we have the role 
of government. 
 
We have established throughout the years that the gaps that are left for 
the need of individuals by, say, the extended family or the nuclear family 
should be filled by somebody, should be filled.  And we have agreed and 
have over the years put together a government organization to do it, or 
done it through some means of government. 
 
So I bring these things to the record, Mr. Speaker, because in no way do I 
want the criticism that I am extending on the government to be misconstrued 
as non-support from the family.  Quite the contrary is true.  We believe 
that anything that can be put into place should be put into place to be 
able to support the family. 
 
I mentioned that the aspect of family from the societal point of view, and 
support of the family from the societal point of view is very important.  
It's also very important from an individual well-being point of view.  A 
member of a family gets first of all his physiological needs met -- just 
the standard things like safety and food and shelter, Mr. Speaker -- but 
also psychological needs which then give him the confidence to go ahead and 
pursue those things that he or she wants to pursue in life. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, having said that, I now go back to my original thesis on 
what is really happening in Saskatchewan and how this Bill fits into the 
scene.  In Saskatchewan we've seen, and everybody has seen ad nauseam, to 
what has happened under this government.  We've seen reduced services, 
increasing deficits, increasing debts, and higher taxes.  Everybody knows 
that; that's been well established.  It has been established to the point 



 

 

where it is tiresome to even talk of it longer. 
 
The sad result of that is now being tried . . . this government is trying 
to use several methods to try to cover up for that result and trying to 
recover.  And many of the members opposite are quite sincere about trying 
to recover.  Unfortunately the baggage that they are carrying, the 
philosophical approach of privatization they are carrying, will only 
contribute to added deterioration in this province as noted by the 
out-migration figures of today.  It will just carry on. 
 
They've had seven years which they've seen this trend developing, which 
they've seen this trend developing, and there have been times when they've 
wavered.  There have been times when they say, well maybe we should cut 
back on privatization; maybe we've gone too far too fast.  And then we hear 
a couple of ministers saying, well maybe it's time to cut down, but at the 
same time we get three or four that are pushing the concept of 
privatization -- dogmatic privatization.  There's room for privatization, 
Mr. Speaker, but not room for dogmatic privatization.  You've got to be 
looking at them one at a time and not taking that whole thing as a 
doctrine, as if it was a religion and going forward with it. 
 
(1645) 
 
Now I'm telling the minister that he's shackled by that baggage.  I'm also 
telling the minister that he's shackled, that he's been set up by what has 
not happened to his department in the budget.  If this ministry and this 
Bill had any chance of succeeding, they would have given him some money to 
work with.  They would have given him some power and some influence to work 
with. 
 
But when I look at this year's budget, the first time that anything for 
families has appeared under a separate budget item, I look at it and I 
examine it.  They look at this as a new thrust.  They look at it as a new 
thrust.  And when I look at it, and it's right here on page 43, Mr. 
Speaker, of the budget document for 1990-91, they give this minister $1.288 
million to work with. And if that is all the information you have, it 
sounds not too bad --- a minister with $1.288 million. 
 
But if you take a look at the fine print on the same page, it tells you, 
Mr. Minister, that this money which this minister's given has been 
transferred to his control from other departments in previous years.  It 
has been transferred from Education, from Health, from Human Resources, 
some from Labour and Employment, some from Justice, and some from Social 
Services. 
 
So what's happened is there's no new money whatsoever.  There's no nothing 
new happening.  It's a bit of a shift.  They give it to a minister.  They 
give him no new staff, and the minister identifies that himself.  And what 
do they do?  They in addition to that . . . and they do a complete 
transfer, no power whatsoever.  They shackle him; they use him as a decoy.  
There is no way that this minister can do anything that hasn't been done 
previously by other ministers.  All he can do is exacerbate the situation 
because there's one additional ministerial salary to pay. 



 

 

 
Now as a matter of fact, if you take a look at the budget allotment that's 
been given here and compare it with what that same vote expenditure had in 
previous years and compare it to last year 1989-1990, you find that the 
budget allotment is down.  Last year this same . . . these same people, 
these same nine people who were working in these various departments, had 
$1.300 million to work with.  This year it's been decreased, as I said 
earlier, to $1.288 million, which makes it into a completely impossible 
situation. 
 
That's why, Mr. Minister, I'm telling you that you are being used as a 
decoy.  You are being put into an impossible situation.  Sadly, I'm afraid 
of it; I feel badly about it for you.  And I feel badly for Saskatchewan 
families, but I think it's time the truth be told as what you're really 
being expected to do. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I then looked at the Bill and I examined the Bill.  And 
what is it that the minister is given power to do, or responsibility to do?  
And you will find that nowhere in that Bill is the minister given any 
specific responsibility of something that he has to carry out.  Not a 
thing. 
 
There is nothing in that Bill that he has to carry out.  In the Bill there 
are a series of "may" clauses:  the minister may do this, and he may do 
this, and he may do this.  I suggest to you, Mr. Minister, that unless 
you're able to take that "may" material and put it into some kind of a . . 
. put it into some type of responsible mode that you will be absolutely, 
absolutely ineffective.  You're been shackled; you're being used as a 
decoy. 
 
What the Bill does do, is it gives you a series of moral . . . it gives you 
the power to do moral suasion.  And that is what my colleague was referring 
to.  It gives you the power to consult, to research, to communicate, to 
evaluate, to recommend.  It gives you all of that power. 
 
And I suggest to you, if you didn't have that power as a sitting member 
before this, before you came to this . . . before you were appointed as 
minister, then there was no point in sitting in that caucus.  That's all 
that that Bill does.  That is exactly all it does. 
 
Mr. Minister, you are being used by this government.  You are being used by 
the front benches and the Premier as a decoy to divert attention.  The only 
thing you're going to be able to do is travel to a few communities, talk to 
them, say, well I'll speak on your behalf to the Minister of Social 
Services, or I'll speak on your behalf to the Minister of Education, or 
I'll speak on your behalf to the minister of human resources and 
development or to the Minister of Justice or whatever situation you arise 
in.  But you will not be able to do anything yourself, and in the end you 
will be used as the mark.  That's unfortunate, Mr. Minister, but that is 
exactly what's going to happen. 
 
Now I must say, Mr. Minister, that there is a tremendous need in 
Saskatchewan for a very proactive position to help families in 



 

 

Saskatchewan.  It is really needed, and that goes from making definite 
action and taking definite action on poverty, on race relations, in the 
area of culture, sports, recreation, in the area of early childhood 
development, in the area of things like dental plans for schools, in the 
areas of social services where there is a tremendous need for specific 
attention to those who are in difficulty. 
 
Mr. Minister, just pause there for a moment.  I wonder if you would be 
aware that in the city that I come from, the city of Prince Albert, that 
when you combine the numbers of the people that are in social services, the 
provincial people and the federal people, that the number has increased 
some fourfold in the last three years -- the number of people receiving 
social services.  When you combine the federal and the provincial 
statistics, that that's what's happened. 
 
Now that is a reflection of what's happening to families in Saskatchewan.  
That's a tremendous, tremendous responsibility, and the minister says 
that's why he's here and I think he believes it.  But I'm pointing out to 
him, Mr. Minister, that you're being used as a decoy, because there's no 
way you're going to be able to affect that; there is no way you're going to 
be able to affect that with the transfer of budget from other places and no 
power.  It's unfortunate; it's unfortunate. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, let me describe to you some of the problems that you 
will be faced with with respect to poverty.  And I will turn, because of 
the time that's limited here, Mr. Speaker, I will refer only to some 
statistics in my own city.  In my own city of Prince Albert, Mr. Minister, 
there are four community schools in which in total give snacks or breakfast 
to 900 students, 900 students.  That's only in one city.  In addition, 
there are 85 children who receive lunches in St. Mark's parish, plus 
another -- pardon me, I gave you the wrong figure there; it's 50 to 80 that 
receive lunches in St. Mark's parish -- plus there are another 85 that 
receive lunches in the schools. 
 
Last March, there were 200 more people who received food from the food bank 
in Prince Albert than the year before that.  And the total was 1,632 people 
who received food in March, in Prince Albert. 
 
I know that your government advertised the total of $740,000 they were 
going to put into poverty or . . . for children.  But when you take a look 
at 64,000 children in the province who are growing up in poverty, that only 
amounts to 3 cents a day.  Compare that with the seven hundred and some 
thousand that Chuck Childers gets, and that comes out to about $2,000 a 
day. 
 
Just do that little comparison.  That sticks very much in people's minds 
when you're looking about what your government is doing to you, Mr. 
Minister, using you as a decoy while this is happening, Mr. Minister.  That 
is what is happening and what'll happen to you in the end is you will be 
used as the mark. 
 
Mr. Minister, there's a tremendous amount of work that has to be done in 
the province regarding the issue of race relations.  It's an issue that 



 

 

must be addressed; it should not be run away from.  It is very, very 
important.  It's important that a government take a proactive stand in it, 
not a fall-back reactive position.  Some leadership is required in this 
area, Mr. Minister, and I look to you to provide some leadership in this 
aspect. 
 
That is one thing I think you might be able to do something about; that is, 
in leading the rhetoric -- I suppose could be the word -- but leading the . 
. . this government needs somebody who will speak up for positive race 
relations in Saskatchewan.  And that will not cost a pile of money.  And if 
you can do that, Mr. Minister, if you can do that then possibly the other 
ministers can be convinced to actually put some money into programming 
which will help.  But they need help from some place. 
 
Mr. Minister, I just want to touch briefly on one other item before I sit 
down.  And this is the area which you also are being . . . another area 
that shows how you're being shackled.  In this province we have over the 
years built up a sport, cultural, and recreational department through the 
use of lottery money.  And every year since that's been put into place, the 
program has been more successful than the year previous.  Every year it has 
been more successful than the year previous until last year when your 
government, through its greed, decided it wanted to pull some of the money 
out of the lottery, away from the lotteries, away from the people who were 
able to use that money for approximately half of the population in 
Saskatchewan in small portions.  There were 1,200 organizations across the 
province in the sport, cultural and recreational areas which were using the 
money very efficiently, always using it efficiently, and using it to the 
benefit of Saskatchewan families. 
 
But what happened is your government pulled the carpet out from under that; 
undermined that whole funding scheme with their greed when they decided 
they were going to put in the lottery tax. 
 
So as a result, Mr. Minister, as a result of that there was a $15 million 
loss in revenue, there was an $18 million loss in sales, in the lottery 
sales, and all of the sport, culture and recreational organizations have to 
decrease their funds this year, that they would get from that department, 
by 20 per cent.  You tell me what the long-term effect of that is going to 
be to families, Mr. Minister.  You tell me.  And you tell me what you're 
going to be able to do about it. 
 
Mr. Minister, I repeat my thesis.  I repeat my thesis: Mr. Minister, you 
are being used here as a decoy.  You have . . . your chances of success in 
this department are extremely, extremely slim because you have nothing to 
work with except moral suasion, the possibility of persuading your fellow 
ministers.  That is all that you have to work with. 
 
I wish you the best, Mr. Minister, because I believe that the cause that 
you, deep in your heart, that you deep in your heart wish to effect, I 
think is honourable.  I believe it's honourable and I think all members on 
this side believe it's honourable.  And I think it's a very sad thing that 
you've been put into this position.  You're being used as a decoy, and when 
it fails, you'll be used as a mark. 



 

 

 
The Speaker: -- The Minister for the Family is about to close debate.  
Under rule 28(2), the mover of a substantive motion has the right to reply; 
however I must inform the Assembly, if anybody wishes to speak to the 
motion they must do so now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- I should be grateful, Mr. Speaker, of the fact that 
they left me two minutes to talk about this very important exercise that 
I'm involved in, Mr. Speaker.  I must say that I was somewhat dismayed by 
the personal attacks, particularly from the member from Eastview.  The 
personal attacks, Mr. Speaker, I thought were unnecessary. 
 
Let me respond to what he just talked about being a decoy.  Well I feel 
very good about being, if what he characterizes as a decoy, Mr. Speaker, 
because what we're doing with Department of the Family, Mr. Speaker, is 
leading the way in North America.  This is the first time in the history of 
government in North America when a government has had a Minister of the 
Family -- someone who sits at the cabinet table, listens to all the issues 
and all the initiatives that the government wishes to bring forward, and 
see how they relate and how they would affect members of the family. 
 
(1700) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I've enjoyed that exercise because it's given me an 
opportunity to be in many communities in this province and talk to hundreds 
and hundreds of people, to attend some of the 50 forums, family forums that 
we've had so far since the middle of February, that have . . . As a matter 
of fact, Mr. Speaker, over 15,000 people in this province since the middle 
of February have come to these family forums. 
 
The family forums, I think, may be the most important initiative that I'm 
involved in, Mr. Speaker.  Because the family forums are gatherings where 
people in the community talk about areas that are of concern to them.  They 
talk about family stress, Mr. Speaker.  They talk about family abuse.  They 
talk about parenting skills and about communication.  They design these 
policies, Mr. Speaker, they invite the speakers, and all we do as a 
department is fund them to a small percentage.  And we've had over 50 of 
these family forums so far in the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I'm always amused when I hear them talk about out-migration.  I've lived in 
this province all my life, Mr. Speaker.  In 1932 there were a million 
people in this province.  In 1990 there are a million people, Mr. Speaker.  
Where did they all go?  They all went to Alberta, to Tory Alberta, because 
we did not have the infrastructure in this province that we should have had 
during the 1970s. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, unless we can build that infrastructure, unless we can 
diversify our economy in this province, we will not keep the young people 
in this province, Mr. Speaker.  But diversification is not my main thrust.  
My main thrust is to listen to the people of the province, listen to the 
teenagers, Mr. Speaker, who tell me that their parents don't listen to them 
enough, and try to encourage the parents, through ways like the family 
forums, to spend more time with their children and talk to them. 



 

 

 
And while the member from Saskatoon Eastview may scoff at that idea of 
people going for walks with their children, Mr. Speaker, I can assure him 
that it really does work.  It's worked, it works for a lot of good 
families, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I thought the member, I thought the minister, or rather the member from 
Athabasca talked about something -- and I'll be very brief, Mr. Speaker, 
because I know that the clock is running out -- I thought the member from 
Athabasca spoke knowledgeably about these particular matters.  He talked 
about a partnership, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I see my role as a Minister of the Family to develop partnerships between 
government and communities, between communities and people within those 
communities, Mr. Speaker, thereby developing a partnership between the 
people and the government of the day, Mr. Speaker.  I find that being very 
important. 
 
Now the members opposite may scoff and sneer and try to make fun of the 
ministry of the Family.  But I feel very good about it, Mr. Speaker, 
because I know, I know in my heart and I see it in the numbers of people 
who come to our forums, that we're having an impact out there, that people 
really do want to talk about their problems.  And finally, a government has 
given them an opportunity to do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as I close, I urge all members in the House, Mr. Speaker, 
to support this Bill because it is the first of its kind in North America, 
Mr. Speaker.  It has far-reaching impact on families in this province, and 
we all know how difficult it is, in rural Saskatchewan particularly, for 
families these days.  But I urge all members to support this Bill, Mr. 
Speaker.  Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee 
of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:03 p.m. 
 


