





























































Hansard: June 19, 1990


 

 

June 19/90 
EVENING SITTING 

 
SECOND READINGS 

 
Bill No. 46 -- An Act to amend The Statute Law 

 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I won't make any remarks on this other than to say that 
is the standard statute law amendment dealing with some technical 
amendments.  I move second reading of Bill 46, The Statute Law Amendment 
Act. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee 
of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 43 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the 
Hon. Mr. Lane that Bill No. 43 -- An Act respecting Police Services be now 
read a second time. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to make a number of 
comments, Mr. Speaker, in respect to this Bill.  I want to talk first of 
all in respect to the consultation process as provided by the Minister of 
Justice in respect to the introduction and getting the public input in 
respect to the Bill.  And I also want to talk briefly about some general 
principles which are of concern to us. 
 
As a basis of a history in respect to the introduction of The Police Act, 
Mr. Speaker, may I remind the House that last year a new Bill, police Bill, 
was introduced and it was stood on the order paper and died on the order 
paper and in effect was a white paper.  So in essence we had a new police 
Act out for the public and those particularly interested, for over one 
year.  And one would have hoped, therefore, that the Minister of Justice 
had ample time to do a good job in respect to the consultation and to see 
whether and to review and to determine whether various aspects of 
improvement of The Police Act had indeed been examined. 
 
And there is no doubt as I talk to the groups that have a great interest 
and respect to The Police Act, that there has been throughout the last year 
some consultation.  If I talk to the federation of police officers for 
Saskatchewan, they indicate that they had discussions with the minister and 
the minister's staff sometime last fall, and they had more recently this 
year. 
 
But it doesn't end quite there.  Because in my discussions with some of the 
groups, they indicate that while they had those discussions, and while they 



 

 

raised some of the concerns to the minister and/or his staff, that they 
were under the impression that once the anticipated final draft was 
prepared, that there would be consultations in respect to their concerns 
before the introduction of the Bill.  And they're disappointed that that 
didn't happen.  There may be a mistake in understanding of language as to 
whether they would be consulted before proclamation or whether before it 
was passed in third reading, but that is the clear indication of some of 
the groups that I talked to. 
 
Let's take a look after this Bill was introduced as a white paper last 
year, providing input.  And the minister comes to this House and we're 
sitting at day 62, I believe it is -- day 64 -- and the minister introduces 
the Bill in first reading and there's absolutely zero time before he's 
launching into second readings and wanting to get on with the passage of 
the Bill.  And when we go out to contact after first reading, which I 
believe was last Friday -- right, second reading on Friday -- at that stage 
already shortly after he introduced in first reading and we contact a 
number of groups that are interested in it, they had not even received a 
copy of the Bill that was introduced in this House.  And the minister says 
this is consultation. 
 
I want to put it to the minister, here he had over a year to put in place 
some real meaningful consultation.  And I want to ask the minister: has he 
followed up with some of the associations and some of the organizations 
that are interested in the amendments to The Police Act, or the new Bill 
rather?  I wonder whether he has had any further discussions with the John 
Howard Society who I understand had to almost foist themself onto the 
process of making representation.  I wonder whether he indeed did go back 
and deliver a copy to them that they might be interested.  I wonder if the 
minister, in his consultation process which he said is complete, has 
included the native people of Saskatchewan in a meaningful way in respect 
to the consultation process.  And now I understand, well, the minister is 
indicating -- or at least the latest reports that I get -- is, oh well, 
there's some complete support in respect to it. 
 
So I think that there has been less than fruitful and total discussion that 
really should have been provided during that whole year that the 
consultation process took place.  And there's no doubt at the present time 
the minister has rapidly decided that the version that he has is the 
version that should proceed because he introduced it in first reading, and 
as soon as he could, he went into second reading and no further 
consultation.  In fact, when we contacted the groups, they hadn't even 
received the Bill, and it was into second reading already. 
 
So we're concerned with that.  And I know that in consultation you can't 
address all of the concerns of the various parties because of the 
divergence of views.  But certainly the major actors, I think, should have 
at least had been privy to whether or not some of their concerns were going 
to be addressed.  And indeed I understand in part of the Act, a section 
which is completely and totally new to them, that they had never seen 
before.  And we're going to be addressing it here tonight. 
 
That's on the process that I wanted to talk about.  I think it could have 



 

 

been more thorough.  I think that there has been some consultation and 
maybe rightly or wrongly the minister may have felt that he completed the . 
. . that some of the parties really anticipated that you would be coming 
back with the final version and discussing the concerns prior to 
introduction of the Bill. 
 
Within the legislation itself, Mr. Minister, you indicate that one of the 
aspects of the Bill is that what you introduce in this new Bill is a 
greater capacity for the ordinary citizen to launch a complaint in respect 
to police actions.  And I can indicate to you that there has been some 
pressure to make it streamline the procedure. 
 
And in the procedure that is adopted here, while it doesn't certainly go 
the full route, nor I doubt whether the minister even explored the 
possibility of a totally independent commission separate and apart from The 
Police Act in so far as grievances against the police, and so there . . . 
While we have increased the capacity of individuals to lay complaints, one 
of the aspects that is of concern to the police officers across the 
province is that under the previous Act, when complaints were brought 
either by the public or internal discipline or incompetence -- internal 
discipline -- that the standard of proof that was required in respect to 
charges against an officer, the standard of proof that was used, Mr. 
Speaker, was that as provided by the Criminal Code, which said that the 
standard of proof would be that it would be have to be proven beyond 
reasonable doubt rather than the civil standard of proof which is the 
balance of probabilities. 
 
What we have done here . . . we have been using the Criminal Code burden of 
proof previously, in the previous Act, I'm advised.  I'm not advised that 
there was major concerns in respect to using the Criminal Code standard of 
proof as against an officer, either by an individual or within the force 
itself.  What we have done is open up the process and what we have really 
done is lowered the standard of proof as against the officer. 
 
They're concerned with that -- many of the officers -- because they feel 
that it was working; the standard of proof that we had previously was 
working fairly well and that it should be maintained.  Moreover they 
indicate that if you decrease the standard of proof that has to be proven 
in a case against an officer that that may affect the performance of that 
officer, that he will take absolute and total caution, that he's working 
strictly and totally within the rules. 
 
Let's assume that officers want to do that, but they work in crisis 
situations as well.  And the thing is what you do to them by decreasing the 
standard of proof to have a charge against them is that they say, well I 
won't take the chance -- it's a crisis, but it's better for me to walk away 
because I am not going to get up against a review hearing and be charged 
under a lower standard of proof.  I raise that for the minister's 
consideration.  There is certainly widespread concern. 
 
Now it can be argued that if you're broadening the aspect of the right of 
the individual complainant to launch an appeal that commensurate with that 
you lower the standard of proof.  But I don't think the two necessarily 



 

 

have to go hand in hand.  I think if you increase the availability of being 
able to raise complaints and the process has been improved, then you don't 
necessarily have to go the next step.  And certainly that is a major 
concern and I think it has been raised with the minister.  And certainly we 
will be discussing that further in Committee of the Whole. 
 
That same thing applies not only to . . . Well I shouldn't deal with 
sections, but there's two provisions in which that burden of proof has been 
altered.  And we feel that whether it's a public complaint or disciplinary 
actions that the standard of proof should really remain at the level of the 
criminal standard of beyond reasonable doubt. 
 
(1915) 
 
There are a number of other provisions that are of concern and have been 
raised.  There is a section which provides within the raising a complaint 
and if a hearing is brought forward, and I think it's a positive aspect, 
that the complainant may attend the basic hearing but can be excluded if 
the hearing officer feels that it's in the public interest.  You have to 
have a pretty sensitive hearing officer, and there should be perhaps some 
right of the officers to make applications that the complainant not be 
there because their consideration here, Mr. Minister, is that sometimes 
evidence may disclose some of the methodology that police use. 
 
And the complainant that is sitting in on the hearing itself could be, not 
necessarily, but may have a legitimate complaint but could be a hardened 
criminal. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- But that's in the Bill. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Yes I know.  But the officers do not decide whether or not 
the complainant won't be there, the hearing officer does.  And that's the 
concern that they have.  And they may very well have a sensitive hearing 
officer.  That's the position that they put forward in discussions of that 
section. 
 
There's several other areas that need to be discussed.  And I'm just going 
to mention a couple of the other sections, not sections but principles of 
the Bill that we are indeed concerned with.  And my colleague, the member 
from Moose Jaw South, is going to elaborate in respect to those.  And just 
to articulate -- not to explain but to mention them -- there is a provision 
also that provides in the Act, that the provisions of the Act supersedes 
any provisions of a collective bargaining agreement, present or future.  
And my colleague as I said is going to discuss that in some detail but I 
want to raise that as a concern.  I think it . . . well, I'll leave that 
for my colleague. 
 
There's another provision which also . . . there's a section 83 and I can't 
go into sections because the principle of the conciliation and what appears 
to be the binding arbitration provision under section 84.  And also, Mr. 
Minister, there is a provision which requires five days notice before a 
strike. 
 



 

 

A few other aspects are of concern which I'll deal with clause by clause.  
But basically those are the essential concerns that have been raised to me, 
and as I say, my colleague from Moose Jaw North, following my comments, 
wants to make some comments in respect to the provisions which I think run 
against good labour practices in the provinces and in fact derogates 
against good labour relations between the parties. 
 
And so other aspects of the Bill, Mr. Minister, we will be dealing with 
when we come to Committee of the Whole.  Those are the comments that I 
wanted to raise for your consideration at this time. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I would ask for leave 
to introduce some guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to introduce 
to you, and through you to other members of the legislature, several 
teachers who are visiting the Legislative Assembly tonight.  I understand 
that there are teachers from Moose Jaw as well as the city of Regina and 
surrounding areas. 
 
They have come to the legislature to monitor the potential for any 
legislation that might have a direct impact upon them.  And I would ask all 
teachers and superannuated teachers to please rise so that we could 
recognize you and thank you for coming. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too would like to ask 
for leave to introduce the guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too would like to add my 
words of welcome to all of the teachers and superannuates that are with us 
this evening.  It's indeed a pleasure to have them with us and I am sure 
that they will enjoy the proceedings.  I also am sure that as the next few 
days unfold, that they will appreciate the type of things that have been 
happening with regard to some of the concerns that they have.  And I too 
would just like to welcome them here to the legislature tonight.  Thank 
you. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 43 (continued) 
 



 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I rise to join with my 
colleague the member from Quill Lakes in second reading debate on The 
Police Act. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, I would concur with my colleague the Justice 
critic and the comments that he's made and the concerns that he has raised 
in this Assembly regarding The Police Act before us. 
 
I would also like to place special emphasis, Mr. Speaker, having the same 
concern, sharing the same concern about the lack of opportunity for 
consultation between the time that the Bill was introduced in first reading 
and then comes to the House in second reading for debate now.  I'm sure 
that the Minister of Justice will be taking note of this and doing his best 
to do some quick consultation to understand the concerns of groups impacted 
by this Bill, as the opposition has done. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to address the bulk of my comments on this 
Bill to matters that the member from Quill Lakes referred to just briefly.  
And, Mr. Speaker, interestingly enough, on matters in which, when I review 
Hansard of June 15 and the comments of the minister in second reading of 
the Bill, to which he made absolutely no reference whatsoever.  And I would 
say, Mr. Speaker, that is not surprising to me that he made no, absolutely 
no reference whatsoever because they have to do with issues that have come 
to our attention that are of significant concern -- and I underline the 
word significant -- not just in passing but of significant concern to the 
rank and file police officers in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we're dealing with this Bill, The Police Act, we are 
obviously dealing very, very significantly with the provision of police 
services and obviously dealing with the mechanisms by which rank and file 
police officers in our province deal with their administrations, Mr. 
Speaker, and it's in that area that I bring concerns to the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is implicit in this Bill a new principle which in my 
time in this Assembly has not been introduced in this Assembly before.  And 
it is of all the items in the Bill the one that appears to be of greatest 
concern to the largest number of police officers -- rank and file police 
officers -- in Saskatchewan.  And it has to do with the fact, Mr. Speaker, 
that this Bill will require police associations to give five days notice 
before taking strike action if they come to that point in their collective 
bargaining negotiations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, to some that may seem to be a fairly minor point, that 
police officers should be required to give five days notice before taking 
strike action.  But on reflection, Mr. Speaker, it is a much more 
significant point than many may give at first thought.  One has to ask why 
it is that the government of the day would require police officers to give 
five days notice. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when I look at that issue, it seems to me that there is 
only one explanation -- I can think of no other -- and the one explanation 
. . . the minister says from his seat, long weekend.  Well what does the 



 

 

minister mean by long weekend?  When he says the issue is long weekend, 
therefore police have to give five days notice to strike. 
 
What he's saying, Mr. Speaker, and I'll allow the minister to make his own 
comments on this, but it would seem to me very clear that what he's saying 
is that there would have to be a five-day period.  Should police 
association give strike notice at 2 o'clock on a Friday afternoon after 
this Assembly has adjourned and it's a long weekend and you need five days 
to go through the long weekend, come back to this Assembly and legislate an 
end to the strike before they have an opportunity to take strike action.  
Mr. Speaker, that seems to be very clearly the implication of requiring 
five days notice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I think about that, there is also a very, very serious 
implication in the principle that's being applied and the thought processes 
that the government is using.  Because clearly, Mr. Speaker, what the 
minister is saying is that it is standard practice.  The approach to 
dealing with the potential for strike action by police officers in our 
province will be to legislate away their right to strike should they ever 
use that, prior to their being able to use that. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, some people would say, well that's in the interest of the 
protection of public safety.  And we get into the debate about necessary 
services and the like.  But, Mr. Minister, when the government of the day 
walks into this Assembly and introduces a brand-new section that was not in 
the previous Act, not in the previous police Act, which says, our approach 
to dealing with the potential for strike will be to legislate that right 
away before they have a chance to use it, Mr. Speaker, implicit in that is 
the conclusion that from the point of view of this government, police in 
Saskatchewan shall no longer have the right to strike.  There is no way of 
avoiding that conclusion when you look at the implications of this 
principle, Mr. Speaker.  One can conclude nothing other than that. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, one has to then ask the minister if it is your objective 
to legislate away their right to strike, what problem are you solving?  Has 
there been some significant problem, or series of problems, related to 
strikes by police officers in the province of Saskatchewan that we're 
attempting to remedy or address in this Act? 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as I look at the history of Saskatchewan, the answer is a 
clear no.  I will be asking the minister in Committee of the Whole -- and I 
give notice to the minister that I will be asking this question -- to point 
to a case here in Saskatchewan where the police, having taken strike 
action, has led to a significant public problem. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the minister may very well say, well we don't want to 
endanger the security of the people of Saskatchewan.  And I would concur 
with that objective.  Now, Mr. Speaker, does that also say when comparing 
setting aside . . . setting beside each other, the right of Saskatchewan 
citizens to have police protection, with the collective bargaining rights 
of the police of Saskatchewan to use ultimately, although extremely rarely 
-- extremely rarely -- the ultimate bargaining chip that they have in their 
negotiations which is to withdraw services. 



 

 

 
How does the minister justify putting into place an item which appears to 
be intended to do nothing more than to eliminate that right from them? -- 
presumably justified on the grounds of police services being a necessary 
service.  And so then we have to ask, Mr. Speaker, if police services are a 
necessary service, which justify in a very through the back-door kind of 
way, withdrawing their right to strike without officially doing that, then 
who's next?  If that's the approach to police services, what's next? 
 
Is it nursing services, Mr. Speaker?  Because nurses provide necessary 
health care services in the province of Saskatchewan.  And, Mr. Speaker, 
what next?  Is it the teachers right to strike?  Because teachers educate 
our children, and particularly, when we come to the end of a school year it 
becomes a little more pressing and more inconvenient if people are not 
allowed to finish their year of studies uninterrupted.  Or is it the 
university professors? 
 
Mr. Speaker, once we begin to slide down the slippery slope of withdrawing 
the right to strike, taking away the democratic right of working people in 
the province of Saskatchewan to organize themselves and to bargain 
collectively with their employer -- and, Mr. Speaker, that's clearly the 
implication of the principle that is introduced in section 85 of this Bill 
-- once we start to slide down that slippery slope, Mr. Speaker, what we 
begin to do is to diminish the bargaining power of people who choose to 
organize collectively to deal with their employers in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
(1930) 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I point out that until this Bill was presented in the 
House the previous police Act had no similar section.  It had no similar 
section.  And the provisions of The Trade Union Act applied to the police 
in Saskatchewan the same as they do to all other bodies in our province 
that are organized collectively. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also point out that it is within the authority of this 
Legislative Assembly to take action where it is deemed to seriously 
jeopardize the public interest -- actions that are taken by bodies in our 
society, including strike actions -- it is clearly within the purview of 
this Legislative Assembly, should that be the judgement of the government 
of the day, to use legislative force to draw conclusions to those.  And 
that has nothing, absolutely nothing to do . . . that's a principle that 
exists.  It is in no way affected by The Police Act with or without this 
clause, this principle being introduced requiring five days notice for 
police officers to take a strike. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, it is not surprising to me that rank and file police 
officers -- I'm talking rank and file police officers across the province 
of Saskatchewan . . . The minister shakes his head, I can hear it from 
here.  Mr. Minister, you'll have the opportunity to respond to this in 
Committee of the Whole. 
 
And I find it interesting that in introducing this brand new section in The 



 

 

Police Act you chose not to even make any passing reference to it in your 
second reading debate.  Now either you consider it insignificant or you do 
not want to draw attention to it, Mr. Minister.  But I'll tell you that 
rank and file police officers, the people who are working on the beat, on 
the street, Mr. Minister, those people are concerned about this provision 
in the Act and it's one of the largest concerns that they have about the 
Act that you're bringing to this Assembly.  I'm telling you that.  If you 
don't know that then you should ought to get out there and do some 
consultation and find that out for yourself, Mr. Minister. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I raise this concern because it is of importance to the 
rank and file police officers in our province; but I raise it as well 
because of the public policy implications -- if it should carry in this Act 
-- the public policy implications that it would have for others who are 
employed in the public or the quasi-public sector, who are or could be 
considered to be in a position to provide necessary services, and we can 
look as I said before, from the police to the nurses to the teachers and on 
down the line. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can finally conclude on this point by pointing out that any 
body that loses its right to strike, whether it be officially, informally, 
or in effect, as this would seem to me to imply, any body which loses its 
right to strike also reduces its ability to win through negotiations, 
through collective agreements, the kinds of benefits that they feel that 
they would like to seek as part of their employment benefits arrangements, 
Mr. Speaker.  And that is of concern to not only police officers but to 
virtually all who are employed in situations in which a collective 
agreement applies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, moving beyond that point, I'd like to draw reference to three 
other principles in the Act, two of which are new and one of which is a 
repeat of the previous Act in essence.  As my colleague, the member for 
Quill Lakes, pointed out that this Act introduces a conciliation section 
which did not previously exist in the current Police Act.  It's new, and 
one has to ask the question -- I give the minister advance notice of the 
question: why here?  Why now?  That's the question.  Why is it not possible 
to arrive at conciliation procedures through the collective bargaining 
process?  Why is it necessary to place it in to The Police Act? 
 
The conciliation also . . . and I give the minister advance notice of 
another question.  For some odd reason, we have here the principle of 
conciliation placed into an Act, which is a different concept, Mr. Speaker.  
But not only that, for some odd notion, it's possible -- it appears to me 
as I take a look at this Act -- it's possible for one party to request 
conciliation for it to occur.  Now that's an odd way to approach 
conciliation when conciliation is, by the authority of the Act, can be put 
in place with only one party, without both parties agreeing to it.  That's 
what it says. 
 
If the minister says that that's not what is intended, then I invite the 
minister to read his Act and I invite the minister to review it and I 
invite the minister to consider withdrawing that section of the Act.  I 
invite the minister to consult with the people who are affected by it. 



 

 

 
Mr. Speaker, there's also within this Act what appears to be essentially a 
rewriting of a principle that was in a previous Act, and that has to do 
with arbitration.  And, Mr. Speaker, as I look at the presentation of that 
principle in this Act, it also appears to have a strange notion.  It is not 
clear.  It is not as clear as it should be.  It doesn't appear to be clear 
at all, that in requesting arbitration which can, which appears to lead to 
binding arbitration -- it's not clear at all -- that that either requires 
the concurrence of both parties, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The minister may very well say that that's not the intent and in that case 
again, I invite the minister to read the Act and to apply his legal mind.  
He certainly has had much more experience in that than I have to reading 
that and to be prepared to provide assurance that it is not possible 
through this Act for one party to begin an arbitration process which ends 
up being binding arbitration without the concurrence of both parties. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, in my comment, and again it has to do with the 
labour relations elements of the Act, this Act as well has a section which 
says that should the board and the police association involved, between the 
two of them, come to an agreement through collective bargaining, about 
something that they . . . a process -- perhaps conciliation, perhaps 
something else -- a process that they both believe in their best interest 
to resolve difficulties, this Act, Mr. Speaker, says that they can't 
implement it if it's outlined in this Act, because this Act will supersede 
any agreement that they come to between themselves in terms of the way they 
deal with each other and the way they resolve difficulties. 
 
As a matter of principle, Mr. Speaker, that is of concern to rank and file 
police officers as well, who would much prefer to be able to resolve some 
of their difficulties and some of the relationships, to resolve problems 
through a collective bargaining process.  And when finding mutual agreement 
between an association and a board, that they would be able to implement it 
without being stymied by the Act. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I will take my seat having outlined those four 
concerns, all of which have to do with labour relations between rank and 
file police officers and the boards with which they deal.  I've given, 
through my remarks, Mr. Speaker, the minister notice of the questions that 
we will be asking.  I encourage before this comes to Committee of the 
Whole, Mr. Speaker, I encourage the minister to do some consultation with 
rank and file police officers as well.  We are obviously on this side of 
the House are interested in seeing a good police Act. 
 
There are, as my colleague has suggested, there are some positive benefits 
to this Bill in the whole realm of police enforcement and protection of the 
rights of the public of Saskatchewan.  And we welcome those.  However, 
there are some very serious concerns that we have, that we've outlined 
here, and I look forward, Mr. Speaker, to hearing the response of the 
minister in Committee of the Whole.  And I would hope in the interim that 
he would take consideration of the comments that the opposition has raised 
here prior to coming to Committee of the Whole for consideration and clause 
by clause.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 



 

 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I was a little surprised at the 
outset . . . and I hope the hon. member doesn't leave because he made some 
allegations which don't stand up to the facts, and he should hear the 
response that when there was some criticism of the consultation, let me 
indicate to the hon. members, that the mayors and boards of the police 
boards of the cities of Regina, Saskatoon, Prince Albert, Weyburn, Estevan, 
Moose Jaw, all the chiefs of those cities, the police association in all of 
those cities, the federation of police officers, the Saskatchewan Police 
Commission were all consulted and all actively involved in the preparation 
and drafting of this legislation.  And it's interesting, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Partly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Oh, let me finish.  It's interesting that . . . I'm 
advised, Mr. Speaker, that all of the police associations support this 
legislation, Mr. Speaker, and I'm advised further that they're having a 
meeting tomorrow because of some of the allegations made opposite so that 
they can, in fact, deliver the message that they want the legislation to 
proceed. 
 
So having said that, Mr. Speaker, I made the offer to the opposition . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Oh. the hon, member doesn't like to hear 
that; The hon. member doesn't like to hear the facts, Mr. Speaker.  They've 
been a consistent impediment to his education.  And so I have made it clear 
to both the opposition and to all members that are affected directly by 
this legislation that if there were any significant objections that the 
legislation would not proceed.  That was the message that was delivered to 
them. 
 
Because we know and understand that any type of legislation such as this is 
a balance of competing interests.  We have the need to protect the rights 
of the officers, the need to protect public safety.  We have the rights of 
the officers against those who make a complaint against police services.  
The Police Act is a very broad Act dealing with policing services in the 
province.  It deals with things like the relationship between a chief and 
the police force.  It deals with the relationship between the police chief 
and the various respective police commissions, Mr. Speaker.  So it's a 
complex Act, and it does deal with a balance sometimes of competing 
interests. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, I received a letter from the chiefs of police and their 
executive men sent the letter to me that they would like to take the 
opportunity to commend my staff, namely Doug Moen, Darcy McGovern, and John 
Baker for their sensitivity during the period of consultation of the new 
Police Act.  They worked diligently to address the concerns of the police 
community, and I believe the Act will be an improvement of its predecessor 
which has served society well over 15 years.  They go on, and it's signed 
by Mr. Swayze, who may be familiar to members opposite, certainly to the 
people of Regina.  And, Mr. Speaker, he states that he awaits the 
consultative process regarding the regulations, and of course that will 



 

 

continue. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there is a balance.  And it's a difficult question whether 
it should be the Criminal Code standard of proof if it's a complaint 
against a police officer.  Should it be that very high standard, or should 
it be the standard of proof as in a civil dispute between individuals?  
Certainly a policy decision. 
 
But we have a duty, I believe, Mr. Speaker, to make sure that the public 
believes that they have an opportunity and perhaps a right, Mr. Speaker, if 
they believe there has been an improper action by a peace officer, to be 
able to lay a complaint and have that complaint dealt with fairly.  And 
that is the difficult question that has to be resolved, Mr. Speaker.  And, 
Mr. Speaker, if you have a very high, very restrictive standard of proof, 
you certainly will not give, I think it fair to say, the public the 
confidence that there would be a fair hearing.  So there is a choice and 
there is a balance between the rights of a complainant and the rights of 
the peace officer.  So a choice, a difficult one, but again I indicate to 
the members of the Assembly that the advice that I have is that the police 
associations favour the legislation. 
 
(1945) 
 
They asked the question, Mr. Speaker, what about the Act superseding the 
collective bargaining agreements?  I say, Mr. Speaker, if we're going to 
have the disciplinary hearings, you cannot waive the disciplinary hearings 
and the disciplinary procedures by the collective bargaining agreement, and 
quite properly so.  These disciplinary procedures are in for the protection 
of the general public.  That's why they're in the legislation, Mr. Speaker.  
So I could go on and on, Mr. Speaker, with regard to specific questions.  I 
have given the assurance to the hon. members and I stand by it. 
 
If they are telling me -- and this is the message I'm taking back from your 
comments today -- that the police officers do not want this legislation, I 
am prepared to make sure that this legislation proceeds no further.  That 
is an offer that I made to all those affected, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Oh, you're laughing.  They're laughing, Mr. Speaker.  
They're laughing out of both sides of their mouths, Mr. Speaker.  Because 
on the one hand they try and say that the legislation is bad.  In fact, the 
police officers favour it; the police chiefs favour it; the police 
commissions favour it; the provincial police commission favours it. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I recognize that this legislation by its very nature, Mr. 
Speaker, has to be a compromise between competing interests.  And if 
somebody that is necessary to the proper operation of this Act feels that 
the Act is unfair to them, it would be improper to proceed with the 
legislation.  I have the assurance given to me by all of those 
representatives that they wanted to proceed, that it will be an 
improvement.  Having heard the words from the opposition, Mr. Speaker, that 
this Act is no good, Mr. Speaker, then my offer stands.  I suspect at the 
end of the day that we will find that this . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Both hon. members have had the opportunity 



 

 

to speak in this case.  Now the minister is asking for the same 
opportunity.  I would like to ask you to give him that opportunity. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- So then another question raised by the opposition was 
that a complainant -- that's an individual that's made a complaint against 
the police officer or officers -- could attend the hearings.  It's 
interesting that on disciplinary hearings of professions and whatnot, we 
are now moving to allow the complainant to attend those hearings. 
 
They raise a legitimate question, Mr. Speaker, and it's one that the police 
officers have raised which is: is it possible for criminals to use this 
process to monitor police activities, police procedures?  Fair question, 
very fair question and a legitimate concern.  Again, Mr. Speaker, the Act 
makes provision to deal with that situation in that the independent hearing 
officer, under section 48(4), can exclude the complainant if the 
independent hearing officer believes it's not in the public interest. 
 
So again we balance, Mr. Speaker, the right for a complainant to be at the 
disciplinary hearings, with the protection of the public.  It's in the 
legislation.  I'm sorry that the hon. members missed it, Mr. Speaker.  I've 
already called your attention to section 48(4).  You may not want to read 
it; you may not want to hear about it but it's in there for the purposes, 
Mr. Speaker.  I would hope that the hon. members would go back and read it. 
 
So again we have a whole series of matters.  Again I just caution, Mr. 
Speaker, that this legislation is, as was the previous Police Act, a 
balance of competing interest. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Five days. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- The hon. member asks about the five days.  For some 
reason, this five days has really got them wound up.  I guess that's as 
high . . . I know it's as high as the hon. member from Moose Jaw can count 
and I know that's why it would be so well registered. 
 
But having said that, Mr. Speaker, the situation . . . we may remember, Mr. 
Speaker, a few years back in the city of Regina, an unfortunate situation 
with a police strike in a weekend.  And there was a legitimate concern 
debated by this Assembly, of public safety.  That's always a concern and 
always an issue in the matter of policing.  The police accept that; they 
recognize that and understand that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the five days simply dealt with because of the very distinct 
possibility of an earned day off plus long weekend giving you that period 
of time.  And that can happen, Mr. Speaker.  No magic to that.  And I'm 
surprised.  I think my understanding of the criticism from the opposition 
was as I said a little earlier. 
 
So again, having said all of that, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well it's very interesting that the NDP stand up in 
this House and say it's quite proper, quite proper for a government to say 
on a long weekend with a police strike in this province that there 
shouldn't be any action and that public safety can be prejudiced, Mr. 



 

 

Speaker.  I don't think there's a fair-minded person in the province would 
accept that -- would accept that.  People that would back the police and 
their rights understand that there is a right and a need to protect public 
safety. 
 
On balance what do the police say, Mr. Speaker, about the legislation?  
Again they have advised us that they want it to proceed.  If, and again I'm 
just going to simply restate it, if tomorrow, Mr. Speaker, we hear 
differently that somebody . . . because it's important that all parties to 
this Act have confidence in the legislation.  It is fundamentally important 
that all of them have that confidence.  And I stand by the offer I've made 
to the opposition and to each of the parties, the commissions, the chiefs, 
and the various police associations.  If anyone feels that the legislation 
is unfair to them, the legislation will not be proceeded.  It's two years 
consultation, Mr. Speaker, that has led to this legislation.  A great deal 
of work by all of them.  And I would like to take the opportunity to thank 
all of them, Mr. Speaker, for the tremendous effort they've gone into it.  
I believe the legislation is acceptable from the advice I have to all of 
the parties, Mr. Speaker.  I certainly urge that all hon. members support 
the legislation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee 
of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 
Bill No. 39 -- An Act respecting Summary Offences Procedure and Certain 
consequential amendments resulting from the enactment of this Act 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Will the minister introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I'd like to introduce to the 
Assembly, Doug Moen, co-ordinator of legislative services, Department of 
Justice; Madeline Robertson, Crown solicitor, legislative services; and 
Terry Thompson, assistant deputy minister. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Mr. Minister, we have reviewed in some detail the 
legislation here, and I want to extend appreciation to your staff and to 
you for the briefing that I received in respect to it; it was most useful.  
I have a number of concerns that I want to raise in a kind of a general way 
to clear up, and I think then that we can move relatively rapidly. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Try to do them in clause 1. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Yes if I can.  And they're general areas of clarification, 
and other than that we have basically no problems with the Bill.  So rather 
than going clause by clause and approving them, I'll raise some of the 
concerns. 
 



 

 

As you have indicated in the legislation, you're setting forth a new Part 
IV of The Summary Offences Procedure Act, and in Part IV you provide a new 
procedure under the offence notice ticket.  You've indicated that by 
regulations you'll be setting, under section 30, what offences will come 
under Part IV of the Act.  I believe that's correct.  You have indicated 
that they will be primarily moving-vehicle offences and traffic-related 
offences. 
 
I want to ask you a couple of questions there.  Will all of the offences 
that relate to Part IV -- that's the new procedure under the offence notice 
ticket -- will all of those have the option of the voluntary payment or do 
some of them not have the option to the voluntary payment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Yes, they do, and they all also have the option of the 
fine option program. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- How soon, Mr. Minister, are you likely to have the 
regulations setting out what specific offences are going to come under Part 
IV?  How soon will you have the regulations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- We're targeting implementation January 1, '91, so the 
regulations would certainly be before that.  I suspect middle of the fall, 
we should have them ready. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Now in the clarification, in respect to the three procedures 
that are provided, I just want a clarification in respect to, under each 
part, that is the Part II, Part III, and Part IV, the three different 
procedures that you put forward in your letter of explanation to me.  You 
indicated the right of fine option will apply.  Has fine option been 
available in the past in respect to Part II and Part III, that is the 
summary procedure under the summons under the Criminal Code and the other 
summons ticket, Part III?  Or is it a new provision under the summons 
ticket procedure, that is Part III?  And perhaps you could explain under 
each part, are there any different options for the right of the individual 
to make application for fine option procedure? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- The options are the same. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Okay.  And is the procedure exactly the same also, in 
respect to the . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Yes, it is. 
 
(2000) 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- All right.  You indicate also in the Bill that under Part 
IV, that if the individual fails to pay the fine that has been levied in 
respect to a traffic offence, or under Part IV, and fails to appear or 
fails to make payment of the fine, you indicate that there will be a late 
penalty surcharge.  That is also going to be set by regulations, as I 
understand it.  Could you indicate what amount you're looking at in respect 
to the surcharge.  Let us understand that there is a surcharge already in 
many of the offences, I guess, in respect to the victims of crime.  And now 



 

 

for late payment, you're indicating that there's going yet to be another 
surcharge for late payment. 
 
I know you're going to set it by regulations, but have you taken a look at 
what level of surcharge you're likely to impose for late payment of any 
fine under Part IV. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- We expect it'll be in the range, I believe we've 
indicated to you, between 20 and $30.  We haven't decided on that figure 
and that is an administrative surcharge. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Well okay now, under Part IV you don't pay your ticket and 
you're late, you pay a surcharge of 20 or $30, you pay the surcharge for 
victims of crime.  And you indicate also that the province in enforcement 
will also be charging a surcharge on the municipalities, and I believe 
something in the neighbourhood of 7 per cent.  Have you done an estimate as 
to the amount of revenue that will be raised, or estimate at least, in 
respect to the late payment surcharge and the surcharge on the funds that 
are raised in respect to the RMs?  I believe it's 7 per cent. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- The amount for the municipalities will be in the range of 
$350,000.  That's our estimate.  And that secondly, as it applies to the 
municipalities that it's a wash as far as they're concerned.  In other 
words that what they will gain in the additional revenues and whatnot, they 
will come out slightly ahead on it and begin to clear off their unpaid 
fines. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- And the revenue that is taken in by the province in respect 
to the surcharge of 7 per cent on anything collected on behalf of the RMs 
for tickets outstanding and on the amount of the surcharge for late payment 
-- have you done an estimate of what likely sum is to be raised there?  And 
is that only to cover basically the administration or is it in fact some 
revenue source of income to the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Understand that the surcharge -- and we very carefully 
say it for constitutional reasons -- is an administrative charge.  
Secondly, we expect to recover from unpaid fines about $959,000. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- The $950,000, does that relate to inclusive of the municipal 
or excluding it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- That's net.  That's after the administration fee and 
charge-back to the municipalities, etc., etc. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Just in one particular section, if you take a look at 
section 29.  I just want to check subsection (2) there, Mr. Minister, and 
it says, where proceedings have been commenced under either the Criminal 
Code or under part III, and a justice does not direct imprisonment, and the 
fine is in default or the offender fails to satisfactorily complete the 
fine option program, the offender shall be imprisoned. 
 
And it sets out a schedule of imprisonment per amount of fine in subsection 
(d) and subsection (e).  What I want to ask you: was that provision there 



 

 

previously or is it a new provision? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- No, it was there previously. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- I want to turn to part VIII, section 49, if I may.  And I 
note the application of The Corrections Act. 
 

 Subject to this Act and any other Act, The Corrections Act applies, with 
any necessary modification, to the imprisoning of and providing 
correctional service to offenders convicted as a result of the proceedings 
commenced pursuant to this Act. 

 
I want to know whether or not, first of all, whether this is a new 
application of The Corrections Act in the summary procedures Act, and I 
want to know the implications in respect to providing the provisions of The 
Corrections Act under the miscellaneous part VIII. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I'm advised that through inadvertence a few years back 
that reference was left out.  It makes no difference to the change in 
practice.  It should have been in previous amendments, but I'm advised it 
makes no difference in practice. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Well no difference in practice, you say, but it wasn't in 
there before . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- It had been earlier. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Pardon. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- It had been in earlier provisions and then, I'm advised, 
some years back that through inadvertence it was removed and is now back 
in. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- I wonder whether you could indicate to me some examples of 
the application of The Corrections Act, how it would apply vis-a-vis this 
Act here.  What kind of circumstances would it, in fact, be used under The 
Corrections Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- We may have a situation where some individual refuses to 
pay their fines and refuses the fine option program to pay off the unpaid 
amount and is incarcerated.  I'll just wait until the hon. member is 
finished. 
 
I'm just going to interject because I know some who may not be familiar 
with the procedure.  We're going through clause by clause of the 
legislation requiring people to pay their unpaid fines before they get a 
driver's licence.  And just as an aside I just received a note that the 
voluntary payment unit has been receiving an unprecedented amount of old 
ticket payments in the last week since the legislation was introduced. 
 
In fairness, both sides of the Assembly support this legislation as fair.  
People shouldn't be allowed to avoid them and for those with the costs that 
go up, there is a fine option program where they can do community service 



 

 

work if it's a financial question.  Having said that, we could have a 
situation where an individual refuses to pay and is incarcerated.  They may 
be out on a temporary release in which case The Corrections Act would 
apply. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Just a couple other sections.  I understand that this 
procedure that you're instituting here that if a fine isn't paid, and if it 
isn't paid in time you pay a late payment.  And if you still don't pay it, 
I guess, what happens then if there is no payment, a driver's licence is 
not issued. 
 
What I want to ask you, other provinces have been in fact dealing with this 
where the licence renewal is suspended or not issued.  Is there any 
evidence that as a result of people -- and I imagine there will be few of 
them because of the fact that the maximum fine is $400 under part IV, and I 
notice that you have increased the fine also for driving without a renewal 
of licence and you've also increased the . . . where it's revoked or 
suspended -- but is there any experience in other provinces that as a 
result people don't pay their fine, their licence is not renewed, and 
whether or not there is a problem in respect to an increase of number of 
people that are driving without any licence? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- What we have found in the other provinces is that they're 
finding a far higher rate of payment than they had anticipated.  Secondly, 
they are also considering extending it, or are extending it to more and 
more offences.  So I would assume from those indications that if there is 
any increase in the number driving without a licence because they simply, 
ultimately refuse to pay completely, is very few and that the benefits far 
outweigh those very few. 
 
As you say, we have increased the fines for those driving without a 
licence.  It may ultimately, if there is a problem which we don't expect, 
certainly we'd have to look at more Draconian measures in the future. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Just for clarification purposes, and I believe I have it 
clear, but in section 64 I know you have increased the amount of fine: 
 

 (3) Any person who drives a motor vehicle on a highway while: 
 
  (a) a refusal by the administrator to 

issue the person a driver's licence . . . 
 
  (b) the person's driver's licence is 

suspended or revoked; 
 

The fine as set out in the "Consequential and Coming into Force" provisions 
under Part X: 
 

  (c) . . . a fine of not more than 
$1,000; 

 
  (d) in the case of a second, third or 

subsequent conviction . . . a fine of not more than $2,000 . . . 



 

 

(and) a term of not more than two years or to both that fine and 
imprisonment. 

 
Just for clarification purposes, for the first offence what was the 
previous amount of the fine, and was there also a similar clause, clause 
(d), for an increased fine or subsequent under the section? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Under the previous sections the fine was to a maximum of 
$1,000.  It didn't matter whether first, second, or whatever number of 
offences.  The provision now is not more than a thousand on the first, and 
in the case of second, third, or subsequent, to fines of not more than 
$2,000. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Mr. Minister, those are the areas that we just want a 
clarification of, and we're prepared to support the legislation and to 
proceed with the passage of the sections and/or page or by part, whichever 
will work. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I thank the hon. member.  We do have copies of the House 
amendments, proposed House amendments which have been handed to the 
chairman.  If the hon. member agrees we can proceed by page and include in 
the page the House amendment for the appropriate section and proceed that 
way. 
 
(2015) 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clause 2 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- There's an amendment to clause 2.  Will the members take 
the amendment as read? 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 2 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 3 to 42 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 43 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Amendment to clause 43.  Will the members take the 
amendment as read? 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 43 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 44 and 45 agreed to. 
 
Clause 46 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Amendment to clause 46.  Will the members take the 



 

 

amendment as read? 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 46 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 47 to 51 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 52 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Will the members take the amendment to clause 52 as read? 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 52 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clause 53 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- The amendment to clause 53, will the members take the 
amendment as read? 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 53 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 54 to 72 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Would the minister move to report the Bill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Yes I will, Mr. Chairman.  Before I do I would like to 
thank the officials that are with me.  The particular legislation, which I 
believe to be a very important piece of legislation, has been a rather 
complicated one and has taken a great deal of work.  I'd also like to thank 
the officials in SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) that have been 
co-operating with us in the development of the changes to this legislation. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 
Bill No. 42 -- An Act respecting the Legal Profession, the Law Foundation 
and the Law Society of Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Does the minister have any new officials? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Yes.  I'd like to introduce again to the Assembly Susan 
Amrud, Crown solicitor, legislative services. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Mr. Minister, we spoke a little bit about consultation, and 
I'm sure that in respect to this there has been a fair amount of 
consultation.  I understand that the benchers were very much involved in 
the drafting of the new Bill, but I just wonder whether you can confirm 
that the rank and file membership of the law society members were involved 



 

 

and had input in respect to the changes.  I understand that there are 
really no basic changes.  But I'd like it on the record that a process has 
been followed that not only do the benchers concur with the provisions of 
the new Bill, but that the rank and file indeed had an opportunity to 
discuss the implications of the new Act. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- The extent of the consultation of course would primarily 
rest with the benchers of the law society as the representative and the 
governing body of the legal profession.  But my officials with the benchers 
did travel to nine different centres to meet with the local bar 
associations and the barristers and solicitors in those areas.  So there's 
been very extensive consultation, and if there were questions we responded 
by having officials go out with the benchers to deal with them.  And the 
benchers have indicated their support for the legislation. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Just one other area that the benchers had requested, and I'm 
wondering whether or not you'd give the rationale for not including it in 
the Bill.  And the one item that was raised by the law society or the 
benchers, not included in the Act, deals with incorporation.  And I'm 
wondering why that particular request was denied in view of the request by 
the benchers. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I might add before I answer, that the members of the 
Canadian Bar Association were also consulted on the legislation, I assume 
the Saskatchewan branch.  Having said that, although I personally support 
professional incorporation, the financial costs are in the range of between 
3 to $5 million a year if all professions are allowed to have the personal 
corporations.  So it was a financial reason that a corporation was not 
proceeded with. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Have you looked into the extent that incorporation has been 
allowed in other provinces? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Only in a cursory way in that we know several provinces 
do allow professional incorporation.  I've indicated to you that I 
personally favour that.  I have indicated as well that when we look at the 
financial costs of allowing all professions to do that in the province, 
there's a revenue loss of between 3 and $5 million annually. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Just in respect to section 18(1), it gives the procedure re 
elections and it gives the powers to the benchers to set the rules 
governing the elections, are set by the benchers.  I think this is a slight 
change in that in the previous Act it was spelled out in more detail rather 
than providing the general powers to the benchers.  Is that accurate?  Was 
that their basic request?  Why was that procedure adopted? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Well the previous legislation did have the specific 
details of rules governing the elections which meant that if the benchers 
wanted to change the rules -- I assume in consultation with the members of 
the profession -- they had to bring it back to the Assembly.  Every other 
profession has the power given to the governing body to make those rules as 
to how their governing body is elected, so that's the provision we chose. 
 



 

 

Mr. Koskie: -- The appeal procedure under section 56, I take it the appeal 
to the Court of Appeal is the same as was in the past? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Yes. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Mr. Minister, we're prepared to support this legislation.  
Those are all the questions that I have in respect to it.  I think that in 
our consultations, certainly there is a general agreement with the 
legislation, and we're satisfied that the consultation has taken place. 
 
I think there's a couple, two or three, positive aspects where the lay 
persons are added as members of the benchers.  And also in respect to the 
old Act, discipline of members were confined to the conduct unbecoming, and 
now it includes the competency of the individual.  And I think that's a 
step forward.  So we're in agreement with the Act and prepared to proceed 
with its passage. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I thank the hon. member.  Certainly the two points that 
he raised are, in my view, significant improvements.  As well the rights of 
a complainant against a lawyer and the right of a complainant to be 
involved in the disciplinary process, to be given notice of the 
disciplinary process, to be represented by counsel, and to appeal are also 
in my view significant improvements on behalf of the general public and its 
relationship with the legal profession. 
 
If the hon. member agrees, there are no House amendments, and that being 
the case, could we proceed in the same manner we did with summary offences 
procedure. Okay. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 102 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order, order, the member from Regina Centre. 
 

Bill No. 7 -- An Act to amend The Intestate Succession Act 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- In this particular Act, Mr. Minister, as is indicated, that 
the amount to be paid to the intestate's spouse has been increased from 
40,000 to $100,000.  I assume that that increase is to take into account 
inflation and other considerations.  I wonder, how did you arrive at the 
100,000 figure? Out of the hat or is there a process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- The figure was on the recommended increase of the Law 
Reform Commission and the preferential share, for the hon. member's 
interest, is: British Columbia, 65,000; Alberta, 40,000; Manitoba, 50,000; 
Ontario, 5,000; and Nova Scotia, 50,000. 
 
So Saskatchewan will have the highest preferential share, in the case of a 



 

 

person dying without a will, so that the surviving spouse would at least be 
assured of that amount, assuming the estate has that amount.  But the 
recommendation did come from the Law Reform Commission. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Bill No. 8 -- An Act respecting the Survival of Certain Causes of Action 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Mr. Minister in respect to this we had the proposals for The 
Survival of Actions Act which was prepared by the Law Reform Commission in 
respect to it and the report that was provided to the minister back in May 
of '85.  And having reviewed the detailed analysis and also the case law 
support of the various positions that they have put forward, I noticed that 
within the law reform proposal here that they essentially drafted the 
legislation which you have adopted and simply cleaned up into legislative 
form.  In reviewing what they have provided within the proposal to you, we 
are in agreement with the general thrust of this Act. 
 
There's just one question that I want to ask, and that is in respect to 
section 6(1).  Perhaps you could give me a bit of an explanation as to . . 
. where it indicates that the cause of action survives pursuant to section 
3, only those damages that resulted in actual pecuniary loss to the 
deceased or the deceased's estate are recoverable. 
 
I'd like just your explanation in respect to limiting the damages to 
pecuniary losses and excluding other damages. 
 
(2030) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- This of course would be the survival of an action of 
someone deceased, and so it would only be for the actual cost.  It wouldn't 
include something, for example, non-pecuniary such as pain and suffering.  
Any such actions in that way that would attribute to the family and giving 
them a cause of action comes under The Fatal Accidents Act. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 14 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 25 -- An Act to amend The Provincial Court Act 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Just a couple of questions in respect to this, Mr. Minister.  
If you look at section 3 of the Act it indicates that subsection 5(5.1) and 



 

 

(5.2) of The Provincial Court Act are repealed and substituted by (5.1) 
wherein it sets out the salary of the chief judge, the associate chief 
judge, and judge other than a judge appointed pursuant to section 6(4) sets 
out the amounts.  Is that the procedure that . . . is the salary going to, 
in the future, be set out under that provision specified?  Because before 
it was done by way of regulations, as I understand it, and now it is set 
out specifically the amounts.  And what I'm asking is in subsequent years, 
what is the procedure? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- It's at the request of the provincial court judges that 
it be set out in legislation.  I frankly question the wisdom of that, but 
that's their choice and this is where they wanted the salary to be set.  So 
it's their request. 
 
I might, if I may, Mr. Chairman, and hon members, introduce one of my 
officials, Mr. Gary Brandt, executive director of court services. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- And I take it subsequently each year the salary is set out? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- The independent commission reports and the legislature 
deals with it.  It'll have to be done by way of House amendment. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- All right. that's the point that I wanted to get at. 
 
In section (5.2) under 3, you still have regulations: 
 

 The Lieutenant Governor in Council shall make regulations prescribing the 
amount of: 

 
 (a) salary to be paid to all persons appointed as judges pursuant to 

section 6(4); 
 

And it goes on.  And I understand what that covers. 
 
But in section (5.3), I want a clarification as to what that applies for.  
It says: 
 

 The chief judge, each associate chief judge and each judge is entitled to 
be paid the salary prescribed in in subsection (5.1). 

 
That's fair enough. 
 

 . . . and the salary, remuneration and allowances prescribed in the 
regulations made pursuant to subsection (5.2) with respect to the chief 
judge, associate chief judges, and judges respectively. 

 
Does (5.2) apply to chief judge, associate chief judge, and judges 
respectively, or am I reading something wrong there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Subsection (5.2) applies to judges that may be used from 
time to time, for example dial-a-judges or the retired judges, judges who 
may have resigned, judges who have resigned or retired from any other court 
in the province, or retired and non-practising barristers and solicitors 



 

 

who may act as a judge from time to time.  That's what that particular 
provision deals with. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- But just the latter part, unless I'm reading it incorrectly, 
I understand it says: 
 

 The chief judge, (I'll just go through it again) each associate chief 
judge and each judge is entitled to be paid the salary prescribed in 
subsection (5.1) . . . 

 
I understand that.  Then it goes on: 
 

 . . . and the salary, remuneration and allowances prescribed in the 
regulations made pursuant to subsection (5.2) with respect to the chief 
judge, associate chief judges and judges, respectively. 

 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- No. The salary, if we go back to section 6(4) of the Act, 
those are the judges that I've referred to, primarily the retired ones that 
may be utilized from time to time.  The second one, there may be from time 
to time administrative duties assigned over and above the normal duties.  
There is provision for remuneration to be paid for those services.  That 
would be done by the chief judge.  Okay? 
 
And (5.3) is the provision, I believe, for the benefits over and above 
salary.  Salary wouldn't include the benefits that are available. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- But I mean I read it, Mr. Minister.  It says: 
 

 The chief judge, each associate chief judge and each judge is entitled to 
be paid a salary prescribed by subsection (5.1) (agreed) and the salary, 
remuneration and allowances prescribed in the regulations made pursuant to 
subsection (5.2) . . . 

 
Right.  Covers those . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Right. But then 
it goes on.  Just follow me through. 
 

 . . . salary, remuneration and allowances prescribed in the regulations 
made pursuant to subsection (5.2) with respect to the chief judge, 
associate chief judges and judges, respectively. 

 
(5.2) doesn't have any chief judge, associate chief judge and judges, 
respectively. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- All it says . . . all that (5.3) says is that the judges, 
including the chief judge, are entitled to the salaries set out plus the 
normal public service benefits or whatever the independent commission may 
recommend which is over and above salary, plus if you go primarily to (b) 
and (c), the northern judges get the northern allowance, and if there are 
time to time administrative duties assigned for which there is additional 
payment, that is empowered under (5.3). 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Just in respect to (5.4), and this is setting up the 
commission, a three-person commission. And you indicate that: 



 

 

 
 On or before October 1, 1990 and on or before October 1 in every third 

year following 1990, the Lieutenant Governor in Council shall appoint 
three persons as commissioners to inquire into and make recommendations 
respecting: 

 
 (a) salaries, remuneration and allowances payable to judges 

pursuant to this Act; and 
 
 (b) judges' benefits; 
 
 for the three-year period commencing October 1 of the year in which they 

are appointed. 
 

I want to ask you in respect to that provision.  It specifies the date as 
when the commission will be first appointed.  And that's October 1, 1990.  
Is there any limitation as to when it shall report? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- No, there's no limitation.  The judges did have a 
request.  It was negotiated that there be a limit.  I had some concerns 
with that, quite frankly, in that it could come back at a time where the 
legislature may find it inappropriate to give anyone an increase, and that 
there should be some flexibility in that commission.  I don't expect the 
commission to take very long, so I don't see that as a problem. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- That's precisely the issue that I was raising.  That they 
had requested some four-month period or something of that nature, in their 
initial negotiations. 
 
The other section, (5.6): here I think that the commission shall submit the 
report to the minister, rather than as requested by the judges that 
negotiated with you.  I believe they wanted it submitted directly to the 
Assembly.  This may be a compromise, that it's submitted to the minister 
and then I believe within 30 days, it's laid before the legislature.  Am I 
correct that they had preferred that in fact it be laid before the 
legislature rather than report of the minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- The further requirement though is that the Minister of 
Justice shall then in turn lay the report before the Legislative Assembly 
not later than 30 sitting days after it's received.  What we chose to do 
was follow the federal legislation which requires this, except that the 
federal minister has six months in which to file.  So just in the interest 
of some uniformity, we chose to follow the federal proposals in this 
regard. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- And one final question then, and this pretty well runs me 
out of the Bill -- section 4, Mr. Minister.  There is also, I think, 
another recommendation is that the judges request it, and it says: 
 

 (3) Except on the recommendation of the Judicial Council, the 
chief judge shall not change the residence of a judge without the 
judge's consent. 

 



 

 

Do you believe that with that present provision that it allows the Justice 
minister sufficient flexibility within the . . . so far as the allocation 
of judges and the residency of judges? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- It takes away, in my view, all the flexibility of the 
Minister of Justice to be able to allocate the judges based on where the 
work-load may be.  It was, the hon. member is aware, held out by the 
provincial court judges as one of the litmus tests of judicial independence 
that they could not be moved.  There was at one point I believe a view that 
they should not be moved in any circumstance without their consent. 
 
In my view we can perhaps -- although I hope it doesn't happen -- envisage 
from time to time . . . or the judicial council may recommend that a judge 
not be located in a particular place for whatever reasons. 
 
And so I made it clear to them that, although this does restrict the 
Minister of Justice's ability to change the residences of judges, that 
ultimately if there is good, valid reason the judicial council should be 
able to recommend change in residence. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Well is it possible under this provision, Mr. Minister, that 
the Minister of Justice has a concern in respect to the work-load in a 
given area, wants it reassigned?  Is it possible, do you believe, under 
this provision that you could contact the chief judge in respect to your 
concern and the chief judge then make a request for the judicial council to 
take a look at it and ask for the recommendation?  Or is that not a 
possible procedure? 
 
(2045) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I don't believe it would be possible for those reasons.  
I would believe that the judicial council would only report if there were 
some serious circumstances that made it inappropriate for a judge to be 
presiding in a centre in which he or she has resided, that they would 
recommend that the judge be moved.  But as I said at the outset, this does 
take away the flexibility of the Minister of Justice to allocate judges, or 
assign judges' residence based on the work-load. 
 
There is the practice -- although I'm not sure how well it's been followed 
-- where the chief judge can ask judges to move temporarily to help out on 
a work-load.  I understand that that tends to be resisted in most cases.  
But again, for whatever reason, it did become, as I say, one of the litmus 
tests as to whether judges are independents or not which was to take away 
the ability of the Minister of Justice to assign even based on work-load. 
So it's the price we're paying. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Have you been able to examine whether other provinces have 
similar provisions vis-a-vis the independence of the judges?  In other 
words, a similar provision where they cannot change their residence without 
their consent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Understand that in most provinces they have moved to 
doing away with judicial centres.  And if they have a court located in one 



 

 

centre, then the problem doesn't arise because the judges would go out on 
circuits as to wherever the work-load may be. 
 
We have maintained in Saskatchewan the judicial centres which means that at 
the superior court level there must be at least one judge living in a 
judicial centre.  And that has led of course to . . . the same philosophy 
has led to requiring the provincial court to reside in both the various 
centres and the various communities around the province. 
 
So some of the provinces don't have the problem.  Where they have done away 
with all of the judicial centres and have the courts reside in one or two 
of the major cities, then there's not a problem. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Just one last question.  What about the judge that has been 
assigned to a given area and may have requested initially, and subsequently 
wishes to relocate out of that area.  Is there a procedure in respect to 
allowing him to be transferred?  What is the procedure? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- The judge simply indicates to the chief judge that he or 
she is prepared to . . . or wishes to move.  You run into the practical 
difficulty of course if a vacancy, say, opens up in Regina, you'll get a 
number of lawyers in Regina who want to be appointed, will only take the 
appointment, say, in the city of Regina -- and I use that by way of example 
only -- which may effectively bar a judge from another centre moving, as 
again by way of example, Regina. 
 
So it's a practical constraint on the ability, but a judge would simply 
indicate to the chief judge that he or she would wish to move in another 
judicial centre. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- If I may again, Mr. Chairman, thank my officials.  Gary 
Brandt has joined us, and I know all hon. members take some satisfaction in 
that the efforts of our court services people, Justice, the judges have 
resulted in Saskatchewan having one of the shortest time to trials, if not 
the shortest in the country, and we can take some pride in that.  And I'd 
like to thank them. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 
Bill No. 39 -- An Act respecting Summary Offences Procedure and Certain 
consequential amendments resulting from the enactment of this Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that the amendments be now read 
the first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- With leave now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Bill No. 42 -- An Act respecting the Legal Profession, the Law Foundation 
and the Law Society of Saskatchewan 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill be now read a third time 
and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 7 -- An Act to amend The Intestate Succession Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now read the 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 8 -- An Act respecting the Survival of Certain Causes of Action 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 25 -- An Act to amend The Provincial Court Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- I move that this Bill be now read the third time and 
passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Environment and Public Safety 
Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 9 

 
Mr. Chairman: -- I'd ask the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, it gives me 
pleasure to introduce the officials from the Department of Environment and 
Public Safety: seated directly beside me is Les Cooke, deputy minister of 
Environment and Public Safety; behind me is Rick Knoll, director of 
administration.  We also have Randy Sentis, the assistant deputy minister.  
As well I have Tom Galimberti, executive director, planning and assessment 
division; Nick Surtees, executive director, public safety division; Mike 
Hegan, executive director, emergency measures organization; Larry Kratt, 
director of environmental assessment branch.  In the gallery we have Bob 
Ruggles, director of the water quality branch; as well Larry Lechner, 
director, air and land protection branch; and we also have Harvey Linnen, 
director of communications. 



 

 

 
Mr. Chairman, these officials are the professionals and the experts and the 
administrators that conduct the day-to-day operations of the Department of 
Environment and Public Safety and it's a pleasure for me to introduce them 
to you and to all members in the legislature. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me join the minister in 
extending our greetings to the officials.  We have, myself and several of 
my colleagues, have a wide range of questions that we want to ask in this 
department. 
 
And I think some of those questions I'm sure can be anticipated because 
some of the events that have occurred under the auspices of what the 
government has defined as environmental protection, I think, clearly have 
been quite the opposite of that.  And we will be asking for some 
explanation of some of the things that this minister and this government 
have done and also some of the things that they have not done. 
 
This debate that we're initiating here in this House, Mr. Chairman, is not 
exclusive to this legislature.  This is a debate that's taking place at all 
levels of society, as more and more of the public is becoming to realize 
that we're going to have to make some very significant changes in the 
pattern of economic activity and the way we do things if we're going to 
address the problems that we face in the not too distant future, if we 
continue to pursue the kind of course that we have have pursued in the 
past. 
 
And it's not good enough, Mr. Chairman, to say, well, it's bad in Ontario 
or it's bad in East Germany or it's bad in Poland, because we have a role 
to play right here.  And either we come to grips with it and we start 
acting responsibly and providing some of that leadership, or there's a big 
price to pay. 
 
There are those, Mr. Chairman, who do not recognize -- they talk about it 
but they don't recognize -- that something has to be done.  I want to give 
you two examples.  Not too long ago, there was a president of a large 
multinational chemical company who was quoted as saying that some people 
may have to die from environmental pollution if we are to have economic 
progress. 
 
There's another example here, Mr. Chairman.  This was said by -- it comes 
from Newsweek, April this year -- said by Othel Brand who was appointed not 
too long ago to the Texas Pesticide Regulatory Board.  And he said: 
 

 Sure it's going to kill a lot of people, but they may be dying of 
something else anyway. 

 
Now I know those are harsh examples, Mr. Chairman, but nevertheless they 
are examples of the kinds of attitudes that prevail in some sectors of 
industry -- not all, because I think it's clear that there are some 
industries that are paying attention to this.  But it also prevails in the 



 

 

minds and the attitudes and in the policy making of some governments and I 
think that that has to change if we are really serious about sustainable 
development, Mr. Chairman. 
 
(2100) 
 
If the answer is yes, that we have to make some changes, then I think that 
there is certain kinds of things that have to happen and I want to outline 
them for the record and for the minister before I go on to ask the 
questions that I have prepared. 
 
We're going to have to shift our energies from cleaning up to preventing 
pollution in the first place.  And I will have a lot to say about that when 
we talk about assessment and talk about the different things that have 
happened in recent months and years.  We're going to have to conserve 
valuable resources like soils and forests rather than just deplete them at 
will.  We're going to have to make our factories, our offices, and our 
houses function as efficiently as possible with respect to the use of 
energy and raw materials.  We're going to have to seize the economic 
opportunities and employment benefits that will accompany strong government 
measures to solve environmental problems.  And we're going to have to leave 
future generations a legacy of the natural wealth that we have come to 
enjoy today. 
 
Some people defined where we're at today as either close to, on the verge 
of, or actually at a crisis situation.  And just so that nobody in this 
House mistakes the fact that we do have a problem in Saskatchewan, I want 
to give the minister some examples because I want to set the stage for how 
I think, I know that the environmental assessment process in this province 
has not been working.  And it's got nothing to do with the legislation; 
it's got everything to do with the decisions of the government.  These are 
big things.  These are not walking down the highway and picking up the 
papers and whatnot, which is a clean-up. 
 
Let's look at those facts.  There are over a thousand species that are on 
the endangered list, and every day that list gets longer and this is 
world-wide.  In this province, let's come to home.  In Saskatchewan in 1960 
the white-tailed deer population was 500,000; in 1989 it was estimated to 
be 250,000.  The duck population returning to Saskatchewan in the spring of 
1950 was estimated at 20 million; in 1976 it was 11 million; and in 1988 it 
had gone down to 4 million.  And I know there will be some who will argue, 
well it was the drought.  But it's not just the drought . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well I knew that some members would say that.  It's not 
that.  It's the destruction of the habitat that the ducks need to survive 
and populate. 
 
The Science Council of Canada, Mr. Chairman, has reported that soil 
degradation is an ongoing insidious problem that occurs in all parts of the 
country at a cost of over $3 million per day, or $1.3 billion annually.  
That's a quote.  And it goes on to say that losses associated with soil 
degradation now exceed $20 to $25 per hectare of agricultural land in 
Canada or 38 per cent of net farm income. 
 



 

 

That's serious, Mr. Chairman.  Another example, and it comes directly 
related to the proposals of the Meadow Lake pulp mill and the fact that the 
government has not adequately addressed the environmental impact study and 
statement and has not allowed the public to have any input. 
 
Between 1985 and 1988, 86,880 hectares of forest was harvested in 
Saskatchewan.  And during that same period of time -- and take note -- only 
19,880 hectares was replanted.  These are statistics that are not mine.  
They're issued by forestry Canada under the name of Frank Oberle, the 
Canadian Minister for Forestry. 
 
We've got to stop ignoring those kinds of things when we approve projects 
indiscriminately without adequate information, without adequate 
environmental impact assessments, and without giving the public an 
opportunity to ask questions and make some input.  And yet that's the 
approach that the government has been taking. 
 
What makes it so tragic, Mr. Chairman, that in face of this kind of 
evidence, the government of this province has time after time issued 
licences for the construction of major projects without public hearings, as 
I have said, or without adequate review of the impacts that they may have. 
 
I will get into some detail.  But we've had the case of the 
Rafferty-Alameda project -- not adequate environmental assessment.  As a 
matter of fact, one level of government refused to follow its own law.  
Another level of government said, hurray, we want this project done so 
quickly we don't care if you don't follow your own law. 
 
We have the case of uranium mine tailings, radioactive, where a new process 
which had never been approved, on which there had never been an 
environmental impact study done, was allowed to proceed -- and I'll have 
some questions on that -- in Saskatchewan, in the North, for several years.  
And after that had been happening, and there had been an accumulation of 
this slurry, the government decided they then were going to have an 
environmental impact study done.  We'll address that in these estimates. 
 
There's a matter of global warming, often referred to as causing the 
greenhouse effect.  We know the severe implications of that.  And yet in 
the very budget which we are considering in these estimates and in this 
session, there are a number of items where the government of this day has 
gone the opposite to what needs to be done.  Instead of putting in measures 
to reduce the amount of carbon dioxide and other chemical emissions into 
the atmosphere, which are causing this problem, the government has done 
things in fact to increase the amount of carbon dioxide emissions.  We'll 
be dealing with that in these estimates as well. 
 
You see, Mr. Chairman, instead of dealing with those things that are doing 
the damage -- in some cases permanent and serious and very huge -- the only 
response that the government has proposed is, we're going to clean it up.  
We're going to clean it up.  Go ahead, let it happen.  We're going to clean 
it up. 
 
Well I say, Mr. Chairman, that when the forest is gone and the habitat is 



 

 

gone, and the trapping industry is done, and the fisheries are damaged, you 
can't clean that up.  You got to deal it at the source, you got to be 
proactive, and you got to do it now.  What did the minister do?  What does 
the government do?  Well, they announced an environmental youth corps.  We 
don't object to that, but it's a clean-up.  It's after the fact. 
 
They've announced a paper collection program.  We've encouraged it.  But 
once again, it's the clean-up.  But they ignore the major repercussions of 
not dealing with an adequate environmental assessment that will prevent the 
damage from happening.  They close their eyes to that.  I say environmental 
assessment because if we're going to have an adequate environmental 
protection policy the key to that is an adequate environmental assessment 
process which does the work, does the assessment, has an adequate report, 
involves the public, and which is taken out of the political hands of the 
ministers, Minister of the Environment or the Minister of Finance, who in 
too many cases are caught in a conflict of interest. 
 
Not only is the cabinet deciding on whether the environmental impact study 
is adequate, the cabinet is also deciding on the huge amounts of money, of 
taxpayers' money that is being put forward into the project -- a clear 
conflict of interest.  And so that whole process has to be given some 
independence, and we have proposed that that be done in an independent 
environmental protection commission. 
 
Proper environmental assessment must take place before decisions to proceed 
with proposals or projects are made.  Proper environmental assessment 
requires a number of things.  These are not just my arguments, they're 
proposed by an organization called SAFE (Saskatchewan Action Foundation for 
the Environment) and many others.  The minister knows about them. 
 
Proper environmental protection should require full public disclosure of 
facts about project proposals and alternatives -- full public disclosure, 
not secretly done as is the case with the Cargill operation.  Comprehensive 
and scientifically credible examination of potential impacts, of project 
proposals and alternatives upon the socio-economic and natural environment, 
have to be considerations. 
 
Participation by the public so Saskatchewan people are informed, heard, and 
paid attention to, is important -- and also that the public ought to be 
meaningfully included in the decision-making process.  Not some cosmetic 
process where somebody, the minister or anybody else, says, well we're 
going to hold some public meetings and we're going to do a little public 
relations, but you can't really ask the people who are proposing this the 
hard questions where they have to answer them; it's just going to be a nice 
little social event so we can provide some comfort.  That's not good enough 
but that's what's happened with the Rafferty; that's what's happened with 
the Cargill fertilizer project; that's what's happened with Millar Western 
pulp mill; and I suspect that that's what the government proposed to happen 
with the environmental impact statement over uranium tailings. 
 
I wanted to make those comments, Mr. Chairman, and that will probably be 
the last speech I'll make in these estimates.  From now on I'll ask 
questions.  The minister will be relieved about that, I'm sure.  But I 



 

 

think it was important to set that stage because I want to now get to 
something which the minister has been heard to say on a number of occasions 
and ask him some questions about it.  It deals with The Environmental 
Assessment Act and the environmental assessment process. 
 
I have here in my hands a copy of the minister's statement which he 
recently made -- in fact, I think it was in June 1 of this year -- in which 
the minister has said that it has become clear to him that The 
Environmental Assessment Act no longer provides the kind of public 
involvement which the people of Saskatchewan want.  Well, Mr. Chairman, the 
problem isn't The Environmental Assessment Act -- and I want to ask the 
minister about that -- the problem is the government's attitude and the 
government not allowing that to take place. 
 
If it's The Environmental Assessment Act, Mr. Chairman, I'd like the 
minister to explain how.  I'd like the minister to explain how The 
Environmental Assessment Act prevented the government from involving the 
public. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- The hon. member has opened these estimates with a 
lengthy statement.  I would like firstly to respond to some of the comments 
that the hon. member has made.  And I want you to know, Mr. Chairman, that 
many of the things that the hon. member has stated, I fundamentally agree 
with.  And I think that most people in Saskatchewan who are concerned about 
our environment would agree with many of the things that the opposition 
member has stated. 
 
There are some things that I'll get into in a minute, Mr. Chairman, that I 
do not agree with.  I don't believe that they are objective or fair or 
reasonable, and I will talk a little bit about those. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the hon. member has stated and made quite a glowing statement 
regarding the fact that this is a ongoing debate in society today; it 
involves all levels of society.  I fundamentally agree.  I don't think 
there's anyone too young or too old to become responsibly involved in 
protecting and enhancing and preserving our environment.  The member 
opposite has said that we must move from just cleaning up to a preventative 
mode.  I very much agree with that, Mr. Chairman.  Society must take on 
more responsibility individually and collectively, business-wise, 
government-wise, institution-wise.  We must all look to the future and 
prevent many of the things that have taken place in the past from happening 
in the future. 
 
When you have a society that is changing with respect to the environment, 
another word that can be used is that of transformation.  And in a 
transformation in society, you've got to stop doing some things as a 
society.  I believe that, Mr. Chairman, I believe we have to start doing 
other things.  And I will show conclusively throughout these estimates, Mr. 
Chairman, of the ways and means by which I and the people in the Department 
of the Environment are assisting society, empowering individuals, and 
giving opportunities to businesses and environmental groups to make these 
fundamental changes. 
 



 

 

The hon. member has stated that he feels that this is a crisis situation.  
I do not disagree.  I think most people have woken up, if you like, Mr. 
Chairman, when it comes to just what is our environment, how we have 
neglected it in the past. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, I will also show conclusively, Mr. Chairman, how we are 
awakening as a society and making fundamental changes.  The hon member 
opposite would hope that all these changes would happen overnight.  I think 
most people out there in society today, at least the ones that I talked to, 
respect that it's going to take some time with many of the things that 
government, institutions, and individuals do. 
 
(2115) 
 
The hon. member has spoken specifically about the environmental impact 
assessment process.  I'd like to respond in a specific manner as well.  
With the environmental groups that I talked to today, Mr. Chairman, with 
the other ministers across the country of Canada that I talked to, most all 
of them are saying yes, it is time for some major changes.  It is time to 
make more clear, to make more definitive the rules and the regulations that 
are applicable to businesses as they struggle to assist us in diversifying 
our economy.  These rules must be made clear for the public at large; it 
must be made more clear to the public.  When is it necessary to call public 
meetings?  When is it necessary to call a public inquiry?  Must government 
call everything a development?  Must government respond to opposition's 
continuous calls that everything must have an absolute public inquiry? 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, I think it's fair and reasonable to say that these are 
difficult decisions to make, very difficult decisions to make.  The hon. 
members opposite must realize that in the short time that I have been 
minister, there have been significant changes.  In the time this 
administration has been in power since 1982, there have been significant 
changes, probably more public consultation than has ever taken place in the 
province before. 
 
The hon. member has spoken specifically about Rafferty and said, well why 
didn't you have more studies on that?  Why didn't you have a public hearing 
into that?  I want to remind the hon. member on the Rafferty dam 
specifically, there was a full public inquiry.  I don't believe that the 
hon. member has that short a memory.  But here in my hand, Mr. Chairman, I 
have the results of a board of inquiry.  Saskatchewan men and women on this 
board of inquiry thoroughly reviewed this application, Mr. Chairman, I 
submit to you, that followed the intent and the spirit and the laws of the 
Saskatchewan legislation to a T. 
 
Clearly, clearly there were some difficulties, Mr. Chairman.  Those 
difficulties admittedly, self-admittedly by the federal government, have 
been recognized today in a payment of some $1 million a month because there 
was unclear federal legislation.  I think that has been made abundantly 
clear by the recent announcement by the federal government that their 
legislation is being changed.  Environmental groups from across the country 
are saying, yes indeed, we respect those changes. 
 



 

 

I could move on, Mr. Chairman, and talk about the Meadow Lake pulp mill.  
There we had public meetings.  The member opposite would say, well they 
were just public relations meetings.  That's not correct, Mr. Chairman.  
Those meetings were widely attended by people all across Saskatchewan.  
There was opportunities for people to stand up, ask questions -- they did, 
Mr. Chairman.  And I'm happy that we called for those meetings.  And I'm 
happy, Mr. Chairman, to announce that significant and fundamental changes 
to that project took place as a result of those public meetings. 
 
Now the hon. member does raise a good point: well why don't you have public 
meetings on everything?  Mr. Chairman, I must respond to you that 
legislation in Saskatchewan must be more clear.  Ministers -- and I've 
stated this before -- have a great deal of latitude and discretion in the 
current legislation as to what should have a public meeting, what should 
not have a public meeting and it's a hard call to make. 
 
Members opposite find it easy to say, well have a public inquiry into 
everything.  Well, Mr. Chairman, I'm not so sure that that would be 
reasonable nor responsible.  But I am positive that through the process 
that I have outlined in the media in days gone by, through appointing an 
independent commission to thoroughly review this legislation, that we will 
come up with a Saskatchewan solution to a Saskatchewan environmental 
problem. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Minister, my colleague, the member from Rosemont 
will deal with the Rafferty issue when we get to it.  But I think even you 
could not deny that three court decisions -- three court decisions -- said 
that the process, environmental assessment process on the Rafferty-Alameda 
project was not followed. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Federal or provincial? 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- It was federal regulations and you supported that, Mr. 
Minister.  Your government supported it.  And if you want we'll get into 
the documentation of correspondence between various officials in your 
department that said and say it on black and white that it was your 
intention and specific strategy to get this thing along as quickly as you 
can before those kind of processes took place, Mr. Minister.  So you are 
every bit as guilty as the federal government was. 
 
But let me get to the specific questions.  Mr. Minister, you say that the 
environmental assessment process is not clear.  Okay?  In the Millar 
Western project, can you tell this House and the public of Saskatchewan 
where in that legislation it prevented you from having public hearings?  
Can you explain that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Chairman, as I understand the legislation, the 
legislation provides for ministerial discretion to hold public meetings or 
public hearings or public boards of inquiries, if you like, and it is a 
judgement call; a judgement call as to whether you have an environmental 
meeting or an environmental public hearing.  And I'd like to clarify for 
the hon. member some of the differences between a meeting and a hearing. 
 



 

 

A meeting, Mr. Chairman, as we conducted those meetings, gave the 
Saskatchewan public the opportunity to stand in front of environmental 
experts and ask every question, an open forum.  I wish the hon. member 
had've been at some of the meetings and witnessed the grass roots people 
from across Saskatchewan up, asking real, genuine questions, concerned 
questions, about their environment, Mr. Chairman.  I believe those meetings 
went extremely well. 
 
True indeed at the minister's discretion one could've called public 
hearings or a public inquiry into the issue, similar to what we did for 
Rafferty.  There is a fundamental difference there, Mr. Chairman.  Cost is 
certainly one of the differences, a public hearing of which there has been 
not many in the province of Saskatchewan.  I do not recall members 
opposite, when they were in government, ever conducting many official 
inquiries or hearings.  You will know that the track record and history of 
public hearings and public inquiries probably on average would cost 
somewhere between 2 and $3 million. 
 
It was a judgement call, Mr. Chairman.  And here again I feel that good, 
proper legislation will distinguish between what is necessary for a public 
inquiry and what is necessary for a public meeting.  And I have confidence 
that the new legislation we will bring forth will make that abundantly more 
clear. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- For the record, let's make this very clear.  You're 
then admitting, Mr. Minister, that the decision not to involve the public 
through public hearings, where the proponents of the project would have to 
have had to provide evidence and support the things that they have said in 
their environmental impact statement, that decision was exclusively yours, 
Mr. Minister.  You say it was the discretionary decision of the minister 
and you made that decision, Mr. Minister. 
 
You were wrong in making that decision because there are flaws in that 
environmental impact study and that statement, and I will ask you about 
some of them later.  There were all kinds of gaps in the papers which you 
tabled in this House which you claimed to be the report that was provided, 
in the case of Cargill, on the environmental implications.  Your own 
department asked certain questions which were not answered in the papers 
that you tabled. 
 
So I think, Mr. Minister, the fact that you're admitting that those were 
discretionary decisions and had nothing to do with the legislation is a 
pretty important point that needs to be made here.  This government refuses 
to involve the public because you know that in some of these cases you are 
not able to justify some of the things that are being proposed. 
 
Can I ask you then, Mr. Minister, specifically about the Cargill, Saferco 
fertilizer plant?  Did that legislation prevent you -- I don't want the 
minister to miss my questions, Chairman, sorry.  Did the legislation 
prevent you, Mr. Minister, from requiring an environmental impact statement 
to be prepared by the Cargill corporation before you approved the 
construction of the plant? 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- I want to clarify with the hon. member his comments 
about not involving the public.  And when it respects the Meadow Lake pulp 
mill, the hon. member cannot stand in this legislature and say that the 
public was not involved. 
 
The public was very much involved in public meetings that were held in 
Meadow Lake.  They were held in Prince Albert, as I recall; they were held 
in another northern town, I think it was Beauval, if I'm not mistaken -- at 
least three or four public meetings.  I will stress, once again -- once 
again -- those meetings were well attended. They took an entire evening, 
each one of them.  I don't believe that there was anybody who contacted my 
office and said, I was at that meeting and I didn't get a chance to speak. 
 
There were public meetings on the Millar Western pulp mill.  I think the 
hon. member should know that.  Indeed there was not a clear environmental . 
. . or pardon me . . . a public inquiry.  The hon. member opposite has 
continuously asked for public inquiries into many, many things.  There was 
not a public inquiry but there were public meetings and the public was very 
much involved. 
 
I think the hon. member's arguments are inconsistent when we talk about the 
new review of the Act that will take place, very much a public review.  
There will be an environmentalist on the panel, there will be a legal 
person on the panel, industry or business will be represented. And those 
three people on that panel will be taking the whole issue to the public.  I 
can guarantee public involvement and public consultation in that whole 
process. 
 
The hon. member brings up the Saskatchewan Fertilizer Company plant and has 
asked, well, did the legislation prevent you from calling public inquiries 
or public meetings?  I would like to very much clarify the decision-making 
process when it comes to this piece of legislation.  The first thing that 
is done, Mr. Chairman, before a minister even gets involved in the process, 
is clearly from a technical point of view.  Taking a look at the 
legislation and how the proponent's proposal stacks up against that 
legislation, decisions are made on technically whether this project is a 
"development". 
 
That decision was made by not any politicians on this side of the House.  
It was made by professionals and experts within the Department of the 
Environment, with no ministerial involvement.  In fact  some time before I 
became minister, that fundamental decision was made by the experts in the 
Department of the Environment. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, one has to take a look at that legislation and say well, 
is that a fair process?  Should that be left up to one or two officials in 
a department to make that decision, or should there be in the legislation a 
committee?  Should politicians be involved in that decision-making process?  
I'm not so sure what the answers are to those questions, but I do have a 
great deal of confidence that after thorough study, after public 
consultation, some of those types of questions will be answered. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Minister, so you're saying that the Act did not 



 

 

prevent you from requiring an environmental impact study by the corporation 
before you gave approval to the structure.  Is that what you're saying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- No, what I am saying is the decision was, number one, 
made prior to myself being made minister.  Number two, in defence of the 
former minister, the decision was made at an official's level, at a 
bureaucratics level as to whether or not this was a development.  And the 
officials are bound by the law to take a look at that Act and make a 
fundamental decision without the involvement, interference of politicians 
as to whether or not this is the development. 
 
That decision was made, Mr. Chairman, after thorough review, after the 
issue had been raised with myself.  I sat with my officials, reviewed the 
legislation.  And I have to say, Mr. Chairman, that I will support the 
decision made by the Department of the Environment, that according to the 
legislation in place today, technically it is not a development, 
technically all the concerns were satisfied under the Act as to whether or 
not it was or was not a development.  And I have to stick with that 
decision, Mr. Chairman. 
 
(2130) 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Minister, you just said that you had to stick with 
the decision that there would not be an environmental impact study.  Well 
we'll get to that in a while, because somehow that decision got unstuck 
when the pressure came to bear on you by certain suggestions of court cases 
and from the public.  And somehow in the middle of that, you changed your 
position.  But it was nothing to do with your concern and your proactive 
involvement in making sure that the right processes were done.  It took 
public pressure and threats of court cases to make you do that. 
 
Mr. Minister, you still didn't answer my question and I'll ask you for the 
third time.  I know what your officials may have said. I'm not sure that 
they said that; in fact I kind of doubt it.  Don't put it on your officials 
because it was a decision of the government.  It was decision of the 
politicians not to have an environmental impact study.  What you did is in 
contravention of your very guide-lines which I shall refer to in a moment. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you not agree that, in spite of all you say, there is 
nothing in the Act that prevented you or the former minister of the 
environment from saying to the Cargill corporation that you expect them to 
prepare an environmental impact statement?  Is that not correct, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- I want to stress once again to the hon. member the 
decision-making process that took place, and the process that took place 
was that the officials in the Department of Environment . . . and I 
shouldn't say just the Department of Environment.  When a proposal like 
this comes forth -- true, it's a major project for Saskatchewan, going to 
create a large number of jobs, help to diversify our economy, and it's an 
important project for the province of Saskatchewan, and from an 
environmental perspective as well, an important project that one must look 
at very carefully. 



 

 

 
After review by the officials in the Department of Environment, and I think 
seven or eight other government  
 Ddepartments, and after analysis by the officials, correspondence, 
commitments in fact were made to the Saskatchewan Fertilizer Company that, 
according to our legislation, this is not a development.  There was no 
ministerial involvement at all at this time. 
 
When I came on stream being minister, that decision had been made.  The 
decision had been communicated to the corporation that you are not 
technically a development; the departments are satisfied with your 
proposal; you may proceed. 
 
Now the member asked specifically, well was there anything preventing me -- 
preventing me -- from going back on the word that was given and the 
commitment that was given to the corporation.  I would have to stress to 
the hon. member that in a fair business sense -- and I try to run this 
portfolio the same way I would run a business.  And I say to the hon. 
member, a decision was made, a technical decision was made.  That 
commitment was given to a proponent.  And no, no, Mr. Chairman, I could not 
-- firstly, morally; secondly, ethically -- go back to the corporation and 
say, no, sorry, you're going to change. 
 
That would not have been right from those standpoints, furthermore from a 
legal standpoint.  The decision was already made that it was not a 
development.  I could not very well go back and say, oh, sorry, this is a 
development. 
 
What I was successful in doing -- and I would ask the hon. member to 
respect this -- what I was successful in doing was consulting with the 
Saskatchewan Fertilizer Company, talking with that company and saying, you 
know, that decision was made; we still respect that it is a safe plant, 
that it is not a development under the Act; but I want you to know, 
Saskatchewan Fertilizer Company, that we're in a changing world out there; 
public expectations on a project of this magnitude would lead me to believe 
that the perception is out there that this should have more thorough 
analysis.  And we were successful in securing a very good agreement with 
the corporation, that basically says, if there's anything that is found not 
to be environmentally safe, there will be changes.  I think it is a very 
positive movement, Mr. Chairman, and I stand by the decision of the 
department.  The project, under the guide-lines issued by the Act, is not a 
development.  But I also say, in today's society we must be more careful.  
And this project will go to further environmental study. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Minister, here is what happened.  The government 
decided that they wanted to have an agreement with Cargill corporation, at 
taxpayers' expense and risk, to build a fertilizer plant.  The government 
could have -- and you haven't said they couldn't have -- required Cargill 
corporation to do an environmental impact study.  The government chose not 
to.  Nothing to do with the legislation; it was a decision of the 
government. 
 
Don't say to this House, and don't insult this House, Mr. Minister, by 



 

 

pretending that some officials in the department would go so far as to make 
an agreement on a major project like this one without first consulting the 
cabinet, and without first consulting the minister.  That is ludicrous.  
The Premier has been known to say -- I can quote it if you want -- where he 
was determined to have this fertilizer plant in Saskatchewan if he 
personally had to build it.  Kind of silly, but then the Premier has been 
known to often be quite silly. 
 
Mr. Minister, it was a political decision that was made.  It had nothing to 
do with environmental concerns.  You say that somehow it's not a 
development.  Will you agree, Mr. Minister, that in the definition of a 
development, follows the following: that where a provincial resource is 
utilized in a substantial way, that then defines a development.  Is that 
not correct, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Chairman, I do want to get back for a moment to 
the hon. member's concern about the decision-making process in the 
department of the Environment as to what is and what is not a development.  
And, Mr. Chairman, in Saskatchewan I don't know how many projects might 
have gone through this process, but I suppose probably thirty or forty or 
fifty or more projects in the last number of years.  And, Mr. Chairman, the 
same process has been used for every one. 
 
If you were to consult with any developers whatsoever who have submitted 
proposals to the department of the Environment; if you were to consult with 
. . . if you don't believe the officials that I have here, consult with 
some ex-officials of this department.  You consult with some legal people 
who have studied Saskatchewan's Environmental Assessment Act and have 
studied the processes that are used, you will find that the processes that 
are used are a technical screening; a technical review by departmental 
officials, and the decision is made at that level.  And the decision was 
made on the Saskatchewan fertilizer plant at an official's level as to 
whether technically it was a development or was not a development. 
 
The hon. member can say well that's not a good process.  Well that's a 
question that bears asking.  That's a real question that bears asking.  
Should officials only be involved in that decision-making process?  Should 
you have ministers involved?  Should you have some other party or persons 
involved in that decision-making process?  I'm not so sure what the answers 
are.  I don't believe you have the answers to that either.  I can only tell 
you that it's a good question.  And it's a question that we will address in 
the whole review of this Act.  But on this decision, and on every other 
decision that I am aware of that has gone through the environmental impact 
assessment to determine whether this is or is not a development, was 
determined at a technical official's level.  And that's fact.  That's the 
process. 
 
The hon. member now has turned to a very specific quotation from the 
legislation and he has asked whether a substantial utilization of a 
provincial resource constitutes a development.  The hon. member has 
conveniently left out the entire line and the entire line or definition or 
quotation out of the legislation that is one of the criterias says: does a 
substantial utilization which pre-empts some other use.  That is the 



 

 

criteria which is used.  Correct. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I'm glad you raised it, Mr. Minister, because I was 
going to repeat it to you.  That's exactly what it says.  It says: 
 

 . . . substantially utilize any provincial resource and in so doing 
pre-empt the use, or potential use, of that resource for any other 
purpose; 

 
Either now or over a period of time in the future. 
 
Mr. Minister, this plant will utilize half the daily consumption of the 
water that's utilized by the city of Moose Jaw.  Are you suggesting that's 
not a significant utilize of a resource or are you suggesting that water 
isn't a resource? 
 
This plant will utilize massive amounts of natural gas which will pre-empt 
the use of that natural gas for some other purposes, either now or some 
time in the future when the consumer who's wanting to warm his house may be 
affected. 
 
Clearly, Mr. Minister, this one provision in your Bill, which I have in my 
hand, in this legislation determines that this is a development.  You 
chose, Mr. Minister, not to call it a development.  That was a political 
decision.  All your officials can do -- and rightfully so -- is give you a 
recommendation, but the buck stops with you.  The buck stops with the 
politicians who are elected because we live in a system of responsible 
government.  It is unfair, Mr. Minister, of you and really quite unseemly 
to blame this on the officials who did not in the end make this decision.  
The government made this decision.  All the officials do is recommend, and 
the signature and the authorization is done by Executive Council.  So don't 
give us that bafflegab, because you know that that's not true, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
But this definition here clearly defines this as a development, Mr. 
Minister, because it does utilize a natural resource -- two of them in this 
case -- in a massive way and pre-empts them from being used, those amounts 
that are going to be utilized for something else.  How can you argue 
otherwise, Mr. Minister? 
 
(2145) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Chairman, I am advised that on both of these 
specific issues, natural gas and water, that a prudent government, prudent 
elected people, must do their part in managing resources.  And certainly 
natural gas is a resource; water is a resource. 
 
I want to talk specifically about natural gas.  The member may want to make 
the argument that natural gas is in short supply.  I want the hon. member 
to know that one of the fundamental things that we try and do -- I think 
most Saskatchewan people, if not all Saskatchewan people would agree -- we 
must develop our natural resources.  Natural gas especially is a product, a 
resource that we have in abundant supply in Saskatchewan. 



 

 

 
For years in this province that resource was left undeveloped for a number 
of reasons.  In the past number of years, Mr. Chairman, that resource has 
been very much developed under this administration.  The decision-making 
process here with respect to natural gas, the questions that the officials 
asked were, if we develop this natural resource called natural gas, are we 
taking it away from someone else?  Is there some other development or some 
alternative use that this gas would be put to? 
 
The answer to that question was no.  No, there was no other project, there 
was no other development, there was no alternative use, and as such they 
felt that it was not a substantial utilization which would pre-empt some 
other alternative use. 
 
When you speak about water, another resource that we must manage very well 
in the province of Saskatchewan, I want the hon. member to be aware, very 
much aware of the actual statistical requirements of water with this 
proposed plant, and that is .03 per cent of the annual consumption of 
treated water by Regina, .03 per cent.  Not 1 per cent, not 1 per cent of 
what Regina water consumption would be, but one-third -- one-third of 1 per 
cent -- of the annual water consumption in Regina. 
 
So the decision was made that yes, water is a resource.  It is a resource 
that must be managed well, but here again it is not substantial.  It is not 
substantial utilization of the water resource which would pre-empt some 
other use.  And I believe, when I look at it here and have this advice from 
my officials, that that was a fair and reasonable assessment. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Minister, you're wrong on your statistics on the 
water.  I mean, the example I gave you was the situation in Moose Jaw.  Mr. 
Minister, your minister in charge of the Saskatchewan Water Corporation 
gave us different numbers -- and we'll have them for you in a while -- 
totally different from what you say.  Your minister admitted that this 
plant will use an amount of water equal to half of the consumption by the 
city of Moose Jaw on a daily basis.  That is a major utilization of a 
resource of which, in this province unfortunately, from time to time we are 
short, to the point where communities have to pump, haul, or in many cases 
ration. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, you are wrong again.  You're using arguments that you 
can't back up and you can't support simply because you're trying to defend 
a political deal in the same way as you try to defend the political deal on 
the Rafferty 
_Alameda project until the courts of this country said that you no longer 
could protect them because you were wrong. 
 
Now you say that in the natural gas situation there is such a massive 
supply that you don't have to worry about it.  But it is a non-renewable 
resource, Mr. Minister.  And even putting that aside, in the process you 
utilized, you broke your own guide-lines, the Saskatchewan Environmental 
Assessment and Review Process guide-lines which I have here for you.  Let 
me read you page 10, article 2.4.  And here's what it says: 
 



 

 

 A project proposal should identify any alternatives (including alternative 
designs, processes, methods, locations and timing), which the proponent 
considered prior to selecting the proposed course of action, and explain 
why each was rejected in favour of the proposed course of action. 

 
An environmental impact study and statement in advance of your 
authorization of construction would have required that there be 
alternatives proposed, particularly since you're using these large amounts 
of natural gas, Mr. Minister.  Why did you allow your decision-making 
process to break your own guide-lines and ignore them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Chairman, I would want to stress that in 
Saskatchewan we do have a lot of natural gas.  I want to confirm with you 
as well that for many years this natural gas was undeveloped.  It has been 
in the last eight years under this current administration where we have 
taken that natural gas, that valuable resource in the ground and put 
Saskatchewan men and women to work. 
 
Now if the hon. member is making the argument here tonight that there is an 
analogy to the oil shortage scare of the 1970s and is using natural gas as 
that type of a scare, Mr. Chairman, I disagree.  I disagree with that, Mr. 
Chairman, fundamentally.  And I would say, Mr. Chairman, that the 
communities that have natural gas exploration and development, that are 
counting on those jobs and opportunities, respect that it's a resource that 
must be managed, managed well. 
 
But don't ever make the case that there's a scary thing out there, that 
we're using up all the natural gas in a short period of time.  We have an 
abundance of it, Mr. Chairman, not perhaps as much as the province of 
Alberta, but we are developing it and it's a good resource to be managed 
well. 
 
With respect to the water, I can only once again reassure the hon. member 
that the amount of water usage is not deemed to be a problem, was not 
deemed to be a problem by the officials in the Department of Environment, 
and more importantly -- more importantly -- not deemed to be a problem by 
the city council in Moose Jaw, not deemed to be a problem by the city 
fathers in this capital city of Regina.  And I respect, I respect very 
much, Mr. Chairman, the decisions made at a local level with respect to 
their water resource. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Minister, what will be the daily consumption by 
this plant of water? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- 723 million gallons of untreated water. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Minister, your colleague reported to this House 
that there would be utilizing of 2 million gallons a day.  It also was 
confirmed by the minister who is your colleague, minister in charge of the 
water corporation -- I'm now looking at Hansard -- in which he said 
clearly, he's confirmed clearly, that the amount of consumption would be 
equal to half the daily consumption of the city of Moose Jaw.  The city of 
Moose Jaw has been known to ration water at times.  The people in the city 



 

 

of Regina have been known to have to ration water at times.  In fact, 
already people are being told you can only water your lawns on certain days 
of the week.  Nothing to do with the capacity to deliver because that's 
already been repaired, Mr. Minister. 
 
You're not being accurate in the information you're providing and neither 
you and your colleague can't even agree on the numbers.  That reinforces 
everything I've been saying here today -- that you made a decision without 
knowing all of the facts.  You made a decision on an environmental . . . 
without having an environmental impact study done, so you didn't know what 
you were making a decision on.  And the fact that you and your colleague 
can't agree on the numbers tells everybody in the public of Saskatchewan 
that this decision was made strictly on a political basis and had nothing 
to do in the consideration of environmental implications, Mr. Minister.  
Can you explain the discrepancy between the two ministers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Chairman, I will make this abundantly clear.  I 
have stated in this legislature this evening, and I want you to pay very 
close attention to this, the annual water requirements, untreated, will be 
723 million gallons on an annual basis.  Now by my quick calculations, I 
would say if you take 365 days of the year, multiply it by what my 
colleague, the minister in charge of Sask Water has said -- 2 million 
gallons a day times 365 days of the year, by my calculations, that is very 
close to 723 million gallons on an annual basis. 
 
There is no inconsistency here.  These are facts that have been documented, 
provided to the city council in Moose Jaw, agreed by the city council in 
Moose Jaw as well as the city council in Regina. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Minister, can you tell the House what the 
consumption of water by the city of Regina is on a daily basis or an annual 
basis? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Chairman, I do not have figures at hand as to what 
the annual amounts of the city of Regina or the city of Moose Jaw are. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- How do you know then, Mr. Minister, that it's one-third 
of 1 per cent that Cargill fertilizer plant is going to use of the 
consumption of the city of Regina? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Chairman, in order to speed up and in the 
interests of time here I will have this calculated. I will have it 
delivered to the hon. member tomorrow.  I have stated, Mr. Chairman, once 
again, consistent with my colleague the minister of Sask Water, the annual 
usage is 723 million gallons in a yearly basis which is, just as the 
minister has stated, 2 million gallons a day times 365 days of the year.  I 
will get our officials calculating and figuring out as a percentage what 
that is of the city of Regina. 
 



 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: -- We'll wait for that, Mr. Minister. In fact, we'll do 
some checking of our own just to make sure that your numbers are correct.  
And we're not going to finish these estimates tonight so we'll have time to 
pursue this again tomorrow or whenever you choose to call them again. 
 
I want to now go back, Mr. Minister, to the question I asked you earlier 
because you never answered it.  I refer you again to your own guide-lines.  
In your guide-lines, I take you back to page 10 in which you say, a project 
proposal should identify any alternatives.  What were the alternatives that 
were identified by the project proposals submitted by Cargill to you, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
(2200) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Chairman, I think it's important to understand 
that natural gas in this particular application, or in other applications, 
has few alternatives.  It is a resource that does not have a lot of 
alternatives.  And, Mr. Chairman, the decision-making process involved 
making an analysis of, if we don't use this natural gas for this project, 
is there some other alternative that may be looked at. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, that was looked at, and it was clearly, clearly arrived 
at the fact that there was no other alternative.  It's not as if there was 
another major, major plant that was going to use this gas.  The hon. member 
will know that we are diversifying the Saskatchewan economy, trying to 
bring as many industries as we can. 
 
But, Mr. Chairman, when it comes to natural gas, there were no other 
alternative uses of this gas that we were stealing this gas away from.  And 
one of the fundamental things we looked at.  Likewise with the water 
situation, we consulted with the city of Moose Jaw, consulted with the city 
of Regina, and it was clear that the use of this resource was not 
pre-empting some other use. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Minister, are you suggesting to this House that 
there was not another fertilizer manufacturing proposal around?  Is that 
what you're suggesting to this House?  Because if my memory serves me 
correctly, Mr. Minister, you are representative of a constituency in which 
there was another fertilizer proposal being proposed along with Rosetown, 
and along with the north-east part of the province.  And your government 
decided to say to that proposal that they weren't big enough and they 
weren't powerful enough and they didn't have enough money.  You had to deal 
with Cargill corporation because they needed the money of the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan so badly that you had to give them $370 million of our money. 
 
Mr. Minister, there were alternatives.  I ask you, why did you not require, 
as is required in your environmental assessment guide-lines, for Cargill 
corporation to propose to you, as part of their submission -- which they're 
required to do -- alternative proposals, which you say they did not do? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm not sure the specific point that the 
hon. member is raising, I'm just not sure that I entirely understand what 
he is getting at.  If the hon. member is getting at the merits and demerits 



 

 

of some other companies that had made representations to Saskatchewan 
communities that they would build fertilizer plants, that is a long debate 
that we certainly can get into if the hon. member wishes. 
 
But I want to make it abundantly clear from an environmental perspective -- 
and this is what I'm here to talk about this evening, to defend the 
estimates of the Environment, to confront the issue of the environment -- 
from an environmental perspective we can ask ourselves: if we did not use 
this natural gas, are we taking it away from another major use that may be 
more environmentally sound?  The answer is no.  It's a resource that, I 
think, in the best interests of Saskatchewan people should be developed and 
should be developed wisely. 
 
Likewise with the water.  When this was looked at, if the hon. member would 
say, well are you taking a bunch of water away from some project or some 
community that would have used this water for another purpose, I think the 
local decisions, the local autonomous decisions that were made by the city 
of Moose Jaw, for instance, by the comments from the city of Regina, would 
tell us that this project will not pre-empt the alternative uses of this 
water -- very clear. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Minister, you have ignored your own legislation 
when it came to the definition of whether this project was or was not a 
development.  That's clear.  It is in section I (ii) clearly stated that 
where a resource or, in this case, two sources of resources are utilized in 
a major way and could have some implications or pre-empt other uses, it is 
a development.  You chose to ignore that, number one. 
 
Number two, you chose to ignore your own guide-lines in the same way as the 
federal government chose to ignore its own guide-lines and regulations in 
the Rafferty situation which you supported.  I gave you an example where 
you chose to ignore them.  If you would care to study your own guide-lines, 
you will see that there are other requirements which the company did not 
follow and you did not require the company to follow.  It says in here: 
 

 At an early stage in the EIA the proponent should undertake a program of 
public involvement to identify issues which residents of the project area 
feel should be addressed in the impact assessment. 

 
This was never done. 
 
It goes on further to say: 
 

 The public involvement program should not be limited to one-way 
communication (a pà la your public meetings) from the proponent to the 
public. 

 
 The proponent should actively solicit input from the general public in the 

area (the general public) of the proposed development, and from other 
individuals or groups likely to have an interest in the project and the 
impact assessment process. 

 
It says in your own guide-lines that the proponent has to outline what the 



 

 

alternatives are.  On none of these, your own requirements, was the process 
followed, and you allowed that to happen, your colleague allowed that to 
happen.  You were in the cabinet at that time so you share the 
responsibility because the buck stops with the Executive Council. 
 
Mr. Minister, let me remind you that this is not the first time this has 
happened.  Let me refer you to a letter that was written on the 
Rafferty-Alameda project between Mr. Hood and Mr. Walker in the Department 
of the Environment in which it was stated the following: 
 

 Our strategy has been, and will continue to be, to take the project as far 
we possibly can on our own and build as much momentum behind it before we 
open the process up to other governments. 

 
That was a deliberate and conscious strategy of their government flaunting 
the laws that you knew you had to follow.  That is exactly the process you 
have used in the Cargill fertilizer plant project, Mr. Minister, exactly 
the project you have used. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- You did not require an environmental impact study and 
you did not require a statement.  You authorized construction and then 
after the construction is under way and after you have signed the 
agreements committing $370 million of Saskatchewan people's money, you then 
say, well we're going to have an environmental impact study finally made.  
But that's after the fact.  You've all ready dotted the i's and crossed the 
t's. 
 
Oh, you say, well if we find something wrong, we won't let them operate.  
Well, Mr. Minister, how ridiculous.  You're going to build a plant; you're 
going to throw $370 million of Saskatchewan people's money into the 
project.  You will find flaws in the project, and then after it's built and 
the money is there, you're going to go to Cargill and you're going to say 
oh, you can't operate.  Who are you trying to kid? 
 
I mean a grade 8 student would know better than to be able to see through 
that one.  The hole in that one is as big as a Mack truck going through a 
sign.  That's the process.  The process here is exactly the process which 
you used in the Rafferty situation, and you know it.  The Star-Phoenix is 
correct, you know.  And it's confirmed by Cargill itself, when the 
Star-Phoenix said in this editorial, the real purpose of the study is to 
allow the government to backtrack, ensuring that all its environmental 
bases are covered.  The reliability of this study is also in question, the 
article goes on to say.  Its premise seems concocted to ensure the project 
goes ahead as in Rafferty, no matter what the environmental outcome. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, what did Cargill say about this?  They said that much 
more detail will be contained in the new impact study and by that 
statement, Cargill admits that they did not provide you adequate 
information and adequate detail in a so-called 70 page proposal which you 
have not fully tabled in this House even today. 
 



 

 

Mr. Minister, that's what's happening here.  It's got nothing to do with 
your concern for the environment.  It's got nothing to do with the 
inadequacy of the environmental assessment process.  It's got nothing to do 
with any of that because all of the legislation gave you all of the 
authority you needed to act but you chose, the government chose not to act. 
 
As recent as March 19 of this year, when I wrote to you prior to that, 
urging that you have an environmental assessment hearing process, saying 
that there ought to be an environmental impact assessment done by the 
corporation -- March 19, you said absolutely not.  That recent, Mr. 
Minister.  I quote to you your letter: 
 

 Therefore I remain convinced that the decision not to require an 
environmental impact assessment was correct and I have not been provided 
with concrete reasons to change my opinion on this matter. 

 
March 19.  Somehow, Mr. Minister, after certain papers were filed in 
certain courts you had a change of heart.  Why don't you come clean?  Why 
don't you stop playing games with the public of Saskatchewan and admit, Mr. 
Minister, that what you are now doing is backwards?  That if the 
environmental impact study has got flaws in it, it's too late because the 
project is on the way and being built and the money that the people of 
Saskatchewan have to put into it is committed and you can't do anything 
about that. 
 
That's bad management.  That's waste.  That's what has put us in the 
situation of a deficit of $4.5 billion and a total public debt of $14 
billion.  That's what this is all about, Mr. Minister.  That's no way to 
run a government.  That's no way to look after the interests of the public 
of Saskatchewan who's the one who are going to have to pay.  You may be 
gone from here some day and you may go back to you're auction business, and 
that's fine.  Maybe you'll get an appointment from the federal government 
to be an agent somewhere, as did the member from Kindersley and the member 
from Indian Head.  That's how little you care. 
 
But I'm telling you, Mr. Minister, we have a far higher obligation than 
that to the public of Saskatchewan who elects us to this place.  Our 
obligation is to protect their interests and not ignore them simply because 
somebody like a Cargill corporation makes a deal with the Premier who is 
determined to have a fertilizer plant at any cost, and go ahead and make 
this kind of a deal without an environmental impact statement, Mr. 
Minister.  Why don't you come clean and tell the people the truth for a 
change? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- The hon. member, Mr. Chairman, would attempt to make 
the case that little or no environmental screening of this project has 
taken place.  Mr. Chairman, I stress to you that initially a great deal of 
environmental screening was done by this project -- enough screening, Mr. 
Chairman, to involve seven or eight different government departments.  
Enough screening that followed the legislation to the best knowledge of 
myself, Mr. Chairman, followed that legislation and deemed by that 
legislation that this project on a technical basis was not a development. 
 



 

 

And, Mr. Chairman, I stand by that decision.  I stand by the decision that 
this project on an environmental basis was sound, is sound today.  The hon. 
member, if he was sincere, would raise his true environmental objection.  
But the hon. member thus far this evening, on an environmental basis, has 
only raised, well you're going to use natural gas, of which we have an 
abundance. 
 
The hon. member has raised the objection, well you're going to use water.  
Is that an objection over and above the local city council in Moose Jaw?  
Is that an objection over and above the statistical analysis that we have 
supplied telling you that the amount of water is not of significant concern 
to Regina?  So I stand by that decision, Mr. Chairman. 
 
We come to the next decision that was made, and it was a decision that was 
made only in co-operation with the Saskatchewan Fertilizer Company.  And, 
Mr. Chairman, I could not have made that decision on my own.  It was a 
voluntary -- a voluntary -- submission to the process used in environmental 
impact assessment. 
 
(2215) 
 
And why do you suppose the corporation on a voluntary basis said, yes, we 
will go through the full process?  Why do you say that, Mr. Chairman?  I 
say because that is good corporate citizenry.  I say that, Mr. Chairman, 
because it proves that this is a corporation that is concerned not only 
about the environment, but about the perception of the environment, as a 
good corporate citizen would. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, I have told you before that in that agreement, if there 
are real environmental objections or concerns that are being brought up, 
there will be an opportunity for people of Saskatchewan to stand in their 
place and address a panel of experts and bring up these concerns.  And if 
those concerns are brought up, Mr. Chairman, there will be changes.  But, 
Mr. Chairman, that is the process that has been followed.  I still stand by 
the decision that the project from an environmental perspective is sound.  
And on a technical basis, I have heard nothing to date to change my mind. 
 
But I do commend the proponent of this corporation who came forth on a 
voluntary basis and said, we will go that extra step.  We will go that 
extra step, Mr. Speaker, and this project will be proven out, proven out as 
the Weyerhaeuser project was, to be a good project for the people of 
Saskatchewan, not only on an environmental basis but on a financial basis 
as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, you have just demonstrated 
why you are not doing your job adequately.  You have just said to this 
House, Mr. Minister, that you have prejudged and predetermined the 
conclusion of the very environmental impact study that you have now ordered 
the Cargill corporation to do.  You have made your decision.  You said that 
just now in so many words. 
 



 

 

Mr. Minister, what is the purpose of it all?  Why bother?  You know what 
your decision is going to be and you know what your conclusion is going to 
be, because you've already made it.  You're not even waiting for the 
report.  But you did make some decisions and you made some decisions not 
knowing the answer to certain important questions which your department 
asked. 
 
I want to give you some examples and I want you to respond to them.  The 
documents which you tabled in this House -- which I say were selected 
documents; they were carefully selected so that all was not there -- but 
the documents said that the report in which you base your decisions to go 
ahead states in so many words that the nitrous oxide emissions are, and I 
quote, "a best guess scenario."  Hardly a strong argument for approving a 
project. 
 
The documents which you provided, Mr. Minister, did not provide an answer 
or a clarification of that.  Nowhere.  We have studied them, we have looked 
at them, and that answer is not answered.  How in Heaven's name could you 
have put your signature to the approval of the construction on a best case 
scenario, Mr. Minister, rather than having some specifics to back it up? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Chairman, the hon. member would know that on any 
project, no matter what process has gone through, there will always be 
items that are subject to regulatory functions.  And I speak, Mr. Chairman, 
of The Clean Air Act that this government instituted, I believe, a year or 
maybe two years ago; an Act that protects in a very stringent way what is 
emitted into our air for the protection of human beings and plants and 
animals. 
 
The hon. member would know that our guide-lines under that legislation are 
probably as stringent as you would find any place across the country.  You 
would find also that violation of that Clean Air Act would put violators 
subject to some of the most stringent penalties across this land. 
 
The hon. member is specifically talking here about nitrogen oxides, 
chemically known as NOX. 
 
For you, Mr. Chairman, and others, what we're talking about here is the 
same type of product that would be released into the air from your natural 
gas furnace in your own homes.  These are once again subject to a 
regulatory Clean Air Act.  The computer modelling has predicted that 
probably about .037 parts per million would meet the most stringent air 
quality standards for Saskatchewan.  We believe they will meet those 
qualifications.  If they do not they are subject to penalties.  Always 
there are these types of questions and that's why we have laws such as we 
do in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Minister, once again you've confirmed what we have 
said, is that you have made an approval even though your own department -- 
and I have the memo here -- said to you that this information was not 
adequate.  It was a best case scenario and more information was needed.  It 
said so.  And in spite of that you gave an approval even though the 
information had not been provided because you didn't table it, if it was 



 

 

provided.  You see, you should read the stuff you table first because you 
get caught on it. 
 
Now let me give you another example, Mr. Minister.  Another area of concern 
with the final report is the oxidization and disposal of the catalysts used 
in the process.  Both your water quality branch and your waste management 
sections were not satisfied with the information contained in the final 
report, and they said more information was required.  Knowing that, Mr. 
Minister, why did you authorize the construction of this plant when you 
knew, because your officials told you, that all the information on that 
subject was not provided? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Chairman, on this general subject I have to stress 
to the hon. member that it is not unusual, not unusual in the least for 
questions like this to arise.  And there are two types of approvals, two 
types of approvals in any different project, Mr. Chairman.  One of the 
approvals is an approval to go and build a project.  Another approval that 
is necessary is to operate that plant.  And, Mr. Speaker, these are two 
very different types of approvals that are given, and I don't think it 
would be fair for any process to say, no, you can't build anything unless 
we have answers to every specific question.  Some answers are dependent on 
whether construction will proceed; other answers and questions are 
dependent on whether permission is given to operate.  And those are 
clearly, clearly distinguishable type of questions. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Minister, but the thing here is that you have 
committed 370 million of our dollars -- our money.  How can you in good 
conscience, Mr. Minister, first of all commit that kind of money; secondly, 
give an approval without knowing what kind of risks you might be 
confronting, and without knowing for sure that you won't be running into 
some problems, and that the plant may end up being for some time if not for 
ever, a white elephant to which we have taxpayers' money in place and 
there's nothing happening in the production end?  How can you possibly 
justify that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Chairman, I would remind the hon. member opposite 
that with any plant in Saskatchewan, any existing plant or any new plants 
that are to be built in Saskatchewan, we have as stringent and tough and as 
environmentally correct regulations as probably any place in North America.  
And I'm proud of the great amount of work and time and effort that we have 
spent in establishing these rules and regulations, such as The Clean Air 
Act. 
 
I tell the hon. member that this plant will be subject to, literally close 
to a hundred different permits, rules, regulations, and they will have to 
meet the most stringent of requirements before anything operates.  And that 
not only goes for this plant, Mr. Chairman, but any industrial plant in 
this province. 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I've got a few questions 
to the minister on the same subject, that is the minister's stated concern 
and sudden concern for an environmental assessment review of the Cargill 
fertilizer plant in Belle Plaine. 



 

 

 
And I note with interest, Mr. Chairman, that the minister made the 
announcement sometime around June 1 after the decision to build the plant 
had all ready been approved and after the government had entered into an 
agreement with Cargill fertilizer -- the large multinational vertically 
integrated agri-food company, that will end up reaping the rewards from 
taxpayers' investment. 
 
And we found that we have a situation here, somewhat analogist as my 
colleague the member from Regina North East has pointed out, that the 
government entered into a project and then under certain political 
pressures which were applied to it, was forced to suddenly recognize that a 
thorough environmental assessment had not been carried out. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Chairperson, that the minister can express before 
the legislature his sudden new-found concern for the environment.  But I 
suggest that that new-found concern for the environment originates in 
another source and from another place, and particularly from the Senate 
floor of the United States Senate -- that the real political pressure to 
put on an environmental impact assessment derives not from any change of 
heart on this government with regards to the environment, but in fact from 
pressure applied by the U.S. Senate.  And I want to read into the record, 
Mr. Chairman, extracts from the Congressional Record, and the Congressional 
Record is the recordings -- much like our Hansard here in Saskatchewan -- 
it's the recordings of the business carried on by the Senate of the United 
States. 
 
And I refer to the Thursday, May 14 issue of the Congressional Record, 
under head: "Concern in the U.S. Fertilizer Industry".  Senator Quentin 
Burdick, the Senator from the great state of North Dakota, raised what I 
think was the real issue, and the real reason why the minister all of 
sudden believes it's politically imperative to carry out this environmental 
assessment. 
 
I'd like to read, Mr. Chairperson, a bit of what Senator Burdick had to 
say, and then I'm going to read a portion of a letter that Senator Burdick 
and nine other United States senators sent to Carla Hills, the U.S. trade 
representative for Canada, regarding the Cargill plant here in 
Saskatchewan.  Senator Burdick says: 
 

 I have other concerns about this project, specifically the fact that the 
government of Saskatchewan apparently has waived the requirement (note 
these words carefully, Mr. Chairman) for an environmental impact statement 
for this project.  Since I represent a State that shares a common border 
with Canada, I am concerned about the precedent that would be set by this 
decision. 

 
 These and other concerns have been included in a letter to Ambassador, 

Carla Hills, U.S. Trade Representative. 
 

And I want to quote the relevant sections from that letter.  Senator 
Burdick writes, and the other senators write: 
 



 

 

 With respect to the environmental assessment of the Saferco plant, 
Saskatchewan claims that the plant will meet environmental standards and 
that it has conducted necessary reviews.  The simple fact is, however, 
that the project has not (and the word "not" is in italics) been subject 
to a full public environmental impact assessment.  Furthermore, the 
Provincial government -- which is not a neutral party -- has refused to 
release to the public any report of its allegedly (and this is the word 
that the senators use, allegedly) thorough internal environmental 
assessment of the plant.  The approach, particularly where it is part of a 
broader program to provide support for a production facility that is not 
commercially justified and has (about it) all the earmarks of political 
pork barrel. 

 
(2230) 
 
Political pork-barrel is the term that the senator . . . 10 senators in the 
United States use to describe this project, and those are: Quentin N. 
Burdick, John R. Hreaux, Frank Murkowski, Pete Wilson, Kent Conrad, Dale 
Bumpers, Charles S. Robb, Conrad Burns, John W. Warner, Dan Coats, and Ted 
Stevens. 
 
Now leaving aside for a moment the sincerity of Senator Burdick, given 
Senator Burdick's actions in regards to the Rafferty-Alameda project, what 
is instructive in this matter, Mr. Chairperson, is that on June 14 the 
issue of Saskatchewan's failure to carry through an environmental impact 
statement was raised on the floor of the U.S. Senate. 
 
Despite the fact that elected representatives in Saskatchewan from this 
side of the House and despite that the public at large raised questions 
with the minister and raised questions publicly about the lack of a full, 
open, environmental assessment process, we find that the minister, far from 
responding to the pressures . . . far from responding to the concerns 
expressed by the people here in Saskatchewan, felt it incumbent to announce 
this environmental assessment project not before the plant was built, not 
before the agreements were signed, not before matters were put in place, 
but only after the U.S. Senate raised the issue of the lack of an 
environmental impact statement.  So the words of the minister and his 
supposed concern for the environment, I think and I trust, Mr. Chairperson, 
ring rather hollow. 
 
I think the facts are fairly clear in this matter that the only reason that 
we see an environmental impact assessment process --  and we'll wait and 
judge whether or not that it meets the requirements of the Act here in this 
province, or meets the intent of that Act -- that the only reason this 
public grandstanding by the minister in regards to the sudden conversion on 
the road to Damascus comes not as a result of any new-found love for the 
environment, or any kind of respect or understanding of the situation of 
the environment here in Saskatchewan and globally, but comes as strictly as 
a result of pressure applied by senators from south of the border. 
 
And I think that's instructive, Mr. Chairperson, because it characterizes 
this government's whole approach to environmental impact assessments.  The 
member from Regina North East has raised a number of issues in this regard; 



 

 

and in regards to this project, I think it's pretty clear, the evidence 
stands pretty clear why now the minister's had that conversion. 
 
But I want to say, Mr. Minister, that the questions I want to ask you 
tonight aren't necessarily on that particular chemical plant, because I'm 
sure you will stand here and you will try to deny that there was any 
pressure put on you by the American senators, or that you'll try to deny 
that there was any pressure put on you by the American senators or that 
you'll try to deny that that had any influence over your decision.  In 
fact, you may even accuse the opposition of carrying forth the wishes of 
the U.S. Senate.  And let me tell you, nothing could be farther from the 
truth. 
 
But this approach to environmental assessment . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . while the member from Cut Knife-Lloyd laughs.  And he 
can't have it both ways: we're either carrying out what the U.S. Senate 
wants or we're out being anti-American.  You can't have it both ways. 
 
It's very simple, Mr. Minister.  It's very simple.  Your approach to 
environmental assessment matters has been marked since at least 1986 -- 
and, I would submit, before that -- at least since 1986 with that kind of 
political manipulation which is used in place of an honest and 
straightforward approach to dealing with what are genuine and legitimate 
environmental concerns of the people of this province. 
 
Now we had the spectacle today, Mr. Minister, in Crown Corporations 
Committee, of the associate minister in charge of the Souris Basin 
Development Authority tabling a letter which had already become public, but 
which I want to read to you because it encapsulates your government's 
approach.  And this letter is from George Hood, the director of planning 
operations for the Souris Basin Development Authority, to Mr. Robert 
Walker, director, coordination and assessment branch, Saskatchewan 
Environment. 
 
I want to read you parts of this letter.  It's dated November 10, 1986, and 
I think it's very instructive if we look at the essence of this letter.  
Mr. Hood states that: 
 

 The undeniable fact is that the Rafferty Dam is a very (and he underlines 
the word very) controversial project with the potential, if not managed 
carefully, (obviously talking here in a political sense) to attract 
significant opposition on both sides of the 49th parallel. 

 
And here is the key, the key first sentence which reveals your strategy in 
regards to environmental assessment in general, but more particularly the 
Rafferty-Alameda project: 
 

 The principals involved in this project have deliberately attempted 
(deliberately attempted) to keep the initial number of agencies involved 
on both sides of the border to as few as possible.  The rationale is 
simply this: the project given its complexity both in terms of hydrology 
and jurisdictional interdependence will have a far greater chance of 
success if the principals, (that is those most directly involved, in this 



 

 

case Saskatchewan, North Dakota, the (U.S.) Army Corps of Engineers, and 
the City of Minot) have the chance of building a consensus on the most 
difficult aspects of the project.  It will come as no surprise to you, I 
am sure, that a number of federal officials have in the past expressed 
their aversion to this particular project.  Given that a number of these 
individuals are still working in related areas the distinct possibility 
exists that if given the opportunity, they would deliberately attempt to 
scuttle the project.  Our strategy has been, and will continue to be, to 
take the project as far as we possibly can on our own and to build (up) as 
much momentum behind it before we open the process up to other 
governments. 

 
And my question, Mr. Minister, is this: this is the strategy that you used 
with Rafferty-Alameda.  Given what you have done in regards to the 
fertilizer plant in Belle Plaine, the Cargill fertilizer plant, isn't it 
only normal for people in Saskatchewan to express great scepticism, to 
express a great deal of disbelief when you stand here and say that your 
government is committed to an open and honest and fair environmental review 
of whatever projects that happen to come before the purview of your 
department?  Don't you think that that's a fair response on behalf of the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Chairman, I talk to a lot of people in my travels 
about this big subject we call the environment.  And, Mr. Chairman, I have 
many, many people, in fact most all people who come forth to me, whether 
they are individuals or whether they are groups, come forth in a genuine 
and sincere manner and they bring legitimate environmental concerns. 
 
And my job is to protect that environment, Mr. Chairman.  My job is to 
listen carefully to those types of concerns, analyse them, and make 
decisions.  Mr. Chairman, I want to submit to you tonight, and to the hon. 
member opposite, that on occasion, and I have to say on rare occasion, 
there are those for whatever reason use this thing called the environment 
that so many people are interested in, they use that as a smoke-screen.  
And I'm only talking about a selected few. 
 
And I want to very much, very much this evening rebut some of the hon. 
member's arguments and I'm going to talk about a country that I love, it's 
Canada.  And I'm going to talk about another country that I treat as a very 
good friend, that's the United States of America.  But I'm going to talk 
specifically about the 10 senators which the member so reverently refers 
to, the 10 senators who purportedly put pressure on this government with 
respect to the Saskatchewan fertilizer company. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, let us just think about this just for a minute.  Imagine 
yourself as a senator in, let's say, Tulsa, Oklahoma, from Tulsa, Oklahoma.  
Now do you, Mr. Chairman, think for one minute that that senator in Tulsa, 
Oklahoma was really concerned about the environmental aspects of this 
project?  Does that make sense to you, Mr. Chairman?  What was that senator 
from Tulsa, Oklahoma concerned about?  Was it the amount of natural gas we 
were using here in Saskatchewan?  I say no.  Was it the fact that we were 
going to use a little bit of water?  I say no.  Was it the fact that we 
were going to emit nitrogen oxides into the air the same way we do in your 



 

 

furnace at your home?  No, Mr. Chairman, that's not the case. 
 
And I ask all hon. members, all fair and reasonable people, to really 
listen carefully to the hon. member opposite who so reverently says, well 
you know these United States senators had environmental concerns.  I submit 
to you, Mr. Chairman, they were hiding under the smoke-screen of the 
environment.  If we want to move on to what their real concern was, their 
real concern, Mr. Chairman, was the fact that a major corporation in 
conjunction with the Saskatchewan government was going to develop a major 
natural resource and create a plant, Mr. Chairman, that will compete and 
will compete effectively in the market-place, not only financially, 
economically, but also environmentally. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, I rebut the remarks of the hon. member with respect to 
United State's senators really being concerned about the environment with 
respect to this issue.  The hon. member has talked long and hard tonight 
again about the subject of Rafferty.  Indeed, Mr. Chairman, Saskatchewan 
people want to build our economy, they want to manage our water, they want 
to manage it effectively, Mr. Chairman, and they want to do it in an 
environmentally responsible manner. 
 
I remind the hon. member that from a Saskatchewan government management 
point of view with respect to the environment on the subject of the 
Rafferty-Alameda project, every single rule, every regulation, every course 
that we could have gone through from a Saskatchewan perspective was gone 
through.  Was there a public inquiry?  I say yes, Mr. Chairman, a board of 
inquiry report stands before us tonight.  Was there a public review period 
that went above and beyond what we were called for?  Yes, not 30 days as 
required by law but 60 days to give Saskatchewan people time to submit 
proposals, to stand at public inquiry meetings, and talk about their 
concerns. 
 
Have there been studies on this subject?  Yes, Mr. Chairman.  And I want to 
remind you that all the Saskatchewan studies would fill the better part of 
a one tonne truck.  Have we managed it correctly here in Saskatchewan?  
Yes.  Are there concerns about a process in Ottawa that's changing, that 
was unclear, that was put into a late cabinet meeting in 1984, that was not 
law but were guide-lines, that was never tried, never tested by law?  Are 
there problems with that process?  Well, yes, Mr. Chairman.  And 
environmentalists and people all across Canada admit that and it's in the 
process of being changed. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, what I'm telling you is that we, from a Saskatchewan 
perspective, are managing this environmental issue, managing the process 
the best way we know how and in conjunction, building and diversifying our 
Saskatchewan economy. 
 
(2245) 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Mr. Chairman, now that we've got the political rhetoric from 
the minister out of the way, let's get down to the issue.  Mr. Minister, 



 

 

I'm not going to disagree with you on the concerns, the environmental 
concerns raised by the American senators.  I'm not naive enough to suggest 
that the Dale Bumpers or Quentin Burdick, particularly given Senator 
Burdick's record in regards to Rafferty-Alameda, in fact are showing that 
great concern over the environment here in Canada. 
 
What I'm suggesting to you though, Mr. Minister, what I'm suggesting to you 
and what I'm suggesting to the people of Saskatchewan is that, having 
raised the environment as part of a political smoke-screen or a political 
response to the Cargill plant at Belle Plaine, that in order to meet their 
objections to avoid future difficulties in regards to dumping, future 
difficulties in regard to the charge by the senators that this is a 
government subsidized operation, that it was only when these issues were 
raised on the floor of the U.S. Senate that in order to cover your 
political hide did you find all of a sudden a conversion on the road to 
Washington and say, yes indeed, we need an environmental impact statement. 
 
It had nothing to do, contrary to what you say, sir, it had nothing to do 
with the legitimate concerns of the environment raised by citizens here in 
Saskatchewan.  Your announcement of environmental impact assessment had 
only one thing in mind, and that was a political response, a political 
response to those American senators who undoubtedly have concerns about the 
effect that this plant will have on the fertilizer industry in the United 
States.  But it was only when they raised those concerns did you find 
yourself in the position where you felt it politically expedient and 
politically necessary to engage in an environmental review process.  That 
modus operandi is the same modus operandi that applies to Rafferty-Alameda.  
You've said, and you say, that the Rafferty-Alameda project has been 
thoroughly studied by the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
It's your contention that in fact the Government of Saskatchewan did 
nothing wrong; that all the fault in regards to the environment -- and this 
is your argument, Mr. Minister -- that the fault, if you like, or the whole 
problems with the environmental review process, rests with the federal 
government in Ottawa.  That's the position that you and your government is 
taking, that it's the federal government that's messed up in this, and not 
you. 
 
Well let me tell you, Mr. Minister, we have documentation to prove that 
while it may have been, while part of the blame may be subscribed to the 
federal government -- and I don't deny that -- a great share of the blame 
in regards to your fiasco in terms of environmental assessment rests with 
your government, and it rests at two levels.  The first level is the nature 
under which and the way in which the Government of Saskatchewan conducted 
its own environmental review.  Well the minister shakes his head and says 
no.  And I can quote from you from the newspapers, for example, the 
Winnipeg Free Press, that singles out your government as having failed to 
provide adequate information in regards to the studies you carried out, in 
particularly, in regards to water quantity, water quality, the downstream 
effects, the whole question of water modelling, so on and so forth -- gaps 
in the information which were identified by the independent federal review 
panel. 
 



 

 

That's one level in which you messed up.  And you messed up not because it 
was any honest mistake, but you messed up because you had as your aim, as 
Mr. Hood's letter outlines, you had as your aim a strategy to ram this 
project through; to ram this project through regardless of the 
consequences.  Now I want to refer to you to the letter that I had quoted 
previously on.  I quote Mr. Hood.  Mr. Hood says: 
 

 My understanding is that the federal Environmental Assessment Review 
Process was established pursuant to a federal Cabinet directive and is not 
based on any legislative authority. 

 
He says that despite the fact that he has had legal advice to the contrary 
from the Department of Justice.  And the Department of the Environment in 
Saskatchewan had legal advice contrary to this statement in this letter to 
Mr. Walker.  And those letters, from the Department of Justice, are on 
file.  But he goes on to say, and this is even more instructive: 
 

 I think it is clear that the Rafferty and Alameda Project is not a "purely 
provincial project" in that the federal government will have some 
involvement as defined in the EARP Guidelines, as federal "decision-making 
responsibilities". 

 
Clear, Mr. Minister, clear.  Mr. Hood, in this letter in 1986, acknowledges 
that the federal government has federal decision-making responsibilities, 
yet the same letter goes on to outline a strategy, a deliberate strategy to 
keep the federal government in the dark -- and a strategy designed to keep 
the federal government in the dark in order to build, as he said, build up 
the momentum behind the project before involving other jurisdictions. 
 
So you can't, Mr. Minister, it appears to me, get off the hook by trying to 
apportion all the blame or even a significant portion of the blame to the 
federal government.  But this is indicative, this approach to environmental 
assessment is indicative of the way in which your government sees the EIS 
(environmental impact statement), the environment impact assessment 
process, as a nuisance.  This is the way that your government sees it as a 
nuisance that you have to get around in order to proceed with your 
megaprojects, whether it's Rafferty-Alameda, whether it's Millar Western, 
whether it's the Cargill plant at Belle Plaine.  And each and every time 
that your government has taken that approach, you've been caught up, you've 
been caught up and you've been caught out, because it's not the honest way 
of approaching the environment, and it's not the honest way of 
administering the Act for which you're responsible, Mr. Minister. 
 
Once again, I ask you, given these facts and given this record and history 
of your government's approach to environmental assessment, is it any wonder 
that the people of Saskatchewan just don't believe your sincerity when it 
comes to developing an open and honest environmental review process that 
will protect the interests of the people of this project?  Is it any 
wonder, when you're presented with this kind of fact here in black and 
white, Mr. Minister?  And how can you justify the history of that?  How can 
you justify the history of that approach when your own member from 
Turtleford, member of your caucus, tells the press that he thinks that a 
proper environmental impact statement should have been done by the province 



 

 

of Saskatchewan in the first place.  That's what he said; that's what is 
recorded on video tape and recorded in the newspapers. 
 
And it's interesting that the member from Turtleford didn't deny the 
statements attributed to him in the body of the story in the newspapers and 
hasn't denied what is down on black and white on video tape -- or excuse 
me, what's down in colour on video tape -- that you are to blame because of 
your approach to environmental assessment and your refusal to take the 
intent of The Environmental Assessment Act seriously. 
 
So once again, Mr. Minister, I ask you this question: is it any wonder that 
the people of Saskatchewan just don't have the faith in your government to 
carry through on environmental assessment the way that they want to see 
projects examined so that their future and the future of their children is 
assured so that they're not going to suffer the effects of one more project 
which degrades the environment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Chairman, I would like to advance the argument to 
you . . . and I'm not so sure that it's even an argument.  I think, Mr. 
Chairman, it's a collection of facts, really is what it is.  And the first 
fact I'd like to talk about is the fact that it is widely accepted across 
this country of ours that the federal rules -- and I will call them rules 
-- with respect to environmental impact assessments are quite flawed.  I 
say flawed from a number of perspectives -- flawed from the perspective of 
some duplication or redundancy, flawed from the perspective of many areas 
are uncertain, flawed from the perspective that the jurisdictional 
responsibilities of the province and the federal government are not clear 
in any sense of the word. 
 
I say that, Mr. Chairman, because I've talked to a lot of ministers across 
this country.  I have spoken with a large number of environmental interest 
groups and organizations.  And I think it would be the consensus of those 
groups that I have spoken to that the federal rules, some of them which are 
guide-lines, some of them which are regulations, some of them which are 
actual law -- the general consensus is those rules have major flaws. 
 
The hon. member would know that very recently a major piece of legislation 
that has hit the table in the federal parliament will massively -- and I 
say massively -- change the legislation that is currently on the books in 
Ottawa. 
 
I'd say, Mr. Chairman, that that same recognition with respect to the 
provincial assessment legislation in this province by the general public, 
that same recognition is there.  That our provincial laws, although it's 
fair legislation . . . I have to give the hon. members credit that for a 
time when they put it in back in the late '70s -- I believe it was the late 
'70s -- it was good legislation; it was good enough for the day. 
 
But if the hon. members themselves will not admit that today it is out of 
step, I can only advance the argument once again that it's widely accepted 
by the public of Saskatchewan that yes, your legislation seems to be 
unclear.  Your legislation seems to leave too many issues for ministerial 
discretion or single official discretion, or not enough public 



 

 

consultation, or enough clarity, at least when there should be public 
consultation, and when it's not necessary. 
 
I don't think the hon. member could really disagree with that widespread 
acceptance that legislation all across this country must change.  I submit 
to you, Mr. Chairman, that we are in a period of change, general change, 
probably unprecedented rate of change with respect to many matters, but 
most specifically with respect to the environment.  Mr. Chairman, the whole 
issue of the environment has had its profile raised so significantly and so 
substantially in the last few years. 
 
So many of these issues have only recently come to the forefront.  The hon. 
member wants to advance the argument, well Saskatchewan, you are unique.  
Saskatchewan government, you don't care about the environment, you've done 
everything wrong.  I don't buy that, Mr. Chairman, and I don't think the 
public in Saskatchewan buy that.  I think the public recognize and respect 
that we are in a changing environment.  The processes are at question.  It 
is a time when projects such as the Rafferty-Alameda dam are very much in 
the news. 
 
But likewise in the province of Alberta, projects like the Old Man dam are 
at issue in the province of Alberta.  Projects such as other pulp and paper 
mills in the province of Alberta are very much at question.  And, Mr. 
Chairman, I submit to you that this minister and this administration are 
dealing, I think, in an efficient and effective manner to manage these 
issues. 
 
Are we doing it perfectly, Mr. Chairman?  No, probably not.  Can we do 
better?  Yes, I'm sure we can.  But, Mr. Chairman, I submit to you that 
most reasonable people would say, you've got your eye on the ball fairly 
well.  You're managing the best way you can.  And in relative terms, Mr. 
Chairman, I submit that we've done a good job in managing most 
environmental issues in this province. 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Well, Mr. Minister, first let me say that I don't believe 
that the present laws in the province of Saskatchewan, or the present laws 
governing environmental assessment in the federal Government of Canada 
can't be improved.  And I'd be the first one . . . one of the first ones to 
stand in my place and vote if in fact we saw you sincerely attempting to 
strengthen the environmental assessment process.  And if you're looking for 
ideas, I don't think you have to look any further than the front benches of 
the opposition, and perhaps take some ideas put forward in regards to the 
creation of an independent environmental agency, such as suggested by the 
opposition critic, my good friend, the member for Regina North East. 
 
That would strengthen the environmental review process.  And if you were 
sincere about it, if you were sincere in what you're saying, then you will 
take a look at that and you will come back to this Assembly, whenever we 
next meet, with a Bill which will reflect that kind of independence, and a 
Bill which will reflect that arm's length from government which is the 
major problem.  And you yourself have identified it, and I believe I have 
identified it tonight, as the major problem.  So that you don't mix 
economic comparatives or a particular minister's pet economic project with 



 

 

the need to have a global understanding -- a global in the provincial 
sense, but a global in the global sense, I guess -- understanding of the 
needs to protect the environment.  And you don't have to look very much 
farther, Mr. Minister, as I said, then the suggestions put forward to my 
colleague, the member for Regina North East. 
 
But what we're talking about in terms of your government, and I detect a 
bit of mea culpa here, I detect a bit of a backtracking from your position, 
and I welcome that.  I think that the criticisms levelled by the former 
minister of Parks and Renewable Resources and Culture, Multiculturalism and 
Recreation, the member for Turtleford, I think maybe they've stung home, 
and maybe in fact have changed your position on that. 
 
But the proof of that will be in the pudding, because we see things that 
have happened just in the last two months, not only in regards to the 
Cargill plant in Belle Plaine, but also in regards to the Rafferty-Alameda 
project which leaves what you're saying to me to be suspect.  In other 
words, the reality belies the rhetoric in this case. 
 
I want to refer you, Mr. Minister, to a letter from the federal Minister of 
the Environment to one of your colleagues, the associate minister 
responsible for the Saskatchewan Water Corporation, dated not two years or 
three or four years ago but in fact dated May 3, 1990, not more than a 
little more than a month ago. 
 
And it goes on, and I'm quoting, Mr. Chairman, because it contains the 
members names and I want you to realize that I'm quoting from this letter.  
It says: 
 

 Dear Mr. Martens: I'm writing to you to make known my concern about the 
April 27 announcement by Saskatchewan of its intention to proceed with 
further construction on the Rafferty dam and associated works in the 
reservoir area.  The announced construction would appear to extend beyond 
what is necessary to meet the requirements of the independent dam safety 
review board and will (and I want you to note these words carefully, Mr. 
Minister) and will definitely be viewed as contravening the spirit of the 
Canada-Saskatchewan agreement. 

 
And as you know, Mr. Minister, this was an agreement reached between the 
province of Saskatchewan and the Government of Canada to assure some kind 
of impartial, independent review process of the Rafferty dam project, even 
at this late date. 
 
(2300) 
 
Now what was your response?  What was your government's response to that 
agreement?  Here the former federal minister of the Environment says, 
"you're breaking the spirit of that agreement."  He goes on to say: 
 

 Activities such as the construction of causeways and bridges in the 
reservoir area and the continuation of work in the new Dr. Mainprize park 
as well as channelization of the Souris River downstream of the Rafferty 
dam have already resulted in misgivings being expressed by environmental 



 

 

groups and could compromise the work of the panel. 
 

Now you see what I'm saying, Mr. Minister.  Here we have an agreement 
reached between you and the Government of Canada that says, okay, let's 
take this out of the purview of the province; let's remove it from the 
political arena; let's put it in the hands of an independent panel -- an 
independent panel, I may remind you, Mr. Minister, which this opposition 
has called for since 1986 and to which we agreed and to which your 
government apparently, when you signed the agreement on April 27, had 
agreed.  Here's the minister, the federal Minister of the Environment 
saying that because you are continuing work on the project, you are 
compromising the review work of that independent panel. 
 
And it seems to me, Mr. Minister, that flies precisely in the face of what 
you've tried to project here tonight; that you've all of a sudden found a 
new conversion and a new commitment to the environment and a new commitment 
to an environmental review process which is independent.  But what did we 
see less than a month ago?  We see you go ahead and compromise in the same 
independent review panel to which your government previously agreed.  The 
former minister of the Environment goes on to say: 
 

 Any delay in the panel's activities, if individual members found the 
situation unacceptable, would result in delays in the completion of the 
assessment, and hence of the project. 

 
And that's pretty clear.  What the federal Minister of the Environment is 
doing is saying, if you continue on with the work, we're going to pull your 
licence, because that's the only way and the minister knows it, that's the 
only way that work would be delayed on the project, unless you undertook to 
stop the work yourself. 
 

 I have referred this matter for further investigation by federal 
officials.  If activities are occurring that are contrary to the terms of 
the agreement or the federal licence to the project, I will take whatever 
steps are appropriate. 

 
Now certain events have intervened on the national scale to . . . We've 
seen a change in the environmental ministers.  But, Mr. Minister, it's my 
indication from Ottawa and from the federal department in Ottawa, that that 
is precisely the steps that the new Environment minister, Mr. de Cotret is 
about to take. 
 
So how can you square that circle, Mr. Minister?  How can you stand here on 
the one hand and say you're committed to an impartial and open 
environmental review process, when scarcely one month ago your government 
-- and obviously with your approval, being a member of cabinet -- that your 
government for which you are responsible, undertook actions which would 
compromise and destroy the credibility of that same independent 
environmental process?  How can you stand here and on the one hand say one 
thing, and on the other hand do something that is entirely contradictory?  
Perhaps you can explain that to the people of the province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- I would like, Mr. Chairman, to turn to the assessment 



 

 

legislation that the hon. member spoke about in the earlier portion of his 
comments.  I do want you to know, Mr. Chairman, that my intention after 
proceeding with the process is that we have in Saskatchewan -- or my 
objective would be -- that we have in Saskatchewan at the end of this 
process the best possible legislation when it comes to environmental impact 
assessments anywhere across Canada.  That's my objective, Mr. Chairman: to 
have the best legislation in Canada.  I believe that we can do that here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I have a lot of faith in Saskatchewan's men and women when it comes to the 
environment or any difficult issue to be managed.  We've been through many 
difficult things in this province, Mr. Chairman.  We have many records in 
this province, Mr. Chairman.  We have many people in the province who have 
done very good work world-wide.  And when it comes to the process that we 
will use to change this legislation, I want to remind the hon. member who 
talks so reverently about an independent commission, and that's a sole idea 
of the New Democratic Party.  It's not the case, Mr. Chairman. 
 
This process that we are committed to by this Saskatchewan government 
administration is exactly that: to have an independent commission travel 
throughout this province; examine from a business point of view, from a 
labour point of view, from an environmentalist point of view, from a legal 
person's point of view, from every point of view and every perspective that 
would be reasonable to look at what our processes here in Saskatchewan 
should be in order that they be the best in the country.  And, Mr. 
Chairman, I have full confidence that they will be. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I would also want to warrant to the hon. member that when 
that report is completed by the independent commission, that report will be 
delivered to myself and at the same time it will also be delivered to the 
public of Saskatchewan. 
 
I will invite the hon. member opposite to have input into that process, to 
study carefully that report when it is made, and I will heartily accept his 
judgements of it.  I will heartily accept and invite his comments as we go 
through that process.  I think it's important that we co-operate on such an 
important process that will be so good, Mr. Chairman, I expect it will last 
for a good number of years. 
 
The hon. member has once again turned to the issue of Rafferty.  I would 
like to remind the hon. member that from an environmental prospective, from 
a Saskatchewan environmental prospective, there are certain works to be 
undertaken at the Rafferty site.  Works that by every environmental 
standard are works that should and must be completed. 
 
Many of those works are part and parcel and condition of the licence that 
we have issued to the proponent.  The licence that we have issued has said, 
you must undertake certain works, certain environmental mitigation 
measures.  And, Mr. Chairman, much of that work is continuing today. 
 
The hon. member has referred to correspondence between the former federal 
minister of the Environment and our current minister of the Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation.  Certainly there has been that correspondence.  



 

 

Certainly some of it is subject to question.  But I remind the hon. member 
that work is continuing under a valid, current, and up to date licence and 
I think that's a very important point. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I want to just 
ask a few questions before we adjourn for the evening on the Meadow Lake 
Millar Western pulp mill.  When you first announced your approval for the 
pulp mill to proceed, you did so, approving the dumping of effluent into 
the Beaver River for two years.  You did so, saying that that was okay, 
there was no problem with that, everything was perfect.  In fact it was 
said by the company and by yourself that the effluent would be even a 
better quality than the water in the Beaver River.  Now you have, Mr. 
Minister, changed your position.  You've now said that the pulp mill can go 
ahead but they won't be dumping for the first two years. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, let me quote to you what officials of the company said 
at one of your public meetings.  And this is a transcript.  And what I am 
doing here is I am pointing out yet another example of the confusion and 
the contradiction that you and your colleagues and the government continues 
to propagate when it comes to environmental questions.  It's not a matter 
of enforcing environmental laws and putting in environmental protection 
policies and programs.  It's a matter of whatever suits the political needs 
of the government. 
 
Because when you announced this project and said it would be dumped for two 
years, the question was asked at one of the public meetings: why can't you 
do something that would not require you to dump for two years?  You know 
what the officials of the company said?  I want to quote to you.  He said: 
 

 We don't see any breakthroughs in technology between now and then that are 
going to suddenly say, aha, that means we can start up effluent free. 

 
When you announced it and at the public meetings the company said 
categorically, there's absolutely no way in which they can dump effluent 
free.  This is the so-called public meetings you have in which people 
aren't allowed to ask questions in such a way, and cross examine as you 
would have in public hearings.  So that at no time can some of this 
information be questioned the way it should be. 
 
Mr. Minister, how is that when you gave the approval there was not the 
technology and there was no possible way in which there was any sight of 
technology developing that would prevent the company from having to dump 
for two years, and then after these public meetings all of a sudden you 
found the technology?  Can you explain that contradiction? 
 
Well sure, Minister goes like this.  That's true, that's about how he does 
it.  Whichever way the wind blows, that's what he has to say.  It's all 
words but it doesn't do anything. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, can you explain to me why the company at those public 
meetings said there was no technology that made it possible, but after the 
meetings the technology was there? 
 



 

 

(2315) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Chairman, I want to clarify for the hon. member 
the process involved in the Meadow Lake Millar Western pulp mill.  Okay? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- I know the process. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- No, I'm not so sure the hon. member does know the 
process because the hon. member makes representations that this government 
or this minister accepted a certain proposal and made a certain decision, 
and that was not the case. 
 
I emphasize, Mr. Chairman, that the process involved was that the 
corporation submitted a proposal to the government under the environmental 
impact assessment legislation.  And that proposal -- and it was only a 
proposal -- was that this mill dump effluent into the river for two years.  
This government did not accept that proposal nor did this government reject 
the proposal at that time.  We did not accept it or we did not reject it. 
 
What we did say, and what this minister did say, was that this proposal 
should go to public meetings.  This proposal should have the public of 
Saskatchewan involved.  And I made that decision.  I just forget the exact 
date that that decision was made.  But the hon. member will respect that 
there was public meetings, and it was as a result of those public meetings 
that this minister made the decision, in fact, made it a part and parcel of 
the approval of this project that the project be effluent free from day 
one. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Minister, when you made the original approval, you 
approved the dumping of effluent for two years.  You said so; you were 
quoted as saying so.  Mr. Minister, how can you now stand in this House and 
suggest otherwise when that, in fact, was what your statement said.  You're 
quoted in the newspaper as having said that.  You still didn't answer my 
question.  How is it that during the public meetings the company was saying 
there is no technology that couldn't possibly make it possible for them not 
to dump for the first two years, but after the public meetings somehow the 
technology was found?  Can you explain that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Chairman, I cannot speak for the company 
themselves, What some company official may or may not have said with 
respect to the technical abilities to be effluent free from day one in this 
project.  I can only tell you, Mr. Chairman, and I can stress that this 
pulp mill in Meadow Lake, Saskatchewan is a pulp mill that we should all be 
extremely proud of in Saskatchewan. 
 
This pulp mill is setting a precedent and a standard for pulp mills across 
at least North America.  I'd say, Mr. Chairman, from an environmental point 
of view, and from a pulp mill industry point of view, the eyes of North 
America are on this pulp mill.  Why are they on this pulp mill, Mr. 
Chairman?  Because this is the first, the first zero effluent pulp mill to 
be put into production anywhere in the entire world, and that's significant 
from an environmental perspective. 
 



 

 

And I would ask the hon. member to pay close attention and to stand up as a 
Saskatchewan citizen and as a person who I believe is concerned about the 
environment, and say hurrah, there's one for Saskatchewan.  There's a mark 
on the wall for Saskatchewan and there's something we can be proud of.  
There's no other pulp mill in the world that is zero effluent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Now let's be proud of that.  Mr. Chairman, I say once 
again, we are proud of this project.  Environmental people from across 
North America are saying, hurrah for Saskatchewan.  And I'd ask the hon. 
member to join in with that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 11:23 p.m. 
 
 


