





























































Hansard: May 02, 1990


 

 

May 2/90 
 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to introduce to you, 
and through you to all the members of the House, 30 of our public servants, 
Mr. Speaker, who are seated in your gallery. 
 
These civil servants, Mr. Speaker, are here today to participate in an in 
depth tour of the Legislative Building and to get a firsthand glimpse of 
different aspects of the legislative process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these tours have been taking place since January and have been 
very successful.  They provide instant, important insights to the people 
who work in the various departments, and are building a strong team of 
spirit between all of us who serve the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they are representing the departments today of the Public 
Service Commission, the Department of Health, Department of Education, 
Consumer and Commercial Affairs, Economic Diversification and Trade, Social 
Services, Urban Affairs, and the director of Hansard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'd like all members to join me in welcoming our civil 
servants here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to ask the members of 
the House to join with me in welcoming a group of 30 grade 8 students from 
Henry Braun School in the city of Regina in the constituency of Regina 
North East.  They are accompanied by their teachers, Mr. Larry Moleski and 
Marg Hudson.  I'm looking forward to meeting with them after question 
period at 2:30 on the stairway and talking to them as well after pictures. 
 
And I'd just like to ask members to join with me in extending our greetings 
and wishing them an enjoyable and educational visit to the legislature 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'd like to 
introduce to you, and through you to all the members of the Assembly here, 
51 students from grade 4, 5, and 6 from Mabel Brown School in the 
constituency of Rosemont, plus four adults who are accompanying them today.  
They're seated in the east gallery with their teachers, Marg Wilson and 
Marilyn Bernhardt. 
 
We'll be meeting at 2:30 on the steps for pictures and after that for 



 

 

refreshments and for a discussion of what's going on in the legislative 
process that you've seen here today.  I'd ask all members to welcome these 
fine students from Mabel Brown School. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Johnson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to introduce a friend of 
mine and a very special guest here today with me.  His name is Mr. Roden 
and he's sitting in your gallery. 
 
Why he's so special to the Saltcoats constituency is that last Thursday 
evening Mr. Roden won the Conservative nomination out there at 
Churchbridge.  With three very . . . 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Johnson: -- There was three real credible candidates out there and, 
like, 700 people.  If Mr. Roden would please rise, I'd like to introduce 
through you, Mr. Speaker, the next MLA in the Saltcoats constituency, Rod 
Roden from Langenburg.  Help me welcome him. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Federal Funding for Agriculture 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I have a question for 
the Premier and the Minister of Agriculture.  Mr. Speaker, the Premier has 
received no doubt as I have, a letter from the president of the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, Garf Stevenson, written today and directed to Mr. 
Don Mazankowski, a friend and a counterpart of the Premier opposite, saying 
that the initial prices for 1990-91 are a shock and that among other 
things, quoting now from the letter: 
 

 The economic scenario for Saskatchewan agriculture and grain producers for 
1990 and 1991 is nothing short of catastrophic. 

 
Nothing short of catastrophic. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier is this.  Mr. Premier, can you 
give the farmers a commitment today in this legislature that the money will 
be here immediately, the $500 million that has been requested by you and by 
others -- no more delays, no more political posturing by you and the 
Conservatives in Ottawa -- pay out now.  Can you make that announcement? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I held a news conference this morning, as 
the hon. member probably knows, and I have just received a resolution that 
the Leader of the Opposition wants to have passed here in the House 
concerning the initial prices of wheat. 
 



 

 

I can say to him at the outset that in my news conference and in my 
response to his proposed resolution, you will get the very same message, 
that there is no excuse for dropping the price of wheat.  It's like waving 
the white flag in front of the Germans and the French and the Americans, 
saying, we give up, we let the price go. 
 
The federal government has acknowledged it's all because of international 
subsidies and cheating and they have abandoned the fact that the farmers 
here have experienced a $900 million loss in income, and now another 25 per 
cent reduction this year.  I said in my news conference and I will say 
here, Mr. Speaker, that it is completely unacceptable that a national 
government would back away from defending farmers facing a national and 
international problem. 
 
I pointed out this morning that the European Economic Community put $10 
billion into a subsidy.  United States put $6 billion in subsidizing wheat 
alone, in 1988.  And that amounts to about $4 a bushel in Europe and about 
$2 a bushel here in North America.  We have to have the same. 
 
The resolution here in the House, Mr. Speaker, said that we need $500 
million now, supported by the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, and $400 million 
later, and this whole House voted for it. 
 
The same applies to the resolution yesterday and the same thing will apply 
to the resolution today -- that we will stand in defence of farmers in 
western Canada and demand that the federal government do its part and make 
sure that it comes through and not cave in in the face of the United States 
or the Germans or the French or anybody else, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question for the Premier.  One 
might be heartened if the facts weren't the other way, by the Premier's 
statement that he is going to stand in defence of the farmers of the 
province of Saskatchewan, but the facts show the contrary.  Now my 
question, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier relates to yesterday's announcement 
on the initial prices. 
 
As the Premier knows, the Canadian Wheat Board gives the government a range 
of prices which the government then selects to determine what the initial 
price is.  Is it correct or is it not correct -- in fact I say, Mr. 
Premier, that it is correct that your Conservative allies, the government 
in Ottawa, chose the low range of the prices for the initial prices 
yesterday; that you knew that; and that if you didn't know that, would you 
please tell the House right now what correspondence you directed to the 
Minister of Agriculture and Mr. Mulroney, the Prime Minister of the 
country, in advance of yesterday's announcement in defence of the 
Saskatchewan farmers that you profess to protect. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I will tell the hon. member that in front 
of all the Agriculture ministers the last time that I was in Ottawa, I said 



 

 

to the Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Mazankowski, that he should not only 
keep and maintain the support that's there, but to raise the initial price 
of wheat in the country and go to GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and 
Trade) and defend it.  And I said, you already have the mechanism.  If you 
want a war chest, do it through the initial prices. 
 
So I did precisely what the farmers have recommended to me and recommended 
across the country, that in fact he raise the initial price of wheat and 
then go to the wall for it and battle the Germans and battle the French and 
battle Americans. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that was supported by the western ministers of 
Agriculture.  I'm taking that very same message to Manitoba at the western 
premiers' conference and I believe we'll have the support of all the 
western premiers, all the ministers of Agriculture in Canada; and by the 
time we're finished, Mr. Speaker, hopefully every Premier in the country. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the Premier.  The 
Premier just said a few moments ago in response to my second question, that 
his position has been urging the federal government to keep the programs 
for rural Saskatchewan.  But I must say, Mr. Speaker, that there's been a 
strange silence by the Premier and the government opposite for the last two 
years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the last two years there's been a reduction of farm aid 
assistance from Ottawa of $800 million each of two years.  And just take a 
look at the list.  The initial price yesterday, 5 to 600 million, according 
to Mr. Stevenson.  FCC (Farm Credit Corporation) interest rates, 35 
million; two-price wheat, gone, 127 million; higher crop insurance 
premiums, 55 million; farm fuel tax rebates reduction, 25 million; freight 
rates, 19 million; cash advances, 19 million.  That's a total of $800 
million.  They've been going on for two years. 
 
Mr. Premier. I accuse you of standing by idly while all of these cuts have 
been taking place over the two years.  You've been more concerned about the 
political salvation of Mr. Mulroney than the economic reality of the 
farmers in the province of Saskatchewan.  Why should any farmer believe you 
now that you're standing up here? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member knows that as a result of 
the efforts that we have initiated in the province of Saskatchewan, the 
federal government since 1985 has contributed $7 billion to agriculture 
here, 7 billion, and we've contributed 1 billion, Mr. Speaker, and the 
traditional ratio is 7:1. 
 
We've got $7 billion out of the federal government and we're determined, 
Mr. Speaker, not to back off now.  And we do not have the capacity to match 
in any kind of 1:1 ratio, nor does any other province expect us to do. 
 
And the only people that are caving in, Mr. Speaker, are the NDP.  That's 
the only people in the country that are caving in.  Every time we speak, 



 

 

they want to cave in.  What we get from the NDP was when the farmers come 
in and when you get the NDP and Barb Byers together they say, well the 
province should pay half. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, they laugh; they know that's the case.  They want the 
province to pay half, and every time the farmers come in, here's a new deal 
out of the caucus offices of the NDP -- cave in Saskatchewan.  Well I'll 
tell you, Mr. Speaker, we're not going to cave in.  We're going to defend 
the farmers, and we're going to get money for the farmers in the province 
of Saskatchewan, and we're not going to tax them to bail out the federal 
government as the NDP would, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Premier.  Is there any 
wonder at all left -- there shouldn't be any wonder left at all -- based by 
the Premier's response about why it is exactly that the PCs in Ottawa and 
the PCs in Regina are doing what they're doing to the farmers of 
Saskatchewan.  Because for a few moments there he was attacking the Ottawa 
government.  Right now in this last question he was defending the Ottawa 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- He's defending and he's attacking at the same time, and 
then he goes ahead and name-calls.  What happened to Consensus 
Saskatchewan?  All the working people in the province of Saskatchewan 
helped to solve this problem as well. 
 
Mr. Premier, my question to you is simply this. After six years of being in 
Brian Mulroney's hip pocket, after six years of doing nothing when all of 
these programs were cut back in Ottawa -- interest-free cash advances, crop 
insurance premiums, rail line abandonments -- all of these things 
articulated; after six years of being in his pocket, in fact singing the 
support of Mr. Mulroney, I want to tell you, how can you explain today your 
sudden reversal of position?  Isn't it a fact that you're changing your 
position because there's a provincial election around the corner and you're 
afraid of your jobs, all of you? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, again, Mr. Speaker, see what it comes down 
to with the NDP?  Politics.  It's always politics.  They don't care . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I just want the media to 
record, and I want everybody else to see, everybody in the gallery and 
across the province, always when we deal with agriculture they start 
talking about elections.  They forget about the farmers; they forget about 
families.  They forget that when interest rates were 21 per cent, they 
didn't do anything.  All they think about is politics, Mr. Speaker.  They 
don't think about the families. 



 

 

 
I'll say, on this side of the House, we have gone to the wall for the 
farmers.  We have squeezed and hollered and pinched $7 billion out of the 
federal government and we're going after more.  We're not going to quit.  
We're not going to play the games that you play -- hauling farmers in here 
and having a few people say, we'll go to a rally, and then they can be run 
by Barb Byers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'll say to you, this problem facing farm families is an awful 
lot more important than politics, your job, or any of the jobs over there.  
This is about real families, and we'll make sure that we go to the wall and 
defend them and not just talk about them like you do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the Premier.  The 
Premier says that we're talking politics.  What is the Premier doing with 
his attacks on the president of the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour 
except playing politics?  What is the Premier doing? 
 
He says that we're playing politics.  I want to say, Mr. Premier . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Unfortunately when the Premier rises, he's 
interrupted; when the Leader of the Opposition rises, he's interrupted.  
I'd like to ask for your co-operation.  The Leader of the Opposition is 
attempting now to put a question.  Let us allow him to do it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much.  Mr. Speaker, thank you very much.  A 
new question to the Premier and the Minister of Agriculture.  I am talking, 
Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Premier, about the credibility of this government when 
it says it's defending the interests of the farmers of the province of 
Saskatchewan.  I'm talking about the credibility. 
 
I am talking about, Mr. Speaker, the Progressive Conservative governments 
in Ottawa and Regina agreeing to do away with all of these farm programs 
that I talked about.  That you've been lock-step on free trade; you've been 
lock-step on the GST (goods and services tax); you've been lock-step on 
privatization, post office privatization; you've been lock-step on Meech 
Lake.  You're in their hip pockets so deep that nobody believes you.  You 
have no credibility. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- And my question, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier is simply 
this.  Look, why don't you simply fess up.  Why don't you say that these 
are the things that you and Brian Mulroney really believe in -- free trade, 
GST, privatization of post offices, privatization generally, Meech Lake.  
Why don't you just fess up. 
 
Why don't you stop this charade and why don't you acknowledge the fact that 
the only way Mr. Mulroney is going to listen to the people of Saskatchewan 



 

 

is by electing a new premier and a new government that stands up for 
Saskatchewan . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, look at this.  All he's interested in is 
politics and elections.  He's not . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I know that this afternoon there's a great 
deal of enthusiasm and emotion in question period; however, hon. members 
who rise to speak still have the right to be heard, and the Premier has a 
right to be heard, as the Leader of the Opposition had the right to be 
heard.  But in order for that to happen members must co-operate. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, as the hon. member knows -- he's been in 
rural Saskatchewan and I've been in rural Saskatchewan recently -- there's 
a great deal of pain and suffering. 
 
But I want to remind the hon. member that the people remind me your 
possibilities and your opportunities to gain money in the 11 years that you 
were deputy premier here and your connections with the Trudeau 
administration and Mr. Chre pétien mean that they got zero help from Ottawa 
here -- zero.  So it was the NDP there and it was the Liberals down East, 
and there was no support. 
 
Now you can criticize $7 billion that we've got out of the federal 
government in the last six or seven years.  You had 11 years of really 
difficult times and you got nothing from Mr. Chre pétien, not a dime; 
nothing from Mr. Trudeau.  And you and Mr. Trudeau could talk about your 
constitution and you could talk about everything else.  And you know what 
happened?  The NDP virtually lost every rural seat in the province of 
Saskatchewan because you never did defend them.  You'd buy their land with 
land bank.  You never gave them any help with interest rates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the farmers know, the farm families know that we'll go to the 
wall to defend them, and they're not going to be fooled by politics.  And 
that's all you talk about when you get into agriculture is politics.  We 
talk about helping the farmers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Provincial Assistance to Agriculture 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a question also to the Premier.  Yes, 
Mr. Premier, I agree.  You talk about it and you talk about it a lot.  In 
1985 you wrote a letter to farmers saying you were negotiating a national 
disaster plan.  You talked about it in a letter to farmers then.  In 1990 
you wrote another letter to farmers saying that the need for a long-term 
stability program.  You're talking about it now. 
 
Well it seems, Mr. Premier, that every four years -- timed around your 
political agenda -- you start talking about what farmers want.  You're as 
phoney as a $3 bill on agriculture, and you know it. 



 

 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Can you stand in your place in this House and tell the 
farmers of Saskatchewan, where is your long-term program? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, with the greatest respect to the 
House, that hardly deserves a response.  I will just say to the hon. member 
that we have designed many, many programs for the people of agriculture.  
Cash advances at zero per cent, Mr. Speaker, individual line service, rural 
gas, feeder programs, diversification programs, money that we put out, Mr. 
Speaker, in terms of just straight cash -- a combination that would amount 
to a billion dollars in savings to rural people.  And we're doing more with 
community development bonds and other things that we know that rural people 
have asked for. 
 
So for the hon. member to stand on his feet and say that we haven't done 
anything . . . If he calls what we've done in the last few years nothing, 
well then what they did in the last 11 years of their administration was 
less than nothing.  And the media knows that and the farmers know that, and 
the farmers will speak, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The farmers speak to me and we speak to them and they know the truth.  They 
know that we're fighting for agriculture; it's very meaningful.  Mr. 
Speaker, I will just say to the hon. member, we have designed better crop 
insurance mechanisms and better support mechanisms, and farmers need us now 
more than ever and we're not going to back away from them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- New question, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, you stood idly by 
and watched the federal government pick $800 million annually out of the 
pockets of Saskatchewan farmers.  Not a peep from you.  Now you're 
struggling to try to get $225 million back. 
 
Mr. Minister, had you done your job, had you done your job in the last six 
years, you wouldn't have put farmers in the predicament they're in now.  
Can you tell me, Mr. Minister, and can you tell the farmers of 
Saskatchewan, why you stood idly by, turned your back on them when they 
were paying $800 million out of their pocket.  And can you tell me, Mr. 
Minister, why you didn't do something about it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, perhaps I could remind the hon. member of 
some of the hundreds of millions of dollars that we put into the 
agriculture program as we go through the various kinds of difficulties we 
faced. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I just want to point out to the hon. member that we come 
up with $115 million on the drought assistance program just recently; and 



 

 

Saskatchewan water program was $33 million; the farm purchase program, 
$98.6 million to date, Mr. Speaker; counselling and assistance, $29 
million; farmers' oil royalty program, $80 million.  You can look at low 
interest loans that have saved farmers $350 million, Mr. Speaker, and not 
at 15 per cent and not at 21 per cent but at zero per cent interest rates 
in the livestock industry. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we've raised $827 million ourself, and in 1987 . . . 
'85-89, we've got $6.6 billion out of the federal government.  Now the 
members opposite say that's not enough.  That's not nearly what they would 
do, Mr. Speaker.  Well it's easy for them to say that's not nearly what 
they would do.  They had 11 years, and between the Leader of the Opposition 
and Mr. Chre pétien and Mr. Trudeau, they didn't have a dime for farmers, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Talk is cheap, Mr. Speaker.  Six billion dollars from the feds and 1 
billion from ourselves is an awful lot more than talk, Mr. Speaker.  We're 
going to put our treasury to the wall for farmers.  They'll see it and 
they're embarrassed by it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Commission on Directions in Health Care 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 
Minister of Health, and it has to do with the Murray commission report.  
Mr. Minister, the Murray commission is recommending a major move toward 
regionalization, calling for the province to be broken into 15 health 
regions and giving these regional boards sweeping powers and control over 
community health services and the ownership of some community health 
facilities. 
 
It also recommends the establishment of numerous numbers of boards and 
commissions and agencies -- an entirely new level of bureaucracy, Mr. 
Minister.  Could you please tell us whether or not you agree with the 
recommendations, and which ones you will be implementing? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, I think it's fair to say that the report 
handed down yesterday by the Murray commission, by Dr. Murray and other 
commissioners, is a very comprehensive one.  It's a comprehensive report 
done over a good number of months, and the report is done on a very, very 
complex system which is our health care system in this province.  There's 
no question that it is that. 
 
The member stands in her place and says today and reiterates some of the 
recommendations.  I heard her yesterday say that she rejected out of hand, 
just right off the start, before any one of the various stakeholders in the 
health care system, all of the organizations, the people who have a good 
deal to do with the governance of health care and so on, before any of them 
have had an opportunity to respond in any way, shape, or form, the hon. 
member from the political opposition in this legislature was out there very 



 

 

quickly and saying, I reject out of hand this and I reject that out of 
hand. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me make this point.  None of us in this House, whether we 
be in the government or in the opposition, none of us in leadership 
positions in the province serve our people well by rejecting out of hand 
very quickly a very comprehensive report, nor do we serve our people well 
if we are too hasty in saying either yea or nay to the report so quickly.  
That's the truth, Mr. Speaker.  Many of the groups around this province 
will be responding and they will be responding to this thing and they have 
asked that they have an opportunity to do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Minister, for two years you have ducked the health care 
issue; for two years you have ducked the harmful cuts you've created to the 
system.  It's time for you to start taking some responsibility for the 
crisis that you've created in health care in this province. 
 
The Murray commission, Mr. Minister, also recommends that these large new 
hospital regions be given the authority to raise local taxes to a limit of 
I believe 5 per cent of the government allocation to the region.  That 
could be a tax bill for each region in the area, of some $5 million, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Now what we have in this province is an increase in school tax, an increase 
in property taxes, Mr. Minister, at the municipal level, because of your 
off-loading, because of your off-loading of responsibility to 
municipalities.  Do you support, Mr. Minister, another level of taxing 
authority being allowed to raise moneys through a municipal levy on already 
overburdened property taxpayers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, it's interesting what the . . . Mr. 
Speaker, the hon. member, and I would just reiterate that it's . . . and I 
believe this.  She said to me that as the Minister of Health, you know, 
you've been dumping responsibility, not taking responsibility for the 
health care system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'll say to the member and to the House, I take the 
responsibility, my responsibility for the health care delivery system very, 
very seriously.  And because I do, I will reject very quickly that sort of 
cursory analysis that the member has laid out here in terms of the 
potential for tax and all of that that's there.  No one has been able to 
analyse that to the point that the member is laying it out here yet, and 
that's being done now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the key point in all of this . . . An example last night.  
Last night I was with both the president of the nurses' union, SUN 
(Saskatchewan Union of Nurses), and the president of SRNA (Saskatchewan 
Registered Nurses' Association) -- two very important groups in the health 
care delivery system. 



 

 

 
Both of those presidents said to me that the reasonable approach to this 
report would be to have them and many others across the province who have 
an interest in the health care system, give them an opportunity to respond.  
And we have said to them, we will give you an opportunity to respond. 
 
It is not serving the public of this province or the health care system of 
this province well to say, as the member has, I reject this out of hand; 
this is wrong; I reject change; there shall be no change; we're the old 
guard.  That stuff does not go in 1990, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Minister, we have been travelling this province for two 
years and listening to input from groups and professionals.  And if you 
haven't formed an opinion with respect to health care policy in this 
province, you are severely lacking in your responsibilities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Minister, some regions will simply not be able to raise 
those kinds of tax dollars, Mr. Minister.  Some regions will simply not be 
able to raise those.  So that causes concern inasmuch as they will be 
entitled, if this policy is implemented, to less health care than the 
richer regions, Mr. Minister. 
 
Now we want to know, Mr. Minister, and you should have an opinion on this 
-- after all, you've been the Minister of Health for a number of years -- 
do you approve of this sort of two-tiered system of health care in this 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, I've said clearly what I don't approve; I 
do not approve of the alarmist tactics that are being portrayed here in the 
House today.  That's for sure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this whole spectre of what the taxes would be in regions that 
are laid out in the report -- as one of the major recommendations, I grant 
you that -- the whole concept that the member is laying out here, all she 
is doing is what they have done for so long. They've felt it was successful 
in the past; it'll be successful in the future.  This is the latest bullet 
in the mediscare war now, Mr. Speaker.  The latest little bullet in the 
mediscare war is, oh, there's a big tax regime coming in and this new 
commission has done it, and what about it? 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is not a reasoned response to a very comprehensive 
document.  And, Mr. Speaker, it is not the way in which we as responsible 
people in this House, both sides of the House, should be responding to a 
comprehensive look at a very complex system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Saskatchewan Commission on Directions in Health Care 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, thank 
you.  I am pleased to have been able to table the report of the 
Saskatchewan Commission on Directions in Health Care, called Future 
Directions for Health Care in Saskatchewan. 
 
The report which was presented to the government is the culmination of two 
years investigation into changing health care needs.  I have asked the 
commission to give it the widest possible circulation.  Province of 
Saskatchewan has an excellent health care system and it is the envy of much 
of the world.  But we know that we cannot be complacent, Mr. Speaker.  
What's worked in the past is fine; we have to be ready for the future.  We 
want to make sure that we're the very best in the world. 
 
As we enter into the 21st century, we must be constantly on the look-out 
for ways to improve our system, to ensure continuing high quality, to 
ensure that it remains accessible to all, to ensure that it remains 
relevant to changing illness and health care patterns, to position it to 
take advantage of improvements in diagnosis and in treatment technologies, 
and to assure its affordability for future generations. 
 
The Commission on Directions in Health Care under the chairman of Dr. Bob 
Murray, was appointed in June of 1988 to conduct a public review of the 
Saskatchewan health care system.  The commission was asked to look ahead 
and ensure that our health system would be ready to meet the demands of the 
future.  The commission's report is now complete and tabled in this House. 
 
And I would like to take this opportunity to recognize the commission's 
contributions on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan.  For commission 
members, the preparation of this important document involved countless 
hours and miles away from their homes and their families.  A particular 
thank you, Mr. Speaker, to commission chairman, Dr. Bob Murray, and a 
special thank you to deputy chairman and executive director, Walter 
Podiluk, and to the commission members -- Morris Anderson, Berva Farr, 
Ernie Moen, Maureen Kurtz, and Bishop Blaise Morand. 
 
This province was built on a tradition of consultation and co-operation.  
It is this same spirit, Mr. Speaker, of listening and sharing on the part 
of Dr. Murray and the commission that made this report possible. 
 
Thank you as well to the ladies and gentlemen of the commission, and for 
their outstanding efforts, to more than 600 individuals and groups who made 
presentations to this commission all across the province.  Their 
contributions are equally appreciated. 
 
Now that the commission's work is complete, we intend, along with the 
people of Saskatchewan, to review this report very, very carefully.  I've 
asked the Minister and the Associate Minister of Health to closely review 
the report.  It will be their responsibility, along with other officials, 
to make sure that we study and examine all the implications and proposals. 



 

 

 
In addition, I finally want to offer this government's assurances today to 
the people of the province that will have a chance to discuss this report.  
As health care providers, as health consumers, and as concerned citizens, 
we understand that when something as important as our health system is 
being reviewed, we will look at it very, very carefully and listen to your 
ideas, suggestions, and evaluations. 
 
This report represents an important step in maintaining and enhancing a 
health care system to meet the needs of the 1990s and the 21st century.  
And, Mr. Speaker, it ensures the province's health system continues to be a 
model for the rest of the world and for years to come. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, we have perused the 
health care report.  We find that it contains many positive suggestions but 
also some recommendations that cause us a considerable amount of concern. 
 
We have raised a number of those recommendations in this legislature and 
with the public and with some health care groups in Saskatchewan.  We have 
today begun our process of consulting with Saskatchewan people and health 
care professionals and health care groups across the province to determine 
what their feelings and recommendations are with respect to the Murray 
report. 
 
We believe it is now important for the government to state what it intends 
to do and what its health care policy is, because we've gone through a very 
dry period with respect to health care policy on the part of the 
government.  In fact there has been a substantial erosion of our health 
care services because of their privatization of some health care services 
and because of their cut-backs and harmful policies in the health care 
system. 
 
We have now had a two-year study, and we understand that the government and 
the Minister of Health is once again wanting to delay the implementation of 
any good health care policies and delay taking responsibility for the 
crisis it has caused in the health care system.  They, I understand, are 
referring the report to another body to be studied, and they simply are 
refusing to take responsibility. 
 
We recognize the contribution that has been made by the Murray commission 
and the members of the Murray commission, and I believe that they have 
certainly put their best foot forward.  But we may not agree with all the 
recommendations, Mr. Speaker.  We may have concerns with some of the 
recommendations and questions concerning some of them.  And as opposition, 
Mr. Speaker, we will be raising those concerns and asking those questions 
and protecting the interests of the people of Saskatchewan and the medicare 
system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 



 

 

 
Bill No. 19 -- An Act respecting the Promotion, Development, Control and 
Regulation of the Production and Marketing of Agricultural Products and 
Certain Amendments to Certain Acts resulting from the enactment of this Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill respecting 
the Promotion, Development, Control and Regulation of the Production and 
Marketing of Agricultural Products and Certain Amendments to Certain Acts 
resulting from the enactment of this Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next 
sitting. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 39 
 

Federal Assistance for Saskatchewan Farmers 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day I would like to seek 
leave of the Assembly to introduce the following, what I would view, 
emergency resolution.  I've given a copy by letter earlier this day to the 
Premier to notify the government of our intention to do so. 
 
The motion I shall read very simply; I would propose that I move, seconded 
by my colleague, the critic for Agriculture, the member from Humboldt, by 
leave, that the following motion be introduced and debated and dealt with 
by this House: 
 

 That this Assembly condemns the Government of Canada for failing to 
provide adequate assistance to Saskatchewan farmers at a time when the 
sharp drop in the initial price will mean a loss of 500 million to $600 
million to Saskatchewan farmers; and further that this Assembly calls on 
the Government of Canada to provide an immediate, direct federal cash 
payment of $500 million to Saskatchewan farmers as advocated again by the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool on May 2, 1990, and to implement a sound, 
long-term, farm income stabilization plan. 

 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my first words . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . well the Minister of Justice says he hopes 
that he doesn't foul this up, the consent by the government to debate this 
emergency resolution.  I will say to the Minister of Justice that it 
doesn't foul us up, but it certainly surprises us, because this is the 
first time that the government has consented to any motion that we 
introduced by this side.  And I think that that's unfortunate that they 
haven't done so earlier.  So I think that the minister opposite should note 
that and perhaps effect a permanent change as far as his colleagues are 
concerned. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don't intend to speak at length with respect to this 
resolution but I do intend to say a few words, and I do intend to say that 
the words that I have spoken are the words which are being echoed 
everywhere in rural Saskatchewan, in fact western Canada. 



 

 

 
They are the words that this province is in crisis in farming and farm gate 
issues and in agriculture. In crisis -- a crisis which has been coming for 
quite some time now, a crisis which the provincial government here in 
Regina and the federal government in Ottawa should have seen, and in fact I 
would argue, did spot as early as 1985, maybe even earlier than that. 
 
In 1985 the federal government indicated publicly that it was about to 
introduce a permanent full-time disaster relief program for the farmers of 
the province of Saskatchewan.  And at that time the minister of our 
province, the minister of Agriculture who is the Premier of the province of 
Saskatchewan, sent out a province-wide letter to all of the producers, in 
effect indicating that that was going to be the case and that the 
government in Regina was going to support this initial emergency response 
by Mr. Mulroney's Progressive Conservative government in Ottawa.  So the 
issue has been before us now since 1985 at least, if not earlier. 
 
The crisis is well-known, and I won't detail the specific characteristics 
of it other than to very briefly highlight the obvious visible impacts.  
Farmers in difficulty with respect to their financial operations total 
anywhere now between 10,000 to 15,000 in the province of Saskatchewan,  
 Daccording to the numbers of the debt review board notices which have been 
given out. 
 
When you travel rural Saskatchewan, as I had the pleasure of doing 
yesterday all day and evening in the Kindersley, Eston, Elrose area, you 
see the tangible results of this kind of crisis everywhere -- farm families 
in stress, farm families worrying about whether or not it's worthwhile to 
seed a crop this year.  Farmers actually raised that question with me, 
farmers who are struggling about the future, not only in terms of the short 
run but the long term. 
 
And in addition to that our towns and our villages and our communities who 
support and buttress and are in a sense the hub of the activity of the 
rural people of the province of Saskatchewan, also now have and have had 
for quite some time, a large shadow of gloom and doubt about their futures 
hanging over their heads. 
 
Yesterday's announcement of the initial prices for the year 1990--91 was a 
severe body blow.  Mr. Speaker, I happened to be in Eston at The Eston 
Press offices at the time that the announcement came across the Teletype 
and was reported to me.  Present at The Eston Press were a couple of the 
journalists, and immediately thereafter a couple of farm people, who I had 
occasion to discuss this with.  And I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, the 
disappointment, the concern, I would even argue perhaps to use the word, 
although it's a bit excessive perhaps, the fear which was evident there 
with respect to rural Saskatchewan, certainly in the Eston experience that 
I had, was something which I don't care to go through. 
 
(1445) 
 
These initial prices are bad news; these initial prices are yet another 
additional, serious body blow to the people of the province of Saskatchewan 



 

 

and to the farming community which is Saskatchewan, or putting it bluntly, 
to the province which is Saskatchewan. 
 
Today the gravity of the crisis was further highlighted by a person who I 
know that we all respect and whose opinion we value very highly.  The 
president of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, Mr. Garf Stevenson, wrote to Mr. 
Mazankowski, the federal Minister of Agriculture, and I've got a copy of 
his letter here, sir, dated May 2, 1990. 
 
I think it's important to put on the record of this House what exactly Mr. 
Stevenson said.  It's not a very lengthy letter, but the words are 
powerful, they're pungent, and they tell the story more eloquently than any 
one of us, I suspect, could say. 
 
The letter reads as follows: 
 

 Dear Mr. Mazankowski:  Further to my letter of April 17th, we have 
witnessed today an additional shock . . . 

 
I'll stop there, Mr. Speaker, by highlighting the word shock.  That is a 
very dramatic and important word, and that was the word used by Mr. 
Stevenson.  He says: 
 

 . . . an additional shock to the financial situation facing prairie grain 
producers as a result of the announced initial prices for wheat and barley 
in the 1990-91 crop year. 

 
Mr. Stevenson continues: 
 

 The expected drop in grain prices announced for the 1990-91 crop year 
translates into a further drop of at least $500 - $600 million in 
Saskatchewan's realized net income next year.  The most recent projection 
for 1990 may also be significantly overstated as well.  Given this kind of 
economic climate, how can producers possibly arrange credit and finance 
their farm operations this year? 

 
He then writes: 
 

 The economic scenario for Saskatchewan agriculture and grain producers for 
1990 and 1991 is nothing short of catastrophic and will require 
substantial infusion (of Saskatchewan) of government assistance to cover 
the shortfall for this period. 

 
And he closes: 
 

 As stated on previous occasions, Saskatchewan farmers need immediate 
financial support from your government.  It is imperative that the 
requested $500 million assistance package be delivered to producers 
immediately.  It is equally imperative that a further assessment be 
undertaken in light of the initial price announcement to determine and 
quantify the additional support that will no doubt be required this fall 
and in 1991. 

 



 

 

 The situation is desperate (Mr. Stevenson says) and we need action now. 
 

Mr. Speaker, note those words -- shock, catastrophic, desperate, we need 
action now.  I don't think you could choose any other words in the English 
language to emphasize the point that you seek to make. 
 
That is the impact of the initial grain prices announced yesterday, and 
it's also the result of the fact that now over the last four months, 
notwithstanding the pleas of farm leaders like Mr. Stevenson and others in 
the farm communities, we have still yet to hear positively from Ottawa that 
the promised $500 million in cash payment -- cash on the dash, as I call it 
-- is going to be made.  We have still to hear this.  There has been 
absolute silence on the $500 million; in fact one could even argue instead 
of silence, obfuscation by the conditions and the rules which Mr. 
Mazankowski and Mr. Mulroney and the Conservative government in Ottawa have 
attached to the proposals taken by the farm leaders here in Saskatchewan 
and, as it turns out, by the members of this Legislative Assembly. 
 
So this, Mr. Speaker, is a grave crisis.  And it's a grave crisis, and I 
think it's worth the debate again today because today we are seeking now to 
introduce at least two other important dimensions to the previous 
resolutions of this House. 
 
Number one, we are seeking to introduce the Stevenson request for the $500 
million immediately; and number two, we are seeking to introduce as well 
the statement, the powerful political statement of this legislature, that 
Ottawa really must act, or if it fails to act, it does so at its own peril. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm urging all members of this House to vote unanimously for 
this resolution, and that moreover we should amend the resolution to 
actually ask that it be sent, a copy of it be sent to the Prime Minister 
and to Mr. Mazankowski as an expression, if it's passed, of the unanimous 
feelings of the farmers and the members of this Legislative Assembly. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, my second point -- my first point being the gravity of 
the crisis -- is to do a bit of an analysis of what it is that has 
contributed to this crisis that we are now debating this afternoon.  And, 
Mr. Speaker, my contention is that since 1984 when Mr. Mulroney was elected 
in Ottawa, that consistently for the past six years the government here in 
Regina, under the leadership of the Premier and the Minister of 
Agriculture, has essentially played the role of active supporters for the 
various serious changes to federal agricultural policy which have been 
initiated over the last six years by Mr. Mulroney and Mr. Mazankowski.  
They have been activists in supporting these various initiatives. 
 
I think a very brief review of these initiatives, all of which have 
prompted Mr. Stevenson's request for the $500 million, is important for 
this House to hear and to remember and to not forget.  And they are as 
follows, Mr. Speaker, not necessarily in the way they took place or in the 
order of importance. 
 
Some of these initiatives that the Premier of this province, the 
Conservatives allied themselves with the Conservative government in Ottawa 



 

 

are as follows.  We had first of all the question of the free trade debate 
and its impact on farming and its possible impact on the principles of 
orderly marketing in the Canadian Wheat Board and supply management 
programs. 
 
We've seen since the implementation of the free trade deal, the pork wars.  
We've seen the $900 million enhancement program by the United States.  We 
have seen the Americans break the spirit, if not the law, of the 
Canada-United States free trade deal. And we've seen the Premier of this 
province passionately and actively campaigning all around the province of 
Saskatchewan and in fact outside the province of Saskatchewan in support of 
a free trade deal which has produced very little for the farmers of the 
province of Saskatchewan and holds the prospect of great danger for rural 
Saskatchewan in the weeks and the months and the years ahead. 
 
There are other examples.  The example specifically with respect to changes 
to farm policy are devastating, again with the shuddering silence, the 
overwhelming silence and complicity of the government opposite in this 
provincial House. 
 
We've seen, for example, the elimination of the interest-free cash advance 
program.  That's a cost of about $14 million.  This Premier, this Minister 
of Agriculture, that government, Mr. Speaker, has not uttered a word at all 
in protest.  We've seen the reduction in the farm fuel tax rebates.  That's 
a cost of $25 million more from the pockets of the farmers, again with the 
active support and initiation by the members opposite.  We've seen 
increases in freight rates, $19 million. 
 
We've seen high increases in interest rate charges, Mr. Speaker, interest 
rate charges which now have gone through the ceiling -- interest rate 
charges which are killing our farmers, killing our implement machinery 
dealers, killing the small-business people everywhere, but especially in 
rural Saskatchewan.  And, Mr. Speaker, we've seen a Premier who has been 
silent on this issue, or when he does go down to Ottawa to fight the 
interest rate problem, comes back with the result being yet another 
increase in the interest rate situation, almost inevitably.  And we've seen 
this as a policy which has taken place as well. 
 
The crop insurance changes mean more expenses for the farmers of the 
province of Saskatchewan, not only in the premiums, but perhaps even some 
further difficulties in the way the crop insurance program is being 
administered and delivered.  And then as a result of the Canada-U.S. free 
trade deal, you remember the two-price system for wheat was eliminated.  
That's a loss to Saskatchewan farmers of about $127 million, Mr. Speaker, 
yearly, annually, gone because of this government in Ottawa and in Regina, 
these two governments agreeing that those kinds of programs should be the 
programs that the farmers of the province of Saskatchewan face. 
 
Interest rates impacting on the banks, credit unions, but what about FCC?  
This is a farmers' bank, the Farm Credit Corporation.  You'd think that if 
there was any organization which had compassion and sensitivity and concern 
for the farmers and for rural Saskatchewan, rural Canada, it would be the 
FCC, owned and controlled by the PCs opposite.  But instead their interest 



 

 

rates have been jacked up by $35 million, and of course yesterday's 
announcement on the initial prices has added, according to Mr. Stevenson, 
an additional 500 to $600 million withdrawal or loss of purchasing power or 
money for the farmers of the province of Saskatchewan -- a total, Mr. 
Speaker, of at least $800 million over each of the last two years. 
 
And we've seen in addition to that, policies of privatization, the shutting 
down the post offices all over rural Saskatchewan, the shutting down the 
basic public utilities of the province of Saskatchewan, or at least they're 
trying to do that with their privatizations of SaskEnergy. 
 
And they have said, on top of that, that they support in principle the 
federal government's discussion paper called the green paper on 
agriculture, which if implemented would be the revolutionary document which 
in effect turns agriculture and the way we've done business here upside 
down, because the green paper puts all of its eggs in the basket of the 
free market system.  And that's exactly the way Conservatives in Ottawa and 
Regina actually think that agriculture should be run. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, I would say this.  I would say that this silence . . 
. I would say no, this act of compliance, this acquiescence, this act of 
acquiescence and support for all of these programs that I've talked about 
and others, reflect at the real heart of matters the problem that the 
farmers of Saskatchewan face today. 
 
At the heart of that problem is, simply put, that the governments in Regina 
and in Ottawa believe in the organization of farming on the basis of the 
free market system, full stop, period. 
 
They believe in the Cargills of the world, whether it's at a Belle Plaine 
fertilizer plant or a meat packing operation in Alberta, or whether it's 
Cargill in the grain gathering and marketing system.  They believe in the 
free market system.  And that's the explanation for the silence, or at 
least the acquiescence . . . the active acquiescence if not passive 
acquiescence of what the government is doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, some people say, you know, you shouldn't 
politicize this matter.  I wish dearly that I could not politicize and 
wouldn't have to politicize this matter.  But the problem is that the 
government in Regina and in Ottawa has embarked on a philosophical 
direction with respect to farming which has led us to this crisis of which 
I speak. 
 
I mean, I don't share their philosophy, obviously, but they have a right to 
advocate it and to support it and to implement it.  I only wish that they'd 
be up front in this.  I wish that Mr. Mazankowski and Mr. Mulroney and the 
Premier of our province and the associate ministers that we have here, I 
wish at least that they would get up and say: look, farmers of this 
province of Saskatchewan, it's going to be free market; forget about 
everything else; we're going to give you transition.  At least they'd be 
open and honest about it and they'd be up front about it. 



 

 

 
Now I'd fight that like crazy.  People on this side would fight it.  But 
this government is not doing that openly.  What they're doing, of course, 
is implementing these policies on a gradual piecemeal basis -- a budget 
here, a budget there, a program here, a program there.  And they're doing 
it, quite frankly, I say in a way which is betraying and deceiving of the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Let me give you a specific example of what I'm referring 
to, Mr. Speaker, when I say deception.  I'm referring here to the Speech 
from the Throne which was delivered in this Chamber on March 19, 1990.  
Now, Mr. Speaker, if you take a look at that Speech from the Throne, on 
page 4 of the full text which was tabled that day, the Premier of this 
province, who wrote that Speech from the Throne, speaking to the 
agricultural crisis talked about a commitment -- that was the word that he 
used -- a commitment from the federal government for financial assistance. 
 
And at the time of March 19 and for the months prior to March 19 there is 
no one, not even journalists in their wild stretching of the imagination 
could construct any other conclusion except that that commitment referred 
to the $500 million which was the subject of the debate as initiated by Mr. 
Stevenson and the other farm organizations. 
 
We witnessed all of the Premier's trips to Ottawa fighting for the $500 
million.  We witnessed the statements and the press conferences in Regina.  
We hear the letters from the farm leaders.  Everybody knows that the 
commitment which was being referred to -- although I have to say truthfully 
did not have the words $500 million in it -- in the context of the debate 
could have no other meaning except it was going to be $500 million cash on 
the dash from Ottawa.  And these people told the farmers of the province of 
Saskatchewan that they had the commitment that it was going to be there. 
 
And here it is May 2, several weeks since March 19, and we have absolutely 
nothing, Mr. Speaker.  That's an example of the deception of which I talk, 
the cruel deception that the farmers of Saskatchewan are being subjected to 
. . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have another example of what I'm trying to 
make, because I say I regret very much to raise this kind of a tone to what 
I hope will be an unanimous motion.  But I have a copy of the Premier's 
television address on March 5.  You, sir, will remember that March 5 
television address where he commandeered the journalists of the province of 
Saskatchewan, who trailed along him like some sort of a . . . in the slick 
wash of the Queen Mary as he hurried on to the private chambers of the 
television studios and his Premier's office here, and delivered that speech 
on agriculture. 
 



 

 

And what did he say?  And here's the copy of the transcript which I have 
here.  Quote.  This is the Premier's words now on that March 5 address: 
 

 I told the Deputy Prime Minister, Saskatchewan people need half a billion 
dollars right now . . . 

 
This is March 5. 
 

 I told the Deputy Prime Minister, Saskatchewan people need half a billion 
dollars right now to get ready for spring seeding, and another $400 
million just to compete with unfair subsidies of foreign governments. 

 
 I also told Mr. Mazankowski that Canada needs a $1 billion contingency 

fund to keep us from becoming casualties in subsidy wars. 
 

I'll stop there.  But note the timing in what I say and then ask whether or 
not I am not accurate in my words.  On March 5 he told the Deputy Prime 
Minister that he's got $500 million that is needed for the province of 
Saskatchewan.  What else could one conclude when on March 19 -- 14 days, 
two weeks later -- in the Speech from the Throne, the Premier announces 
that he has a commitment?  What else to conclude but there was a commitment 
here? 
 
And then, just continuing on from this text of March 5, the Premier writes 
and says following, quote: 
 

 Thousands of farmers have to have cash for spring seeding.  There is no 
disputing this fact.  We agreed (referring to his meeting between Mr. 
Mazankowski) we agreed to jointly fight the subsidy war at the 
international negotiating table.  And I can assure you, Saskatchewan's 
farm community will have direct input in those efforts.  We simply must 
succeed. 

 
And then closing: 
 

 And the Deputy Prime Minister confirmed that farmers affected by last 
year's regional drought will be receiving additional crop insurance 
compensation prior to seeding.  I came back from Ottawa with a mutual 
agreement to work out the farm financial crisis. 

 
Were the words of the Premier on March 5, 1990 on television in the pure 
presence of anybody who cared to watch that TV show.  Those are the words. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, those who say we're being political, I say I have no 
apologies for that, because I want to know from this government: were these 
just words or do they mean something?  When he said there was a commitment, 
was that just a word, or was he fooling and toying with the farmers' 
affections and feelings and the situation?  When he says there's a mutual 
agreement -- not an agreement to discuss, but a mutual agreement -- to 
solve these problems, two weeks later was there an agreement or was there 
not? 
 
I want to know why this government and this Premier and the government in 



 

 

Ottawa have not delivered on that $500 million cash when they said that 
they would do so. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I think some very important and fundamental 
questions on farm policy have got to be asked by the farmers of the 
province of Saskatchewan.  We have had this various set of issues and 
various changes to the budget and programs that I've talked about, Mr. 
Speaker, and you know what the result is -- $800 million debt.  We've had 
the Premier's television speech and we know what the result is -- still no 
$500 million cash on the dash.  No indication of that whatsoever. 
 
Now we've got the initial prices being reduced as low as they have been, 
yesterday, taking by the way the bottom range, the bottom level of the 
range, and with this devastation and with Mr. Stevenson's letters.  And I 
think some important questions have got to be asked on a political basis in 
this forum and in this legislature, and to be blunt about it, in Canada's 
parliament as well. 
 
I want to know -- and the journalists should be pressing the Premier of the 
province of Saskatchewan -- was there a commitment or was there not?  And 
if there wasn't, why did he use that word?  I want to know, did the Premier 
of this province of Saskatchewan write, in advance of yesterday's initial 
prices, to Mazankowski and to Mulroney, urging them to make sure that the 
low end of the range would not be chosen, that the farmers in desperate 
needs needed the high range.  Did he write or did he not?  And if he wrote, 
I want to see copies of those letters that he wrote in order to confirm 
that he's fought for the farmers in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to know whether or not the Premier of this province still supports 
the GST which is going to be an additional financial burden on the farmers, 
adding to the crisis of which we're talking about.  I want to know whether 
the Premier still supports the selling off and the privatization of rural 
post offices which is still going to be an additional cost on the farmers 
of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to know whether the Premier still supports the Government of Canada 
on all of the major initiatives on farming, on privatization, and on Meech 
Lake.  I want to know whether or not the Premier still supports this 
federal government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Because I say, Mr. Speaker, that the conclusion that has 
to, the conclusion, the conclusion . . . sorry. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I can only regret and comment publicly that of 
my many years in this legislature I don't think I have ever seen a member 
of this House standing at the door, away from his chair, yelling from the 
door to another member, that that has ever happened before on an important 



 

 

debate like this on agriculture.  And I can only condemn the Conservatives 
opposite for paying such little attention to the issues here that is before 
us, and condemn that member. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Never.  That's never happened, sir.  That's never happened.  
There's been a lot of catcalling from our side and from all the sides in 
the debate; I understand that.  But when a member gets up and leaves his or 
her chair and then just bellows across the . . . (inaudible interjection) . 
. . Not order.  That's the situation.  I object to that, sir, and I think 
the farmers of the province of Saskatchewan should object to that. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I'm going to continue on with my remarks and I would 
invite the members opposite to join us in the debate.  I'd invite the 
member opposite, if he doesn't like what I say, if I prompted him to leave 
the Chamber, to get up and to join the debate. 
 
I want to continue with my remarks, Mr. Speaker, by saying that this is a 
critical issue because we have some fundamental policy differences on 
farming that we've got to sort out.  This government, this Premier, and the  
 DConservatives in Ottawa believe in what I say is the green paper on 
agriculture, which means the free market system decides.  And I think 
they've implemented those changes to the budget with these disastrous 
consequences, and we don't on this side. 
 
And it's about time we started calling a spade a spade, and let's put that 
difference of policy on the line.  It's about time that the Premier of this 
province and the Prime Minister of this country simply said that they are 
going to bury their differences and understand that they're going to 
abandon the green paper, or if they're going to support it, at least get 
out there and support it -- but abandon the green paper and set into motion 
a set of permanent, long-term policies, policies that we're advocating, 
policies on long-term income stabilization, policies for long-term debt 
restructuring, policies with respect to intergenerational land transfer, 
and a whole host of other areas. 
 
It's about time that the Conservatives came out from hiding and they either 
support those programs, or if they don't, then they draw a line on the 
fundamental policies, because the future of Saskatchewan's at stake. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there's one other possibility as to why these programs 
have taken place.  Maybe the possibility is that the Premier simply has no 
more credibility in Ottawa; that's the other option.  It may be that the 
Premier of the province of Saskatchewan for six years now, having contented 
himself to singing the Hallelujah Chorus to Mr. Mulroney, is not taken 
seriously in Ottawa. That might be the other explanation. 
 
It might be that after six years of saying, aye, aye, Mr. Prime Minister, 
to Meech Lake, to GST, to privatization, to these agricultural changes, to 
free trade, to the interest rate policy going up, it may be just that after 
six years nobody in Ottawa is taking this Premier and this government 
seriously any more.  That may also be an explanation. 



 

 

 
Because the government decided very early, the Premier decided very early, 
as a matter of tactical stance, that what he would do was to go down there 
and to try to negotiate through reason with the Prime Minister -- I do not 
object to that, by the way -- but pretty soon found himself trapped by the 
Prime Minister when they bailed this government out in the last provincial 
election campaign and gave it $1 billion in 1986. 
 
This government is lock, stock, and barrel bought and owned by the 
Progressive Conservatives in Ottawa, and that might be the reason for their 
silence right now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- And I can't help but also remark, Mr. Speaker, in the 
context of this debate, that the government now on the eve of a provincial 
election, which is going to be a difficult election for all of us; it's 
going to be a toughly fought campaign -- one can only help but assume that 
the Premier of this province, now desperate, desperate for the lack of 
federal assistance, whether it's because they don't take him seriously or 
whether because he has supported those policies, my theory, for whatever 
reason, the provincial Premier and the government are so desperate now that 
their only option is to try to effect a change in public posture, to try to 
communicate to the farmers of Saskatchewan that all of a sudden there's a 
brand-new Premier who is standing up and fighting for the province of 
Saskatchewan, that he's standing up to his political master, the Prime 
Minister of Canada, Mr. Mulroney. 
 
I tell you, Mr. Speaker, it won't wash.  Rhetoric won't wash.  Nobody 
believes this government any more.  They don't believe them in Ottawa; they 
don't believe them in Eston; they don't believe them in Kindersley any 
more, Mr. Speaker.  They don't because the farmers have realized that the 
stock and trade of this government has been to give hand-out, ad hoc 
agricultural programs at election time, and in between the election time 
privatize and fasten your belt to the free market system, resulting in the 
crisis that we have for rural Saskatchewan and farmers today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I think there's one way in which this thing 
can be remedied a bit and that is to pass this motion with respect to the 
$500 million and endorsing Mr. Stevenson's complaint and request and in 
effect getting this motion packaged and mailed down to Mr. Mulroney and to 
Mr. Mazankowski and saying that this is still the freely expressed will of 
all of the legislators in the Saskatchewan House -- all of them. 
 
It's still not too late, even if we've got major philosophical differences 
on farming.  They believe in Cargills and corporate and free market 
farming.  We don't.  But even with those differences we should be able to 
unite on this motion which is current by Mr. Stevenson's letter, which 
hooks on the $500 million that they told us they had a commitment on but to 
which the farmers have not delivered yet. 
 



 

 

And keep in mind before I close here, Mr. Speaker, in this question period 
I asked in the first question to the Premier, how are you making out on the 
$500 million; can you make an announcement today that it's going to come?  
I didn't get an answer. 
 
On the second question I asked was, is it true that the initial prices were 
at the bottom end of the grade?  I didn't get an answer, I mean an answer 
yes or no, to those arguments or explanations, if you will; didn't get an 
answer. Got no answers at all except the politics which is always being 
played here by the Conservatives opposite, a politics of divide and 
conquer, a politics of playing rural Saskatchewan against urban 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Minister of Health laughs at my remarks; he's entitled to do that.  But 
I want to tell the Minister of Health that he'd better get out to rural 
Saskatchewan pretty soon, and when he gets out to rural Saskatchewan he'll 
realize that the politics of division and hatred, country versus city, the 
politics that this PC government in Regina is practising, is the politics 
of the '80s and it's dead.  The people want co-operation and action, that's 
what they want. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- And so, Mr. Speaker, we have differences, and I've tried to 
explain to you, sir, some of my differences.  But notwithstanding those 
differences, notwithstanding the tactical positions that we take, this is a 
crisis of monumental proportions.  I think it's here because of a 
combination of events over the last two or three years.  That's my view. 
 
None the less, whether you agree with it or not, sir, this House can send a 
powerful message and tell the wheat pool that we're on side with them, and 
send a powerful message to Ottawa if we endorse this resolution 
unanimously.  Mr. Speaker, I urge the members of the House to do so.  Mr. 
Speaker, no less than the future of Saskatchewan may be at stake.  Thank 
you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move the resolution which you 
have in front of you, and it is that this Assembly condemns . . . Do I have 
to sign it again, Mr. Speaker?  The one that I forwarded to the Speaker is 
signed, and by leave.  Will Mr. Speaker accept that as the moving of the 
motion?  Thank you very much, sir. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I enter this debate.  
I'm glad that the government accepted the debate because it's such an 
urgent, urgent problem facing the farmers of Saskatchewan. 
 
There is a farm income crisis in Saskatchewan that has not been addressed, 



 

 

Mr. Speaker, for many, many years.  And possibly, just hopefully by 
emergency motions like this we can force this Government of Saskatchewan to 
deal with that crisis in a manner that will turn around the hard times that 
Saskatchewan farmers have faced. 
 
There is a sharp drop in the initial grain prices.  On top of all the other 
crises that we have in Saskatchewan, the drop in the initial grain prices 
is going to put an additional burden.  In fact what it will do, Mr. 
Speaker, it will drive many people off the farms. 
 
Five hundred million dollars is needed desperately in order to maintain the 
life-style that Saskatchewan farmers have, $500 million that this 
government claims it had a commitment for agriculture for some money.  And 
we've seen the political football going back and forth from this government 
to the federal government.  And they give all their excuses and reasons why 
nothing's happening and they say they're negotiating.  And the result is 
farmers in this province are facing devastation. 
 
There are over 10,000 farmers with notices of foreclosure.  There are 
farmers who are taking quitclaims on their land, just walking off because 
there is no solution provided by the government opposite. 
 
Now as you know, Mr. Speaker, the Canadian Wheat Board puts forward a range 
of prices, then the government chooses a price of the grain for the coming 
year.  Well there are a number of reasons, Mr. Speaker, as we saw last 
year, when the range was given to the government, the government chose to 
pick the range, the price at the bottom of the range. 
 
And as the year progressed, it entitled them then to make an interim 
payment, to make them look like good guys that they were trying to do their 
best for farmers by giving them money as soon as possible.  It was a 
charade because it was not necessary to drop the price way down and then 
give an interim payment. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, that's exactly what the process is going to be this 
year: try to make themselves look good by putting the price as low as they 
possibly can, and then giving an interim payment some time in the fall when 
it's around political opportunism, time of an election, possibly. 
 
And another reason, Mr. Speaker, is that the federal government is so 
afraid now of the agreement that they signed with the United States, the 
free trade agreement.  Because we have seen in the past when there was a 
deficit, after this agreement was signed when there was a deficit in one of 
the pools of grain, then the Americans say, well, that's an unfair subsidy, 
because the government has to pick up the difference if there's a deficit 
in the pooling system. 
 
So what's the result of this wonderful free trade agreement?  It's driving 
down the initial prices.  And this Premier and this government supported 
that.  And the result is that farmers are again burdened because of low 
initial grain prices. 
 
This is a political move on the part of the government.  The Canadian Wheat 



 

 

Board is a very integral part of this whole system, Mr. Speaker.  This 
government is attacking that Canadian Wheat Board.  It's a position that 
they have taken over and over again, despite the fact they say they do not.  
Every instance, every move, weakens the Canadian Wheat Board.  And the free 
trade agreement was one of the very major things, very major point that we 
made that we had to maintain that board. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I hope that this motion will push this government.  And we on 
this side of the House will continue to keep pushing this government into 
making an agreement, in order that Saskatchewan farmers can maintain their 
livelihoods. 
 
In fact today we moved this rule 39 motion, and in Ottawa the member for 
Moose Jaw-Lake Centre, the MP Rod Laporte, also moved an emergency debate 
in Ottawa.  Because we feel as New Democrats that the Government of 
Saskatchewan and the Government of Canada is simply dragging its feet and 
not doing their part to put forward immediate cash that the farmers need in 
their hands, and also, and as important, a long-term stability program.  
That is so important for the farmers of Saskatchewan and it is not coming 
forward. 
 
The Premier has consistently apologized for Brian Mulroney and has 
consistently defended him.  Year after year he talks about the Prime 
Minister, as indicated by the Tory Party.  And here's a paper -- it's 
called Canada's Choice. It's a Tory paper; it's got a big picture of the 
Prime Minister on the front of it. And it says, "A political leader of 
strategic genius, a national leader of purpose and courage." 
 
That's what the Tory Party is saying about the Prime Minister through their 
newspaper.  But when it comes to the political advantage of the Premier, 
all of a sudden he puts on this phoney charade about attacking the federal 
government. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it simply does not wash with the people of Saskatchewan, 
because they have seen time and time again where this Premier could have 
stood up and stopped the federal government from implementing changes to 
the system in agriculture that we have that would have saved farmers money.  
And my leader has gone over some of them, but I think it's necessary to 
repeat them. 
 
This government stood idly by while we on this side of House were 
encouraging them to stop the process that we were going through with 
reference to the transportation increases.  And this is a Tory government 
who has a formula in Ottawa for increasing the transportation rates.  And 
if you can believe it, Mr. Speaker, the formula includes a projection of 
production for the coming year.  So before the crop comes off, they're 
going to project it and write it into the formula to determine the cost the 
farmers have to pay to transport their grain. 
 
And what happened last year?  The national transportation authority had a 
projection and the western grain transportation authority had a projection, 
and the government chose to choose the higher production number, so that 
then the formula would enable them to charge more money to haul grain.  



 

 

Where was this Premier when that process was going on?  And the same 
process, we went through it again this year, and we see again an increase 
in the transportation rates.  This is taking hundreds of thousands of 
dollars, in fact millions of dollars, out of Saskatchewan farmers' pockets. 
 
This government, this Premier of this province stood idly by, and by his 
silence he was agreeing that that was okay. 
 
The fuel rebates are another example, Mr. Speaker.  This government cut the 
oil royalty rebate about $17 million.  The federal government cut their 
rebates by 4 cents a litre.  And this Premier and the federal government 
worked hand in hand with that to increase the costs to farmers for their 
fuel.  And as a result of that, Mr. Speaker, farmers now this year are 
paying 33 cents a gallon more for their diesel than they did last year. 
 
And now he's standing up and hollering at the federal government saying 
they're doing it all wrong.  Well he simply can't get away with that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
There are other instances that I can quote.  The interest-free cash 
advance, $27 million a year, a cost to farmers.  In fact if you look at the 
cash advance now, the interest rate on the cash advance is over 14 per 
cent.  Some benefit!  And where was this Premier when that was taking 
place.  He was sitting there in his chair applauding Brian Mulroney, saying 
how great a guy he was, what a tremendous leader he was, and how much he 
was doing for Saskatchewan farmers, when he was taking money out of the 
pockets of Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
They eliminated the two-price wheat system.  Again this Premier and this 
government were sitting there saying nothing and endorsing the fact that 
the two-price wheat system which was going to remove $147 million from 
Saskatchewan was going ahead.  They said nothing about it.  They agreed 
with the federal government. 
 
Then there was the crop insurance, shifting the crop insurance.  And I have 
a theory on the crop insurance shift from the federal to provincial 
coffers.  I think that's a direct result of the 1988 drought program where 
the deal was made that Saskatchewan would get so much of a drought payment 
but the government had to take over 25 per cent share of the crop insurance 
costs.  And again we saw the premiums go up last year, albeit the coverage 
went up, not proportionately mind you.  And we are seeing premiums going to 
continue to go up because the provincial government is going to unload that 
share onto the backs of Saskatchewan farmers.  So they were working very 
hand in hand with the federal government on that program. 
 
And we see again, and this is a very recent development of the multi-year 
disaster program, whereby this government and this Premier actually worked 
out a formula to cut RMs out of the program.  And I ask, why did they not 
go on a strictly individual basis, when the farmers were led to believe 
they were going to be paid on an individual basis. 
 
They weren't given the regulations.  In fact some of the literature was 
sent out along with the record of production papers that were sent out to 



 

 

the Saskatchewan farmers.  And if farmers didn't have any grain . . . or 
stored-grain reports, I'm sorry.  If farmers didn't have any grain, then 
they weren't interested in the stored-grain report.  So they probably 
didn't even see the letter.  The thing is, it was very important 
information putting out and this government did not see fit to ensure that 
farmers got the message about the multi-year disaster program. 
 
So they intentionally cut out areas to save money.  Is that standing up for 
Saskatchewan farmers?  And now they condemn the federal government.  Well I 
think that is very, very phoney. 
 
And there are other examples, Mr. Speaker.  The high interest rate policy.  
Last year, there was a motion on the order paper all session, the longest 
session in the history of this province, all session, condemning the 
federal government for increasing interest rates.  And they wouldn't bring 
it forward.  This year they turned down another motion where we asked the 
federal government to . . . where we would want the unanimous consent of 
this House to ask Farm Credit Corporation to reduce their interest rates to 
8 per cent and rewrite land values at current values.  They turned that 
down, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So they can't stand in their place now and all of a sudden say, well the 
federal government are the bad guys; we know we're trying our best.  
Because over a period of years, they simply have not taken on the federal 
government head on and say no, you cannot do that.  But what do they do?  
They stand in their place and they make a list of all the moneys sent out 
by the federal government.  And that money was needed and that money was 
appreciated. 
 
But my point here, Mr. Speaker, is that for every dollar the federal 
government put into the farmer's pocket, they also took a dollar out, and 
that's why there is no solution to the problem.  There's no solution to the 
problem, Mr. Speaker, because there is no will to solve the problem. 
 
If Devine had a . . . I'm sorry, Mr. Speaker, I apologize for that.  If the 
Premier has opposed the federal government in each one of these instances; 
if he would have stood up on his hind feet and said, no, we cannot afford 
that, then he wouldn't be in the mess that he's in today, politically.  But 
more importantly, the farmers of Saskatchewan wouldn't be in the great 
dilemma they're in now with cash flow problems. 
 
It lies heavily on the shoulders of the Premier of this province to take 
the responsibility for the actions of his colleagues and his inaction on 
behalf of Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Speaker, the Premier is good at writing letters.  In 
1985 he wrote a letter -- and I'm going to quote from this letter -- 
saying, and he says, and this is a letter to farmers: 
 

 Therefore, I have proposed a National Emergency Assistance program to 
provide greater protection against crop failures during multi-year 



 

 

disasters.  This would supplement the benefits available through crop 
insurance. 

 
So he was talking about a long-term disaster program.  And he goes on to 
say: 
 

 Negotiations are currently proceeding between the Government of Canada and 
the provinces in the attempt to have such a program in place as quickly as 
possible. 

 
That was in 1985.  Where is the program? 
 
And again in 1990, another letter to Saskatchewan producers, a letter that 
is blatant advertising paid for by the Saskatchewan taxpayer, blatant, 
political advertising when he sends this type of a letter out to 
Saskatchewan farmers.  And part of it reads, and I quote, a letter from the 
Premier to producers: 
 

 I have also supported a new long-term program to bring stability and 
predictability to Saskatchewan agriculture. 

 
Well those are the words we heard in 1985.  And he has done absolutely 
nothing, absolutely nothing to bring forward a long-term stability program 
except write farmers letters saying that he's going to do it.  What 
credibility does he have left, Mr. Speaker? 
 
We have promoted on our side of the House a long-term stability program, 
income stability whereby the first 8,000 -- using wheat as the example -- 
the first 8,000 bushels of wheat would be paid at the U.S. target price of 
some $5.50 a bushel now I believe.  At that time it was 5.28 a bushel. 
 
Mr. Speaker, then there was a debt restructuring program where Farm Credit 
Corporation would have its interest rates pegged at 8 per cent over a long 
period of time, to provide stability and debt restructuring for 
Saskatchewan farmers.  And also we're promoting a land transfer program, 
intergenerational transfer of land. 
 
Those are the needs of Saskatchewan people.  I know it; we know it, and the 
government knows it.  And they have chosen not to; they have chosen not to 
react or respond to those types of programs. 
 
But can you imagine a program of providing the first 8,000 bushels, if 
produced by a farmer, at a guaranteed rate of return?  And when you work 
that program out, Mr. Speaker, it would cost you no more than the federal 
government is putting out today in their ad hoc programs, but it would 
provide long-term, predictable, stable income.  And that's what's needed.  
I ask this government, this Premier, and these members who claim to be 
rural members, where's their long-term program?  They don't even mention 
one. 
 
(1530) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would like to end my portion of this debate on this 



 

 

note.  We see the Premier of Saskatchewan condemning the federal government 
for dropping the initial prices, for failing to come forward with $500 
million.  As I have stated, that, I think, is as phoney as a $3 bill, 
because all the while underlying everything that's happening in this 
country is what's called the green paper on agriculture which this 
government supports and which that member for Cut Knife-Lloyd, again 
standing on his feet yapping, supports. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that green paper in agriculture states basically that 
they're going to let the market decide what happens to the agricultural 
sector.  The federal government is stating through that green paper that it 
is backing out of support for agriculture. 
 
This Premier supports the green paper.  He cannot now say that he's running 
down the federal government for their actions because the actions they are 
taking are the actions that he supported through the green paper, Mr. 
Speaker.  That is cynical and hypocritical, and I say it is phoney and the 
farmers of Saskatchewan can see through that phoney Premier and that phoney 
government and they will turf them out as soon as they get a chance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- So, Mr. Speaker, I ask the members opposite, I ask them, 
the Premier and all the so-called rural members, where have you been for 
the last six years?  Where is your long-term program that you talk about?  
Where is the stability for Saskatchewan agriculture and farm families that 
you talked about?  Why do you continue ad hoc programs? 
 
I'd like to ask the members opposite, what do they tell their constituents 
when they go out in rural Saskatchewan?  What do they tell them?  You know 
they blamed it . . . this is a sorry scene.  They started blaming 
everything on the New Democrats, starting in 1982.  All the problems in 
agriculture the New Democrats' fault.  Then they started blaming the United 
States and the European Economic Community.  And then they started blaming 
the weather.  All the while taking no responsibility, all the while no 
actions. 
 
And now when they're out of blaming people, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what do 
they do?  They turn their guns on their own people to save their political 
hide.  And all they're trying to do is distance themselves between Brian 
Mulroney's sinking ship and they know it's a sinking ship, because I've 
been out in rural Saskatchewan and Tories are telling me, hard-core Tories 
who will never vote anything else but Tory -- but they may stay home -- are 
telling me that Brian Mulroney is doing a terrible job. 
 
And that's the line that's coming out.  That's the line that they're trying 
to use.  So this government is trying to distance themselves from that.  It 
doesn't work.  Farmers in Saskatchewan can see the history of the legacy, 
the devastating legacy that these members opposite have left by supporting 
the federal government hand in hand.  And they know that they cannot 
continue along that manner.  They know that this is phoney boloney when it 
comes to the Premier of this province, trying to distance himself from the 
federal government. 



 

 

 
Because as I said, and the key here, Mr. Speaker, is that this Premier, 
this government, supports that green paper on agriculture.  That green 
paper says deregulation, getting out of the industry.  So they cannot get 
away with saying that Brian Mulroney has a problem; they have no 
responsibility. 
 
They have the responsibility.  If they were a government who stood up for 
Saskatchewan farmers, they would go down to Ottawa and fight for 
Saskatchewan farmers.  And they would have done that from 1982 to the 
present.  But you don't wait eight years and then start saying all of a 
sudden, we're going to start fighting Ottawa. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I strongly support this motion and I just sincerely hope that 
these members opposite come to their senses, start telling the truth, stop 
being phoney, and think about Saskatchewan farmers ahead of their own 
political interests. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, it's a privilege for me to get up and 
speak on behalf of agriculture in Saskatchewan again today, as I did 
yesterday.  And I want to provide a number of items that will deal with the 
resolution as presented by the members opposite.  And I will say that we 
will be supporting that motion with a very slight amendment.  And the 
amendment I will read into the record at the conclusion of my remarks, and 
it will be dealing with sending the information to the Prime Minister and 
to the Deputy Prime Minister, the Minister of Agriculture in Ottawa. 
 
We will be supporting it in a general sense.  And I just want to point out 
a number of additional things that I believe that we ought to be taking a 
look at as we review the focus that we take in dealing with an item as 
intense in Saskatchewan as this one is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday I was talking about a very important fundamental 
issue that deals with why we have a problem in Saskatchewan today, and that 
fundamental issue, Mr. Speaker, is this. 
 
When the Japanese farmer is getting six times the price of the world market 
for his rice; the European farmer is getting four or five times the price 
of the world market for his durum; the United States producer is getting 
export enhancement on his commodities that he markets internationally, we 
in Saskatchewan fundamentally believe that the responsibility rests with 
the federal government to defend the people of Saskatchewan and the farmers 
and rural people in the province of Saskatchewan.  We fundamentally believe 
that is right. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the Premier and I have been meeting with organizations 
from across this province and we have discussed those very issues with them 
in finding out what they think that we should be talking about.  We met 
with Sask Wheat Pool, the SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 



 

 

Municipalities), Saskatchewan pork producers, Saskatchewan livestock 
feeders, the National Farmers Union, United Grain Growers, the western 
Canadian wheat growers, canola growers, crop insurance board of directors, 
and Saskatchewan stock growers. 
 
All of these people have said to us, this is not a Saskatchewan problem; 
it's a problem for Saskatchewan.  It's a problem in Saskatchewan, but it 
rests with the federal government and their responsibility is to provide to 
the people of Saskatchewan some comfort in terms of the conditions that 
exist on the international market. 
 
And those, Mr. Speaker, are the reasons why yesterday we initiated a 
response to the initial price of grain dropping, and the method that we 
did.  We talked about it extensively yesterday.  It is a dramatic decrease 
in the income for Saskatchewan producers who are already hard hit.  
Nineteen eighty-nine is expected and anticipated to have about a $900 
million income, net income return to Saskatchewan, and 1990 is expected to 
be around 100 million.  Mr. Speaker, that is a significant drop to the 
people of Saskatchewan, and do you know what?  When you calculate the 
volume of dollars that has to go to feed the people of rural Saskatchewan, 
the amount of dollars that goes out to support the debt load that they've 
got and all of the things that they need to exist on, a hundred million 
dollars does not go very far with 60,000 farm families. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that clearly is the reason why we are supporting, not 
only this motion, but the one we did yesterday and the one we've done 
earlier, where we are pointing to the observation made by the members 
opposite and us today that we need to address this issue to the federal 
government. 
 
We also want to point out that the federal government needs to become far 
more proactive in dealing with the international trade negotiations that 
are going on at this time.  I fundamentally believe, Mr. Speaker, we are 
having a crisis in agriculture in the grain today more than at any other 
time for a number of reasons.  One is the export enhancement and two is the 
trading negotiations that are going on now in Geneva with the countries 
across the world. 
 
Those countries are negotiating, for the first time, agriculture.  And what 
are they doing?  They're having a hiccup in their system too.  And when I 
read in the paper about farmers in France going on strike because of the 
anticipated lowering of the subsidies, and the Japanese saying they're not 
going to lower their subsidies, we say to the federal Government of Canada 
that it's time to seriously consider the value that agriculture has to 
Canada, and that based in Saskatchewan and western Canada.  It is extremely 
important, in my opinion, that we believe that and that we tell the federal 
government. 
 
And I want to say that the Premier did that this morning in his news 
interview and he did that today in question period.  We did that yesterday 
and we are focusing on this.  We will again focus on it when the premiers 
meet on the other end of the week, and we will be dealing with it from that 
area.  We will be dealing with it at an agriculture ministers' conference 



 

 

in Toronto in the middle of the month, and we'll be dealing with it again 
in August.  But we fundamentally need, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the federal 
government to realize that they have a responsibility in this. 
 
We saw the other day an increase again in the Farm Credit Corporation 
interest rates.  Now this is going to affect those people that are needing 
to borrow again.  It's going to affect those people who are dealing with 
their cash flow in terms of looking at other investments, and that is going 
to seriously . . . in fact, Mr. Speaker, it'll make a serious inroad into 
the kinds of things that farmers would like to do this year in purchasing 
land and dealing with their input costs. 
 
We talked about yesterday some other issues dealing with interest rates.  
We dealt yesterday with the low prices on grain, and that's what the Pool 
letter indicated, that the Leader of the Opposition read.  And, Mr. 
Speaker, we are going to support this motion with an amendment that reads 
like this: 
 

 That the following words be added after the word "plan": 
 
 And further be it resolved that a copy of this resolution be sent directly 

to the Prime Minister of Canada and the Deputy Prime Minister, the federal 
Minister of Agriculture. 

 
I so move, seconded by the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I will be very brief 
in my remarks this afternoon.  I just wish to stand in the Assembly and 
support the member from Morse on the amendment which he has just made in 
the Chamber. 
 
I think that the motion, as presented by the Leader of the Opposition, is a 
good motion.  I believe that anything that we can do in this particular 
province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to enhance the position of agriculture is 
something that deserves the respect and the support of all members of this 
particular legislature. 
 
We have sent, for two days in a row now, a very strong message to the 
federal government of this country, and I think the amendment as put 
forward by the member from Morse just makes this motion all that much 
stronger in driving that message home to this particular federal 
government.  Any time that moves such as this, moves like the reduction 
which we have seen in the last two days in the initial prices of grain, 
when we know that the world is running out of food grains, means that 
people are abdicating their responsibility, not only to the farmer in this 
province, but to people all around the world who depend on food grains for 
that staple part of their diet. 
 
As the Premier said in his remarks yesterday, said again in his press 
conference, and again in question period today, there is an abdication of 
responsibility by this particular move of the federal government. 
 
(1545) 



 

 

 
The Canadian Wheat Board is an instrument of the federal prerogative in 
this country and as such takes direction from the federal government and 
its associated bodies.  The Canadian government has actively been engaged 
in negotiations to bring food grains under the rule of GATT in the world 
economy.  It is absolutely fundamental for the producer in this province 
and indeed in western Canada to have food grains inside the structure so 
that the market-place can work in the world economy today. 
 
We have absolutely said to our competitors in the world grain market that 
we are not prepared to go to the wall and do with food grains what should 
have been done a long time ago.  A move like this says that Canada is not 
prepared to go the extra mile to ensure that this rational move is made.  
Canada traditionally has always been a strong and reasonable voice in the 
world grain economy.  We consume very little of our production, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker.  We export the vast majority of it, and always have done.  The 
world wheat agreement did not work back in the '60s and early '70s; 
two-price wheat system in Canada did not work during the 1970s. 
 
We know that the place for food grains in the world today is under the GATT 
structure.  And for the very reason alone, what happened yesterday means 
that a motion such as we saw yesterday, as moved by our Premier, and again 
today, as moved by the Leader of the Opposition, is absolutely fundamental 
so that the people in Ottawa get the message straight and clear from the 
legislature and from the people of this province that this is not the 
proper move to make at this time in the GATT negotiations when we are 
getting near the end of that particular round. 
 
It is the time to stand firm, look them square in the eye, tell them 
they're cheating and it isn't right for the producer anywhere in the world 
and it certainly isn't right for the consumer, for those people around the 
world who depend on food grains to fill their bellies. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it's with a great deal of pleasure that I rise and 
second this particular amendment.  And I would ask that all members of the 
legislature vote for the amendment because I think it strengthens the main 
motion and that we send that motion united down to Ottawa.  Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I want to join in respect to 
the motion that has been put forward by the Leader of the Opposition, and 
being supported by the government members.  I think all of us here at least 
realize and share the major crisis that is confronting Saskatchewan, and 
each and every one have stood up here and have indicated that.  But the 
fact remains that while the crisis exists, the solutions are not put 
forward. 
 
We had a Premier here who is now saying it has to be shifted completely and 
totally on the federal government.  But in 1985, as the Leader of the 
Opposition indicated and as we indicated in the question period, all of the 
signs of the trouble that agriculture was encountering were present.  And 
this government opposite and the federal government absolutely refused to 



 

 

put into place a long-term agricultural policy. 
 
And what is happening now is that the very existence of rural society as we 
knew it, have known it, is threatened today.  I take a look, and I remember 
when we raised this a year ago.  I take a look at The Western Producer: 
farms in financial trouble. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they show a map of Saskatchewan and they 
categorize the amount, percentage, of farmers in a particular category.  
And we'll find, Mr. Speaker, it indicated that over 10,000 farmers have 
either gone through the farm debt review or the provincial counterpart, or 
in fact have given their land back with a quitclaim. 
 
Now 10,000 farmers are on their knees; 60,000 farmers in Saskatchewan are 
depending on the political whims of the two Tory governments that are 
playing politics with the lives of an industry that is vital to 
Saskatchewan.  That's what's happening, my friend from Milestone-Bengough. 
 
Ten thousand farmers have already gone through the debt review, and we 
stand in this House.  In the federal budget not one single word was 
mentioned in respect to agriculture.  That crisis was known or else this 
Premier here hasn't conveyed it to Ottawa.  And the only reference that we 
have -- not the only reference, but the significant reference in the budget 
that was brought down provincially -- as has been pointed out, is that they 
had a commitment. 
 
Well I say to the people of Saskatchewan that not only does the Premier 
apparently not have a clad, clear-cut commitment.  What is happening, not 
only are we not getting this money that we need, but at the same time the 
federal government is carrying on an attack against the very farmers that 
are in trouble. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- As the president of the wheat pool indicated, that setting 
the initial price for grains at the level that has been proposed by the 
government will cost farmers in Saskatchewan between 500 and $600 million, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker.  That is an amount that agriculture cannot support. 
 
But let's take a look at what else is going on.  At the very time that 
agriculture is under attack, we find the federal government -- what do they 
do with their Farm Credit Corporation?  They have increased the farm credit 
loans to farmers four times in the last two months.  That's helping 
farmers.  And where is all these rural members opposite?  Not a single 
complaint to the federal government. 
 
And at the same time that agriculture is on its knees, what does the 
federal government do?  They embark on a freight rate will cost more this 
year, very significantly more.  And these are the practices that have been 
going on by the federal government, running exactly counter to what they 
should be doing. 
 
I want to say that the human tragedy that is confronting rural people is 



 

 

too serious to play politics with it, I agree.  And we have come into this 
House;  We have moved resolutions in respect to interest rates and has been 
refused by the government members.  Today is the first motion that they 
allowed us to debate, and they had to because they're embarrassed. 
 
And I say, what has happened is that the farmers are being deserted.  I 
think that it's true that the Tories, both federally and provincially, have 
a plan, a new plan for rural Saskatchewan, and it doesn't take in what they 
call the marginal 40 per cent of the farmers as set out in the account by 
the Royal Bank, and as a consequence we have no programs. 
 
Where was the Premier, the Premier of Saskatchewan, the Minister of 
Agriculture?  In 1985 he said he was going to work with the federal 
government to get a long-term agricultural plan.  Where is it? 
 
And now the members opposite get up and say, well, we are not going to get 
into a bidding war protecting farmers.  Well what do you expect?  You say 
you can't afford to take on the U.S. or the Common Market.  How can the 
farmers on their own defend themselves? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- What we need is action, both provincially and federally -- 
not a vacillation and an excuse that each of you are standing up and giving 
today. 
 
I'll tell you, if you've got millions of dollars for Cargill, you'd better 
have millions of dollars for the farmers across Saskatchewan because 
they're saying, they're saying to us, we can't trust the Tories in Ottawa 
and we can no longer trust the Premier of this province to act in our 
interests.  That's where it's at. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- People across rural Saskatchewan have two questions.  They 
say, when is the next election?  That's what they're asking.  They have 
absolutely given up in respect to getting an agricultural policy which will 
address the crisis in Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to tell you, we have put forward our agricultural program as was 
released, Saskatchewan Agriculture: the Case for Government Action.  And we 
set out, and what we have asked for and farmers across this province, they 
want to be able to have some income stability in their operation.  Farmers 
cannot go on with ad hoc programs because there is no way in which they can 
plan their affairs. 
 
And what you have done -- you're not interested in the welfare of the 
farmers.  Your policies are designed for one purpose, and that is for 
re-election of the Tory party.  That's the criteria that you use in 
addressing agriculture, and I say that you've been found out, my friends.  
And the Saskatchewan farmers, they don't want your ad hoc welfare programs.  
What they want is a sound, long-term agricultural policy that's predictable 
and that they can manage their affairs. 



 

 

 
Can you feature the magnitude of the crisis that we have in Saskatchewan 
today, and here we're sitting, May 2, asking whether or not we can get some 
assistance from Ottawa.  That is absolute disgrace.  And it's a disgrace 
because the Premier led the people of Saskatchewan to believe that we had a 
commitment, and every indication was that it was $500 million. 
 
Now he says the criteria for it is that you have to match dollar for 
dollar.  That's what Mazankowski is asking for.  Well I say to you, because 
I represent a rural Saskatchewan and I have a tremendous respect for the 
farmers and their families out in rural Saskatchewan and I have a 
tremendous respect for the way of life that they practised in the past, and 
I'll tell you I am going to do everything possible, and our party is, that 
tens and thousands of farmers are not going to be driven off the land by 
the inaction of both the provincial and the federal government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, the member from Weyburn is 
chirping.  But I'll tell you, Mr. Minister of Finance, if you had 
priorities that respected the wishes of the people of Saskatchewan, we 
wouldn't be in the mess that we have. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- That's the problem.  Your priorities are screwed up just 
like those in Ottawa.  You play for the big boys and not for the ordinary 
citizens of Saskatchewan, and that's where the problem is. 
 
There's no doubt throughout Saskatchewan, as I'm talking to farmers, what 
they have asked for is an income stabilizing program where there's 
predictability.  And I'll tell you that we have set out that agricultural 
policy in the last federal election.  We have endorsed that and we have 
gone to the farmers in respect to it.  And there is a program whereby we 
could guarantee to individual farmers up to 8,000 bushels, using wheat as 
an example, setting it at the U.S. price at $6 a bushel, and every farmer 
in Saskatchewan would be guaranteed of a basic income, instead of waiting 
for the hand-outs of the Tories opposite.  That's the problem. 
 
(1600) 
 
I say, Mr. Minister of Health, we'll get to you in due time.  I'm speaking 
to the farmers of Saskatchewan and I'll speak as long as it takes to get my 
point across.  Because obviously over on that side they don't want to talk 
agriculture any longer, about two minutes by each of the speakers on this 
important matter. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that there's no time for delay, absolutely 
not.  And if we had a premier and an associate premier and if we had a 
minister of Finance, I'll tell you they would be sitting on the doors of 
Brian Mulroney's doorstep until he came across and provided money for 
Saskatchewan people. 
 



 

 

But the truth of the matter is that the Premier of this province, he owes a 
debt to Brian Mulroney, and he can no longer go down to Ottawa and demand 
any more.  Because you know when he got into trouble in the last provincial 
election, he had to phone in the middle of the night and say, Brian, give 
me a million dollars, I'm losing this election.  It had nothing to do with 
helping farmers or stabilizing the agricultural industry, it was totally 
political. 
 
And what do we have now, Mr. Speaker?  We have a rerun of 1985-86 going 
into the election.  What do the Government of Saskatchewan do?  Well they 
don't give a production loan of $25 an acre, what they do is cut it in 
half, twelve and a half.  It's not $25 at 6 per cent, it's twelve and a 
half dollars at ten and three-quarters per cent, and they can have it for 
six months.  The cost of that is 31 cents an acre.  That's about what the 
Premier of this province says his aid is to Saskatchewan -- 31 cents an 
acre; that's the subsidization. 
 
I want to conclude my remarks, Mr. Speaker, and say that I'm pleased that 
we have been able to join in a request to the federal government for some 
aid.  I'm going to say to you here, sir, that $500 million is not going to 
address the problem and the magnitude of the problem that's out there.  We 
do need, beyond that, a comprehensive agricultural policy.  We have to have 
an income stabilization program; we have to have debt restructuring; we 
have to have intergenerational transfer system.  Those are the things that 
we need. 
 
And I say, only will that happen when we change the government of Ottawa 
and the government here.  And I say that the people of Saskatchewan and the 
people of Canada are prepared to do that, but in the meantime, we will 
continue to fight on for the best possible help to the farmers of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swan: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I appreciate the opportunity to say a 
few words on this motion that has been introduced by the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
This particular motion is going, to some extent, in the right direction, 
Mr. Speaker.  Our government has, over the past number of weeks, been 
speaking about agriculture and been requesting funding from Ottawa.  We 
have put in a joint resolution by this legislature on two different 
occasions, one yesterday and one about a month ago.  Those resolutions are 
both calling for assistance from Ottawa to provide funding for our farmers 
to continue to operate and be able to seed this year's crop. 
 
I think it's important for us to realize that not all of the troubles that 
have occurred in agriculture have occurred in the last week or in the last 
month but rather have occurred over a long period of time.  Much of the 
difficulty that has occurred in the farming community started back in 1980 
and it continued on through.  And once the farmers experienced the 
extremely high interest rates of 1981, they got into financial difficulty.  
And for many of them they were not able to recover from that financial 



 

 

shock that occurred at that time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have worked with the federal government to try, through the 
last eight years, to put in place programs that will assist agriculture to 
survive.  That has been extremely difficult to achieve in the tight 
economic times that Saskatchewan and Canada have been going through. 
 
I was pleased, Mr. Speaker, to see assistance come from Ottawa from 1985 to 
now in the quantities of about $7 billion.  Those $7 billion have come in a 
variety of programs and have been of a lot of assistance to Saskatchewan 
agriculture.  But as grain prices have dropped and the dollar value has 
dropped in Canada and across the world, it has placed considerably more 
stress on our agricultural industry than has ever been experienced before.  
Our government this year has again put in place a half a billion dollars 
worth of seeding loans that will assist at subsidized interest rates for 
farmers to buy the necessity of seeding this crop. 
 
We realize that that is not enough, and yet the treasury of Saskatchewan is 
stretched pretty much to its limit.  It's very difficult for us to go 
beyond what we have, in order to provide assistance.  And I believe that 
the people in Saskatchewan realize that. 
 
So we have asked the federal government to put in 500 million now with 
additional payments later in the year.  We have seen the federal government 
announce that they had $250 million, which is certainly not enough, and 
that 250, they say, must be matched equally by Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, there's never been a time that federal programs have 
been matched dollar for dollar by provinces.  That's simply not the way the 
system works.  Much of the difficulty that we face is because of the 
subsidy programs that are in place in other parts of the world; and the 
United States, putting in very major subsidies to its producers, is now 
selling grain to Russia and other markets that Canada has traditionally 
been able to sell to.  And the United States are selling below the cost of 
production in most cases where they have made grain sales in the last two 
years. 
 
When we look at the European Economic Community, they as well have had 
considerable grain subsidies over the last number of years, and their 
farmers are realizing upwards of $10 Canadian per bushel for wheat sold to 
their customers within their own community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these were not issues that were raised by Saskatchewan or 
problems that were caused by Saskatchewan farmers.  We have some of the 
best agricultural producers anywhere in the world. We can be proud of our 
agriculture industry, but it cannot fight the treasuries of the European 
Economic Community, the United States of America, and Japan, 
single-handedly. 
 
Our farmers need some assistance, and for that reason the resolution that 
is here today, I believe, is worth supporting.  It really only repeats what 
we have said to the federal government a number of times, but it's one more 
time that we say it, and I believe that's valuable. 



 

 

 
We have over the past few days had some shocks to the agriculture industry 
that I think need to be mentioned, and one of them is that the credit 
corporation, the Farm Credit Corporation of Canada, has increased its 
lending rates to farmers four times since the beginning of January of this 
year.  And at the present time the rate has risen to fourteen and a half 
per cent.  Now you cannot afford to borrow for capital land purchases at 
fourteen and a half per cent and have grain prices drop to the level that 
they dropped to yesterday. 
 
That drop in grain prices yesterday has brought the price of wheat in 
Saskatchewan at about $3.15 a bushel.  That, Mr. Speaker, is far below the 
cost of production of a bushel of wheat in today's markets.  For this to 
happen, it has really cut the heart out of farmers just at the time when 
it's time to seed a new crop.  There isn't really a crop that we can seed 
today that is going to bring enough in income to pay the cost of operation 
for this year. 
 
So Saskatchewan is going to have to see some assistance from the federal 
government if our farms are going to be able to survive.  It's a very, very 
difficult time for agriculture, and a time when I think that all political 
parties in all parts of Canada need to get together to work out solutions 
over the long period that will place our agriculture on a stable base. 
 
Now there may be some who think that agriculture is out there and fighting 
this issue alone, and that's not the case.  When agriculture suffers in 
Saskatchewan and across the prairie provinces of Canada, all of the 
businesses and the rural communities suffer at the same time, because 
agriculture is still the very base of our society. 
 
When I talk to people in my constituency, which is mainly an agricultural 
constituency and a very high-producing constituency, most of them tell me 
that they cannot encourage their young people to stay on the farm because 
there simply isn't enough money being made on the farm that young people 
are interested in staying.  So they are looking at other opportunities to 
get out and to earn a living in other forms of labour or industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that cuts down the population of rural Saskatchewan.  And as 
that happens, it makes it more and more difficult for us to deliver 
services to that part of our province.  As those services cut back, the 
small towns suffer, the businesses in those small towns suffer, and indeed 
all of us suffer. 
 
I think the health care report that came in yesterday indicates much of the 
same concern that I am expressing, in that as the population moves out of 
rural Saskatchewan, it is more and more difficult to deliver health 
services, education, and services to the agriculture industry. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased that this particular motion is here.  It's a 
repeat, as I mentioned earlier, of the motion that has been put through to 
the federal government, but I believe this will reinforce again the very 
severe need that we have in Saskatchewan. 
 



 

 

And the cut-back in farm prices that we saw yesterday took out about 
another half billion dollars out of the income of our Saskatchewan farmers.  
I think the first 500 million that we're asking for is needed immediately, 
but we will need much more than that in order for agriculture to survive in 
the future. 
 
With those comments I will be supporting the motion that is before us, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
The division bells rang from 4:15 p.m. until 4:20 p.m. 
 
Motion agreed to nemine contradicente on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas 
 
 Muller Gleim t 
 Schmidt Britton t 
 McLeod Gardner t 
 Lane Saxinger t 
 Hepworth Romanow t 
 Maxwell Prebble t 
 Hardy Rolfes t 
 Martens Koskie t 
 Meiklejohn Thompson t 
 Martin Brockelbank t 
 Hopfner Mitchell t 
 Swenson Upshall t 
 Gerich Simard t 
 Klein Kowalsky t 
 Pickering Atkinson t 
 Toth Anguish t 
 Duncan Hagel t 
 Petersen Calvert t 
 Wolfe Lautermilch t 
 Swan Trew t 
 Johnson t 
-- 41 R 

Nays 
-- 00 R 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

QUESTIONS PUT BY MEMBERS 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, as relates to the questions put by 
members, items 1 through 7, I would ask that all of those items, nos. 1 
through 7 inclusive, be converted into motions for return (debatable). 
 
The Speaker: -- Items 1 to 7 are converted into motions for returns 
(debatable). 



 

 

 
MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Not Debatable) 

 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, as it relates to these motions for 
returns, I would ask that the motions for return no. 3, items 3, 4, and 7, 
that those could be ordered, and that all the other motions for returns 
(not debatable), being 1, 2, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, and 12 be converted to 
motions for returns (debatable). 
 
The Speaker: -- Items 3, 4, 7, are ordered for return.  Items 1, 2, 5, 6, 
8, 9, 10, 11, and 12 are converted to motions for returns (debatable). 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Education 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 5 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, last day when we did the 
estimates on post-secondary education, I had asked for some information to 
be made available for us today.  I was wondering whether you could send 
that information over to us today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, I have, as I'd indicated last 
time we were in estimates, the interim report of the private vocational 
schools.  And the member opposite had asked for the regulations, but since 
they are not completed at this point -- they are in drafting -- I'll give 
you the report. 
 
Also you had asked for clarification on the two different sets of numbers 
with regard to letters that had been written to you, and I had indicated 
the other night, looking at the two different years.  And I have that for 
you as well. 
 
You had also asked for a copy of recommendations made by the Government of 
Saskatchewan to the federal government regarding changes to the Canada 
student loan program.  And this one, Mr. Chairman, the member opposite had 
asked what percentage of students have loans over $20,000 and over $25,000. 
 
 DAnd I would indicate that as of February 1990, that 2.11 per cent of all 
consolidated loans, in other words in repayment or repaid, were in excess 
of $20,000, and 0.5 per cent were over $25,000.  This represents total 
indebtedness under both the federal and provincial loan programs.  
Seventy-eight per cent owe less that $10,000 in combined federal and 
provincial assistance.  The average loan last year for university students 
was about $4,200.  So I will send the member a copy of that as well. 
 
I believe that was all that you had requested. 
 



 

 

Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a question or two to the 
minister in respect to the issue dealing with governance, French school 
governance, and the announcement made by the government on or about April 
23, 1990 to the effect that they were postponing, as I understand it, a 
unanimously agreed course of action, agreed upon course of action, as 
represented by the Gallant report. 
 
The minister's stated reason was that there are complex legal and 
constitutional issues.  I realize that my colleague, the critic for 
educational matters, the member from Saskatoon Nutana, has asked some 
questions in this regard and I've had the opportunity of reading the 
transcript of the answers given, but I must confess that I am somewhat 
unclear as to what those complex constitutional and legal reasons are that 
the government has identified, notwithstanding the reading of the 
transcript. 
 
Would the minister care to take another run at it and to provide to the 
members of the House and to the francophone community and others, 
specifically what the complex constitutional and legal concerns are that 
your department has spotted. 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I again point out it's quite 
interesting that the Leader of the Opposition has, you know, finally at 
this late date been even interested in the francophone governance. Not one 
question asked in this House during question period. 
 
But I would indicate to him what the concerns are. And these are also being 
communicated with the various groups that are involved with the francophone 
governance.  We have already met with the secretariat; we will be meeting 
with the parents and also with the task force to explain in detail why in 
fact it was necessary to delay the legislation. 
 
In the first case, Mr. Chairman, the Wimmer judgement in Saskatchewan 
established a certain right for management and control of Fransaskois 
schools by francophones, but the Wimmer judgement specified neither the 
type nor the extent of the management control required. 
 
Now our legislation was fairly well along, Mr. Chairman, but with the 
bringing down of the Supreme Court decision, the Mahe pé decision, in the 
province of Alberta on the 15th of March; and when a copy of that judgement 
was finally received here in Saskatchewan, it necessitated taking more time 
to take a look at the legislation as it was being developed here. 
 
And some of the specific concerns were this, Mr. Chairman: that the recent 
Mahe pé judgement from Alberta goes further than the Wimmer judgement in 
suggesting a particular type of French governance based on a sliding scale, 
where student numbers might warrant either complete governance, partial 
governance, or simply representative participation.  The proposed 
legislation did not take these considerations into account.  Neither did 
the Gallant report. 
 



 

 

A third issue, and I think this is one that is of more serious concern 
insofar as the francophones in Saskatchewan are concerned, and that's a 
problem that was identified in terms of section 29 of our specific 
legislation.  And the implications of this section is that some of the 
parents that qualify under section 23 of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms 
to hold office on the conseil scolaire are denied this right under section 
29 of the proposed legislation. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, I'm sure that the francophone people within the province 
of Saskatchewan would not want to see legislation being put forward that is 
in fact, in some cases, going to disenfranchise them. 
 
So since this is the first really clear definition of section 23 of the 
Charter of Rights and Freedoms that has come down in Canada, it's the 
feeling of the people here in the province of Saskatchewan and particularly 
in Justice and Education that more time should be taken to study this 
particular document, which is a significant document, in that we do ensure 
that our legislation is in fact going to meet the needs of the francophone 
people and will quite clearly spell out the specific types of direction 
that they want to go within the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So because of the significance of the Supreme Court decision, it resulted 
then in our delaying our legislation going forward.  And I'm sure that as 
the hon. member opposite knows, it takes a fair bit of time to draft 
legislation.  And because of the time line that is needed to get teachers 
in place, to get school boards in place, to get facilities and all of those 
other arrangements that have to be made, it would be necessary to have this 
legislation in place, pass through this House by the end of May.  Mr. 
Chairman, that is just not possible because of the time that is needed to 
study the document out of the province of Alberta. 
 
This does not take away from the commitment that we have to the 
constitution or to the court case that came down here in 1988. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, the minister might be surprised that members 
on this side of the House have not asked questions in question period in 
this area. 
 
Frankly, I'll tell the minister it comes as no surprise to me that this 
government is not able to manage anything, including this project, which 
obviously seems to be the case given the decision and the announcement that 
you make and the explanations that you make. 
 
So you can express surprise about what we ask, but I'll tell you I have no 
surprise about your incompetence.  This matter of the Mahe pé decision, you 
keep on referring to as a Supreme Court decision.  Now surely, Mr. 
Minister, you understand the Supreme Court of Alberta is no different than 
the Queen's Bench of the province of Saskatchewan.  You're surely not 
misrepresenting this to mean the Supreme Court of Canada decision?  Let me 
just ask that question and sit down. 
 
You understand that these are parallel courts.  Wimmer and the Mahe pé 
decision are parallel courts, one not ruling over the other. 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the Leader of the Opposition is 
the lawyer.  And it was my understanding that the decision of the Supreme 
Court supersedes the Queen's Bench here in Saskatchewan.  Now in fact 
that's the understanding I have.  The point remains that it has caused some 
concerns within Saskatchewan with regard to the legislation here that was 
pretty well along, in that we want to ensure that this is in fact going to 
be done right. 
 
And the francophone people that I have talked to understand this, and they 
do not want to be having legislation that is going to come in that is in 
fact going to disenfranchise them or not allow them to have some of the 
rights that they feel need to be addressed.  So for those reasons, we do 
feel that we need more time with it. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, unless I am corrected by you, sir -- 
and you have a spate of officials behind you advising you, so this should 
be easily correctable -- the Supreme Court of Alberta is just a different 
name for the Queen's Bench of Saskatchewan.  They are the same courts at 
the same level.  They do not have any supervisory or superior powers one to 
the other. 
 
Now unless you're telling me that Mahe pé was a Supreme Court of Canada 
decision, in which case then your argument is valid, my question to you is, 
am I correct in saying that the Alberta decision, Supreme Court of Alberta 
decision comes from a judge of the same footing and level as Wimmer of the 
Court of Queen's Bench in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, the information that I have on the 
document here indicates that clearly that it is the Supreme Court of 
Canada, not the Supreme Court of Alberta. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, the minister is referring to a document which 
he says is clearly indicative that it's the Supreme Court of Canada, and if 
that is the case, I grant the minister has an important point.  However, I 
would like him to table that document, and I'm assuming that it's a 
decision of the . . . the actual decision.  Would you be kind enough to 
indicate if you'll table the document and exactly what the title on the 
document is. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Yes, I'd be happy to table the document. And the 
title of the document is Jean-Claude Mahe pé, Angeline Martel, Paul 
Dube pé, and l'Association de l'E pécole Georges et Julia Bugnet versus Her 
Majesty the Queen in right of the province of Alberta and the Attorney 
General of Canada.  And it lists a few others there as well.  So I'd be 
happy to table that. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm pleased the minister will table the 
report, the document in any event.  We'll take a look at that. 
 
What I want to ask the minister is this: why was it that the Government of 
Saskatchewan didn't intervene in the Mahe pé case before, as it seems now 
the Supreme Court of Canada? 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, I am informed that the reason that 
the province here would not be involved is that we do not have any 
jurisdiction in that this was an appeal of a decision that came down from 
the Queen's Bench in Alberta. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- But, Mr. Chairman, as I understand it, this is a decision 
which involves section 23 of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms, amongst 
other provisions, which as the minister knows, is a key aspect of the 
Canadian constitution.  And in a constitution case of this nature, which 
will impact on the province of Saskatchewan and what we propose to do or 
not propose to do with respect to francophone governance, one would have 
thought that the provincial government would have had a say or an interest 
to advance before the Supreme Court of Canada on the interpretation or the 
issues before it. 
 
Now that is done quite frequently and in many cases, and I'd like to know 
why it is that in this instance on this constitutional case, there was no 
intervention. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, there would not be any opportunity 
for the province of Saskatchewan to intervene in this case, as I understand 
it.  We have to keep in mind that the responsibility of education is a 
responsibility of the province.  Therefore this was a decision that was 
taking place in the province of Alberta and there would not be the 
opportunity for the province of Saskatchewan to be involved in it. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, I find that answer a little bit puzzling, and 
I must say to the minister, with the greatest of respect, I don't think I 
can accept it.  But for the time being I'm going to move on and ask another 
question. 
 
And I say I find it puzzling because I don't see what impediment there is 
-- I shall use that word -- for a provincial government not to intervene in 
a matter which is of constitutional importance affecting a provincial 
government.  Section 23's interpretation by the Supreme Court with respect 
to francophone governance clearly is affecting Alberta as we see by the 
Mahe pé decision and clearly is going to be affecting the province of 
Saskatchewan by virtue of your decision.  And how it is or why it is that a 
government, a responsible government fully knowledgeable of these matters, 
would not be present at the court hearing before the Supreme Court to 
articulate a point of view as to how section 23 should be interpreted, in 
the light of the Gallant report, in the light of the province's objectives, 
is, as I say, to my mind rather confusing to put it mildly, puzzling to put 
it mildly. 
 
But let's leave that aside for the moment.  Since Mahe pé apparently worked 
its way up through the various levels of the courts in the province of 
Alberta and essentially deals with 23, section 23 in French governance, and 
the various arguments pro and con including the decisions taken there were 
done by the various courts at the various stages, why is it that the 
Government of Saskatchewan here did not spot earlier the dangers that were 
inherent and bring those to the attention of the francophone community? 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well let's keep in mind, Mr. Chairman, that the 
Wimmer decision did not address some of the issues as they were addressed 
in the province of Alberta.  This is the first time that there really has 
been a case where there has been a clear definition put forward as to how 
section 23 applies to the francophone rights.  So I mean let's keep that in 
mind. 
 
And when you consider the implications of that decision that came down, and 
with the comparison made with the legislation that we were putting forward, 
and when you've got a section that is clearly out of step with section 23 . 
. . I mean, it's the lawyers that are designing this thing.  And as the 
member opposite should understand, that it's obviously a concern when 
you've got a section in our legislation which appears to be really at odds 
with section 23, which in fact could result in francophones being 
disenfranchised. 
 
But until there was something such as the Mahe pé decision, which is now 
clearly a guide that can be used in this province in helping us to design 
the legislation, the feeling is that we need to take a little bit more time 
to draft this properly.  So the plan is that since it couldn't be 
introduced in this session, that we would want to introduce it during the 
next session of the legislature. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- But my question to you, Mr. Minister, is this.  Realizing 
fully that a definitive interpretation would have to be rendered by the 
Supreme Court of Canada, as it apparently turns out to be the case, and 
understanding that, your department and your government surely would have 
been aware of the issues as they came before and rose through the courts, 
as they come before ultimately the Supreme Court of Canada. 
 
At some point prior to the Supreme Court's rendering a verdict, the 
question of the possible interpretation on a sliding scale or the questions 
of whether or not our potential section 29 conflicts with 23, would have 
been well addressed then before the lawyers and the courts, well before the 
judgement of the Supreme Court of Canada.  Now your officials must surely 
have kept pace.  Justice must have kept pace. 
 
And my question is, on the assumption that my understanding of how these 
things work is correct, why is it that the department, your department, was 
not on top of the arguments and why was it that you did not take the action 
that you took, if I may put it that way, or at least alert the francophone 
community of a possible outcome of the decision in Mahe pé, as it 
ultimately worked out?  And more importantly, why weren't you there before 
the Supreme Court? 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, the Leader of the Opposition can 
wonder about some of the things that were happening within the Department 
of Education.  I guess that I would wonder about the fact that the Leader 
of the Opposition was not even aware of the fact that this was indeed the 
Supreme Court of Canada that was involved in the case. 



 

 

 
But I would also point out that there has been very close communication and 
co-operation with the francophone community.  There was close communication 
with them in the drafting of our Bill.  And when you stop and consider that 
we were working on the decision that came down, the Wimmer decision, and 
that we were looking not so much at numbers with regard to what we were 
going to be putting here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And the Wimmer decision, of course, that's something that you're going back 
a couple of years.  There's been a fair bit of discussion with regard to 
that.  But at the same time, this decision in Alberta only came down on 
March 15, so the information on the report from that decision has not been 
available for all that long a period of time. 
 
So we have been in contact with the francophones.  They were involved in 
helping to draft the legislation.  So I can suggest to you, sir, that it 
was some surprise when you would find that our section 29 in our Act would 
not be saying the same thing as what would be said in section 23. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, this may surprise you, but I do not 
have . . . I'm not the fountain of knowledge that some of your members 
obviously think I am.  And it may also surprise you but I don't have 15 
officials sitting behind me, as you do, and with another 15 sitting right 
behind me in the galleries. 
 
And so I'm asking you for the questions and I'm asking you to give your 
government's answers.  If you want me to explain our position, wait a few 
months and, if you're in this House, you'll have a chance to ask us about 
our position. 
 
Obviously I'm not going to get anywhere, to get the answer, to the question 
which I'm seeking to have answered, namely: why is it that there was not 
some earlier warning to the francophone communities or to the community in 
the province of Saskatchewan prior to the decision of Mahe pé about these 
potential dangers?  But you keep on insisting that this is an educational 
matter, a number of other answers which you've given.  I'll leave that 
aside for the moment. 
 
My question to the minister is this, therefore, moving on from their topic.  
Are you saying that the francophone communities therefore endorse your 
decision, taken on April 23 or thereabouts, that this matter should be held 
in abeyance until these complex legal and constitutional issues are solved? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, I would point out that we have been 
in contact with one of the groups; we will be meeting with all of the other 
groups that are involved with francophone governance of education here in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
But on April 23 when the announcement was made, I certainly understand the 
disappointment that many of the francophone people in Saskatchewan had, 
because they had been looking forward to having control of their own 
schools come September 1 of this year. 
 



 

 

So I'm not suggesting that for any minute that they were all happy with the 
decision.  I know that they were disappointed.  But we are working with 
them; we will be meeting with them to explain further the reason for the 
delay and going into things in detail.  This is a very complex situation.  
We fully understand that, and we want to work with them in the months ahead 
to ensure that as the legislation is prepared and put forward, that in fact 
it is going to meet the wishes and concerns that they have and the 
aspirations that they have for control over their own school system. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, we will continue doing that.  The task force will still 
be involved.  There are still issues that have to be dealt with and 
concerns that have to be worked out.  The secretariat is still going to be 
involved because there are things that they have to do, and we will be in 
continuous contact with the parents as well to ensure that when we come out 
with the new legislation, that in fact it is going to do what everyone 
wants it to do. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Well that's all very fine and dandy, Mr. Chairman.  It 
sounds nice in any event, even from a nice sounding, nice looking minister, 
but the bottom line of it is that the francophone groups obviously don't 
share your, at least initially, I'll put it that way, have not shared your 
assessment of what the Mahe pé decision means with respect to Saskatchewan 
French governance, and you in effect have admitted as much. 
 
I guess my question to you, Mr. Chairman, to you, Mr. Minister, through the 
Chair, is this.  You will have, no doubt, within your department the 
appropriate legal briefings or analysis of the Mahe pé decision which 
identify where it potentially conflicts with the proposals of the 
Saskatchewan government.  I would appreciate if you would table that for 
the House, for me, so that we can take a look at your advisors' legal 
concerns.  And I'm sure that you will make it available to francophone 
communities to satisfy them of their concerns. 
 
Could we have the analysis tabled to take a look at the issues that you 
raise and satisfy ourselves that this matter, in fact, requires more time 
and more consideration? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I would suggest that we will be 
sharing all of that information with the francophone groups, and we will be 
pleased to provide you with a copy of it just as soon as we have everything 
finalized, and as we go through our estimates we will be happy to provide 
that. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Just on this point.  You say, as we go through our 
estimates; I don't think we'll finish before 5 p.m.  We might not even 
finish tomorrow, but . . . And I don't want to press you; I understand that 
there are some legitimate concerns here.  But how soon can we get this? How 
soon are you meeting with the francophone groups to discuss this issue with 
them?  Or putting it bluntly, perhaps the question you might answer is: 
what is your schedule for meetings with the francophone groups, say the 
ACFC (Association Culturelle Franco-Canadienne) is one? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, we will be meeting with all of the 



 

 

remaining groups within the next two weeks.  And as soon as Justice has the 
information that the member has asked for, we will be happy to provide it.  
But we will be providing that information to the other groups as we meet 
with them over the next two weeks. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- And the issues are, as you tell me, two issues: one, a 
sliding scale on the interpretation of where numbers warrant; and number 
two, a potential conflict on the draft section 29 with the section 23 of 
the Charter of Rights and Freedoms.  Are there any other "complex legal and 
constitutional issues" here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Those are the two major issues, Mr. Chairman.  
There may well be other issues that will be raised by Justice, but that 
will be included in the information that we give to you. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Have the francophone communities forwarded to you written 
submissions as a result of the Mahe pé decision and their interpretation of 
it with respect to the proposed legislation?  And while I'm on my feet, how 
about tabling a copy of the proposed Bill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- In answer to the first question, Mr. Chairman, we 
have not had any such responses from the francophone community, and we do 
not have a copy of the proposed Bill here today. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- I realize you may not have it today.  Can we get a copy of 
it at some time in the very near future, perhaps during the consideration 
of the estimates? 
 
You realize why we're asking these questions.  You say that section 29 of 
the proposed Bill conflicts with section 23 in light of the Mahe pé 
decision.  You give us other interpretations with respect to sliding 
numbers on the interpretation of where numbers warrant.  These, I think, 
are important considerations all right, but wouldn't it be fair to give to 
the opposition the necessary documentation in order for us to read your 
interpretations of those documents, to see whether or not the conclusion 
that you arrive at is the one that we also can arrive at.  So can we get 
the draft Bill tabled? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, we will not be providing a copy of 
the draft Bill. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- I'm sorry.  The minister said, will not be?  And why? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, I would believe that we would be 
following the same practice as other governments have in the past, that 
it's not the practice of putting forward copies of draft Bills where 
there's still discussion going on, where a Bill is not totally complete.  
So we are not going to be providing a partial Bill to the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- But you see, Mr. Chairman, in this instance, that my 
problem is that he says, the minister says that section 29 of the proposed 
Bill conflicts with the interpretation of section 23 in the Mahe pé 



 

 

decision.  That's what he says and he invites us to accept his 
interpretation and his word. 
 
I think under normal circumstances that might be sufficient.  But this 
being such a very important and sensitive issue, I think a good argument 
can be made that that isn't sufficient.  I think we should see what section 
29 of the Bill proposed says, and then take a look at the Mahe pé 
judgement, and then we can conclude whether or not the interpretation of 
the department and the minister is correct.  I don't see how that would be 
dangerous to him or undesirable. 
 
It might very well be that we'll end up with the same interpretation that 
you end up, and wouldn't that be of an assist, if I may put it that way, to 
your proposition?  So will you reconsider the request that I make? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm not going to be giving the Leader 
of the Opposition a Bill that is at the drafting stage.  That's not been 
the practice of this House and that's certainly not going to be the 
practice now.  As I indicated to him earlier, the Bill was still at the 
draft stage; it was not in the final form.  And so there's really not going 
to be any partial Bill that is going to be put forward. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, I have another question which is very brief 
here.  Again, I haven't looked at this Supreme Court judgement quite 
obviously, and I may be misreading it again. But I see on page 3, a list of 
the interveners for the Attorney General of Saskatchewan, Robert G. 
Richards.  So apparently you did intervene.  Can I ask whether or not you 
would table a copy of the intervention and the supporting documentation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- As I understand it, Mr. Chairman, the 
representative that was there was there as an observer from the Department 
of Justice, not from the Department of Education. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Well I just have a couple of more questions in light of the 
House Leader's desire to adjourn the House for today.  You will know there 
is no difference with respect to the Government of Saskatchewan, whether 
it's the Justice minister or the Minister of Education.  The Attorney 
General for Saskatchewan is legal officer for the cabinet and the 
government of the province of Saskatchewan.  If he intervened on behalf of 
the government, he intervened on your behalf. 
 
And I'd like to know, why can't we get a copy of the intervention, the 
submission taken by the Minister of Justice?  To be quite frank with you, 
we'd get it by going to the court-house, I suppose, in Ottawa and getting a 
copy of it.  But in order to save time and money, why not just give us a 
copy of it?  I mean what could be the problem there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, the representative that was there was 
there as an observer, not there to intervene, and it was through his 
observations at the court hearing that we were made aware of some of the 
concerns that were being raised. 
 
The committee reported progress. 



 

 

 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:01 p.m. 
 


