





























































Hansard: June 21, 1990


 

 

June 21/90 
EVENING SITTING 

 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 
Bill No. 47 -- An Act respecting the Saskatchewan Association of 
Speech-Language Pathologists and Audiologists 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Would the minister introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Seated to my right is Drew 
Johnston and behind him, Gerald Tegart. 
 
Mr. Chairman, just for the benefit of the committee, I'd like to make a 
correction.  In second reading I said that the Act also specifies that up 
to two public representatives may be appointed to the council.  That was an 
error.  The Act specifies that one representative may be appointed by 
Lieutenant Governor in Council to council. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.  We have had an opportunity, 
as I indicated before, to review the Bill in some detail and speak to the 
speech-language pathologists and audiologists.  They are in favour of the 
legislation. 
 
We don't have any particular problem with any specific provisions; however 
I do want to point to the fact that we have an extreme shortage of 
speech-language pathologists and audiologists in the province.  I have 
spoken on this in the legislature on numerous occasions.  And before me, 
Mr. Chair, I have a document that was prepared by the association of 
speech-language pathologists and audiologists back in somewhere around 
October of 1988.  It indicates here that the ratios in Saskatchewan are 
extremely high of speech-language pathologists and audiologists to 
population: one to every 13,416; when in Alberta next door, it's only one 
to every 6,538. 
 
The association also points out to the Minister of Health and the PC 
government that there's an extremely high turnover rate in Saskatchewan for 
speech-language pathologists and audiologists, and they indicate that 
Saskatchewan does not appear competitive with other Canadian provinces in 
regards to benefit packages.  It's not competitive. 
 
And this document, of course, makes a number of recommendations which the 
government has had, obviously, because I believe that this was presented to 
the government at some point.  It makes recommendations that in order to 
deal with the professional drain of speech-language pathologists and 
audiologists from Saskatchewan, that benefit packages and incentives be 
provided and that employment packages be strengthened. 
 
Well the fact of the matter is they're still not competitive with some of 
the other jurisdictions.  And that may not be the sole reason, Mr. Chair, 
for the shortage of the speech-language pathologists and audiologists, but 



 

 

it is one of the reasons that we have a shortage in this province, and it 
simply has not been addressed by the government. 
 
Now I have gone on before at some length as to the consequences of young 
children not having access to this service in their developmental years and 
how crucial it is that young people in need of the service have access to 
it, but because of the shortage, that access is simply not adequate.  And 
there are similar shortages in other therapies, Mr. Chair, in Saskatchewan; 
for example, physiotherapists. 
 
And I want to take this opportunity to correct what the Minister of Health 
said in estimates with respect to physiotherapists.  He indicated that we 
said there were only 180 physiotherapists in the province.  And that's 
simply not true.  If he took his time to read Hansard he would know we said 
there were 180 working in Saskatchewan, not 308 as he indicated.  He 
indicated 308 registered.  We were talking about working physiotherapists. 
 
We have gone back and confirmed those statistics with the association, and 
also were advised by them that there were 90 who did some part-time work 
but some of this work was as little as one day a week or less. 
 
So the minister, when he said our statistics were not correct was quite 
wrong, Mr. Chair, and, in fact, he did not take the time to read Hansard to 
see that we were talking about working physiotherapists. 
 
But that's an example.  That is an example of the shortages that we have in 
this province in the therapies.  And one of the major reasons for it is the 
lack of benefit packages and incentives.  And if we compare salaries in 
neighbouring provinces, in the prairie provinces, to what's being paid 
here, and benefit packages, we quickly see, Mr. Chair, that the problem in 
Saskatchewan is that the government is not competitive, and that is 
certainly what was pointed out by the association.  Now I'm going to ask 
the associate minister what there is in this particular legislation that 
helps us deal with this shortage, if anything.  Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Mr. Chairman, probably one of the main things that the 
Act does to help deal with the shortage is that it gives the profession the 
courtesy that it deserves and has deserved for some time.  The Act and the 
by-laws will recognize equivalent qualifications from other provinces and 
countries.  The Act and by-laws will allow for the grandfathering of 
Alberta and equivalent baccalaureate graduates as well as those equivalent 
professionals not currently members.  The professional association is 
currently encouraging non-members to apply for membership.  The Act 
increases the professional status and activities of these professionals in 
the province. 
 
As the major employer or funder of these professions or professional 
physicians, we wanted to ensure the Act not have a negative impact on 
supply.  The Departments of Health and Education are satisfied that the Act 
achieves this. 
 
Also I'd just like to say briefly that the speech-language pathologists and 
audiologists do a real service to the public across the province.  I've got 



 

 

a special concern in that I have a son that has used the services of 
speech-language pathologists.  I recognize that early intervention is 
important, as does anyone that's been involved in that process, and I think 
that it's time that the profession was allowed to have the status that it 
does deserve, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Minister, can you tell me whether or not you have 
received the by-laws from the association, and if so, could we have a copy 
of them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Mr. Chairman, we have a draft of the by-laws.  The 
association is currently drafting and redrafting those by-laws as I 
understand it.  The by-laws would have to be approved by the Minister of 
Health and then they would be made public.  If my opposition critic would 
like to review the draft, I'm sure we could arrange something like that. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- I would appreciate that, Mr. Associate Minister.  Now could 
you tell me whether or not the government is looking at developing 
incentive and benefit packages that make Saskatchewan competitive with 
Alberta and other prairie provinces? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Mr. Chairman, I had the pleasure of visiting with a 
couple of the members, the president and Kelly Richter, last week and we 
talked about this issue briefly, and anyway, we have a bursary program that 
is in place.  And the bursary program is working and it's working quite 
well, and we're presently considering possibly expansion of the bursary 
program.  The bursary program, as I understand it, has been in place since 
the early 1980s, and since that time, the numbers that I have before me are 
that some 22 out of the 26 individuals that used the bursary program have 
come back to practise in Saskatchewan, so we seem to think that it is 
working quite well.  The bursary program is fairly expensive, but we're 
currently considering expanding the bursary program to attract people into 
the profession.  That seems to meet some of the needs that are in place. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Associate Minister, with respect to the bursary program, 
your minister was quoted as saying that they would pay for the education of 
anyone interested in this particular occupation.  The fact of the matter 
is, is there were only two bursaries that were paid last year, and I think 
perhaps you've raised it to three or four this year, if I recall the 
minister's response to those questions accurately.  That's hardly paying 
for people who are interested in taking this education. 
 
As I understand, you've received a number of phone calls expressing 
interest.  Now I do understand that a Bachelor's program has to be taken 
first.  So what you are paying for is only the Master's degree program, Mr. 
Associate Minister.  Is that not correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- What we pay for, Mr. Chairman, is the Master's degree 
program and it's over $7,000 per year per student.  As far as the numbers 
that were referred to earlier, it's my understanding that there were four 
last year, and there'll be four this year.  There's two speech-language 
pathologists and two audiologists, and that's maybe where there was the 
confusion about the questions in estimates. 



 

 

 
Ms. Simard: -- So it's only the masters program you're paying for and then 
only for bursaries.  So if there's eight people who apply, there's only 
four bursaries.  Is that not correct, Mr. Associate Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Mr. Chairman, that is correct, and as I've stated 
earlier, we're currently reviewing the situation and possibly we could look 
at expansion of those bursary programs. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Now the bursary issue is not the only issue of course, Mr. 
Minister.  Because when we take a took at salary rates, for example, in 
Saskatchewan as compared to Manitoba and Alberta, the top range in 
Saskatchewan is 41,772 according to the information I have.  In Manitoba 
it's 45,183; in Alberta it's 44,000, and in Alberta there is a signing 
bonus of some 10 to $15,000.  How do you match those salaries and benefits, 
Mr. Associate Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm not totally familiar with the salary 
breakdown in the other provinces or the benefit package.  But I would say 
that in the consideration that we're giving to looking at the bursaries and 
possible expansion of the bursaries, we'd gladly take a look at those 
salaries and review them. 
 
I'm not sure, but it could be that in some of those provinces bursaries 
aren't available to those students that are graduates, and so that may be 
part of the reason for the difference in the salary ranges.  But I don't 
have that information before me. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Well, Mr. Chair, we've raised this issue in the legislature 
not once, but several times.  We keep raising this issue in the 
legislature.  We keep saying it's salaries and benefits that are the 
problem; the association says it's salaries and benefits.  And this 
minister still doesn't know what the comparisons are.  No wonder the 
problem isn't dealt with.  They don't even know what the facts are.  They 
haven't even looked into it.  And how many times have we raised it? 
 
Now I say that's incompetence.  I mean it's not as though it's an issue 
that hasn't been raised.  We've raised it repeatedly.  And they still don't 
know what's going on in that area. 
 
Well I'm going to ask the associate minister another question, and that is: 
what steps the department is taking to improve services to rural and 
northern areas. 
 
(1915) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd like to say that we are dealing with 
the speech-language pathology professionals Act, and we're not dealing with 
estimates.  We're trying to give the profession, you know, the rights that 
they deserve, and give it some status, and try to make the province more 
attractive in which to practice. 
 
As far as rural and remote areas go, we are currently putting together a 



 

 

health career video for health care professionals across the province.  As 
I understand it, that health care video would be introduced into high 
schools, I believe grade 9 or grade 10, so that people across this 
province, especially rural Saskatchewan . . . although the opportunities 
that do exist in a health care field whether it be nursing or physiotherapy 
or speech-language pathology or whatever. 
 
The bursary program is an incentive.  It's an incentive for students across 
the province.  And as I understand it, when people sign up for the bursary, 
Mr. Chairman, we can suggest to them a rural location and may actually help 
in the designation of the rural location that's available to them. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I know a little bit 
about speech-language pathology, and I want to just ask you for a minute 
about the Alvin Buckwold Centre in Saskatoon.  There are rural school 
divisions who have people, speech-language pathologists who are so 
over-worked that they're quitting.  The Alvin Buckwold Centre has funding 
for speech pathologists coming from three different levels, and what they 
say there is if you want good speech pathology you go to a private 
pathologist. 
 
Mr. Minister, the problem is that you and your government . . . I mean you 
can bring in Acts like this to try to tell people that you're helping out 
people who need those therapists.  But I'll tell you, if you were serious 
about the problem, you would start working toward developing a college at 
the University of Saskatchewan so they don't have to go to North Dakota or 
any other places to get the training. 
 
And you can give all the incentives you want.  You can give all the 
incentives you want, but I'll tell you, unless you're serious about 
correcting the problem . . . and that means case loads that people are 
capable of handling, which right now they can't handle because the funding 
isn't there; that means providing incentives to major centres in Regina, 
P.A., and Saskatoon to provide the facility and the therapists in order to 
have those people give the children that need those services the proper 
attention. 
 
Right now you and I both know that is not happening.  That is not 
happening, and I prove that because in the rural school divisions, the 
case-load . . . the area is so large, the numbers are so heavy, that there 
are people and children being neglected. 
 
And you may want to bring in your Act to tell them that they're going to 
give incentives to help those children out, but I'll tell you, Mr. 
Minister, you have no idea unless you've been out there as to what those 
case-loads are and what the responsibilities of those people are. 
 
So I ask you: what are you going to do?  What will this Bill do?  If 
nothing, what are you going to do to help those people in rural 
Saskatchewan have the services that are available in other provinces to 
provide care for their children who need those speech pathology services? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I don't know for what reason the 



 

 

hon. member would approach this Bill in the fashion that he has.  As far as 
rural Saskatchewan, believe me, I understand rural Saskatchewan.  I come 
from rural Saskatchewan.  I come from small town Saskatchewan.  I have a 
son who has had the problem and we've experienced it. 
 
The speech-language pathologists do excellent work.  They are available.  
We have to arrange for meetings and times and things like that, and that's 
all part of life, but everyone meets those challenges.  I'm fundamentally 
aware of those challenges and the challenges of rural Saskatchewan, much 
more so than most of the members opposite could ever begin to understand. 
 
At any rate this Bill gives the profession the status that it deserves and 
that in itself, if you've taken the time to speak to the speech-language 
pathologists, is something that they really appreciate, Mr. Chairman.  They 
really appreciate this Bill and they are actually upset, quite upset, at 
the fact that members opposite might stall it. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order, order.  I'd ask the member from Battleford to rise 
and apologize to the House. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- What did he say? 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- He called the minister a liar.  I asked . . . I want him 
to rise and apologize. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- I wasn't even speaking to the minister, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order.  I asked the member to rise and apologize. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- I said nothing to the minister. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Is the member going to apologize? 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- I didn't . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- I ask the member once more to . . . 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- I apologize. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Minister, you know that that is not true.  You know 
that those speech pathologists in Saskatchewan are overworked because the 
case-load and the area that they have to cover is so great that they are 
leaving.  They have no benefits.  And you can say that this makes them feel 
proud of their profession.  Well I'll tell you it's not proud of the 
profession that they want to feel; it's they want to have a decent 
case-load to be able to service those people that need the facilities. 
 
And let me tell you, Mr. Minister, I and several other members of this 
caucus know exactly what we're talking about because we're directly 
involved in it.  So don't tell me that you know about rural Saskatchewan 
and that we don't. 
 
There is . . . and I just will take one more second here to repeat this.  



 

 

There is the Alvin Buckwold Centre in Saskatoon who provides those 
services, and the funding is so confused that there is no responsibility 
for providing that service.  The rural school divisions provide that 
service but the case-load is so heavy that they simply do not have time to 
provide an adequate service. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I just wanted to get up and tell you that this . . . what 
you said was absolutely not true.  And I ask you to not defend your record, 
but tell me what you're going to do to improve it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I mean we'll beg to differ on a few 
things, but we sure won't beg to differ about our understandings of rural 
Saskatchewan and the good work that speech-language pathologists do do.  
And it doesn't take away, Mr. Chairman, from the fact that this Bill does 
give them the status that they do deserve, and it does other things, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
This Bill protects the public.  I mean it lays out clearly, you know, the 
designation for speech-language pathologists and audiologists.  There's 
protection for the public and that's something that the public I believe 
deserves, and it's something that speech-language pathologists would like 
to give to them.  The speech-language pathologists would like to ensure 
that the graduates, people that claim to be speech-language pathologists 
are qualified, and I'm sure that they will take that challenge and meet it. 
 
The commission has made recommendations; the commission has toured 
Saskatchewan.  This is one of the issues that was brought to their 
attention.  And, Mr. Chairman, I'm pleased to report to the committee that 
it's actually one of the commission's recommendations that we've been able 
to follow up on, and we've been able to follow up in short fashion. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  Mr. Associate Minister, you said or 
at least implied by your comments that we were attempting to stall that 
Bill, and that is a falsehood and you know it.  And I have spoken to the 
speech and language pathologists . . . I spoke to the speech and language 
pathologists and audiologists; they know we weren't trying to stall this 
Bill. 
 
They know that you only came forward with this Bill last Friday and then 
wanted to push it through.  They know that, Mr. Minister.  The printed Bill 
came out last Friday and they appreciate the need for us to review the 
legislation in detail once we receive the final draft, i.e., the printed 
Bill, which we did.  And they also know that providing, after I did my 
review, we didn't have any difficulties with the Bill, that we were 
prepared to proceed, with leave if necessary, through committee and third 
reading.  They know we weren't trying to stall that.  And your suggestion 
that we may have been attempting to stall this Bill is a falsehood, Mr. 
Associate Minister, a falsehood. 
 
We know that this Bill gives the profession status.  We know that and we 
believe the profession deserves it.  We know about the good things in the 
Bill.  It will improve their professional status and in this way may 
attract more speech 



 

 

_language pathologists. 
 
But what we're bringing to your attention tonight -- which we've done on 
several occasions before -- is this: you have to go further than this.  You 
have to look at incentives in other provinces.  You have to look at benefit 
packages.  You have to look at work-loads.  And you have to take measures 
in that direction, which means a little political will on your part, Mr. 
Associate Minister, because this Bill isn't going to be costing you any 
money.  This is something the speech-language pathologists will be 
administering.  It's not costing you any money.  It doesn't take any 
political will and priority setting on your part, Mr. Associate Minister. 
 
And we're saying it's time for the government to stand up in its place and 
stand behind the speech-language pathologists and audiologists in a real 
fashion, which is through salaries, incentives, and case-loads, in addition 
to providing them with their own professional legislation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I'd just like to say that we are 
standing up for speech-language pathologists tonight, and we are standing 
up for the public.  And hopefully we'll do them both very well, and I 
appreciate my opposition critic's comments in that regard. 
 
I would like to also say that we have agreed to review the bursary policy 
and look at possible expansion.  And I've agreed to review salaries and the 
comparisons.  But I'd just caution everyone that the numbers made available 
here tonight may not have taken into consideration the fact that maybe 
there aren't bursaries paid in other provinces and things like that.  Also 
a consideration that there's a difference in the cost of living in 
different provinces and those sorts of things.  At any rate, I hope that 
those comments will satisfy the opposition. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order, order.  There's no amendments to this Act.  The 
Table is asking for leave to move from item 1 to item 47 coming into force. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 47 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- I want to thank the minister and his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Mr. Chairman, I would just like to take this opportunity 
to thank the officials and thank the opposition critic. 
 
(1930) 
 
Bill No. 19 -- An Act respecting the Promotion, Development, Control and 
Regulation of the Production and Marketing of Agricultural Products and 
Certain Amendments to Certain Acts resulting from the enactment of this Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, I have with me Stuart Kramer, 
acting deputy, to my right; behind me, Calvin Mulligan; and over to my 



 

 

right, Terry Scott. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I think this can go 
fairly quickly, but I just have a couple of short questions.  When it comes 
to section 7 of the Bill where it talks about establishing the plans and 
talks specifically about development plans, am I right to assume that this 
includes the right of an association to have a vote on whether or not they 
should have check-off for their particular commodity? 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, the plan calls for more flexibility in 
the process than there was before.  The plan can have a vote or not a vote.  
You can go with refundable or non-refundable check-offs.  There's a whole 
dynamic of increased flexibility in relation to the producers and when they 
want to establish a plan for themselves. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Minister, there's one point I guess I want to get to, 
and I'll get to it now, and that is in the whole area of check-offs, 
whether or not they're refundable. The problem that I have or the assurance 
I want from you is that this will not reduce your government's commitment 
to public funding of commodities that are now publicly funded for research 
development and marketing. 
 
Because there are several problems that arise in this, and one is that when 
a commodity group establishes a plan and establishes a check-off, there is 
the potential then for the producer to fund totally the market research and 
development of their product.  And given your government's history and the 
federal government's history of reduced funding to commodities around 
Saskatchewan in particular, I want you to tell me tonight that you will 
give the commitment to any producer group that establishes a check-off, 
that that will not facilitate your government reacting by reducing public 
funding to that commodity. 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, we are committed to funding research.  
The Ag Development Fund was set up in 1985 to deal with research and 
development and we committed $200 million to that. 
 
Last year what we did is we put it into legislation, that it became a Crown 
corporation to deal with an independent board, to deal with the funding for 
research projects and also the development side where the research goes the 
next step further in dealing with the components of on-farm testing. 
 
And so the check-offs are a part of an increased opportunity that the 
boards and commissions may want to have in their specific area that deal 
with a specific item; for example, marketing research or those kinds of 
things that they think are important.  And we have no intention of reducing 
the volume of dollars.  We want this to walk alongside that. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Minister, have you given that commitment to those 
producer groups who have approached you to ask for the possibility of 
starting or having a vote on development or marketing?  What assurances 
have you given them?  Could you just specifically tell me what amount of 



 

 

dollars that you are putting into, let's say canola research, and how that 
will be affected by the fact that producers are now . . . could potentially 
now have a check-off in that industry? 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- I can say this, Mr. Chairman: that we are dealing with 
these on a regular basis today.  And we have projects that we've gone 
together with with the pulse growers.  We have projects that we have got 
together with the sheep and wool commission.  We have projects with the 
pork board.  And we will be working together with them on other projects. 
 
And we do that through the Ag Development Fund and then we proceed as a 
complementary funding method for research and development.  And a lot of it 
focuses back to the boards and commissions having a broader perspective and 
a unit to come to us to deliver the Ag Development Fund money.  And that 
makes it easier for us to deal with than it did before. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Okay, Mr. Minister, just one more question then.  Can you 
give me your assurance that in next year's budget there will be no 
cut-backs in research, development, and marketing programs from your 
government to the agricultural sector in this province?  Can you give me 
that assurance right now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, I think that our record speaks for the 
kinds of things that we do on the research side.  We have put money 
together with the pulse growers into the component of their research that 
they want to have, with the sheep and wool producers.  We have done it with 
the pork producers.  We have even taken the Ag Development Fund money and 
put it into the ag college in Saskatoon. 
 
All of these things and this Bill are not there to reduce the funding.  
They're to provide an area of opportunity so that they can better access 
the funding opportunities that we have.  And whether that's with the 
provincial arm of the research side of the Ag Development Fund or whether 
that's a federal opportunity in research, it makes a better opportunity for 
them to gain access to the funds that are there.  And we are not in a 
process here of setting a budget for what we're going to do next year, 
we're in a process of putting a Bill together that the people want to have.  
And it makes it easier for them to deal with the one single component that 
wasn't in the old Bill, and that is the development commissions or . . . 
yes, the development commissions and the development boards.  And those are 
the things that focus on this Bill.  And that's why it's important for us 
to deal with it at this time. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- I understand that, Mr. Minister.  But the concern that I 
have is that under a Bill like this, where you have reduced the amount of 
numbers of people who have to vote in favour of establishing a marketing or 
development board, that potentially could lead you to say, well the 
producers are now putting in so much money, we don't have to put in as much 
money.  Just simply give me your commitment that you will not, as a result 
of this Bill, reduce your commitment, your public funding commitment to 
agriculture in Saskatchewan.  Just stand up and say, no, we will not reduce 
it. 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, our record in research, led by . . . our 
record led by our Premier in research is far ahead of any research that has 
ever been done in this province before.  And that, Mr. Chairman, is 
absolutely a fact.  And we have the people coming to us from these various 
organizations and wanting that assistance.  And we are providing not only 
the money for that, but we're providing for them the legislative authority 
to deal with it, not only in a marketing sense but in a development of 
whatever they want to do in research or in market development, any of those 
components.  We are there to help, and this is an enabling legislation to 
do that. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I explained to you the potential that 
comes out of this Bill.  All I want you to tell me is that you will not, as 
a result of this Bill -- whereby producer groups are funding certain 
specific areas of research or development -- that you will not reduce your 
funding commitment to agricultural projects in Saskatchewan, whether it be 
the pulse growers, the canola growers, any of the marketing boards.  Just 
stand in your place and tell me that you will not, as a result of this 
Bill, reduce your current commitment to funding.  That's all I'm asking. 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, the canola growers have come to us on a 
number of occasions to deal with some opportunity.  They came to us in 
1988, the very first time, to deal with an opportunity to develop a 
commission that would have a refundable opportunity to deal with the market 
development that they wanted to have. 
 
Secondly, the canola growers wanted that, in that way, to give them 
flexibility.  They didn't have any flexibility in the old Bill.  And they 
prefer this arrangement and this Bill provides them the flexibility.  What 
it does, Mr. Chairman, the third thing it does, is it gives them an 
opportunity -- their organization -- to deal with more funding for their 
direct input.  It gives them an opportunity to plan on how they want to 
come to the government for the Ag Development Fund funding. 
 
And all of those things are more important today than they were before.  
And that's why this is important to pass this Bill. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Well, Mr. Minister, we can be here all night.  And I've 
asked you three times now to just make a commitment that you weren't going 
to reduce your funding to research and development.  And, yes, that's 
exactly right, as one of my colleagues says.  That means, because you will 
not stand in your place and give us that commitment, we know exactly, 
exactly what you're up to. 
 
What you're trying to do is make it easier for the commodity groups to 
check, to have a check-off in their product. And you say they use it for 
specific areas but I know exactly what's going to happen.  You're going to 
say, well these farmers now can fund their own market research and 
development, therefore the government doesn't have to do it.  Mr. Minister, 
that simply is not good enough.  And if you would have had a commitment to 
maintain your funding, you could have simply stood up and said, yes. 
 
So I guess there's no point in carrying this on any further.  I will be 



 

 

watching, Mr. Minister, in your budgets coming up and I will predict right 
now, as a result of this Bill, you are going to be probably reducing your 
funding for agriculture research. 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, we have worked together with the 
organizations that have already become either a marketing board or a 
commission to deal with the areas that they have wanted to deal with.  They 
have initiated the check-offs and with that check-off they have initiated 
more funding than they did before.  And so what I can say to you is, our 
record proves that what we are doing is right and that they want to have 
it.  And we have the canola growers dealing with this.  We have other 
people that perhaps will start after they see how they can gain access to 
this money through organizing themselves province-wide.  They'll perhaps 
deal with it but we want to put a window out there, of opportunity for 
them, and that's what we're doing. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
(1945) 
 
Clause 7 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- A House amendment to clause 7, moved by the Associate 
Minister of Agriculture.  Will the members take the amendment as read? 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 7 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clause 8 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- House amendment to clause 8, moved by the Associate 
Minister of Agriculture.  Will the members take the amendment as read? 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 8 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 9 to 11 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 12 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- House amendment to clause 12.  Will the members take the 
amendment as read? 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 12 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clause 13 
 



 

 

Mr. Chairman: -- A House amendment to clause 13.  Will the members take the 
amendment as read? 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 13 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clause 14 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Clause 14 has a House amendment moved by the Associate 
Minister of Agriculture.  Will the members take the amendment as read? 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 14 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 15 to 33 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 34 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Clause 34 has a House amendment moved by the Associate 
Minister of Agriculture.  Will the members take the amendment as read? 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 34 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 35 to 40 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 
(1930) 

THIRD READINGS 
 
Bill No. 27 -- An Act to amend The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital 
Corporations Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- Now, and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Bill No. 38 -- An Act to amend The Municipal Employees' Superannuation Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- Now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 35 -- An Act to amend The Income Tax Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- With leave now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- With leave now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 34 -- An Act to amend The Child and Family Services Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- Now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Bill No. 4 -- An Act respecting the Consequential Amendments to Certain 
Acts resulting from the enactment of The Child and Family Services Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- I move that the amendments be read now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- Right now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Bill No. 33 -- An Act respecting the Administration of Young Offenders' 
Services 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now read the 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Bill No. 47 -- An Act respecting the Saskatchewan Association of 
Speech-Language Pathologists and Audiologists 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now read the 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Bill No. 19 -- An Act respecting the Promotion, Development, Control and 
Regulation of the Production and Marketing of Agricultural Products and 
Certain Amendments to Certain Acts resulting from the enactment of this Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- I move that the amendments be now read the first and 
second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- By leave right now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 



 

 

 
Bill No. 50 -- An Act to amend The Teachers' Superannuation Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I am pleased 
to explain the reasons for this enabling legislation and what it will 
accomplish.  The issue with which the Bill deals, Mr. Speaker, is the 
integration of pension payments from the teachers' superannuation plan with 
payments from the Canada Pension Plan.  I should emphasize at the outset 
that the issue pertains only to the old formula pension plan for teachers.  
It does not apply in any way to the annuity plan established in 1980. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my colleague, the Minister of Finance, recently tabled the 
Report of the Provincial Auditor with respect to integration as it is 
interpreted for purposes of the teachers' superannuation plan.  The auditor 
determined that the integration formula being used for the plan is not only 
inconsistent with the existing regulations, but that the formula itself 
does not bring about true integration as required by the Act.  The outcome 
was that the only way in which the issue could be resolved was through 
amendments to The Teachers' Superannuation Act itself, which is what we are 
dealing with in this Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, teachers' superannuation is a mandatory item in the provincial 
teacher bargaining, and it has been past practice for changes in the 
superannuation plan and the legislation to be agreed to during the 
bargaining process.  This Bill follows the traditional approach in that it 
is enabling legislation designed to allow the terms of a negotiated 
agreement to be implemented. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to outline the two main aspects of the negotiated 
agreement which this Bill will allow us to implement.  First is the 
question of past pension payments.  Some time ago I provided assurance to 
all superannuated teachers that I would be taking all possible steps to 
ensure they were not required to repay any part of past overpayments they 
might have received. 
 
This Bill will fulfil that commitment by allowing the passage of a 
retroactive regulation to validate all pension payments from 1966 onwards.  
By retroactively providing legal authority for these payments, we will be 
eliminating any question of overpayments or repayments. 
 
A major concern of existing superannuates has been the potential impact of 
the integration issue on their future pension amounts.  I am pleased to say 
that existing superannuates will have their pensions fully protected under 
the terms of the agreement.  This Bill will allow us to authorize the 
continued payment of pensions to these superannuates in accordance with the 
existing procedures. 
 
The second major aspect of the agreement addressed by this Bill is payments 
to future superannuates.  In this respect, the Bill provides for 
integration of the Canada Pension Plan with teachers' superannuation 
benefits in accordance with proposals put forward by the STF (Saskatchewan 
Teachers' Federation) representatives and agreed to by the 
government-trustee committee. 



 

 

 
Regulations will provide that teachers who retire between now and December 
31, 1991 will have their pensions calculated in accordance with the 
integration formula currently in use.  Teachers who retire after that date 
will have their pension benefits integrated with Canada Pension Plan 
payments at age 65 in a manner similar to teachers in most other provinces. 
 
As I have said, Mr. Speaker, this Bill is intended to enable the 
implementation of the terms of a negotiated agreement.  The Bill deals with 
a serious legal and financial problem which had to be addressed quickly and 
decisively, and I am pleased that we are able to proceed on the basis of 
such an agreement.  I believe that the legislation will eliminate the 
concerns of existing superannuates and will establish the basis for fair 
and reasonable integration of teacher pensions in the future. 
 
I therefore move that Bill No. 50, An Act to amend The Teachers' 
Superannuation Act be now read a second time. 
 
(2000) 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Mr. Muirhead: -- I would like to ask leave of the Assembly to introduce 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to introduce three 
gentlemen up in the gallery here, three farmers, irrigation farmers from 
Outlook.  They've been in today to the farm show and come over to watch the 
proceedings tonight.  They're Mr. Ansil Derdahl and his two sons Reg and 
Ray.  They're also in the irrigation business selling irrigation equipment, 
and I thank them for coming over here tonight, and I ask my colleagues to 
give them a warm welcome.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 50 (continued) 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  First let me say that 
the government of Saskatchewan and the Minister of Education and their 
behaviour on the administration of the teachers' superannuation plan has 
been most despicable.  You and your government, Mr. Minister, have caused 
untold anguish for literally thousands of Saskatchewan teachers, whether 
they're presently retired or looking forward to retirement.  This 
government caused this crisis.  They like to blame the Provincial Auditor 
but this government caused this crisis. 
 
On April 20, 1990, Lorne . . . pardon me, the Minister of Finance, the 



 

 

member from Weyburn, wrote the Provincial Auditor asking whether the 
Teachers' Superannuation Commission was following its own legislation and 
regulations governing the integration of CPP (Canadian Pension Plan) 
benefits with the teachers' superannuation benefits. 
 
On May 11, 1990, the Provincial Auditor's office, after seeking a legal 
opinion from their legal counsel, Mr. Gordon Neill, advised the Minister of 
Finance that the Teachers' Superannuation Commission had been calculating 
pension benefits under the teachers' superannuation plan in a manner that 
did not comply with the legislation or the regulations.  The Minister of 
Finance then moved the auditor's report in this legislature on May 23, 
1990. 
 
It was obvious, Mr. Speaker, that the Teachers' Superannuation Commission 
has accepted the auditor's report and they determined that they weren't in 
a position to rectify the problem of the regulations. 
 
Then the Minister of Education advised teachers, presently receiving 
pension benefits, that they would not have to pay back any payments all 
ready received.  And then -- and then the Government of Saskatchewan went 
to the bargaining table and literally put a gun to the heads of the 
teachers' bargaining committee. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Get off of it. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Now the members over there can say, get off of it, but 
that's simply not true, Mr. Speaker, it's simply not true.  The truth hurts 
-- the truth hurts.  They came to that bargaining table with a gun to the 
head of the teachers -- that's what they did. 
 
And what they said was, you either agree with what we want or we're going 
to implement legislation.  And this Minister of Education tells us that 
pensions have always been negotiated in this province and that's true.  But 
last Thursday and Friday, the Minister of Education, through his bargaining 
committee, was threatening to impose his view of the world when it came to 
teachers' pensions.  And that is so.  And that is so. 
 
Now the teachers tabled a proposal to deal with this situation.  They 
tabled a proposal last Friday to deal with this situation which is 
basically the legislation that we see here before us.  But last Friday, the 
government bargaining team was not prepared to deal with the teachers' 
proposal, and what did they do?  On Monday this government served a notice 
of motion of its intent to introduce legislation regarding the integration 
of Canada Pension Plan with the superannuation plan.  That's what they did. 
 
And on Tuesday, on Tuesday they were able to negotiate the same proposal 
that the teachers had put forward on Friday.  And I say that's despicable; 
that's despicable.  You put a gun to the teachers' heads and that's exactly 
what you did, Mr. Minister of Health.  And, Mr. Minister of Health, you 
don't know what happened at the bargaining table, but the Minister of 
Education certainly does. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has caused untold anguish for teachers across 



 

 

this province.  We had teachers writing people; we had teachers phoning 
people; and we had teachers in this gallery putting pressure on this 
government. And what they were saying was, negotiate; don't legislate.  
Negotiate; don't legislate -- because that's historically been the trend in 
this province. 
 
Now the government, by serving notice of a Bill on Monday night to 
unilaterally change teachers' pensions, clearly showed its lack of respect 
for the right of teachers to bargain collectively.  It clearly shows 
disrespect for the collective bargaining process.  The government's actions 
have caused a great deal of concern to retired and working teachers.  The 
government's thoughtless action in this entire situation could very well 
have provoked a province-wide provincial strike.  The government's action 
is sending a message to teachers across Canada that the province of 
Saskatchewan did not care about its teachers at a time when school boards 
are desperately trying to attract teachers to this province because of 
pending shortages. 
 
And I wonder, is it a coincidence that this pension issue was raised 
immediately after the STF launched a court case to force the province to 
meet its financial obligations to the Teachers' Superannuation Fund. 
 
Generally, Mr. Speaker, the government has used strong-arm tactics in 
dealing with this entire situation -- that's what they did.  And what we 
see here today is the legislation that does protect superannuate pensions . 
. . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- It does protect superannuates' pensions, but it's the very 
same proposal that the teachers had put forward last Friday, Mr. Speaker -- 
last Friday. 
 
And I say to the members opposite, your behaviour has been despicable.  
You've caused untold anguish for literally thousands of teachers.  And even 
though we have this legislation today that will protect teachers' pensions, 
whether they're superannuated, and will protect teacher's pensions the way 
. . . the formula . . . the way Canada Pension Plan is integrated with the 
teachers pension up until December 31, 1991.  We still have to deal with 
what happens to teachers on January 1, 1992. 
 
Now I understand that there has been a memorandum of agreement as to what 
happens to teachers' pensions as of January 1, 1992, but that still has to 
be confirmed once the entire collective bargaining process has been 
through, and then that will be taken to teachers. 
 
And all I can say to you, Mr. Minister, is there are literally dozens of 
other issues on the bargaining table, and I would suggest to you that you 
get down to business and negotiate a collective agreement in this province 
so that we won't continue to have labour disharmony in the teaching 
population which we've certainly seen to date.  Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 



 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee 
of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Executive Council 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 10 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Would the Premier introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to introduce 
several officials.  Beside me is my deputy minister, Mr. Stan Sojonky; 
behind him is the secretary for social policy, Mary Tkach; the director of 
administration is Don Wincherauk; and the secretary for economic policy is 
Oswald Henry; and the associate deputy minister of intergovernmental 
affairs is Andre Dimitrijevic.  There are other officials here and maybe 
even more than that from time to time. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I want to say to 
the Premier before we start the estimates that the Leader of the Opposition 
will be back in the Assembly probably in about an hour, and in the 
meantime, I've got some questions and I know other colleagues have 
questions that they want to put to the Premier. 
 
I want to start off, Mr. Premier, by asking you for the name and title and 
current salary of your personal staff, if you could give me that list.  I 
think that's a routine question.  You probably have it with you.  If you'd 
send that across and I could have a look, then I'll have other, subsequent 
questions on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, we'll provide it shortly.  Maybe the hon. 
member could elaborate on personal staff, what he means a little bit more 
precisely -- if he wants all of Executive Council, or what particular 
people, and we can . . . 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- What I'd like, Mr. Premier, is your staff in your 
department that you're responsible for, with the salaries and any increases 
that may have occurred in the past, let's say, 12 months.  And if you can 
get that over to me as soon as you can, because there's some questions that 
I just want to ask following that. 
 
(2015) 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- We'll put that together as quickly as we can and send 
it to the hon. member within a very short period of time. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I wonder as well, Mr. Premier, if you can tell me the 
name and salary of your deputy minister, and also if you could, whether 
there's been an increase in salary or any of the remunerations in the past 
year. 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- The deputy minister is Mr. Stan Sojonky who's sitting 
beside me, and he started in November at a salary of 9,269 per month, and 
it has not changed. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Premier, I wonder if you could tell me what the 
previous deputy was making, the monthly salary, so I can make that 
comparison. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- The previous deputy minister received seventy-nine 
ninety-nine, as of November '89. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could tell us whether or 
not this increase, percentage increase -- and I'm just taking the time now; 
my colleague is figuring that out -- but would this be a standard increase 
that everyone in your department would have received?  I understand that 
your staff received at some point, a 10 or 12 per cent increase during the 
past year.  Was this across-the-board increase that everyone received, or 
was it just the deputy minister's salary that went up by this amount? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- There was a structural increase of 4 per cent.  And 
then there are performance increases that would be, not across the board, 
but depending on individual performance. 
 
With respect to the deputy minister, I think, as you probably know, Mr. 
Sojonky was the deputy minister of Health, a rather senior individual.  So 
when he moves across, it would be reflected in the fact that he is a senior 
individual coming laterally from one deputy's position to another. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well I'm not here to argue whether your deputy does a 
good job or whether the salary is the right salary.  All I'd say that I'm 
sure that he replaced someone of a high level as well.  I'm sure that the 
person that was earning $7,900 a month was a high-level civil servant.  The 
simple fact is that the increase in salary is 17 per cent -- about 17 per 
cent.  From 7,900 to $9,200 is an increase from $96,000 a year to 111, or 
about $15,000 a year.  That's over a thousand dollars a month increase. 
 
And I just make the argument, not whether or not your deputy is doing a 
good job.  I'm sure he is.  I'm sure he does a good job every day.  But 
what I'm saying is that at a time when your government finally admits that 
there's child hunger in this province and that 64,000 kids are going hungry 
and you have 3 cents a day for them, that when you have civil servants 
getting increases of 17 per cent or $1,000 a month, that people ask, and 
not surprisingly, where is the fairness and why has this government gotten 
out of touch so quickly. 
 
And I want to make it clear that I'm not attacking or arguing about whether 
or not your top civil servants in your department do a good job.  What I'm 
talking about is the fairness and the perception of fairness that the 
public will think about when they see someone getting a 17 per cent 
increase. 
 
And the decision obviously, moving from 7,900 to 9,200, that position, the 



 

 

salary paid to that position has increased by 17 per cent.  And I would 
just like to ask you, Mr. Premier, whether or not at a time when farmers 
are going broke -- 10,000 of them facing foreclosure, many of them as a 
result of your own government's foreclosure notices, 10,000 who have 
already left in the last eight years for a total of 20,000 farmers who have 
left or are being forced off the land -- is it fair that some civil service 
positions are getting increases of 17 per cent or salaries of $111,000 a 
year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- I'll just say to the hon. member so that he has a fair 
comparison.  The deputy sitting beside me was the deputy minister of 
Health, and he was receiving between 8,500 and $9,000 per month as the 
deputy of Health.  So it was not a 17 per cent increase when he comes over 
to becoming the deputy in my office.  So he's a senior civil servant.  The 
individual that was the deputy minister before was obviously a younger 
individual who had not been at the deputy minister level, but obviously 
made it, and he was a more junior position. 
 
So I don't think that you would want to see a deputy minister, say, for 
example, of Health in any public service move into the Premier's office and 
take a cut -- I mean, just move across -- if he's earned it.  He's been 
there for years, served in several departments, in Social Services and 
Health and others.  He has the experience.  And it's pretty much a lateral 
move. 
 
So just to point out, it's not really fair to say that he got this 
increase, and he didn't.  He has had this experience, he brings it to the 
office.  And if you were to hire him, that's about what you would pay as a 
deputy.  If he was hired by another government as a deputy level, it would 
be about the same. 
 
I mean, I understand why you're saying that it may be associated with that 
kind of an increase.  But this individual is a senior civil servant, was 
paid this particular level, and to bring him into the office you have to 
stay in the ballpark. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Premier, you've indicated that your deputy was in 
the Department of Health, earning $8,500 a month, I believe, and is now 
working over in your department at $9,200 a month.  That's about a 10 per 
cent increase.  And any way you cut it, whether you go position where the 
increase is 17 per cent, if you just go by the amount being paid to your 
deputy versus, I think, Mr. Riddell who was there before -- I think that's 
who your deputy was before -- that the position has had a 17 per cent 
increase in the amount being paid.  And if you compare your present 
deputy's position in the Department of Health to the position now, it's a 
10 per cent increase. 
 
I think the point remains the same: is that many people in the public think 
that at a time when others are being told there's no money for minimum wage 
increases, except at election time; when farmers are being told that they 
have to do with less than they had last year; that people wonder why.  And 
I say again, I'm not arguing whether your civil servants are doing a good 
job or not -- that's not the point -- but if it's good for high-paid civil 



 

 

servants to get a 10 per cent increase, then you have to believe that 
people on the bottom rung of the ladder deserve a 10 per cent increase as 
well. 
 
And I just don't know how you can expect the public to believe that some in 
our society who are already making in the area of $100,000 a year deserve a 
10 per cent increase, working for the government, protected; while people 
who are on the front line, earning 5 or $6 an hour, are being told that 
there's no money for increases.  And I would just like you to deal with 
that for one moment, Mr. Premier, the fairness of that approach.  How is it 
that your employees in your department get an automatic 4 per cent 
increase, plus bonuses; your deputy gets a 10 per cent increase, or 17 per 
cent if you look at the position per se?  How do you justify that in the 
light of the fact that the economy of the province is in a very, very 
disastrous and precarious position? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, I'll point out to the hon. member that 
the increases, for example, in the minimum wage as of January was 25 cents, 
and July 1 will be another 25 cents.  So it's 11 per cent the first time 
and a 10 per cent increase the next time, so you're looking at a relatively 
significant increase across the piece so that you will have now the minimum 
wage at $5. 
 
That certainly ranks with other jurisdictions, Mr. Chairman.  And if the 
hon. member wants to make the point that it's people at all levels deserve 
an increase, the floor has been raised 11 per cent in January and 10 per 
cent by July which is, added together, relatively significant.  It may not 
in his view be high enough, but it's probably as high a move in terms of 
minimum wage in a six-month period as we've seen for some time.  So it's a 
fair comparison. 
 
Again I will go back to the salaries of my deputy.  His change in going 
from responsibility to Health to responsibility for all the departments was 
a 7.8 per cent increase.  And I'm sure he would know, being in government, 
there's a very large responsibility associated with being the deputy 
minister in Executive Council.  Because of his experience versus the 
previous public servant that was there, you have to pay that kind of salary 
to get people to move laterally.  If he was to move to a department in 
Alberta or Manitoba, it would be very, very similar. 
 
So I think it's comparable.  His was 7.8 per cent.  The minimum wage went 
up 11 per cent in January and another 10 per cent in July. 
 
(2030) 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well, Mr. Premier, I don't want to get bogged down on 
this point because I've got a number of other questions that I want to ask.  
But I really think that many of the people who watch the proceedings here 
and have an understanding of how salaries work and see the spread between 
the rich in this province and the poor growing by leaps and bounds, which 
it always does when you have -- and I'm not being particularly critical of 
your government -- but when you have right-wing governments in power the 
spread always magnifies.  And it doesn't come as any surprise, nor should 



 

 

it. 
 
But when you have your deputy earning $111,000 a year . . . And I don't 
know how much experience he has.  He may be a long-time, 20-year employee 
at the level he's at.  I don't think he is, and I'm not going to get into 
that.  But I think he's rather recent as a deputy minister, within the last 
five years.  But I want to say to you, Mr. Premier, this: when you have 
people on minimum wage, and this is after the increase, after your much 
talked about increase which happened after five years of being frozen, 
earning the same amount in one year as your deputy does in one month, I 
think the gap is too great. 
 
Now you may not agree with that.  You may think that the gap of having 
someone on minimum wage working 40 hours a week every week of the year, 
earning one-twelfth of what your deputy earns -- and I'm not saying he 
doesn't work hard, but I'm sure his life-style is commensurate with the 
kind of income he gets -- that I think the spread is too great.  That's the 
point that I'm making. 
 
Now we can argue whether he should be earning twelve times as much or six 
times as much, but carrying this program on where the people at the top get 
10 per cent increases year after year, and the people at the bottom get an 
increase once every five years, you can see where we get to in a very short 
period of time. 
 
And I'm not to be argumentative.  But I just want to make the point when we 
have the highest level of family poverty in the country at the present time 
-- this is from Statistics Canada and other people who follow it closely, 
the highest level of family poverty in the country -- then I think we have 
to be careful about the increases we give our top civil servants.  Whether 
it's your deputy at 111,000 or whether it's Chuck Childers at 740,000, I 
think we have to be very, very careful about the kind of messages we send 
to poor people in telling them to tighten their belts.  That isn't fair.  
It shows you're out of touch. 
 
And I want to ask you one more time, Mr. Premier, whether you think that 
the people who are earning $100,000 a year working for your government, or 
$740,000 a year, and getting those kind of increases, that that is fair.  
In light of the fact that we have tens of thousands of children, 64,000 
children going hungry at the present time in the province, is that fair? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, we usually get into this discussion where 
the opposition does pick on the public service.  And they do it every year 
and they'll say that the public service should not be paid what it's paid.  
And then they'll compare it to the minimum wage.  Everybody knows that a 
minimum wage is the starting wage; it certainly isn't the maximum.  And 
young people start on it and other people live with it.  But they always 
make the comparison.  And I'm sure that the public service does not 
appreciate the fact that they do get picked on. 
 
When you look at the spread, Mr. Chairman, when you look at the spread, I'm 
sure that if we look at, Mr. Chairman, the spread between those that have 
and those that do not all over the Soviet Union, Mr. Chairman, you'll find 



 

 

that 1 per cent of the population in the Soviet Union is very rich, very 
high under the Marxist system.  And the rest of the people are very, very 
poor -- very poor. 
 
And they've decided to change that system and go to democracy and go to a 
market and go to a mechanism that allows people to improve and have 
equitable access to improvement. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the opposition, if they want to compare the Soviet bloc to 
the North American bloc in terms of fairness, in terms of opportunity, we 
would . . . you know, I suppose we could be here debating it for a century, 
but the Soviet bloc has said, I give up.  We've been wrong.  Marxism didn't 
work.  We're abandoning it.  We're going to democracy and we're going to 
markets and we're going to have some fairness.  Because the gap between 
those that are poor and the 1 per cent in the civil service that have all 
the money is so wide, people said it's terrible. 
 
And when you talk about farm income, farm income in the Soviet Union is 
very, very low -- very, very low.  And if you talk about family poverty in 
the province of Saskatchewan, there's family poverty on the farm as a 
result of drought, as a result of high interest rates, and other things, 
Mr. Speaker.  And I can only say to the hon. member that we have delivered 
in the neighbourhood of $7 billion in the last five years into terms of 
farm income; just in the next few weeks another quarter of a billion 
dollars. 
 
It certainly isn't enough.  But obviously, Mr. Speaker, with respect to 
agriculture . . . And the hon. member compares civil servant salaries to 
agriculture.  Well I mean let's . . . we might as well get right into it 
and say it's difficult when it's dry.  It's difficult with drought.  But 
our capacity to deliver to farmers in the neighbourhood of $100,000 per 
farm on average, Mr. Speaker, is not enough, it's not perfect, but it 
certainly has been a significant contribution, and the hon. member also 
knows that. 
 
So with respect to the public service, they do work hard.  The public 
service individuals who have dedicated their career need to be respected.  
They have contributed and they compete in the province of Saskatchewan with 
any public service across Canada.  And I don't think that it's fair to pick 
on them, saying, well they should be taking less than their professional 
counterparts in other jurisdictions because of problems in drought or 
problems some other place. 
 
Let me finally make the point: we've reduced the Executive Council staff by 
eight person-years.  We've reduced the budget by over $300,000.  We've cut 
our salaries and rolled them back to 1989, Mr. Speaker.  The opposition 
didn't; I'll say that.  I mean for the Marxist supporters, Mr. Chairman, 
they didn't roll back their salaries, but we rolled back ours.  And I say 
that to the viewing audience that is watching tonight, that the cabinet 
ministers and the legislative secretaries rolled back their salaries.  I've 
cut my staff.  I've cut my budget by $300,000.  And I didn't see the 
roll-back over there.  So if they're concerned about the minimum wage or if 
they're concerned about the taxpayers maybe saying that this Legislative 



 

 

Assembly spends too much money, it was reduced on this side of the House. 
 
But, Mr. Chairman, it was not reduced on that side of the House.  So you 
can't have it both ways.  I mean, we rolled ours back.  I don't believe 
that the Leader of the Opposition or the other members rolled theirs back 
as well. 
 
So I would just, if the hon. member wants to compare a market economies and 
Marxist economies, I suspect we could get into it for a long time.  But 
obviously we believe that the gap in democracy and in a market-driven 
economy is certainly much fairer, Mr. Speaker and Mr. Chairman, than you 
would find in the Marxist economies which have now said it just didn't 
work. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Premier, I suppose I could say I'm happy that 
you're into the position of now defending the Chuck Childers salary of 
740,000 a year and arguing that that is a proper amount of money to pay one 
individual, $740,000 a year.  But I can tell you, there are literally tens 
of thousands of people in this province who don't think it's fair.  There 
are tens of thousands of farmers who believe that paying one individual 
$740,000 a year . . . in fact a no-cut contract for five years that amounts 
to over $3 million that has to be paid out whether that employee is working 
or not working, whether he is at some point proven to be mentally 
incompetent or not, that he still gets paid that $740,000 a year -- you're 
now in a position of defending that. 
 
And if it wasn't so sad, I tell you, Mr. Premier, we may laugh about it.  
But the problem is that you allowed, and your Minister of Families allowed, 
$740,000 to feed the 64,000 hungry children that you admit exist and live 
here in the province of Saskatchewan, the same as one individual receives 
working in your newly privatized Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan.  And 
this is not a deal that was signed by the new company; it's a deal that was 
signed by your minister and your government while the company was being 
privatized.  At the very time we were debating the Bill in the House last 
year, your minister and your government signed the deal with Mr. Childers 
that allowed for him to receive $740,000 a year for five years. 
 
Now you can see the contrast to why people are upset.  Here you have the 
children being taken care of by your new Minister of the Family, getting 3 
cents a day per child, and Mr. Childers getting $2,000 a day for the work 
he does.  Now don't be surprised if some people in the province will say 
you're being unfair and out of touch. 
 
Now you can compare and say that in eastern Europe people are rejecting 
that form of government, and I agree, as well they should; as they're 
rejecting your friends, the dictatorships on the right wing in places like 
Chile.  They're rejecting them because they don't like them.  And I can say 
that you're the same as Augusto Pinochet in Chile, but everyone knows 
that's nonsense for you and I to debate how we're like eastern Europe and 
you're like the dictators in Chile.  And we know that's childish and silly. 
 
And that's why the eastern press is beginning to write about you, sir, 
because of your absurd statements and stretching of the truth.  It makes 



 

 

not one tittle of sense for you to come here and compare us to Marxists in 
East Germany, any more than it does for us to compare you to Pinochet, the 
dictator in Chile who kept government there by using guns and was a 
right-winger like yourself.  I mean, you know that's an absurd argument. 
 
And so I wish you would treat this place with the respect that it deserves, 
of debating the philosophy of the New Democratic Party of Saskatchewan 
versus the policies of your government. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- What is your policy? 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well our policy is well-known.  For 10, 11 years we 
balanced the budgets; we had growth in the economy; we had no deficit.  The 
record of the New Democratic Party is well-known. 
 
But I say to you, sir, that you are now in a position of defending Chuck 
Childers's $740,000 and saying that that's a good deal -- a good deal.  But 
I want to say to you, sir, that there are many, many farmers and working 
people who believe that having 70 per cent of the single parents in 
Saskatchewan living in poverty is not good.  You can argue that that's all 
right because these high-paid civil servants, your staff, are working 
harder than everyone else in the province.  But many people will say, well 
if that's true, why are we in so much economic trouble?  Why have we got a 
$14 billion debt?  That's what they're saying. 
 
Now to defend Chuck Childers's salary may be a position you want to be in, 
sir, but I want to say to you that the poverty in this province, which is 
escalating at a very, very high and fast rate, is in part at least due to 
the fact that some people who work for your government, Chuck Childers and 
others, are earning more than they deserve.  So I want to say to you that 
in closing this part, I'm disappointed that you haven't got more compassion 
for the working poor in this province, and at least would say, we have to 
work harder in order to get them up to a living salary and a living income 
so that they could take proper care of their children and family members. 
 
Mr. Minister, I now want to turn to out-of-province trips for a few 
moments, and ask you, can you tell me the agencies that you're responsible 
for and the department that you're responsible for; can you tell me the 
destinations, the persons accompanying you, and the total cost of the 
trips, and the purpose of the trips that you took outside of Saskatchewan 
during the past year, during the past 24 months. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- We'll provide that. 
 
(2045) 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I wonder, will you get that to me within the next few 
moments, because there'll be some questions that I want to ask.  I would 
like that broken down too, Mr. Premier, in terms of Air Canada, Canadian 
Airlines, and the amounts paid. 
 
I would also like to ask you, on those days where you're not able to catch 
a commercial airline, and I'm sure in most occasions you do or you would 



 

 

try to, on those days where you have to lease an aircraft -- for example, 
jet aircraft that I understand you had to use today in order to make your 
commitment in Newfoundland and then get back to the House for estimates . . 
. I would also like to know the commercial charters that you would use. 
 
And also if you would tell me which company you would use on a day like 
today where you had to use jet service.  I'll ask you that one pointed 
question.  For example today, which company provided the jet service that 
you used to go to Newfoundland? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- The charter from Saskatoon was West Wind to Ottawa, and 
from there to Newfoundland and back again was with the federal government. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Can you tell me, Mr. Premier, on the flight to Ottawa, 
can you tell me the cost of that portion of the trip and who was 
responsible for paying it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- I don't have today's, but here's one that would be, I 
would think, very similar: Westwind Aviation, Regina, Ottawa, Thunder Bay 
and return on . . . well it was in 1989 and it was $9,430.  I imagine it 
would be very similar. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- So that was in 1989, probably about, like, 9,000, 
probably about 10,000.  Could you tell me who was responsible for making 
that payment?  Was that picked up by the federal government?  The total 
trip?  I imagine they paid for the trip from Ottawa to Newfoundland, but 
who was responsible for the charter that you took this morning and back?  
Was that the responsibility of the federal government, the Newfoundland 
government, or the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Executive Council pays for flights that I would take in 
terms of charter.  The federal government pays for the air force.  I mean, 
if you use a Challenger that I used today, it's federal government expense. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well, Mr. Minister, my question then is: can you tell 
me how many flights, charter flights, that you took outside the province in 
the past year.  Have you got the number, the people who went with you, and 
the cost of those trips, the total? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- My officials are constructing that and we'll get it to 
you as quickly as we can. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, I want to ask the Premier a couple of 
questions associated with travel.  Can you tell me the booking agencies 
that you would use, the travel agencies that you would use when it comes to 
arranging your travel?  Have you got a travel agent of record, or are there 
one or two travel agencies you use?  And can you give me the names of 
those? 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Why is the member from Kinistino on his feet? 
 
Mr. Saxinger: -- I would like to ask for leave to introduce some guests. 
 



 

 

Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Saxinger: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd like to introduce some guests seated in 
the Speaker's gallery.  They are Gary and Debby Varga from St. Benedict, 
and Guy and Linda Bilodeau from Debden.  These two are partners.  They just 
bought the Chisum mill in northern Saskatchewan.  They are here at the show 
to display their log building.  They are in the Jubilee Building if 
anybody's interested to have a look at it.  And I want to ask this Assembly 
to please help welcome these guests to this Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Executive Council 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 10 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- We are phoning the public servant that does my booking, 
and she will outline the agencies that she uses.  She uses Air Canada an 
awful lot and probably several.  But we'll get that information. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Premier, while you're at it I want to make sure 
that you understand what I'm asking here.  I want you to give me the travel 
agencies, not the . . . I asked in a previous question the airlines that 
you use.  I'm not asking for the carrier at this point; I'm asking for the 
travel agencies.  And if you would give me the list of those. 
 
Just a couple of other things that I would like information on before I 
give up the floor to a couple of my colleagues.  I want you to give, for 
the year 1989-90, the total amount spent on the agency to your agency of 
record on advertising; and for 1990-91, the amount that you have budgeted 
for advertising; and secondly, for the year 1989-90, the total amount spent 
on polling in your department in market research; and also for '90-91 the 
amount that you've budgeted for polling in your department. 
 
And I would like that information.  Make a commitment to get it to me in 
writing.  I'll then turn this over to my other colleagues. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- We'll provide that. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I have some 
questions as well to the Premier.  Mr. Premier, over the last number of 
years you've been talking consistently about a code of ethical conduct for 
Saskatchewan cabinet ministers and legislative secretaries.  And I want to 
quote from some of the documents that you've placed before the people of 
this province and some of the comments that you make.  And I want to say, 
Mr. Premier, I'm not sure that you have fulfilled that commitment because I 
don't see anything that has happened here in the legislature, and I would 



 

 

like to ask as to what you're future plans are with respect to that. 
 
I want to quote from a white paper on proposed ethical conduct put forward 
and signed by you in March of 1986.  And I quote, it says: 
 

 This government has stated a commitment on a number of occasions to the 
development of conflict of interest guide-lines for ministers and 
legislative secretaries. 

 
I'll skip some, but it goes on to say: 
 

 The proposed code of ethical conduct sets out seven basic principles for 
which this government believes should govern the behaviour of public 
office holders in the conduct of their duties. 

 
Mr. Minister, I'll just quote a couple of those for you this evening.  And 
the second principle you list is, and I quote: 
 

 Any conflict between the private interests, the public office holders, and 
their official duties, must be resolved in favour of the public interest.  
Upon appointment and while in office, public office holders are expected 
to arrange their private affairs in a manner that will prevent conflicts 
of interest from arising. 

 
Under article five, Mr. Minister, you state: 
 

 The public office holders shall not take personal advantage or private 
benefit from information obtained in the course of their official duties." 

 
Now, Mr. Minister, this goes back, this document, from 1986, as late as 
this spring. 
 
In March in your throne speech, you indicated to the people of Saskatchewan 
that you still had that commitment that you gave to the people years back.  
You've had a white paper from the Hon. E.M. Culliton in November of '86.  
In your throne speech of this year, and I want to quote from that throne 
speech, Mr. Premier, you say -- this was March of 1990: 
 

 The people have told my ministers it is critical all elected public office 
holders act in the performance of their duties with the utmost regard for 
the interests of the people of Saskatchewan.  To avoid even the appearance 
of any wrongdoing by my ministers, my first minister will implement a set 
of guide-lines for the ethical conduct of cabinet ministers and 
legislative secretaries.  These guide-lines, enforceable by the Premier, 
will be made public. 

 
Well, Mr. Minister, we've sat through almost . . . some 60-some days of 
sitting in this session, and I've seen nothing introduced in this 
legislature.  And I want to quote to you, Mr. Premier, from the Regina 
Leader-Post of June 14, 1990.  It says: 
 

 In the hours before the March 20 throne speech, Premier Grant Devine told 
reporters that he would introduce a code of ethics for cabinet (ministers) 



 

 

and legislative secretaries sometime early in the session. 
 

It goes on to say: 
 

 Legislation that would provide the public with even greater freedom to 
access government records could also be formulated in time for inclusion 
in this session. 

 
Further on, Mr. Premier, in that particular newspaper article, your Deputy 
Premier is quoted and said that both are under review by the government. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, we've had commitments from you before in this, along 
with other issues, but I want to say with respect to the code of ethical 
conduct and the conflict of interest guide-lines, we've seen nothing in 
this legislature.  And I'd like to ask you, Mr. Minister, if, before this 
session ends, you intend to introduce some legislation that will deal with 
a conflict, or a potential of conflict, and if we will see that in this 
session?  Will you give us that commitment today, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the hon. members are aware of the 
fact that the Speech from the Throne applies to the entire year.  Some of 
the things that you can get introduced and passed take place, as you know, 
in the spring session, and some of them are carried over.  In this 
particular case, I'm sure the hon. member can be reminded that we have had 
pieces of legislation that have been introduced that didn't pass.  We have 
had other pieces of legislation that never made the floor. 
 
In terms of the code of ethical conduct, the recommendations by E.M. 
Culliton were taken very seriously.  And as the hon. members know, that all 
members of the legislature, and legislatures across the country, are 
looking at ways and means to make sure that the public is very confident in 
the way that they behave and perform their duties as cabinet ministers.  
And the codes of ethical conduct that have been presented in other 
legislatures are certainly being reviewed by my office and my staff here to 
find out what is most appropriate.  All I can say to the hon. member is 
that this is something that takes some time and we are putting our best 
efforts at it, and the year is not finished. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well, Mr. Premier, the simple fact is that if this 
session is to go on through summer, then perhaps you may have the 
opportunity to introduce that type of legislation this year, and then we 
may be assured that your commitment would be that that would happen.  But 
with respect to your reference to fall sessions, Mr. Premier, in the last 
couple of years in this province you've been afraid to face the opposition, 
and the people of this province through the opposition, through two 
sessions in a year.  The only sessions that we've had have been spring 
sessions, never knowing when they're going to start or when they're going 
to end, simply because you've never had budgets prepared on time in a 
number of years, so we've started later and sat through the summer.  And 
the fact is, Mr. Premier, there is no consistency with your government with 
respect to spring and fall sittings. That just simply doesn't happen in 
this province any longer since you've taken power in this last session of 
government. 



 

 

 
So I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, are you still committed to the 
introduction of conflict-of-interest guide-lines or legislation in this 
House, or are you convinced that all is well and that there are no problems 
and will never be any problems and things should just run along as they 
are?  Is that you position, Mr. Premier? 
 
(2100) 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I said to the hon. member that 
there have been modifications in other legislatures. We're examining all of 
those and looking at them with a great deal of detail.  And certainly as a 
result of the work by Mr. Culliton, we have the basis from which to operate 
with some specific recommendations, and we are taking those very seriously.  
We are putting together a package that can be used in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Let me say to the hon. member that just was asking the questions, I do have 
two pieces of information for him with respect to the travel agencies.  The 
Nationals Wideworld Travel is one agency that we use, and the other is 
Regina National Travel. Those are the two that, from what I gather, we use 
most of the time. 
 
And if he would just allow me one other point, I was given this, and we 
were talking about the public servants in Saskatchewan.  The public 
servants in this province just won a national award and I believe that it 
is only appropriate that we do recognize very good public service. 
 

 "Civil servants win honors for quality."  Saskatchewan civil servants are 
doing it right, according to the Institute of Public Administration of 
Canada. 

 
 The Public Service Commission, the central human resource agency for the 

provincial government, is being honored for an innovative program it 
developed to improve the standard of service in government departments and 
agencies. 

 
 "Serving people first" (pardon me) is a series of courses for Saskatchewan 

civil servants who care about providing quality service to the public. 
 

And it goes on to talk about the fact that Saskatchewan public servants did 
receive top-notch awards and recognized by their peers across Canada.  I 
just thought the hon. members would be interested in receiving that kind of 
information about the quality of service.  And the Saskatchewan public 
service is ranked as right with the top of any public servants any place in 
Canada.  And they do deserve to be recognized for that quality service. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Minister, I want to take you back to the conflict 
of interest legislation.  And I would like to ask you, Mr. Minister, after 
waiting for years and consultation and studies and more studies and more 
consultation and more words and more promises in this throne speech -- the 
other promise that you made in your throne speech was open and honest 
government and an end to waste and mismanagement that has been so 



 

 

characteristic of your government since 1982. 
 
Mr. Minister, in your throne speech, you committed to the people of the 
province that in this year you would be introducing legislation with 
respect to conflict of interest guide-lines.  And I want to say to you, Mr. 
Minister, you don't have to fool anybody in this province because they know 
you're not going to call a fall session.  And they know that if you don't 
have that legislation introduced in this spring session, it just isn't 
going to happen.  And they'll be in line for more promises and more 
commitments and more hollow words from you, sir. 
 
So I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, at what stage is the preparation for 
this legislation at?  Is it ready to go?  Has anything been done?  Has 
anybody even in your department put a pen to paper to design some 
legislation with respect to conflict of interest? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, perhaps I could repeat the answer and add 
a little bit that there have been codes of ethical conduct redesigned 
across Canada, and we are studying those that have been introduced and 
tabled in other jurisdictions.  In some cases it's legislation; others just 
tabled the guide-lines.  And we've had all kinds of guide-lines tabled in 
this legislature over the years.  It's professional conduct, and you would 
know as well as anybody else that it's based on a professional code of 
ethics.  Whether you're a lawyer or you're a professional agrologist or 
you're a professional engineer, it's based on a personal code of personal 
integrity. And that's what really counts and that's the most important. 
 
You can put it down and change it in terms of how you describe it, but it 
is the professional activity.  And as a former professional public servant, 
as a professional agrologist myself, I know that the code of ethics has 
been there for years and it's up to the individual to live up to them.  And 
we don't change the code of ethics every year to modify them, but they know 
in the medical profession, you know in the engineering profession, the 
legal profession, there is a personal code of ethics and a professional 
code.  And it's been there for a long time and it's up to you to live up to 
it. 
 
I will say to the hon. member that we have had much opening up of the whole 
governing process in recent months, so that the hon. member should be aware 
of the fact that much of the public participation in government has been 
expanded to a very, very large extent.  I direct, for example, the hon. 
member's attention to the Future Directions on Health Care in Saskatchewan.  
Now this is where the public is involved to a very large extent in the 
whole question of health care administration. 
 
Future directions in health care, Dr. Murray's commission, was established 
in July of '88, reported in 1990 -- hearings over 41 days in the province 
of Saskatchewan on our biggest budget item, which is health care -- is 
very, very large.  They had 13 centres, 450 briefs from individuals and 
associations across the province -- very open; one of the most open public 
hearings mechanisms that you'd ever find.  They never turned anybody down, 
as far as I know.  Went all four corners of Saskatchewan.  Certainly went 
through northern Saskatchewan, rural communities.  And it's for open access 



 

 

to how the government operates, and to recommend the things that we can do 
in health care. 
 
The same applies to Consensus Saskatchewan.  And the hon. member knows that 
it is complete open access to talk about the four major areas of concern to 
the public. And they design.  Consensus Saskatchewan designed their own 
objective.  And these are people from all walks of life and they hold 
meetings all across the province.  And we estimate there'll be something 
like 2 to 3,000 people that will actually participate in the province of 
Saskatchewan looking at future of the province in terms of management, in 
terms of resources, of saving towns and villages, to safety nets like 
health and education. 
 
You can also look at the commission.  And we raised it here because of a 
Bill that was tabled with respect to SaskEnergy.  The Barber Commission 
held hearings all across the province of Saskatchewan, examining the 
questions of having equity in a utility, and replacing the debt with more 
equity.  And it was examined at length in public hearings. 
 
We're looking at budget preparation sessions that were put together that 
allow people to have access to government, access to the budget; hearings 
across the province; new advisory committees to ministers, like the nursing 
advisory committee in health; safe use of medicine committee in health; the 
GST (goods and  
 Dservices tax) advisory committee in finance -- a combination of those 
things that are put together that allow the public to participate and open 
up. 
 
So I say to the hon. member that these are just some examples of where we 
have opened up the government to the public so that they can speak and have 
hearings.  And we are looking at other pieces of legislation that we can do 
more. And the code of ethic changes and the guide-lines that have been 
presented in other jurisdictions are being examined by our people, 
seriously.  And we're looking at those in preparation for anything that we 
think would be appropriate to be tabled in the legislature or tabled in the 
public, or given to the media or anybody else. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well, Mr. Premier, clearly you're not going to answer 
my question, but I guess maybe you have.  What you're saying is really that 
you've done nothing.  But what it doesn't do, Mr. Premier, is deal with the 
problem.  And I want to say to you, Mr. Minister, I would like to give you 
an example of just why people are asking for conflict of information 
legislation from your government, because if there is a government in this 
province that needs one, it would have to be the government that's 
governing right now and has governed since 1982. 
 
Mr. Minister, and Mr. Premier, I want to talk and ask you some questions 
with respect to the Pioneer Trust issue.  You might recall that in late 
1984 and early '85 your government was making a decision as to how to 
handle Pioneer Trust, the company that was in some major difficulties.  And 
you will recall throughout that month you were deciding whether or not you 
were going to bail Pioneer Trust out to the tune of twenty-seven and a half 
million dollars. 



 

 

 
And my question is this, Mr. Minister: during this period when the cabinet 
was discussing the possibility of a bail-out for Pioneer Trust, did you or 
any of your cabinet ministers declare that they had personal business 
pending with Pioneer Trust such as large personal loans or mortgages 
awaiting approval?  Can you answer that, Mr. Premier? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, with respect to the hon. member's 
question, I would have to go back and research any cabinet minutes or 
details with respect to that particular time period -- 1984 I believe he 
said, or 1985.  And I will give the hon. member the commitment that I'll go 
back and research anything that was relevant.  We've been through that 
particular issue I think in several of my estimates, and I'll dig up 
whatever information that I had at that time and anything else that we 
might have access to. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well, Mr. Minister, Mr. Premier, that's just simply not 
good enough.  This is at a time when a major trust company in this province 
was going down the tubes.  Your government was making a decision with 
respect to twenty-seven and a half million dollars worth of public funds 
and a public bail-out, and I want to say, Mr. Minister, that I just simply 
don't believe that you couldn't recall any conversations with any of your 
cabinet with respect to their involvement with this corporation. 
 
You know full well that Pioneer Trust was headed by a group of well-known 
PCs, well-known party supporters of yours.  And you know full well that 
there would have been a possibility or could have been a possibility that 
one of your cabinet colleagues would be dealing with that particular trust 
company.  And I say to you, Mr. Minister, that that's just not simply good 
enough to stand in this House and say you can't recall because you people 
either can't recall or it's under criminal investigation or you take notice 
of a question or deny, deny, deny.  And I'm telling you that's not good 
enough tonight, and you're not going to get off the hook on this. 
 
I'm asking you that question again, Mr. Minister. And I want to know as 
well -- you might want to bring your mind back to '84, late 1984 and early 
1985: did any of your cabinet ministers declare themselves ineligible from 
a cabinet discussion because of an involvement with that trust company, 
with Pioneer Trust?  Can you tell us that tonight, Mr. Minister?  You've 
got a gaggle of officials around you.  Surely one of those can refresh your 
memory. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, the hon. member is now going back to 
1984.  I believe it's accurate to say that we didn't bail out Pioneer 
Trust.  I mean it just folded.  It's not a nice thing to have happen.  It 
was one of the earlier Saskatchewan companies that developed into the 
insurance business, and with difficult economic times, along with Principal 
Trust and some other banks and credit unions and other things, Mr. 
Chairman, 
 
It had to fold, and we did not bail it out.  So that was the end of it.  
It's unfortunate that these companies or banks or financial institutions 
have lost money.  Our credit unions have lost a lot of money.  Banks have 



 

 

lost money.  Farmers have lost money.  People across western Canada, in all 
kinds of investment, lost as a result of drought, lost as a result of high 
interest rates, market collapses, the price of land -- all kinds of things, 
Mr. Chairman. 
 
So this trust company did, and we did not bail it out.  That was it.  We 
just said: look, people who invested in it have to take their lumps.  And 
that was the decision.  That was in 1984.  We've been through this several 
times.  So as I said to the hon. member, if there's anything else that we 
can find, I will certainly offer it to the hon. member.  But there was no 
bail-out in any way, shape, or form by the taxpayers.  None.  We didn't 
touch it. 
 
(2115) 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well, Mr. Premier, I'm going to rephrase the question 
and I'm going to ask you if, when you are making major decisions or when 
you're in the process of making major decisions -- as you were in the 
Pioneer Trust deal -- does it not cross your mind to ask your cabinet 
ministers, or ask of your cabinet ministers, if there is any involvement 
with those corporations that may be perceived or be a conflict of interest?  
And I ask you, Mr. Minister: wouldn't that sound like reasonable policy?  
Wouldn't that sound like the reasonable thing to do? 
 
And I ask you again if you had any conversations with any of your cabinet, 
with any of your Executive Council, with respect to involvement with loans 
with the Pioneer Trust corporation when you were making the decision as to 
whether or whether not you were going to put twenty-seven and a half 
million dollars into Pioneer Trust in late 1984 and early 1985? 
 
And I'm asking you that question again, Mr. Minister, and we're going to be 
here a long time unless you decide to answer that question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, I've answered the question.  And I've 
said to the hon. member we've been through this several times in the last 
few years, and if there's anything else that I can find for him or if I can 
dig up with respect to cabinet minutes, I will -- that is public.  And 
we've gone through it. 
 
Clearly when you deal with all kinds of policy, when you're looking at 
agriculture policy, when you're looking at home policy and economic policy, 
you're looking at a combination of things that people have to deal with 
that affect all kinds of people, and particularly those that are across the 
province and those that are involved in agriculture and those that are 
involved in economics and those that are involved in other things.  And you 
treat them with respect.  The hon. member knows that.  He's very well aware 
of the kinds of things that the cabinet will have to deal with. 
 
And in this case I say to the hon. member again.  And he raised it.  He 
said a $27 million bail-out.  There's no bail-out.  None.  Not a dime.  No 
money went into it.  So I mean, that's the fact.  And we've said that for 
now, what, six years?  And you're asking me about cabinet decisions with 
respect to a bail-out in 1984.  I'll say there's no bail-out, and any other 



 

 

information that I can provide you I will.  And my officials will provide 
information that is relevant to the particular decisions.  Obviously, I 
mean, cabinet decisions that we go through are not published, and I mean 
some members in the opposition have been in cabinet and they know precisely 
what that's like. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Premier, that isn't the question, and that's not 
what I asked.  So let me make it very brief so even you might understand.  
Is it the practice of you and is it the practice of your cabinet that when 
you're making major decisions that if there is a potential for conflict of 
interest or there is a conflict of interest, that your officials, that your 
cabinet will notify you?  Is that standard practice in your cabinet?  Will 
you tell me that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, we've been through this.  When ministers 
are in cabinet, and in cabinets here and in cabinets across the country, 
they declare themselves and they leave the room.  This is recorded in 
minutes and you'll see them recorded in minutes.  It's the policy that goes 
on in cabinets across Canada, in the British parliamentary system, and as 
far as I know in other cabinets in democracy. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Minister, I'm sure you've got the minutes of those 
meetings by now, and I'm sure you've had a chance to survey them.  And I'm 
going to ask you specifically if any of your cabinet exempted themselves 
from discussions or from the meetings with respect to the Pioneer Trust 
meetings that you had in late '84 and late '85?  Surely you would know if 
one of your cabinet exempted themselves from discussions.  Can you tell us 
that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Well no, I don't have the minutes with me tonight.  
They go back several years.  I will just give the rules and they are 
applied in our cabinet as they are cabinets across the country; that when 
ministers are in cabinet they declare themselves, they leave the room, and 
that's the way cabinets operate and the way that they should operate. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Minister, can I ask you this: do you recall in '84, 
late '84 and early '85, if any of your cabinet colleagues exempted 
themselves from any discussions at cabinet meetings?  Would you just tell 
us that, sir? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, cabinet ministers do exempt 
themselves from cabinet meetings from time to time.  That's a fact.  And 
they may have in '84 and '85 and '86 and '87 and '88 and '89 and '90.  
Secondly, I don't attend every cabinet meeting; I attend most of them.  So 
I can't bring forward all the minutes and all the activities and who was at 
cabinet meetings that go back over six years.  I mean be fair, to be 
realistic, I just don't recall every single cabinet meeting and who sat 
around the table.  Cabinet ministers come and go, I'm sure as you know. 
 
The cabinet meetings go on and sometimes they have cabinet without people 
in attendance.  Sometimes there's cabinet without my attendance.  So over 
the last six years there's been many, many cabinet meetings.  We meet in 
cabinet almost every week, and certainly through the session.  So you're 



 

 

asking me to recall an awful lot of meetings specifically.  And so I'd say 
the rule is, cabinet ministers declare themselves, and that's what happens. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Premier, you're playing games.  I've asked you, and 
you know that it doesn't happen that often that a cabinet minister would 
have to exempt himself from a discussion, and you've all ready said that, 
because of a conflict or perceived conflict. 
 
And I'm going to take you back to 1984, Mr. Minister, and I want to read a 
letter into the record.  And after I've read it to the record, I'll be 
passing it across to you for your information.  This letter was dated 
November 21, 1984, and it's from one of your former cabinet colleagues, Bob 
Andrew, the then minister of Finance.  And it's addressed to Mr. Will 
Klein, executive vice-president of Canadian Pioneer Management Limited in 
Regina, Saskatchewan.  And it says: 
 

 Dear Mr. Klein:  Please be advised that the Government of Saskatchewan 
will guarantee the 27.5 million dollar preferred share offering of 
Canadian Pioneer Management Ltd. 

 
 Details of the guarantee are now being reviewed by officials.  You may 

expect the guarantee to be ready in time to allow your new equity to be 
placed prior to December 31st, 1984. 

 
Mr. Premier, this was on November 21 in 1984.  And the reason I'm asking 
you about whether or not any of your cabinet exempted themselves from that 
discussion or from those cabinet meetings or discussions surrounding this, 
is because I also have before me a certificate of title on a piece of 
property in Yorkton, Saskatchewan.  And I want to read the certificate of 
title, the title of who it is listed as being under, and the name is one 
Lorne McLaren, and the property is at lot 3, block 2, Yorkton, plan 9913. 
 
As I look down the certificate of title, I note under the date of 
instrument dated December 15, 1984, a loan made by Lorne McLaren in favour 
of Pioneer Trust in the amount of $190,000.  This is December 15 of 1984, 
Mr. Premier.  And the next line below that, I see on December 15 of 1984 a 
loan from Pioneer Trust to this same minister in the amount of $70,000, Mr. 
Minister.  Now that amounts to loans from Pioneer Trust to your then 
minister of Labour three weeks after your Minister of Finance gave him the 
commitment, gave Pioneer Trust the commitment for $27.5 million in terms of 
a loan guarantee.  Only three weeks after, we see filed on the certificate 
of title loans from that company in the amount of $260,000 from one of your 
cabinet, Mr. Premier, the former minister of Labour. 
 
Now I'm going to ask you again if that minister exempted himself from any 
discussions with respect to this issue.  I'm asking you, and surely that 
will have refreshed your memory, Mr. Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, I can only say to the hon. member that 
the rules of cabinet are clear, and I've read them to the hon. member.  
They've had several cabinet meetings with respect to all kinds of issues 
and particularly that one, and I can't add anything more to the hon. 
member.  I have had many, many, many cabinet meetings and I'm sure that the 



 

 

hon. member knows that when it goes back over the last five or six years -- 
some . . . in some cases where ministers would be there and some cases 
where they would not, and some where I would not be in attendance.  So 
that's all I can provide the information and that is absolutely the case. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well, Mr. Minister, let me recap this again for you.  
On November 21, 1984 your Finance minister tells Pioneer Trust they're 
going to get a guarantee, a loan of twenty-seven and a half million 
dollars.  Three weeks later your minister of Labour files on a certificate 
. . . is filed on a piece of property owned by your minister of Labour, on 
the certificate of title, two loans totalling the amount of $260,000. 
 
Now clearly, Mr. Minister, there is a perception of a conflict of interest.  
And if you weren't aware of that, Mr. Minister, I'd be very surprised.  And 
if your minister never made you aware of the fact that he was pursuing a 
loan and negotiating a loan from this trust company that your government 
was looking at bailing out, and had made a commitment which they later 
reneged on, surely, Mr. Minister, Mr. Premier, your cabinet minister, a 
minister of the Crown, should have come to you or you should have been 
asking the questions as to whether or not there may be some problems in 
this dealing. 
 
And I'm asking you now, Mr. Minister, Mr. Premier, you were made aware of 
it after the fact I'm sure, and I want to know what disciplinary action you 
took, Mr. Premier, against the member from Yorkton?  That's what I'm asking 
you tonight. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the hon. member says that there is 
a perception . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- At least the perception. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- At least the perception.  Well that's what he's dealing 
with.  So I've answered the hon. member's question.  I said that . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- You've avoided the hon. member's question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- No, well look, we're going back five or six years on 
cabinet meetings, and it's extremely . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Look in the minutes then. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Well it's got nothing to do with the minutes.  I mean 
sometimes you'll have cabinet ministers in attendance and sometimes that 
they're not in attendance.  And you can have the minutes and you can look 
at who was there and who's not there.  The rule is before us and the rule 
is followed, Mr. Chairman.  And that's all the information that I can give 
the hon. member.  The rules are followed. 
 
And he can play with perception all he likes.  I mean that's in the world 
of his politics. If he wants to play in that perception, I can't stop him 
from doing that.  I can only say to the hon. member, we have rules and 
they're followed.  And the cabinet ministers abide by them, and that's the 



 

 

case.  And he can deal with perception if he likes, and I'm sure he will in 
his own way. But I will tell him that the rules are as I've stated and the 
cabinet ministers follow them.  To the best of my knowledge, they follow 
them all the time. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Minister, I'm going to ask you . . . Look, pretty 
clear why there was no conflict-of-interest legislation introduced in this 
legislature.  It's because you, sir, don't want any, because you are 
comfortable governing the way you've been governing since 1982 with no 
accountability. 
 
Now I'm asking you this, Mr. Premier: did he tell you that he was pursuing 
a loan from this trust company?  And I want to know -- I want a yes or no 
answer to that -- did he tell you or didn't he? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, we're operating under the same rules that 
the previous administration had and the administration before that, Mr. 
Chairman, the same rules that apply in cabinets across the country.  And 
they are there where cabinet ministers declare themselves, and that's 
what's followed.  And it's followed here and it's followed in other 
jurisdictions.  And that's the case; that's what happens. 
 
Now you ask me which cabinet ministers attended which meetings over the 
last six years and then you . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- That's not what I asked you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- That's exactly what you asked me.  You're asking me on 
what particular dates were cabinet ministers present and when were they 
excused.  Well I mean, that's what . . . I've given you the rules and the 
rules are followed. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Minister, you say in this case the rules were 
followed.  Are you convinced that the rules and the spirit of your 
regulations were followed in this instance?  And if those rules were 
followed, do you feel they're appropriate and do you feel they're tight 
enough and do you feel the public interest has been protected in this 
instance? 
 
(2130) 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, if the hon. member will allow me just one 
paragraph. This is from the Hon. E.M. Culliton in his report to this 
Assembly in November of 1986.  And he says the following, and I believe 
that it's relevant.  Mr. Culliton says this: 
 

 I have concluded a code of ethical conduct is not necessary.  There are a 
number of good reasons for reaching this conclusion.  First and foremost, 
there is nothing in the political history of this province that suggests 
that such a code is necessary.  Secondly, there is no province in Canada 
that has found it necessary to provide such a code.  Thirdly, such a code 
would normally lead to a great deal of political bickering, which is 
something to be avoided and not encouraged.  Finally, it would be 



 

 

impossible to devise a code that would encompass every type of 
unacceptable conduct. 

 
 The result would then be that the code would be a shield and not a 

guide-line.  This is to be avoided.  The right of a Legislative Assembly 
to rule where their members' conduct is or is not acceptable, to be 
decided in the light of prevailing circumstances whatever they may be, 
must not be eroded or undermined. 

 
Now it's the end of the quote.  What Mr. Culliton is saying is fairly 
obvious.  You have a code of guide-lines for cabinet ministers across the 
country, and you do here.  The code is before us, the guide-lines are 
followed.  And as in the case of any professional guide-lines, it will be 
up to the individual.  And that's the case.  It's a professional integrity 
that's there with the code that are in place across Canada. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Premier, by refusing to answer any questions with 
respect to the conflict of interest legislation that clearly isn't ready, 
by refusing to answer as to whether or not this minister told you that 
there was a potential for conflict or was a conflict, by refusing to answer 
those questions, Mr. Minister, what it does, Mr. Premier, is condemns the 
type of government that you've been delivering.  And I want to say to you 
that it's not a proud performance that you're making on behalf of the 
people of this province as their leader, as their Premier.  I think it's a 
disgrace that you will stand in here in your throne speech in March of 
1990, promise conflict of interest legislation; you came in here, make 
excuses for not delivering it; when we raised the potential or a perception 
of a conflict of interest, you don't remember.  Mr. Premier, I'll defer to 
my colleague from The Battlefords because I think he has some other 
questions along this line to ask of you. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Premier, before leaving the topic that was brought up 
by the member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake, I want to ask you that in light 
of the facts . . . And these are facts: we sent you across the letter in 
which the Minister of Finance, Bob Andrew, said that they would guarantee, 
your government would guarantee $27.5 million to Pioneer Trust.  Mr. 
Premier, it's also a fact that we sent across a copy of a certificate of 
title which shows on that certificate of title that the member from 
Yorkton, then the minister of Labour in your government, received two loans 
three weeks after the letter of guarantee from your government.  Those 
loans totalled $260,000, Mr. Premier.  Mr. Premier, my question to you is: 
when you examine the minutes from the cabinet meeting and you find that the 
member from Yorkton did not declare a conflict of interest, will you take 
disciplinary action against that member? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, the rules, as are laid out, are followed 
by cabinet ministers.  There are decisions that are taken in cabinet over a 
long period of time, in some cases several cabinet meetings.  In some cases 
things that are on the cabinet agenda come up and sometimes they don't.  So 
the hon. member at best would be on some sort of a fishing trip to find out 
all the various kinds of members that were at various kinds of cabinet 
meetings over a period of 1984 and '85 when the decisions are being made. 
 



 

 

I can only say to the hon. member: the rules are there and the rules are 
applied and individuals follow them.  And to the best of my knowledge, they 
always follow them.  And I have asked them to follow them and they have 
followed them to the best of my knowledge. 
 
And as former chief Culliton says, you have to depend on the individual 
integrity and honour of the members.  And I do.  I think every Premier in 
the country would do the same, and say it's up to the hon. member to 
declare.  When they declare, that's it.  And then you take it from there.  
And that's all the Premier can do.  And that's what the Premier's expected 
to do. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- There's no fishing trip.  Do you question the validity of 
the letter signed by your former minister of Finance?  Do you question the 
validity of the certificate of title that has the information filed on it, 
Mr. Premier?  We question the validity of your comments, Mr. Premier, 
because you won't tell us whether or not the member declared there was a 
potential conflict of interest when the cabinet decision was made to send 
the letter to Pioneer. 
 
It's your information that's lacking, Mr. Premier, not our information.  
It's you that won't tell us whether or not this one individual cabinet 
minister exempted himself from a meeting where these discussions took 
place.  We're not asking about which cabinet ministers were at which 
cabinet meetings.  We want to know about one specific cabinet minister who 
is no longer a cabinet minister but still sits in your government 
representing the constituency of Yorkton. 
 
Very clearly, Mr. Premier, we want to know whether or not, if you accept 
the validity of these documents we provided with you, and in your search of 
the cabinet minutes if you find that the member did not declare a conflict 
of interest, will you take disciplinary action against that member?  Very 
simply that, Mr. Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I have said again and again this 
evening that the code of ethical conduct that is applied to cabinet 
ministers here is the same as other jurisdictions, and I believe that the 
ministers have lived up to that code to the best of my knowledge.  And they 
have, as far as I know, after the scores and scores and probably even 
hundreds of cabinet meetings that I've been at with my fellow colleagues, 
that they have always been honourable and lived up to it. 
 
So I can only say to the hon. member: to the best of my knowledge, that is 
the case.  In this case, I would say to the hon. member: it would be the 
same as the conduct and the expectations and the code that is applied 
across the piece, in our cabinet and any cabinet you'd have in this 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
I would add to the hon. member that was asking for more codes and more 
legislative codes, one other quote from Mr. Culliton, I think, is 
appropriate.  He says, and I quote: 
 

 I have grave reservations as to the wisdom of attempting to establish a 



 

 

code of ethical conduct for members of the legislature.  There can be 
conduct that is unacceptable and contrary to the standard of conduct that 
the public is entitled to expect from its elected representatives.  But it 
would impossible to formulate a code that would encompass all possible 
situations. 

 
I just go on to say to the hon. member that it is based on personal 
integrity and honour, and that's the best way that we can deal with it here 
in this House.  So the hon. member in opposition obviously can . . . I mean 
question the personalities of the members on this side of the House because 
you would rather be here and us over there. 
 
But the point is the same code is applied to cabinet ministers down through 
the decades in the province of Saskatchewan.  This administration was 
elected in '82 and again re-elected in 1986 and we had the same code and 
the same guide-lines. 
 
And since 1984 we were re-elected, and you know that.  So that the people 
have made their judgement and the people in democracy are always right.  
And so they certainly looked at this in 1986 and said, look, fair ball.  We 
re-elected the members based on this code and based on the fact that we did 
not bail out trust companies.  We said, no.  It's impossible.  We can't do 
this. 
 
So I would say to the hon. member that I expect cabinet ministers to live 
up to the code, and as far as I know they have. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Well what about if they don't?  What about if they don't?  
What do you do about it?  Nothing?  Do you stand and cover up?  Are you 
going to go back and examine cabinet minutes? 
 
Well I want to talk to you about something else concerning the same member 
that it won't be in your cabinet minutes.  And I'll send across to you a 
copy of a letter from the law firm of Rusnak Balacko Kachur & Rusnak.  This 
letter was written on May 30, 1985 and it's written to McLaren's Music & 
Trophies Ltd., 44 Broadway East, Yorkton, Saskatchewan.  And I quote: 
 

 Dear Sirs:  Re: Edward A Laurence versus McLaren's Music & Trophies Ltd., 
Lorne McLaren and Blaine McLaren.  Please be advised that we are the 
solicitors for Mr. Ed Laurence. 

 
 A loan in the amount of $150,000.00 has been made to McLaren's Music & 

Trophies Ltd. secured by a Promissory Note in that amount, dated June 1, 
1983.  The Promissory Note is hereby demanded to be paid forthwith. 

 
 I trust you will govern yourself accordingly, however, if you have any 

questions or desire any further information please contact me.  Yours 
truly, Ronald Balacko. 

 
Now, Mr. Premier . . . Have you sent a copy of that across? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Yes. 
 



 

 

Mr. Anguish: -- You have a copy of that letter.  Mr. Premier, I would point 
out to you that one Edward Laurence is a fairly high-profile Conservative 
in the Yorkton area.  And subsequent to this loan that was given out for 
$150,000 interest free -- no interest on the loan -- Mr. Laurence is one of 
the principals of a building, Broadcast Place, where the court-house all of 
a sudden moves into Broadcast Place. 
 
Now I'm wondering, Mr. Premier, if you're aware that there's a million 
dollar contract between your government and the people who own Broadcast 
Place, and also that there was a $150,000 loan attached to it.  Do you 
think there could be perceived a conflict of interest in that situation, 
Mr. Premier?  And in fact, has the member from Yorkton discussed this issue 
with you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, I would just go back and respond to the 
hon. member with respect to the code that is before the cabinet ministers 
and the guide-lines that are there.  They are followed by the cabinet 
ministers; they are, to the best of my knowledge, responded to in a very 
professional way.  And I expect them to do that.  And any Premier who has a 
cabinet does expect them to do exactly that.  The code that is outlined . . 
. (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Chairman, the hon. members would 
probably like to know that the guide-lines recommended by Mr. Culliton, I 
can read to him again. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Don't bother. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- They say, don't bother.  So I'll just say the same 
guide-lines apply all the time; the code applies all the time.  People are 
there on their honour and their integrity, and they declare themselves.  
And when they do declare themselves and they're not there during the 
cabinet meeting, and I expect them to do that.  That's the guide-lines that 
applied then and apply now and across the country, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- We accept that's there what you say is there.  What we want 
to know is what you do about it when it's broken.  That's what we want to 
know.  And I repeat to you again: I've sent you across the letter from 
legal counsel.  Now what has happened, it appears that the member from 
Yorkton, at that time the minister of Labour, received an interest-free 
loan from Mr. Ed Laurence, a co-owner of Broadcast Place company, on July 
1, 1983. 
 
A few months later, the Government of Saskatchewan awarded a five-year 
lease to the same company for housing the provincial court-house.  Now, Mr. 
Premier, it seems to me that a member of cabinet should in fact declare 
that he has got a loan, interest free, from a private investor who is 
trying to secure a contract to provide tenant space for your provincial 
court.  I'm wondering, Mr. Premier, if you can tell us whether the minister 
of Labour at that time declared to you that he had business dealings with 
the people who in fact provided tenant space whereby you could move the 
court-house into.  Can you tell us whether he declared that to you, Mr. 
Premier? 
 
(2145) 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, the hon. member can almost be heard, I'm 
sure, in Newfoundland as he hollers from his seat.  And he can go on his 
fishing trips if he likes.  I will just say to the hon. member again, the 
code is followed.  The guide-lines are followed.  The cabinet ministers are 
on their honour to follow those and they do.  They declare themselves when 
there's a conflict, and that is the way it operates.  That's the way it 
should operate, and that's the way it has operated. 
 
Now the hon. member knows those are the rules in a federal cabinet and a 
provincial cabinet.  And you expect your people to follow those.  And the 
guide-lines is recommended by somebody as honourable as Mr. Culliton . . . 
says those are the best guide-lines because it's based on individual 
integrity and your honour.  And that's the way you have to operate.  And 
you can go on all the fishing trips you like, but that's the code.  That's 
the way it operates, and that's the way I expect them to operate.  And as 
far as I know, that's the way they have operated, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Well my question to you, Mr. Premier, is this: are you 
going to follow up on the documentation that we gave you here this evening 
in this Assembly?  Will you investigate the cabinet minutes to determine 
whether or not the member that we referred to declared a conflict of 
interest or absented himself from those meetings?  And will you provide 
discipline to that member if he has broken the guide-lines that you are so 
high and mighty about here this evening? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, I always follow up, and I do expect the 
cabinet ministers to live up to the code and to the guide-lines, so the 
hon. member can rest assured that I do. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Just very simply, I'll put it to you again one more time: 
will you follow up on the documents that we gave you this evening? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, I always follow up on the documents that 
are presented and any other things that are put forward here in this 
legislature, and I expect the cabinet ministers and former cabinet 
ministers to live up to the code -- and that view has not changed and will 
not change, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Will you examine the cabinet minutes to determine whether 
or not the member from Yorkton declared a conflict of interest or absented 
himself from the meetings? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, I have said to the hon. member that I 
have responsibility to make sure that the cabinet ministers live up to 
their codes and their guide-lines, and I will make sure that they do.  And 
the hon. member has asked me to check on this particular case, and I will 
check on all particular cases to make sure that they do. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Will you report back in writing to us to tell us what your 
conclusions are after your investigation, Mr. Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, I will advise the hon. member of any 



 

 

information that I find that is pertinent to this particular question. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Premier, I think this exemplifies the need why there 
should be conflict-of-interest legislation, and I think there should be 
more of a scrutiny process as to what's done within your government.  We 
get many, many examples where there is less information to the public than 
what there has been previously, whether it's through the public accounts 
process or whether it's through Executive Council. 
 
Mr. Premier, we expect that you will look into the cases that we brought up 
this evening, and rather than make up some kind of an answer to come back 
to us, we ask you to have due diligence in your pursuit of the matter that 
we brought up to you here tonight.  And we will expect and look forward to 
that report back from you in the very near future, Mr. Premier. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Premier, I'd like 
to pursue this line a little bit more.  I'm going to be talking a little 
later with you and asking you some questions regarding the impact of some 
of your government's policies as it relates to families, young people, and 
seniors. 
 
But I guess one of the concerns that I think people of Saskatchewan have 
about your government is maybe exemplified by what we've seen tonight, and 
that is the way you people do business.  It's the way you people relate to 
the public.  And, Mr. Premier, I would suggest that this level, the way you 
people relate to the public of Saskatchewan, is in fact in some ways more 
serious than the mismanagement of some of the economic and social and 
financial policies, because it in fact chips away at our democratic 
practices and our democratic traditions and institutions in this province 
which . . . We've got a proud heritage of adhering to democracy in this 
province.  But you people clearly over your eight years have not listened 
to the public of Saskatchewan. 
 
This Consensus Saskatchewan approach, which is your brain-child, I 
understand -- despite the fact that many of your cabinet colleagues saw it 
for what it was -- basically it's a last-ditch effort to try and save your 
government and project an image that you really care what the public of 
Saskatchewan think.  And you've clearly demonstrated that that is not 
sincere over your eight-year term, Mr. Premier.  Your approach is one of 
confrontation.  Whether it's ordinary working men and women or teachers or 
other groups, it's been one of confrontation. 
 
Your approach is clearly one of intimidation.  Members of your cabinet have 
attacked people who are concerned about the environment.  Members of your 
cabinet have attacked ordinary working men and women for wanting to 
collectively bargain.  Your Minister of Consumer Affairs has attacked 
Principal investors, blaming them for the fact that that company failed 
when you people weren't doing your job. 
 
So your approach has been one of intimidation.  Your approach has been one 
of withholding information from this Assembly, withholding information from 
the public of Saskatchewan.  I would suggest, Mr. Premier, that that's 
very, very serious.  That's a breach of the integrity of this Assembly and 



 

 

has contributed towards a sense of broken public trust. 
 
That's a concern of your government.  Your government has made secret 
deals.  We only find out the results of the arrangements, these deals -- 
whether it's Cargill or Weyerhaeuser or other sweetheart deals you have -- 
where the information is leaked to us.  And you don't seem to share the 
information in an open manner. 
 
That's what the auditor said.  Your administration started out this term, 
Mr. Premier, in a very deceptive way, where your Finance minister admitted 
that after the election that in fact you were $800 million out in your 
budget deficit projection.  And that was a very conscious decision.  I 
think the public of Saskatchewan believe that.  It was not an error; you 
knew that situation. 
 
I think we've seen here where there's no conflict-of-interest guide-lines.  
We've seen tonight, the last hour we've focused on that, and you refuse to 
answer the questions that were asked.  And again I think you've downplayed 
what the Saskatchewan public see as a very, very serious matter, Mr. 
Premier.  And I don't think any viewers who are watching believe that you 
did not remember whether or not the member from Yorkton declared a conflict 
of interest or not.  I don't think the public believes that. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- All you have to do is turn around and ask him. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- That's right.  He was here. 
 
But no fair tendering practices, Mr. Premier, is a concern that a lot of 
small-business people have across this province, whether it's . . . This is 
why you've got the issue with the STC (Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company).  Many buildings, there seems to be conflict around much real 
estate because of a lack of fair tendering.  I'm well aware in my riding of 
a liquor store that was awarded that didn't meet the specs, Mr. Premier, 
and have to ask why that's the case. 
 
But rampant patronage is a hallmark of your administration.  And, Mr. 
Premier, you know, these issues are very serious and they have to rest on 
your shoulders, sir.  The string of broken promises, the broken promises in 
taxation; I won't review them because they're very clear to people of the 
province. 
 
But you broke your promise regarding the SaskEnergy privatization.  And I 
would like you to know that the vast majority of the Saskatchewan people 
believe that if you were re-elected, you will privatize SaskEnergy.  So 
your credibility, Mr. Premier, that the behaviours of your government that 
I've tried to outline here that are well established in the public mind, 
these behaviours are anti-democratic. 
 
You people flaunt the laws regarding the environment.  You people flaunted 
the law regarding SaskEnergy and the Securities Commission a year ago.  The 
auditor said, the Provincial Auditor, an officer of this Assembly, said 
that your government breaks it's own laws -- breaks its own laws.  Your 
Minister of Justice of all people then ran at the auditor, and you defended 



 

 

him -- you defended him, Mr. Premier. 
 
And I don't know if you really comprehend how very serious this is.  You 
talk about democracy around the world, you talk about East Germany.  All of 
the Speech from the Thrones from the members of your cabinet started out 
their speeches by appreciating the freedoms and the wall going down around 
East Germany.  And your government has practised -- actively practised -- 
eroding many of the democratic traditions and institutions and practices 
and conventions that have been well established over many administrations 
in this Assembly and in this province. 
 
The auditor said that your government is not financially accountable.  Your 
Minister of Justice attacked him and you supported him.  You actively, Mr. 
Premier, ignore the public of Saskatchewan; you say you're interested, 
you've got these Consensus Saskatchewan hearings going on.  But, Mr. 
Premier, the lack of public input and involvement -- and this maybe 
exemplifies your lack of concern for public interest and public input and 
involvement -- your lack of concern about any input on Meech Lake is 
something that disturbs a lot of people around this province.  It disturbs 
a lot of people around this province, sir, that in three years -- three 
years -- you haven't had the courtesy and the interest and the sincerity to 
involve the public of Saskatchewan.  That exemplifies your lack of concern 
for public input, and this is not a laughing matter, Mr. Premier. 
 
Your late filing of annual reports . . . you know, Mr. Premier -- I don't 
think you know this -- but we got today an annual report, tabled today, 
1986-87.  Three annual reports today on one department.  But going back to 
1986-87, the first year of your term, you're at the end of your term now.  
Now that's the kind of lack of financial accountability that the Provincial 
Auditor was talking about.  That's the lack of financial accountability 
that the public of Saskatchewan is concerned about.  You can't view that as 
being accountable.  We can't even examine your expenditures.  Not only are 
they late, but they're of such a poor quality.  There's less and less 
information in these annual reports than there have been in years gone by. 
 
You're allowing your officials, your government officials, your cabinet 
ministers to sabotage public accounts.  I happen to know that there's 
ministerial interference in the hiring of staff in many of your 
departments.  Your Crown corporations officials are refusing to allow us to 
call some of the senior officials to that forum for cross-examination and 
questioning to answer questions that the public has a right to know about. 
 
And you continue to hide in Crown corporations huge expenditures which we 
have no access to, which the Provincial Auditor has no access to, directly.  
And the Provincial Auditor was concerned about that.  You people have 
gerrymandered the boundaries, the electoral boundaries, in a way which were 
in 1986, when the opposition, the New Democrats, won the popular vote by 
one per cent and your government won 13 more seats . . . on analysis with 
the new boundaries, the new gerrymandered boundaries, based on the same 
results where the New Democrats would have won by 1 per cent, you would win 
by 15 seats.  So you've made the electoral process more unfair under your 
government.  You will go to any length to hold on to political power. 
 



 

 

(2200) 
 
Mr. Premier, your government -- and ultimately you because you're the 
Premier; you're the person overall responsible -- your government chooses 
to ignore the Ombudsman's report whenever it's convenient.  Whether it's in 
child welfare, not acting on the recommendation that the Ombudsman makes, 
or the Principal Trust affair where the Ombudsman said that your government 
was clearly accountable for that, you've chosen to ignore that. 
 
Mr. Premier, my point here tonight is that there is a long list of areas 
where your government, under your leadership, has eroded the democratic 
principles and traditions of this province, and has eroded democracy 
itself.  As I say, you talk about democracy and freedom in eastern Europe 
while you practise and you allow to practise in this Assembly a very, very 
scary situation where you're engaging in some of the concerns that you talk 
about being espoused by other governments. 
 
I could go on and on.  The Canadian Police Information Centre has 
information on Saskatchewan residents.  You refuse to share what 
information that they have.  That's a violation of our human rights, I 
would suggest.  You keep promising freedom of information legislation.  You 
promised that in 1985, '86. In your throne speech you promised it again.  
And we understand from the Deputy Premier a few days ago that you're still 
studying it.  So no freedom of information legislation. 
 
Mr. Premier, all of this has added up in the mind of the public of 
Saskatchewan to a lost confidence in you and your government, to have 
broken public trust.  And I would suggest to you, Mr. Premier, that you 
have lost the moral authority to govern in Saskatchewan.  You have lost the 
moral authority to govern in this province by your actions.  You have lost 
the right to call yourself a democratic government.  I am aware of the 
seriousness of that allegation.  You're out of touch, Mr. Premier.  The 
public sees your government as deceptive and hypocritical and dishonest, 
and you're not going to fool them by Consensus Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Premier, in my view, and the view of a lot of the public of 
Saskatchewan, under your leadership -- and this is more serious than your 
mismanagement, which is serious and is creating a lot of hardships for 
Saskatchewan people -- but you've lost all sense of ethics in terms of how 
you're running this government, and all sense of decency.  And I believe 
that this is a blemish, a major blemish on the record of the Saskatchewan 
government and that the public of Saskatchewan will not forget this. 
 
Now you haven't been listening to me, Mr. Premier, and you still aren't.  
But I'll wait until I get your attention, and then I'll ask you a question. 
 
Mr. Premier, I wonder if you could tell me when your government intends to 
introduce freedom-of-information legislation?  You promised it in the 
throne speech.  We've come to the end of the session.  We've been talking 
about it for five years and we've seen nothing.  You're rationalizing why 
it's not possible -- too much money, still some things to consider, still 
under consideration.  You've had five years to study this.  As we found 
tonight in terms of conflict of information guide-lines, you simply are not 



 

 

prepared.  You are not prepared to see freedom of information brought into 
this legislature because there is simply too much you're trying to hide.  
Could you answer: when do you plan to bring in freedom of information? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, with respect to freedom of information, 
there are a couple or three considerations that we have before us in terms 
of review.  In talking with other jurisdictions and how they operate, one 
is the cost of freedom-of-information provision in terms of a new 
bureaucracy and how you would set it up, where it would be housed.  Some 
have looked at under the Ombudsman and others have looked under a special 
new kind of mechanism. 
 
Then at the same time, in looking at other jurisdictions, there's the whole 
question of a privacy provision, because you have to respect the 
confidentiality of much of the information that is in the public service as 
you deal with private individuals.  And in many cases we find that the 
privacy commissioner and the privacy part of the freedom-of-information 
package is more onerous and almost dominates the freedom-of-information 
side of the new equation. 
 
So we're examining both of those and we're looking at other jurisdictions.  
So from a cost point of view, from a bureaucracy point of view, from where 
you set it up in terms of what kind of department and how it's examined, 
and in terms of how do you respect individual rights in terms of their 
privacy, because individual rights are very important.  And what a privacy 
commissioner and the provisions would be under that role is a very 
important question.  So we are examining those in some detail, we've looked 
at other administrations across the country, and when we have a package 
that we think that is reasonable, we will be bringing it forward. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Well, Mr. Premier, I understand what you're saying.  I 
don't personally accept that.  We have introduced a Bill into this House -- 
a private members' Bill -- that has been looked at by many, many groups in 
the province including the Saskatchewan Association of Taxpayers who are 
very concerned about your lack of accountability and your lack of sharing 
information. 
 
We have looked at other jurisdictions, Mr. Premier, where this legislation 
is in place, and we are assured that this legislation, as drafted in the 
private member's bill which you have access to, and as drafted in this 
democratic reform paper, not only has the legislation as drafted here been 
effective, it has not created a bureaucracy. 
 
We're not calling for setting up a bureaucracy.  The process is reasonable.  
It's a process that has worked in other jurisdictions.  What we want is the 
right of citizens to access information that is of public nature, that they 
have a right to know on the one hand, and to balance that with the privacy 
rights and safeguards of individuals on the other hand. 
 
And this paper and that Bill has 10 or 12 areas that respect the privacy 
rights.  Obviously we know that that's important.  And I would suggest that 
you don't listen to the Minister of Justice, who's hiding behind this 
notion just as a way of diffusing the issue, that it will create a big 



 

 

bureaucracy.  You haven't properly protected the rights of citizens.  
You're not concerned about protecting the rights of citizens when you won't 
share information with us about what information you've got about citizens 
on the security commission, the police security, and you're arrangement 
with the federal government.  I don't hear the Minister of Justice being 
concerned about privacy rights being violated there.  So I don't accept 
your explanation of why you have not introduced freedom-of-information 
legislation. 
 
And I want to switch if I can, for just a few minutes, to the whole area of 
families, Mr. Premier.  Because I've heard you talk many times about the 
value of families, the value of our young people.  In fact, in 1982, you're 
the man that was committed to bringing the young people home.  You've 
talked many times about our pioneers and the value of our senior citizens.  
And yet, Mr. Premier, there's a paradox in all of this, because what you 
say, the rhetoric that you use, and then how your policies impact on 
families is quite a different matter. 
 
Mr. Minister, Mr. Premier, eight months ago you set up a Family ministry, 
and I have a lot of personal respect for your Family Minister.  But eight 
months ago you set up a Family ministry.  And we've talked about the 
mandate in this House with the Bill and the mandate is fine and I gave the 
minister credit for that.  But what we need, Mr. Premier, is more than a 
mandate.  We need a will to bring in policies that are supportive to 
families, economic and financial and social policies.  And the true test is 
in eight months, what has been the impact with the influence of the 
Minister of the Families on the average Saskatchewan family?  Has anything 
changed?  That's the true test to whether or not in the last eight months 
Saskatchewan families are better off. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister or Mr. Premier, since this minister, with all due respect 
to him, has been the Minister of the Family, we have gone from the second 
highest rate of family poverty to having now the highest rate of family 
poverty -- in this province, the highest rate of family poverty.  We've got 
45,000 families in this province who live in poverty, Mr. Premier.  We've 
got 64,000 children living in families, according to Statistics Canada, who 
live below the poverty line. 
 
Mr. Premier, we've got 12 food banks in the province.  In 1989 they 
provided food to some 29,000 people; 50 to 60 per cent of those 
Saskatchewan residents were children; 1990, it's my understanding that the 
demand on food banks is up 25 per cent.  Not only that, since we've had the 
new Family ministry, two new food banks have opened in this province.  Now 
what has been your budget response?  Your budget response has been to 
allocate $740,000 to fight family hunger -- $740,000 for 64,000 children, 
the equivalent of Chuck Childers's salary for one year.  Not only that -- 
in three months you people haven't even been able to allocate that 
$740,000.  It's 3 cents a day per hungry child to start with, and in three 
months you still haven't allocated it.  Twelve dollars a year per hungry 
child is what you allocated in your budget. 
 
What else did you do?  What else was your response to young people?  You 
cut $500,000 from youth employment programs.  That was your response to 



 

 

dealing with youth unemployment. 
 
So, Mr. Premier, one is left to conclude that despite the good intentions 
of your Family ministry, given the record that things have not improved, 
that this is a public relations initiative; otherwise the situation 
wouldn't be getting worse.  The Family minister's job is to evaluate the 
impact of government policies on families and then to suggest changes and 
improvements to you and your ministers.  And the situation is getting 
worse. 
 
(2215) 
 
A thousand farm families a year are leaving the farm.  Your government 
putting pressure on family farms through foreclosures; your government 
putting pressure on family farms through your deregulation support, your ad 
hoc programs, and your free trade agreement.  Your government, the last 
three years in a row, we've had a record level of family bankruptcies: 
1990, family bankruptcies are up 27 per cent over 1989, which was a record 
level, Mr. Premier.  So obviously small-business people aren't feeling your 
support. 
 
Out-migration -- you're the man that was going to bring the children home.  
Well, Mr. Premier, in the last five years, up to May of this year, there 
was a net out-migration from this province of some 77,000 people; 50 to 60 
per cent of those people are under the age of 34 years. 
 
And so, Mr. Premier, you're forcing young families and young people to 
leave the province in record numbers.  Now that's objective information.  
That's clear to all families.  Very few families have been untouched by 
out-migration. 
 
The economy.  Your preoccupation with privatization.  You phased out the 
department of co-ops.  You gave up on the co-op approach.  But your 
policies, your privatization policies, Mr. Premier, has meant that 
Saskatchewan had the poorest job-creation record in 1989 of all the 
provinces.  Saskatchewan was the only province whose labour force fell in 
1989.  This is public information.  Your Family minister should be advising 
you of this stuff. 
 
You've had health-care cuts which have put pressure on families.  All three 
of the education systems are in a crisis.  And you've just finished your 
confrontation with teachers. 
 
I suppose in the whole area of taxation on families best exemplifies the 
pressure you have put on families.  And you've broken promises around 
taxes.  You were going to phase out the sales tax.  You weren't going to 
bring in a flat tax.  The public knows that you have done the contrary to 
those. 
 
But you have shifted, Mr. Premier, you have allowed to shift taxes from 
corporations, losses of revenue from natural resources, to average 
families.  Taxes on average families have gone up 119 per cent -- 119 per 
cent. 



 

 

 
An Hon. Member: -- He must be in trouble in his riding. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- No, as a matter of fact I'm not in trouble in my riding.  
I'm not in trouble in my riding.  You're in trouble in the province, Mr. 
Premier.  I'm not in trouble in my riding. 
 
Don't you worry about me.  You worry about running a clean government with 
policies that help families, not hurt them.  That's what you should worry 
about.  But you've put taxes on families 119 per cent since '82 and 
corporations only 18 per cent.  And I'm not even mentioning the gas tax and 
the lottery tax and the used-car tax. 
 
Mr. Premier, you run with a government with a few winners, a few winners, 
and many, many losers -- many, many losers.  What we've seen in this 
province by you and your ministers, your abandoned ministers, is an 
incredible record of mismanagement and waste. 
 
And, Mr. Premier, I know you find this humorous, but it isn't humorous.  
This is not humorous.  Saskatchewan young people, families, and seniors are 
paying the price.  Mr. Premier, many Saskatchewan families are feeling 
desperate and they're feeling humiliated and they're feeling -- the 45,000 
poor families in this province -- are feeling a sense of desperation.  And 
they've lost their dignity.  And this is not funny. 
 
I hope, Mr. Premier, that you have taken the time to read the Red Cross 
study that was recently released, because I think that will give you a 
pretty clear message about what's happening in Saskatchewan.  And in a very 
gentle way, in a very gentle way, this organization lays some 
responsibility at your doorstep. 
 
Mr. Premier, I would suggest that you have placed . . . your policies have 
placed incredible stress on Saskatchewan families, Saskatchewan young 
people.  I don't know why on earth since 1986-87 with the high unemployment 
rate we've got here, you have allowed $7.4 million to be cut from youth 
summer employment programs.  For the life of me, I don't know why you've 
allowed that.  So you're placing more stress on families and young people, 
and then you cut the services: 750 women turned away from transition houses 
in 1989.  So you cut the supports at a time when families need more 
supports. 
 
Mr. Premier, I would say that in terms of your mismanagement there are two 
areas that stand out that are of particular concern to Saskatchewan people.  
And one is the debt -- the incredible debt that you have allowed this 
province to get into, a debt that future generations are going to have to 
pay for, a debt that our young people are going to have to pay for.  And, 
Mr. Premier, you have bankrupted this province.  This province is on 
welfare thanks to your mismanagement. 
 
The second area, Mr. Premier . . . and I know you got a long letter from 
one of my constituents about 3 months ago, and you wrote her back a 14 page 
letter.  And one of the major concerns she has is that you have given away 
assets of this province that our seniors and builders took many years to 



 

 

build up, and you have given those away.  And this woman that wrote you was 
concerned, as are many seniors.  They're concerned that their grandchildren 
are having to leave this province that they helped to build.  And this 
woman was sick about that.  And she wrote you a very, very compassionate, 
very emotional letter that pleaded with you not to be giving away 
Saskatchewan's resources, to maintain the control of Saskatchewan resources 
to Saskatchewan people.  That's what she asked you to do. 
 
So, Mr. Premier, what I would say is that . . . and what I'm hearing from 
people in my constituency is that you're on the wrong side of Saskatchewan 
families.  You're on the right . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . yes, 
this is your last term.  I'm glad you recognize that.  You're on the right 
side of Chuck Childers.  You're on the right side of Cargill.  You're on 
the right side of Weyerhaeuser and GigaText, but you're on the wrong side 
of Saskatchewan's families.  You're on the wrong side of Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
Your member from Wilkie -- and I want to know whether or not you agree with 
this; this is going to be my question, so be thinking about it, be thinking 
about it -- your member from Wilkie . . . but first of all you said in the 
budget, the throne speech, that you were going to eliminate hunger.  You 
said you were going to eliminate hunger.  Well the family minister doesn't 
want to hear this, but you said you were going to eliminate hunger.  Two 
days later the family minister said we didn't mean we were going to 
eliminate hunger; we meant we were going to reduce hunger. 
 
A week later, your member from Wilkie said it would be irresponsible to say 
that we could eliminate hunger.  That's what he said.  In the bread basket 
of the world, your member from Wilkie said we could not afford to eliminate 
child hunger in this province. 
 
Mr. Premier, I know that you don't agree with that.  You have children.  I 
think the member from Wilkie has grandchildren.  Now you wouldn't want you 
children . . . This is not funny, Mr. Premier.  This is not funny.  You 
would not want your children going hungry.  You would not want your 
children going hungry.  You would not want anybody saying that we can't 
afford to feed your children.  Your member from Wilkie says that we can't 
afford to, and you laugh about it.  Well I would say, Mr. Premier, that 
typifies the insensitivity of you and your government and that is not 
acceptable, sir.  That is not acceptable. 
 
Now, Mr. Premier, what families of Saskatchewan need from your government 
is they need some openness and honesty.  They need some sincerity.  They 
need some compassion.  They need opportunities, and families need to be 
able to live with a sense of dignity.  All families want security.  Seventy 
. . . $740,000 towards 45,000 poor families is not going to give families a 
sense of dignity.  We've got the highest family poverty rate in the country 
and you've got to deal with that.  You're responsible, Mr. Premier, and you 
must respond. 
 
And I don't want you to get up in a few minutes and give me rhetoric . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well listen, I'm quoting tonight from public 
information about . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I'm going to talk 



 

 

about drug abuse because you're the government that subsidizes alcohol 
going into northern Saskatchewan, but you took away the subsidy to food.  
Now how can you live with yourself, Mr. Premier?  How can you sleep?  And 
you're laughing about that. 
 
Seventy per cent of the families living in the North living in poverty, and 
I've asked four of your ministers, including the Minister of Health and the 
Minister of the Family if you would reverse that decision in northern 
Saskatchewan  
_- quit subsidizing booze and start subsidizing food.  And they have not 
answered that, and I want you to answer that, Mr. Premier, tonight.  I want 
you to answer that question. 
 
So, Mr. Premier, if I can have your attention, if I can have your 
attention, Mr. Premier, I would like to ask you two questions, and if you 
don't answer them, I'll get up and ask them again.  First of all, do you 
agree with the member from Wilkie that Saskatchewan cannot afford to 
eliminate child hunger?  That's my first question.  My second question is, 
will you tonight make a commitment that your government will cease 
subsidizing alcohol to northern Saskatchewan and transfer that subsidy over 
to food, basic food for northern residents?  Will you answer those two 
questions, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, the hon. member touched on several items 
associated with hunger, and families, and food, and co-operatives.  And I 
could just touch on a few bits of information that he might be interested 
in.  And perhaps I could start with the whole question of the family and 
how we have been spending renewed money and effort to stay close to 
families, and I will just list several of them so the hon. member can be 
aware of them. 
 
We have a new Minister of the Family, as the hon. member knows, and the 
Family Foundation, that was established in '89 to consult, and evaluate, 
bridge concerns, provide information.  I did raise the family at the annual 
premiers' conference in 1988.  We hosted a national symposium about 
families in 1989.  We provided $85,000 to sponsor forums.  And I would like 
to point out to the hon. member that the family forums in the province of 
Saskatchewan have hosted 61 forums in 23 Saskatchewan communities, and over 
15,000 -- or close to 16,000 -- participants, Saskatchewan people, have 
come out to the forums to be involved.  And it ranged on family issues, as 
the hon. member might know, that covered a large combination of things that 
people were concerned about including: divorce; family life improvement 
programs; family violence; better parenting; issues associated with coping 
strategies for the 1990s and change; family festival workshops; drug and 
alcohol awareness; the Everyone Wins programs; teen parent relationships 
that are significant particularly today; the family, the necessary and 
secure base; parenting and information about them; the convention of 
communities. 
 
So thousands and thousands and thousands of individuals have come out to 
the family forums and very much appreciative of the fact that these forums 
are taking place in dealing with problems associated with many of the 
issues that people across Canada and certainly across Saskatchewan are 



 

 

concerned about. 
 
With respect to individuals, we have allocated a great deal of money to 
address hunger.  We have breakfast programs in 18 community schools now in 
Regina and Saskatoon; a child-hunger education program.  We have 
school-family centres in Regina and Saskatoon.  Increasing of social 
assistance increases that are financially, I think, significant.  
Obviously, as I mentioned earlier tonight, increased the minimum wage by 11 
per cent in January and another 10 per cent in the first part of the year. 
 
So the situation with respect to increased awareness and involvement of 
families across the province of Saskatchewan, dealing with a host of 
issues, a range of issues that they think important, is very well attended.  
Almost 16,000 people have attended these meetings. 
 
(2230) 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Family poverty is going up. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- The hon. member says that the level of poverty is up in 
the province of Saskatchewan.  And I can say to the hon. member that nobody 
is more aware of  
 Drural poverty than I am as a result of an awful lot of conditions in 
agriculture.  If you look at 87 . . . I believe that farm income is 
declined by 87 per cent in 1990.  And the hon. member may not be familiar 
with the agricultural situation, but I can tell the hon. member that this 
administration certainly is. 
 
We are putting $277 million into the farm economy within the next few 
weeks.  We have allocated, between this administration and the national 
government, about $8 billion into the farm economy.  And that's what, as 
you know, addresses the figures and the numbers that he has raised. 
 
I mean if you want to separate out the farm economy from the urban economy, 
you will see a tremendous difference in the statistical information that 
you're talking about.  So, to be fair, when you have drought and you have 
low farm income . . . And certainly it's been documented by co-operatives. 
The Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and others have said the big change in the 
numbers are associated with a decline in farm income. 
 
Now when farm income falls to zero -- in fact it was estimated this year to 
be minus $9 million net -- now that's not a lot of farm income.  Now I will 
tell you, however, that despite low farm income, farmers do feed their 
children, farm families do look after their relatives and their friends and 
their neighbours, and farm families do have a resilience.  So I don't think 
it's fair to them for you to make the allegation that there's low net farm 
income and as a result farm families don't feed their children. 
 
I think to be very fair, all those numbers that you're talking with . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well you've got to defend the numbers as 
well as I do.  So you want to stand there and talk about the numbers.  The 
numbers are skewed as a result of a net decline in farm income.  That's the 
truth.  That's the fact. 



 

 

 
Farm income is down 87 per cent, and in fact it was forecast to be zero.  
Now that will skew the numbers that you're talking about.  Farm families at 
the same time feed their children, and don't tell anybody across the 
province that they don't feed their children.  It's not fair to them or 
anybody else to leave that impression as a result of the statistics that 
you're presenting here tonight. 
 
If you want to, you can separate them out.  You represent an urban riding 
and you can talk about the statistics in the riding that you represent.  
Fair enough.  But don't take those statistics that include all of rural 
Saskatchewan and apply them to your urban riding.  Because you're not going 
to fool anybody.  You're not going to fool anybody in Saskatoon; you're not 
going to fool anybody in this legislature when you're starting to play with 
those numbers.  So I'll just make the point to the hon. member, farm income 
in a province that has 50 per cent of the farm land in Canada, is down 87 
per cent.  And that is significant and it would have an impact on the 
numbers. 
 
Let me just add to the hon. member.  He mentioned co-operatives and the 
fact that I might have given up on the co-operative approach.  Isn't that 
the term that you used . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Okay, let's 
take a look at co-operatives.  There have been 100 new co-operatives 
incorporated in 1989-90, for a total of 1,200 registered co-operatives.  We 
can talk about a few joint efforts with the co-op. 
 
The NewGrade upgrader is close to a billion dollars, creating a large 
number of jobs.  It's the largest project in the history of Saskatchewan, 
and it's built as a joint venture with a co-operative.  And that is the 
Progressive Conservative administration in the province of Saskatchewan, 
dealing with the co-operative, making the largest project in the history of 
the province.  You didn't acknowledge that.  I think it'd be fair if you 
did acknowledge it.  In fact I haven't heard members opposite ever 
acknowledge the NewGrade upgrader and the fact that it's built with a joint 
venture -- the Government of Saskatchewan, a Conservative government, and a 
co-operative; the largest project in the history of Saskatchewan. 
 
Secondly, if you look at the results of the new health care card and the 
research that's gone into it and the publishing of that card and the 
manufacturing of that card, it's by Co-op Data Services.  Now that card is 
being marketed all over the place, and particularly -- I'm proud to say 
that I had the opportunity to meet with the Minister of Health in Belgium; 
and other provinces and jurisdictions are looking at it.  And that is in 
co-operation with who?  Who's that with?  A co-operative. 
 
When you look at Prairie Malt, and the fact that it is now owned by the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and an American large company -- that's done with a 
co-operative.  The Saskatchewan Wheat Pool has been very instrumental in 
diversification and I give them full credit.  The same applies to the new 
expansion at Lanigan with Mohawk Oil and the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool -- 
that's a co-operative.  We provide the incentives in ethanol so that they 
can do that, and a co-operative is taking advantage of it. 
 



 

 

During the past four years, co-ops have invested $200 million in capital 
projects in the province of Saskatchewan, encouraged by our administration.  
The co-op could give you a summary: there's 600,000 members of 
co-operatives in the province of Saskatchewan; 4.3 billion in annual sales; 
over 7 billion in assets; more than 14,000 jobs; and over 4.5 billion in 
deposits in credit unions. 
 
And you look at Community Development Bonds; we deal with co-operatives.  
In fact, the only financial institutions that can put up $50,000 into 
communities are co-operatives.  Credit unions can put up $50,000 backed by 
this administration; that principal is guaranteed; they can take an equity 
position.  Who are we doing it with?  Co-operatives. 
 
Now I can go on for a long list of economic opportunities and 
diversification and for small business, for towns and villages, on the 
basis of co-operatives, that is many times larger than the activity of the 
NDP in co-operatives in the history of Saskatchewan.  In fact, when you 
expand the operation that we have here, in the last few years in the 
province of Saskatchewan with diversification, it has been led by 
co-operatives and equity positions taken by our administration. 
 
So you raised co-operatives and said I had forgotten the co-operative 
movement and the co-operative approach.  You've never seen so much economic 
development with co-operatives in the history of the country or the history 
of Saskatchewan as you've seen in the last five years in this province.  
And that is a fact.  And you can go to the upgraders, you can go at Co-op 
Data Services, you can go to credit unions, and you can look at the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, and you can look at the initiation of new co-op 
feeder associations.  The range is large. 
 
Now you might raise that that is part of the mixed economy that you often 
talk about.  Well let me just say that the mix in Saskatchewan is healthy, 
the growth of co-ops is healthy, and I'm very proud of that.  And the fact 
that we will deal with small business, with co-operatives, with large 
business, with people from across the world, is something that Saskatchewan 
should have been doing a long time ago, not just building in government, 
but building with all the players -- business, co-operatives.  And I just 
make the point because you raised it. 
 
This administration is very, very proud of co-operatives in the province of 
Saskatchewan and has gone out of its way to encourage co-operatives, build, 
expand, and diversify.  And I give them full marks and full credit for the 
capacity to do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  My purpose in rising at 
this late hour is not to continue the debate on the co-operative situation, 
but I will, having said that, preface my remarks by saying that 
notwithstanding the Premier's list, the recitation of his list, the cold, 
hard reality is that the percentage of economic activity which is 
attributed directly to co-op activity in the province of Saskatchewan is 
noticeably down by our calculations -- anywhere in the neighbourhood of 5 



 

 

to 7 per cent since the election of this government in 1982. 
 
And we also have the incontestable other fact that for the first time in a 
long while in the province of Saskatchewan, if not perhaps for the first 
time in the history of the province, we have a minister of privatization 
sitting around the cabinet table advising the minister on how to sell off 
matters of Crown corporations and aspects of our Saskatchewan heritage, but 
we no longer have a minister of co-operatives sitting around the table 
protecting the interests of the co-operatives. 
 
The Premier might argue that that means nothing.  I argue that it means a 
lot, both in terms of symbolism to the co-op movement and to the people of 
the province of Saskatchewan, and in terms of hard-core economic policy.  
As the statistics point out, a reduction of economic activity due to co-ops 
in that neighbourhood of about 7 per cent.  But again, I don't want to 
dwell on that.  My colleague from Saskatoon Eastview, I think has made that 
point.  And I simply want to reiterate those bald facts in the face of the 
Premier's rather lengthy but unconvincing defence of this government's 
economic policies. 
 
Rather, Mr. Chairman, what I wish to do this evening for the time permitted 
and allotted to me for the moment, is to ask the questions of the Premier 
in rather specific terms in several areas which I think are very important 
for the people of this province and the overall direction of the province's 
future development.  I have them broken down in four or five areas.  And 
the first area that I wish to deal with is with respect to agriculture. 
 
We have talked about agricultural estimates in the session thus far.  I 
want to focus in however, on one other matter which has not received the 
kind of attention publicly which I think it absolutely warrants.  And that 
is the question of transportation policy as it relates to agriculture and 
agricultural development, and transportation policy as it relates primarily 
to the farm sector in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And what I want to ask the Premier . . . these are straightforward 
questions as I'm sure, Mr. Chairman, you understand and recognize, with a 
minimum of rhetoric as advance to the questions.  I want the Premier to 
give this House, if he will please, a clear and concise statement of his 
government's position of what agriculture transportation policy should be 
in specific reference to the Crow benefit -- please note the words that I 
use specifically and clearly here -- in the face of what one can only 
describe, or what I shall describe as the current federal-provincial state 
of negotiations on ag transportation policy as it relates to the Crow 
benefit. 
 
To prompt the Premier, perhaps, what I'm really wanting to know is whether 
or not the province of Saskatchewan is backing the proposition that the 
Crow benefit should be paid to the railway companies as part of a 
transportation subsidy or whether it is backing the position that this 
payment should be made to the producers.  What is the position of your 
government, Mr. Premier, in this regard? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, very briefly, just so that we have it on 



 

 

the record, two points: one is that I do want to give the hon. member just 
a word on co-operatives so that we all are talking from the same number. 
 
The total expenditure on facilities, expansion, and other projects in 
co-operatives in 1987 was 12.6 million, up 87.5 per cent from 1986; the 
total membership in 1988 was 682,724, a rise of 22 per cent since 1983; and 
the total value of assets in 1988 was estimated to be 4.7 billion in 
Saskatchewan, up 40 per cent from 1983.  I would just say to the hon. 
member: co-ops have been growing and expanding at a phenomenal rate in 
their asset base as well as their value and their memberships. 
 
And I would just also say, and the hon. member mentioned with respect to 
privatization, one of the most significant and successful privatizations 
was taking something owned by the government and turning it over to the 
co-operative movement, which is Prairie Malt, to turn over to the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and its employees there -- very successful, 
endorsed, supported by the co-op movement.  Obviously they bought it.  I 
just make that point. 
 
With respect to agriculture and the Crow rate, our position has been -- and 
I've laid it out at the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool meetings and other meetings 
-- it has not changed.  And we've taken a position of 50-50; that 50 per 
cent, if they're going to change the policy, and right now it all goes to 
the railroads, they're going to change it. 
 
When we go back and look at the split in the communities across the 
livestock sector and the grain sector and how they would like to see it 
allocated.  We said 50 per cent to the railroads and 50 per cent to the 
farmers.  And we know that there's not a consensus as you go across the 
Prairies.  And certainly the Alberta Wheat Pool may have a different 
position and the Manitoba Wheat Pool, and I'll speak for Saskatchewan.  
When we look here, you've got some organizations that want it to go one way 
and some the other, and we have said that we will allocate it 50-50 if they 
want a recommendation. 
 
I will make the point, and the wheat pool has made that with me, and I've 
looked at their studies, that the key question is for Saskatchewan to 
maintain its share of, as you put it, the Crow benefit.  And if we've 
traditionally received about 55 or 56 per cent of that benefit, we must 
make sure that our share stays there.  If we have that locked in, then you 
can have some very interesting discussions about how you spend that share. 
 
(2245) 
 
So there's two questions.  There's the political question of how do we lock 
in our benefit so that, as they say, the Alberta solution is not the 
Saskatchewan dilution.  The fact that we maintain our 55 or 56 or 57 per 
cent share of, say, 7, $800 million annually, then you can have the 
discussion how best should we spend it. 
 
As you see the diversification taking place . . . and I'm sure you're aware 
in the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and in other commodities where you're not 
just selling barley, but you're selling malt.  You're not just selling 



 

 

straight grain, you're maybe selling doughnuts.  Or you're not just selling 
just a straight raw commodity, you're selling a manufactured commodity.  
Then your business mix and the manufacturing and processing and 
diversification mix that the wheat pool is into, for example, changes the 
economics. 
 
So the basic question is to maintain our share, 57 per cent, and then we'll 
have lots of interesting discussions about where that goes.  And I've had 
some very good discussions with Garf Stevenson about that, I certainly have 
with the presidents of co-operatives and farm organizations, the livestock 
associations, and others. 
 
The changing economy of the 1990s and the 21st century means that we are -- 
and I think everybody agrees -- processing and manufacturing more, adding 
value.  I think you've endorsed that in this legislature that we should 
take the raw commodities and we should add value because that's where the 
wealth is and that's where you can generate the prosperity. 
 
So you have two questions that are associated there.  One is associated 
with the historic rate and our share; and the other is how best you 
encourage processing and manufacturing and value, and the jobs that go with 
that, because there are an awful lot more jobs in processing and 
manufacturing than there are just in producing the raw commodity.  So if 
you make paper, there are more jobs in a paper mill than if you're just 
cutting fence posts and selling them.  And it's the same principle, and as 
you add value it provides new opportunities for jobs in the province. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- I take it, Mr. Chairman, from that lengthy answer that the 
Premier's saying that his government's position is that with respect to the 
Crow benefit, in the future he would like it paid out on the basis of 
roughly 50 per cent of the benefit payable to the railway companies or in 
some form of transportation subsidy, and 50 per cent to the producers.  
What I want to know is will the Premier tell me what other provincial 
government is adopting that position with respect to this issue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Well I would have to check, Mr. Chairman.  I believe 
that the . . . I could be corrected and the hon. member will have to check.  
I believe that the Alberta government has taken the position that they want 
all of the payment paid to producers. And if I'm not mistaken, I believe 
the Manitoba government has said something similar or very close to to it. 
 
There is some split between, I believe, various farm organizations as you 
go across the Prairies. And I think if I would go back and look at it, 
there would be a difference between the Alberta Wheat Pool for example, and 
the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool on this issue.  And I could be corrected if 
that's not the case, but there certainly is some very strong views, as I'm 
sure you would . . . differences of views as you go across farms and 
ranches across the Prairies, and there has been for some time. 
 
So because of the increase in the livestock sector in the province of 
Saskatchewan, which is very important to us, and their concerns that we not 
retard them or hurt them, the Saskatchewan government has taken the 
position that until we have more information or more consensus on a 



 

 

position, that we would just sort of be there with the farmers.  Half the 
farmers want it paid to the producers and half the farmers say, we'll pay 
the railroads.  And with the diversification of the livestock industry, 
that's a very big question. 
 
Farm income, net farm income in Alberta is up this year in good part 
because they've so diversified into livestock.  And you know that as well 
as I do.  If the livestock industry is basing its profit on the feed grain 
business and feed grain prices have been relatively low, obviously their 
margins are better and their net farm income is better than ours in 
Saskatchewan, and they use that as the basis for the argument, maybe we 
should be diversifying more. 
 
And so the positions have moved back and forth across the prairies.  And we 
just said look, until the farmers make up their mind, we'll look and 
respect all of their views -- the livestock industry and the grain 
industry. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, forgive me for saying so, and I say 
this to the Premier, but I get confused with the Premier's answers.  That 
may be my fault.  His first answer to my first question seemed to be 
predicated on what he would have advanced as a logical economic argument 
for 50-50. 
 
His second answer to my second question is predicated on the basis that 
there are conflicting views amongst the farm organizations and groups, and 
the easiest way -- these are my words and not his -- in which to settle 
this matter is to simply make it 50-50.  And the economic argument is not a 
consideration. 
 
My question to the Premier is: which of those two rationales is the basis 
of your position of 50-50?  And I would ask, when we come back for the next 
day, if you would provide for me, since you have officials sitting at this 
very important committee meeting, to provide for me the information of 
which other government in Canada supports a 50-50 proposition with respect 
to the payment of the Crow benefit. 
 
So the second part you don't know.  You say you're going to have to check 
that.  I don't think we need to go through that argument again, but I do 
want you to ask the first question that I ask here.  On what basis is this 
50-50 proposition of payment based as far as you're concerned?  Is it a 
matter of simply ducking into what seems to be the most convenient 
political hole given the controversy that's out there, or is it based on 
some form of the economic and sound agriculture and economic development 
policy?  What's the answer to that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, that's a reasonable question.  I will put 
forward to the hon. member that we took that position having talked with 
and canvassed farm groups a couple of years ago on where they thought the 
benefit -- as you put it, the Crow benefit -- should be allocated.  And at 
that time farmers were split.  And as far as I know the farmers are still 
split.  And it's the farmers that should have the say with respect to the 
allocation of this benefit, if it's changed, if it's changed. 



 

 

 
Now what we have said is two things, and I agree totally with the wheat 
pool on these two points.  One, the most important thing -- that we should 
lock in and make sure that we do not vary, and this administration will not 
vary on that -- is that the share of that money stay the same, the 
percentage coming to the Prairies, that goes to Saskatchewan stays the same 
regardless.  Now people will admit they are using, pay the railroad, as a 
political argument to lock in the share.  And they have said that to me 
personally and they may have said that to you.  And if you get them in a 
corner, they'll say, I'm not so concerned about how the payment is made -- 
livestock, processing, railroads and what-not -- what I'm really concerned 
about is that percentage stay the same in Saskatchewan. 
 
And they'll admit to you when you get them in the corner that the reason 
that they want to pay the railroads -- and Lord knows the railroads got 
enough money.  This isn't something that is easily endorsed by a lot of 
people, that you've got to give the CPR or the CNR more money, right? The 
reason that they're doing this is to make sure that the share stays the 
same. 
 
Once you get over that argument, then there's a really interesting 
discussion.  When you're in the malt business and the barley business, 
where should that freight rate support go?  Now that's a very interesting 
question. And believe me, it is split, when you look at processing, value 
added, livestock, and so forth.  Because if you're in the malt business as 
opposed to the barley business, as you take the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, 
all of a sudden some of that transportation number and economics changes, 
and changes considerably -- or if you're in the food packaging or marketing 
business.  And we're getting into more of that. 
 
So the key question for us to address in this Assembly and this province is 
to make sure the percentage stays the same.  Then we can have long 
discussions with farmers, processors, manufacturers, and everybody in the 
province in terms of what's best for the province of Saskatchewan as we go 
into the 21st century in terms of jobs and opportunity, and particularly at 
the farm level. 
 
So you ask me where I get my position from.  I get it from talking to 
farmers, talking to farmers that are in the hog business, talking to them 
that are in the malt business, talking to them in the livestock, as well as 
just grain production -- talking to those that grow canola, grow flax-seed. 
Processing opportunities are now before the flax growers, and some of them 
are pretty exciting. 
 
Those are very interesting questions.  And so it is a time where we're 
looking at more processing and manufacturing, and that's a time when we 
have to deal with both.  So you asked me where I get the position.  People 
of Saskatchewan, farmers of Saskatchewan particularly, as they look at the 
change in the mix from grain to livestock, is significant and I believe we 
should listen to them. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, again I don't want to be obstructive or 
obstinate about this, but I am really trying to get from the Premier a very 



 

 

clear statement on an urgent matter which is progressing along at some 
pace.  There will be very soon, it is expected -- at least as I am advised 
-- some form of a report by the transportation task force on the question 
of the Crow benefit, as I described it. 
 
And as the Premier knows all too well, historically the location of this 
province in this part of the world with respect to getting our agricultural 
products to port, is to large measure the reason for the Crow payment in 
the first instance; and very largely the reason why the question of what 
happens in the future is so much a matter of importance and in the public 
domain. 
 
And I say to the Premier that within the next two or three weeks or so, 
there's likely to be some form of a transportation task force report.  And 
I want the Premier to tell me who his representative is on that 
transportation task force studying this issue.  And I want again -- not to 
be as I say, apologize for sounding obstinate or perhaps a little bit 
obstreperous -- I want him again to tell me whether or not it is his 
instruction to this representative that Saskatchewan's position is this 
50-50 proposition. 
 
So perhaps I should add a third question: when is it that you expect the 
report to be tabled?  Who is our representative?  And is it your 
instruction to our representative that it should be paid on a 50-50 basis? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Our representative is Mr. Neil Petrovitch.  He's 
director of transportation and policy, and the action is expected in about 
a month.  The report will be in about a month.  And so the hon. member will 
receive that.  I will say to the hon. member -- and we got into this last 
year -- I remember now the words and the pretty significant difference with 
respect to philosophy, and I'll be glad to pursue it.  I won't, but I'll 
just raise it again. 
 
I think the hon. member used the word that Saskatchewan was trapped because 
of its geography here.  And we therefore had to pursue the same line of 
policy that we've had for the last hundred years or more.  I will say to 
the hon. member, more and more people are coming to recognize the fact that 
we are not trapped, that we cannot just take raw commodities and have them 
exported out of the province.  We are not trapped.  We don't have to take 
the raw lumber and export it out.  We can make pulp and paper with the best 
of them.  And as you add value, you know as well as I do, the significance 
of the cost declines. 
 
If you're going to be marketing a package sandwich that has grain in it and 
meat in it, then the percentage of transportation on that becomes less and 
less significant as you add more and more value.  So as you look at paper, 
as you look at malt, as you look at bacon, as you look at gasoline and 
diesel fuel, as opposed to the raw commodities, then transportation becomes 
less and less significant.  We're manufacturing turbines now that can be 
marketed all over the world.  And the same applies to paper.  The same 
applies to other things. 
 
So the old argument in a developing economy, which is fair enough that we 



 

 

had to start with raw commodities and we had to have a subsidy to get the 
raw commodity out as fast as we could, is not necessarily consistent with 
the fact that you can add value and process and manufacture and have more 
prosperity.  So that's why we're looking at the whole question of whether 
in fact you want to make paper, make malt, make bacon, add value and have 
more sophisticated products manufactured in Saskatchewan as opposed to the 
raw commodity.  So I just make the point to the hon. member, if he says 
that we are, again, land-locked in the middle and we're trapped, I would 
say that there's increasing view.  And if you look at processing and 
manufacturing being up 600 per cent in the province of Saskatchewan in the 
last few years, increasingly the industrialized world is saying we can make 
things the same as the Japanese. 
 
Japan is a long ways from here and we send raw materials over there; they 
send packaged material back here.  The distance, Mr. Chairman, has not been 
the significant factor.  The fact that they can use technology to make 
things has been very instrumental.  In fact, as they say in the country, we 
send our rocks over there and they send cars back.  Mr. Chairman, much of 
what we'd like to do here is to make and manufacture and add value to 
commodities.  Those considerations, farm considerations, policy 
considerations, will be instrumental in the views that we take to the table 
in the report that's coming down in the next month. 
 
(2300) 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, again I'm pleased to hear of the Premier's 
world vision about economic development and how we have decided to opt into 
this great economic boom in the province of Saskatchewan, notwithstanding 
our record.  But please, Premier, spare me for the moment the lecture which 
I think we've all heard in Saskatchewan, and a lecture which has been 
rejected by the people of the province of Saskatchewan.  Because I want to 
tell you that no matter what you say, the reality is that we have producers 
upon whom their future survival, amongst other factors, will depend on what 
you and your government are doing on the question of transportation, 
getting their commodities out of this land-locked area, which is the 
reality, and to market or to port. 
 
And I want to know why it is that the provincial government, so far as I 
can tell, alone of all the governments, and I stand to be corrected 
tomorrow when your officials advise you -- advances a proposition of 50-50, 
something which is certainly novel, if not unheard of.  Why it advances 
this position.  And I guess my specific question to the Premier is: why is 
it that you advanced this proposition in clear opposition, for example, to 
the stated point of view of the three prairie pools? 
 
The three prairie pools, as I read in newspaper reports and elsewhere, take 
the view that the benefit should be viewed as a transportation subsidy, 
paid to the railroad people, that it should be on a distance-related basis.  
I have my rationale as to why that policy is there, which I think is tied 
into the realities of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Why is it that you find that unacceptable from the leading farm 
organizations -- not the only ones, but the leading farm organizations?  



 

 

And how is it that this 50-50 formula has been concocted?  On what basis 
50-50?  Why not 75-25 or some other combination?  What's the economic and 
solid policy position in this regard? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, I've already answered that -- the farmers 
themselves. 
 
We've looked and come up with the position two or three years ago.  The 
farmers themselves were saying, we haven't made up our mind.  And the 
farmers in the livestock industry feel very strongly about this.  They 
deserve to be respected and understood.  And we've looked at that situation 
very carefully.  And the increase in the livestock industry is very 
important to the province of Saskatchewan.  We're going to make sure that 
they have our ear. 
 
And I would think it's fair to say -- and you know politically as well as I 
do -- that the livestock industry have had the ear of this government.  No 
question about that.  And the livestock associations and the expansion in 
feed lot operations, expansion in the beef and the hog industries because 
it is diversification in jobs.  It's very important. 
 
The livestock industry's income is up.  And a good part of farm income in 
Saskatchewan is now linked to the question of livestock.  We've got 
programs and packages that I'm sure you now endorse, like interest-free 
money to the livestock industry; cash advances, no interest at all -- the 
only place in North America that the livestock industry has zero per cent 
interest rates.  Now that's pretty significant. 
 
You start talking to them about margins and economic opportunity, that's 
there.  I just respect the livestock industry and the processing side of 
agriculture enough to know it's important that we weigh that in our 
considerations, and that's precisely what we did.  We talked to farmers, 
we've asked about them. 
 
The province of Alberta has said no, pay the producer.  Period.  And the 
farmers of Alberta generally support that -- pay the producer.  That's what 
they say.  In the province of Saskatchewan it's split, and we've got a 
growing livestock industry, more processing, more diversification.  And 
that just happens to be the fact.  In Manitoba I think you would find the 
majority would say, pay the producer. 
 
So here we have Saskatchewan that is different than the two provinces on 
either side of us.  Legitimate arguments about the growth of the livestock 
industry and the diversification that has taken place. 
 
So you ask me where we get that position -- in talking to farmers and 
ranchers across the province. And they're relevant and they're credible 
people who have said, you know, look at this very carefully.  And so we 
have. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, there must be some cost-benefit analysis 
studies carried out by your Executive Council people or your Agriculture 
people or Transportation people based on the assumption that the 50-50 



 

 

formula, which is something you're advocating and therefore standing 
behind, some cost-benefit analysis as to what the impact will be in the 
province of Saskatchewan vis-a-vis the gains and the losses both on the 
grain side and on the cattle side.  What do those studies show, and will 
you be prepared to table an internal study of the government?  You can take 
a look at it and vet it if there's some sensitive analysis.  What will a 
50-50 combination pay-out mean to those sectors?  Because I venture to say 
that on any change from Crow benefit as a principle of transportation 
subsidy, even for the benefits to the cattle industry, the losses to the 
grain producers will outweigh in large proportion any of the benefits that 
may come off from the change in this methodology. 
 
So surely my question to you is twofold: you have conducted these studies.  
Being an economist yourself, you would have directed your officials to have 
conducted this cost-benefits analysis; and secondly, show to us, prove to 
us -- and if you don't think that we're interested in this thing in an 
objective way, I assure you that we are, although we come from some biases 
-- show to the people of Saskatchewan what the cost-benefit analysis is, on 
the assumption the 50-50 message is accepted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, we are doing analysis.  The 50-50 
is based on the fact that the farmers themselves had differences of 
opinions.  And we're going back and doing the analysis.  I can give you an 
example.  We received a wheat pool report that looked at the implications 
of change.  And I've gone over that with a great deal of detail.  Their 
major concern is that the percentage stay the same and then we'll look at 
the changes.  If you implemented a wholesale change immediately to pay the 
producers, under the wheat pool's analysis there would be a net loss in the 
province of Saskatchewan, and that's that they call "the Alberta solution 
is the Saskatchewan dilution".  And we don't want that. 
 
Now as the mix changes over time, we're going to have to examine it over 
and over again, as you examine the implications.  And the wheat pool is 
aware of that, and all organizations.  As their industry and the wheat pool 
itself changes over time, you may find, as you point out, it should be 90 
per cent to the railroads, 10 per cent to the farmers.  Then in five years 
it maybe should be 50-50.  In the next century, it should be something 
else.  And our ongoing analysis and other things would provide that kind of 
sensitivity.  The most important thing, the most important thing is that 
the percentage coming into Saskatchewan does not change.  Then as the mix 
in Saskatchewan changes over time, then you can play that examination on an 
ongoing basis, and that's only fair.  And the wheat pool acknowledges that 
with their research. 
 
So we're doing our own research.  We don't have the conclusions.  We said 
50-50 because the livestock industry and the grain industry and producers 
are split.  Now that's just a position to show that we do have some 
compassion for both sides as we look at this change in the agriculture mix 
into the future. 
 
And clearly, we're processing more, no question about that.  So we're just 
sensitive to it.  But you make a fair point.  Maybe it should be 90-10 now; 
maybe later it should be 75-25.  As our economy changes into the 21st 



 

 

century and the analysis tracks it, we may find that as long as our 
percentages is there, then we may find better ways to spend the money.  And 
I think the wheat pool and others would acknowledge that. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Now, Mr. Chairman, I don't want the Premier to misinterpret 
the point that I make here.  I have a couple of points, but the point that 
I'm making in this last series of questions I want to be absolutely clear 
about. 
 
The point that I want to make with respect to your government's 
accountability and responsibility is this: by your own admission, the 
transportation task force report is going to be tabled within about a 
month's time more or less.  You have a representative on that committee.  
That committee represents Saskatchewan's interests.  You have tried to make 
the point to me that the interests are mixed.  Let's leave that argument 
aside for the moment. 
 
You have said in general terms, that Saskatchewan's interest can be best 
served by 50-50, something that I am very sceptical of and to be quite 
frank with you, would oppose.  But leave that aside for the moment.  In one 
month's time, there will be a report, or thereabouts, which will have grave 
impact on grain producers and cattle people.  But let's just talk about the 
grain producers for the moment in the province of Saskatchewan.  And you 
are telling me, sir, with the greatest of respect, you are telling me that 
this is some sort of rolling analysis, almost on a week by week, or month 
by month, or day by day basis, with respect to the percentage splits that 
the Government of Saskatchewan's involved in. 
 
Surely that cannot be the position of any responsible government.  Surely 
the position of any responsible government is got to divine -- pardon the 
expression -- the choices which are before it, tough as it may be, and to 
advance a position, tough as it may be, backed by the appropriate economic 
and agricultural analysis, as tough as it may be, and fight for that 
position in that transportation committee. 
 
Are you telling me, sir, that Saskatchewan is at this stage in the federal 
committee, namely that it has no firm definitive economic analysis, that 
it's an ongoing rolling analysis, and that in a month's time a report may 
be tabled which could have catastrophic results to the agricultural 
community, and that as a consequence of this policy, there will be no 
reports or documentation tabled to this legislature or to the farmers of 
the province of Saskatchewan.  Because that's what I hear you saying. 
 
And I'm trying to be as objective as I can about it.  Surely, sir, that is 
an impossible posture.  Surely that is an incredible posture for the 
farming community and the agriculture community, and is one which has grave 
danger for the future development of this province of Saskatchewan.  And 
therefore I want to say to you in the few remaining minutes left to us this 
evening -- because I understand you've been in Newfoundland all day today 
and you must be tired, clearly  
_- surely we've got to try to resolve this issue. 
 
What clearly have your officials been submitting?  What is their 



 

 

proposition and on what is it based?  What studies is it based?  Who are 
going to be the winners; who are going to be the losers?  What's the 
fall-out in the agriculture economic development sense.  Because that is 
going to be a very key issue of the future.  So my point again to you is 
this -- I want you, sir, to be very precise on this -- is it your firm 
position, 50-50?  If so, what are the numbers as to who wins and who loses 
on the assumption that 50-50 is adopted?  Because the farmers of the 
province of Saskatchewan want to know.  And I tell you, as the Leader of 
the Opposition, I want to know. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, just to state again is that because of 
our close contact, and mine as the Minister of Agriculture -- and we have, 
I think we represent all the rural seats in this province except two - 
_ we're very close to the agricultural sector.  The farmers have told us 
that it's important to the producers; we should listen to them.  They have 
some very strong views in the hog industry, and in the beef industry, as 
well as in the grain industry.  And we just have gone in and said look, 
until the farmers make up their mind, and we have done all the research, 
we'll just take a position of 50-50. 
 
Now I've said that position is there as a result of the mixed views on the 
farms.  The hon. member goes back and says well, see your research.  The 
research and the report will be public within about a month.  There will be 
hearings in Saskatchewan on the report, I understand.  And people can look 
at it and examine it in detail. 
 
The key question, the key question: where there's unanimity in the province 
of Saskatchewan -- just so you know -- is that the percentage Saskatchewan 
receives today stays the same.  Then as Saskatchewan grows over the next 
decade, and the next decade, and the next decade, how we allocate that 
money is a fair question.  And you may be right; it may be 90-10; it may be 
100 per cent to the railroads today as it is, and that will stay that way 
for some time. 
 
I will tell you the province of Quebec likes it the way it is.  That's an 
interesting question.  Interesting question -- why the province of Quebec?  
When you start talking to our dairy industry and our hog industry and our 
beef industry and you tell them that the province of Quebec likes it just 
the way it is so they can get access to cheap grain, that's an interesting 
question.  And there's been some interesting dialogue between western 
Canadian farmers and central Canadian farmers, particularly in the province 
of Quebec. 
 
I'll just make the point that as we do this research we have said we are 
sensitive to the change in the mix in Saskatchewan.  We're sensitive to the 
livestock industry and we will be as sensitive to it as we can.  And the 
report will be out; our analysis is going on. 
 
And I'll just make the point once more, Mr. Chairman, that I believe it's 
fair to listen to both sides in this and that's all our position is, that 
we respect the livestock industry and we respect the grain industry and we 



 

 

want to take the time to make sure that we listen to them very carefully. 
 
(2315) 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, the Premier keeps referring to some sort of a 
statement about 90-10.  I know he does not mean it in this sense but I'll 
just simply clarify this.  I'm not advocating a 90-10 position.  I'm not 
advocating a 50-50 position.  I believe the system with respect to the Crow 
benefit being viewed as a transportation subsidy, distance-related, paid to 
the railroads, with all of its difficulties is the best economic position 
for the grain producers in the province of Saskatchewan based on history, 
based on geography, based on political, economic fact. 
 
There are problems with livestock.  We understand that.  There are other 
ways to get at that -- other ways to get at that.  Your argument is not 
new.  You say your argument is new.  Your argument about Quebec and cheap 
grain is an argument that Otto Lang has been advocating and advocated from 
1969 and earlier when he was the minister of Agriculture, Canadian Wheat 
Board minister, and Transportation. 
 
And the people of the province of Saskatchewan fought Mr. Lang in 1969 to 
1971 during that period.  And they stopped it then.  And here you are, 20 
years later, coming back with the same old argument, and with no economic 
numbers, no economic positions.  You see, you present this, I mean -- with 
the greatest of respect to you -- you present this as some sort of new 
economic concern.  Of course we know it's a new concern about cheap grain 
to Quebec; of course we want to diversify in the province of Saskatchewan; 
and of course there's no easy way to square this circle, but somebody has 
to make the choices.  That you is, sir, for the time being. 
 
You are the Premier and you must divine the choices in the best interests 
of the economic community.  And what you're telling this House and telling 
me right now is that for the time being it's 50-50; in fact, you're saying 
it might be 90-10; it might be 80-20; it might be some other combination.  
That's what you're saying, and you're saying this without telling the 
legislature or sharing with us what the rationale on an economic basis is 
in this context. 
 
Now I don't mean to be haranguing you, but that's the position that you're 
in; that's the position you're in.  I mean, at least Otto Lang -- give the 
devil his due -- took the position of simply saying the Crow benefit is all 
wrong; it works to the detriment of Saskatchewan cattlemen and the 
diversification; we should do away with it.  End of issue -- pure and 
simple.  And you people jumped on that bandwagon in 1982.  I mean, at least 
he was honest about this. 
 
Now we're into another very critical phase, and all I'm asking you -- I 
mean, this may sound like it's a partisan political speech -- all I'm 
asking you quite legitimately is I think we are owed some rational 
explanation as to who the winners and the losers will be on the 50-50. 
 
Now let me ask you another question here, let me ask you another question 
here.  And again, Mr. Chairman, again I am mindful . . . the House leaders 



 

 

presumably are negotiating an appropriate time to adjourn for tonight, so I 
don't want to give the Premier a chance to respond before we resume, but I 
want to ask this question.  If you won't share the study . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . No, your study.  I don't mean the transportation task 
force study.  I want to know what position you and your people have been 
fighting for there over all these months.  And I want to know your analysis 
and, as my colleague says, on what the issue was.  Don't tell me what 
Mazankowski and the boys are going to be releasing a month from now because 
I'll tell you that gives me no comfort.  And I want to tell you, it gives 
me no comfort to think that they're going to have public hearings after 
they release the report that they get stuck to.  I want to know what your 
position has been in that task force report with studies. 
 
Now I ask you two things.  Number one, I ask again: will you table the 
studies as to the winners and the losers on the 50-50?  I've asked already.  
And I'll expect, with the greatest of respect, tomorrow your officials to 
provide me the answers of what other governments take the same position of 
50-50 and, for that matter, what other farm groups take the position of 
50-50. 
 
But my question is, for the time being: will you table your internal study 
or studies, in this regard as to winners and losers?  And if you won't, my 
next question is: have you at least shared your studies and numbers with, 
let's say, the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, to let them know of what the 
possible impact is going to be about this policy? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- I can only say, Mr. Chairman, that with the work of the 
task force, we are doing our research.  We will be sharing it with the 
wheat pool, with the members opposite, and with others when we finish it.  
And it's an ongoing research and analysis.  When you look at the benefits 
and the analysis . . . you can just take the wheat pool study, and they'll 
show you some that will benefit and some that will be cost.  And as the 
industry changes you will have different ratios and different developments.  
Over time we're going to have to continue to monitor that.  I'll only say 
to the hon. member, it's an ongoing research and it's an ongoing 
discussion.  In the province of Saskatchewan you have a mix and you also 
have a changing, so we're going to be examining it every year.  I think 
it's worthy of research, and I believe the wheat pool would agree with me 
on an ongoing basis. 
 
So you keep examining the mix.  I know that the minister of Ontario is 
increasingly worried, Mr. Chairman, because the livestock industry is 
moving out of Ontario, moving to the West and moving into Saskatchewan, 
moving into the Prairies.  Now that's a good sign. 
 
One of the biggest demands for grain in the prairie basin is the domestic 
livestock industry, the domestic processing of grain.  So if we can 
increase that, obviously we can add more value because you can ship that 
grain out at a much more valuable level and at a higher price.  If you 
processed all the grain in Saskatchewan, if you did, and shipped it out in 
package form, we would be all much wealthier.  And obviously, as the hon. 



 

 

member says, we are trying to diversify more and add more value so that you 
can process it.  As you do that, the mix and the analysis changes, and 
we're going to have to examine that this year, the next year.  We'll share 
with you the information.  We're doing studies and analysis.  I don't have 
any to present to you tonight but the task force will be out there.  We'll 
be sharing them with the groups, with the farm organizations, with you. 
 
There's no secret studies going on, I'll tell you that.  We're examining it 
all very carefully.  And I guess I could say from my own academic 
experience that there are volumes of studies on freight rates -- I'm sure 
you're aware of that -- and the implications to diversification.  Volumes.  
And they talk about all the different ratios and all the different 
examinations.  The transportation officials and the Minister of 
Transportation has no end of studies.  And I suppose we can table all of 
those that have gone back for years. 
 
So it's an ongoing discussion.  We said that we are sensitive to both 
sides.  That's precisely why we said that it should be examined fairly.  
You spoke tonight about the grain industry, but you said you had another 
plan for the livestock industry.  I think you should be very clear in this 
Assembly what your plan for the livestock industry is. 
 
Now you said it could be dealt with in other ways.  I'd like to know what 
it is and I'm sure they would like to know what it is because that balance 
out there is very important.  So we're just sensitive to the balance, and 
we said until we find the consensus in rural Saskatchewan, we're prepared 
to look at the 50-50. 
 
Now if you've got some information that says this should all be one way or 
the other, I'd be glad if you shared that information with me.  I mean, 
there are lots of organizations, and particularly the livestock 
organizations, that would like to have that information as well. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Premier, I say this to you with respect, but I think 
you're ducking your responsibility as the Premier of the province of 
Saskatchewan on this issue.  That's the only conclusion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- You're ducking your responsibilities, sir.  The 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, a member I'm told of this transportation task 
force, the Alberta pool is a member, various organization; Ontario 
cattlemen are, provincial governments are.  All of these people are 
individual members and they come with positions to advocate. 
 
Your government is a member of this transportation task force report, the 
government responsible for the economic development and the agricultural 
development of the province of Saskatchewan, and you're telling us tonight, 
your telling me, you're asking me, the Leader of the Opposition, what do I 
think about it, to try to give you some ideas about it, when the report is 
going to come down from Ottawa in a month's time or so. 
 
And what other conclusion can anybody make except that you and your 



 

 

government are ducking the issue?  And that's irresponsible, sir.  That's 
irresponsible.  You give me all of the speech about diversification; please 
spare us.  The history of this province has been to attempt to diversify.  
Premiers long before you have tried all kinds of diversification schemes -- 
some succeed, some don't succeed, some are better, some not as good. I 
think that there are very few that are not as good as this government.  But 
spare us that. 
 
What we need to know is on the next $720 million annual, or whatever that 
amount is with respect to the transportation subsidy, this particular Crow 
benefit that is being paid, at a time when national governments and 
institutions are debating its future, we need to know what this provincial 
government stands for.  We need to know what you and your officials have 
been telling this group.  We don't need to know the end result.  I mean, we 
need to know the end result but at that stage in the game, it's too late.  
It's too late.  Well all right.  The Associate Minister of Agriculture says 
we need to know the end result.  Of course we need to know the end result.  
But if the end result turns out to be something based on 50-50, or some 
other operation of that nature, I don't understand that. 
 
And I tell you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Premier -- this is Executive Council -- I 
tell you your ministers, you have four ministers in one form or another 
responsible for this task.  I don't know how many officials you have 
sitting behind you.  You've got the Minister of Transportation.  I don't 
know what he's getting paid for in this issue.  Has he spoken or delivered 
any report on this thing?  I've seen none.  I don't know what the Associate 
Minister of Agriculture has done.  Absolutely none.  I don't know what the 
Minister of Rural Affairs has done in this area.  Absolutely none.  
Absolutely none.  Absolutely none.  And the Minister of Highways runs out 
of the legislature because I happen to criticize him. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order, order.  Members are not to make reference to 
people's absence or presence in the legislature. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, I didn't mention his absence.  I mentioned 
the fact that he was in this legislature and leaving this legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Members are not to make reference to absence or presence.  
Members are not to make reference to absence or presence in the 
legislature. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I abide by your ruling, but it'll be 
interesting to know how we ask questions without any reference to who's 
here.  But none the less that's your ruling.  We can't refer to who's here 
and who's not here; that's fair enough.  But I'm not going to be 
side-tracked by that issue. 
 
The issue that I'm talking about . . . and I accept your ruling, Mr. 
Chairman, I mean that quite sincerely.  I accept it, and I apologize for 
having broken the rules.  But the point that I'm trying to make is that 
there are four ministers.  There are another two that are content in 



 

 

heckling me on an issue which I say simply can be answered and answered 
legitimately by saying: what basis is 50-50 being advanced? 
 
Well the Premier says that he's got all of these agricultural MLAs backing 
him.  What about the agricultural MLAs?  Have any of you asked the Premier 
what the basis of the 50-50 payment is out?  Have any of you asked for 
those economic studies?  Has the Minister of Finance, who represents a 
semi-rural riding, has he asked it?  How about the member from 
Rosetown-Elrose?  How about the member over there from Arm River?  Do you 
know what the Saskatchewan government position is on the Crow benefit or 
not?  Do you know?  Because if you know and we don't know, that is not 
right, and it is not correct for the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan.  It's fundamentally wrong. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- And we're not talking about peanuts.  We're talking about 
millions of dollars.  And we're talking about the futures of farmers.  And 
we're talking about the future of diversification.  And I'm asking a 
simple, and I think, sir, a very legitimate request: I want to know on what 
basis that 50-50 is made.  I want to know who the winners and the losers 
are according to your studies.  I want those studies tabled and if not a 
good reason to why they're not being tabled.  And I think that nothing less 
is adequate.  And surely that is not irresponsible to ask of it. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Chairman, and to you, Mr. Premier and the leader of 
this government, that if you refuse to do this, if you refuse or fail to do 
this, I can only draw one conclusion: that you either have absolutely no 
policy, and you're going to abdicate for the agricultural province of 
Canada, a position on this important issue which I can only say is shameful 
to you and to the government.  Or in the alternative, you've got a policy 
which in effect amounts to the doing away of the Crow benefit, and in 
effect phasing it out, eventually, to the detriment of rural Saskatchewan, 
and farmers, and towns, and communities, unless you show me the studies 
that justify the 50-50.  Now what is it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I remember the hon. member went 
ranting and raving about this issue back in '82, and I think he was 
responsible for saying that, let's go in April and go in the Crow, and he 
lost his riding over it.  I mean, I don't know that he's that much more 
informed about agriculture policy in the last eight years than he was in 
1982.  I'll only say to the hon. member, we were elected in '82 and 
re-elected in '86 and in 1986 with respect to all the economic 
opportunities for farmers; we're very sensitive to them. 
 
(2330) 
 
I will say to the hon. member that the farming community has not reached a 
consensus.  I will just provide to you in terms of the responses from 
various jurisdictions.  When we're looking at . . . Alberta and British 
Columbia released a position paper October 31 of last year to pay the Crow 



 

 

benefit directly to producers.  The Saskatchewan Wheat Pool maintain the 
current position of paying the benefit to the railroads following review 
and discussion at their annual meetings. 
 
Manitoba released a discussion paper November 6, 1989, outlining impacts of 
various payment options and is waiting for public input before taking 
another position.  They're going back to talk to the farmers in Manitoba.  
And that's their position to date; to find out what is best for Manitoba.  
You're saying that you know what's best for Saskatchewan.  You've got a 
hard, fast position, and you discount anybody talking about it.  The 
province of Manitoba has said, I think we should go out and talk to the 
farmers.  I'm saying the same thing.  You should listen to farmers.  Not 
make up your mind in here, but listen to the farmers. 
 
The federal Minister of Agriculture released a discussion paper November 6, 
'89, identified payment methods under the WGTA (Western Grain 
Transportation Authority) which should be reviewed and evaluated during a 
policy review.  Ontario remains very firm -- pay the producer.  Quebec 
recommended, pay the railroads, but has recognized the pay-the-producer 
option would not have a negative impact on the agriculture economy.  And 
the whole issue is being reviewed by the General Agreement on Tariffs and 
Trade.  The GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) negotiations to 
be completed by the end of 1990 will evaluate the whole implications of the 
Crow benefit when it comes to international trade. 
 
All right.  The hon. member has said he wants to know the basis for the 
50-50.  The basis for the 50-50 is discussing it with farmers and ranchers 
and farm organizations across the province of Saskatchewan.  The Government 
of Manitoba has said they will not take a firm position until they have 
discussed it with the farmers in the province of Manitoba.  We have said we 
will listen to the farmers of Saskatchewan.  I think it's only fair that we 
should continue to listen to the farmers, Mr. Chairman. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 11:33 p.m. 
 


