





























































Hansard: June 18, 1990


 

 

June 18/90 
 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to present a petition on behalf of 
Marlene Joyce Crate.  And, Mr. Speaker, this is her last chance for 
justice. 
 

 The petition of the undersigned, Marlene Joyce Crate of the city of 
Winnipeg, Manitoba, humbly showeth: 

 
 That the petitioner was injured in an accident on the 21st day of June in 

1981 in the province of Saskatchewan, which injury petitioner believes was 
caused by the negligence of Ronald Morin and Alexander Delaronde, both of 
the city of Flin Flon in Manitoba; 

 
 That the petitioner negotiated personally and without the aid of a lawyer, 

with an adjuster from the Manitoba Public Insurance Corporation for a 
period of over one year following the date of the accident; 

 
 That the petitioner was subsequently informed that under the provisions of 

section 180(1) of The Vehicles Act RSS 1978 chapter v-3 and as amended by 
section 143(1)(a) of The Vehicles Act 1983. 

 
The Speaker: -- Order.  I've been listening to the hon. member's petition 
and in presenting petitions, the hon. member's asked to state only the 
essence of the petition, which means the prayer and then you present it. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- I guess, Mr. Speaker, the essence is, that the extension of 
time had run out for the . . . (inaudible) . . . So I'll read, therefore, 
the final paragraph: 
 

 Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your honourable Assembly may 
be pleased to extend the time for filing a statement of claim against 
Ronald Morin and Alexander Delaronde in the Court of Queen's Bench for 
Saskatchewan until December 31, 1990. 

 
 And as in duty bound your petitioner will ever pray. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Britton: -- I see, Mr. Speaker, I still have my friends from the other 
side. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in all seriousness, I would like to introduce to you, and 
through you to the rest of the members assembled, 25 grade 7 students from 
the Dr. Perry School here in Regina.  And I'm doing this on behalf of my 
colleague from Regina South. 



 

 

 
I will be meeting with these students at about 3:05 and we will have some 
refreshments and probably some questions.  And I would ask all members to 
help me welcome these people in the usual manner and wish them a safe 
journey home. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You can see it didn't take the 
member from Wilkie long to get his seat back. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce to you and to all the members of the 
Assembly some members of the Saskatchewan Association of Speech Language 
Pathologists and Audiologists.  Today with us are the president, Lynn 
Bateson -- they are seated in the Speaker's gallery -- and with her is 
Kelly Richter, who is the chairperson of the legislative committee.  And 
there are some 12 other members. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'd ask all members of the Assembly to welcome these worthy 
professionals to the Assembly.  They are here today to hear second reading 
of the legislation to give them professional status. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask everyone to welcome these guests. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is with a great deal of 
pleasure that I introduce to you and to members of the Assembly some 16 
grade 3 students from Saar School in Kronau.  They are accompanied by their 
teacher, Miss Shirley Drever; chaperons, Sheila Fahlman and Mr. Bob 
Jackson. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all know that Kronau is the curling capital of 
Saskatchewan.  I don't know how many potential junior champions will be in 
the grade 3 class, or national champions, but I'm sure there will be some 
representatives over time based on the past history of that community. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would ask all hon. members to join with me in welcoming 
the grade 3 students.  I will meet with them after question period.  Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLaren: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It's indeed a pleasure 
for me today to introduce some more students that have come to Regina and 
the Assembly from outside our province.  There are 16 grade 7 and 8 
students from the St. Lezaire E p√©cole in St. Lezaire, Manitoba. 
 
We welcome you here this afternoon -- they're in the west gallery, Mr. 
Speaker -- and we hope that you will enjoy the proceedings of the Assembly.  
Thank you for coming to Regina and the Assembly to be with us today. 
 
I would just like to wish everyone good luck in your exams this year, and 



 

 

have a good, enjoyable, and happy holiday.  And I'll meet with you on the 
steps of the legislature around 2:30 to answer any questions that you might 
have.  And I would ask all members, Mr. Speaker, to welcome these students 
from St. Lezaire, Manitoba, with us today. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Population Drop in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  My question today, in 
the absence of the Premier, is to the Deputy Premier.  And, Mr. Speaker, it 
stems from the fact that the Statistics Canada people have recorded the 
population drop in Saskatchewan to the point now where we are below 1 
million for the first time in six years; and also that for the period of 
January to March of this year, we were the only province or territory in 
all of Canada in which to show a drop in population. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we believe that the major cause for this is the 
government's policies of megaproject financing and privatization.  My 
question to the Deputy Premier is: will you admit that these statistics are 
chilling and point out a very serious situation?  And if so, will you 
indicate to the legislature that this government will at long last abandon 
its wrong-headed policies which have led to this catastrophe? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- Mr. Speaker, if the Leader of the Opposition suggests 
for a moment that it is due to the policy for the population decline, I 
would ask on the other hand, is the Leader of the Opposition ready to admit 
it that in fact it was the policies under this government that took the 
population of Saskatchewan well over the 1 million mark in about '84-85? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- Same old thing.  You can't have it both ways, Mr. 
Speaker.  I think in fact, Mr. Speaker, there is need for concern when the 
population does go down.  The Leader of the Opposition and myself would 
both agree on that.  I believe it is incumbent upon any government or any 
Assembly within a province, when their population declines, to take a look 
at the reasons why.  Those sectors in fact where it's been happening and 
the Leader of the Opposition will recognize the difficulties with the 
agriculture sector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have said that we need to diversify.  We need some 
stabilization within the agriculture community plus diversification.  We've 
seen the announcement of diversification with several projects coming on 
that in fact will hold this province in good stead in the future, 
population-wise and job-wise, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  A new question to the Deputy 
Premier.  The Deputy Premier indicates, Mr. Speaker, that conditions beyond 
the control of this government are to fault for this precipitous drop.  And 
I point out to you, Mr. Speaker, that in the case of Manitoba and Alberta, 
also heavily dependent upon farming and agriculture, they did not drop. 
 
I draw to the attention of the Deputy Premier that in the Maritime 
provinces, the population did not drop.  I draw to the hon. minister, the 
minister of economic development, that no province and no territory in all 
of Canada except Saskatchewan has dropped.  Combined with cut-backs to 
education, thereby cutting back opportunities for our young people, the 
situation is disastrous. 
 
Now look, Mr. Speaker, I want to ask the Deputy Premier this question: why 
don't you people simply stop trying to blame everybody else and anything 
else, understand the facts which are here before us in the province of 
Saskatchewan and get on with the new long-term economic game plan that 
makes sense and gives results, not the current situation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- One would assume that the Leader of the Opposition 
would know, Mr. Speaker, that of all the arable land in Canada, 43 per cent 
of it belongs in this province -- 43 per cent out of the whole of Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that tells you the reliance that this province has on 
agriculture.  We have stated many times that a firm economic development 
policy that is going to serve this province and its people well, Mr. 
Speaker, into the future is going to have to look at diversification into 
manufacturing, into the processing of its raw materials, and into the 
processing of food.  Mr. Speaker, we have been active in doing that and we 
will continue that in the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the Deputy Premier, 
and quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, I must say that her answer can only be one 
of little comfort for the people of the province of Saskatchewan, because 
she says that they're going to continue with more of the same. 
 
And more of the same means, as the statistics show, bankruptcies at a 
highest rate ever, housing starts down at the lowest rates ever, fewer jobs 
created at the lowest -- this is a precipitous drop -- the credit 
worthiness of the province of Saskatchewan going right down to the bottom 
line, and this Deputy Premier says, we're going to continue to give the 
people of the province more of the same. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to the Deputy Premier is: in the face of all of 
these statistics, in the face that other provinces have been able to 
manage, without waste and incompetence, in the face of the fact that this 
is the only jurisdiction in all of Canada which has shown these massive 
indicators of economic failure, why you can't you do at least the right 
thing and acknowledge you've made a mistake, you're doing the wrong things 



 

 

and change your policies and change your ways.  Why not do that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- Mr. Speaker, it's interesting to note, despite the 
difficulties that we have had with agriculture, despite the weather, 
despite low prices, the markets right around the world, that our population 
is still over a million.  Now, Mr. Speaker, if we had have not made an 
effort to look at diversification, I'd venture a guess that we would be 
well below the million mark without job opportunities; for instance on pulp 
mills, Meadow Lake, the Prince Albert situation, the upgrader in Regina, 
the upgrader that is beginning in Lloydminster, plus a lot of the other 
smaller plants. 
 
I think of one in my own constituency, Mr. Speaker, and that's Threadfast, 
which has expanded several times over the last few years.  Our 
manufacturing base is up 600 per cent, Mr. Speaker, and we believe firmly 
that we must continue the diversification efforts, like the Saskatchewan 
fertilizer plant and other plants; that as it pertains to agriculture and 
the processing of food, Mr. Speaker, can only in fact get us on that level 
where we will be competitive with the other provinces in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

By-Elections in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Speaker, I direct my question as well to the Deputy 
Premier in the the absence of the Premier.  Madam Deputy Premier, the facts 
speak for themselves: employment down 5,000 last year, the only drop in all 
of Canada; the end of the year, our labour force shrunk by 14,000, the only 
drop in all of Canada.  Bankruptcies are up all across the piece, Madam 
Deputy Premier.  And then you have the credit ratings of this spring from 
three different credit rating companies, Madam Premier. 
 
In eight years, in eight years of this government, the only people who seem 
to have prospered are the Cargills and the Pocklingtons and the Childers of 
the world, and no job creation program for our young people in the budget 
of this year, Madam Deputy Premier. 
 
And I say to you, when you say that the people of Saskatchewan support your 
government's efforts to get the economy going, I say that people can't 
support what isn't there; they can't support what isn't there.  And so I 
ask you, Madam Deputy Premier, why not put it to the test?  Why not put it 
to the test? 
 
There are two vacant seats in this Assembly.  At the end of this month, 
there will be another one.  Why not go to the people of Indian 
Head-Wolseley and the people of Kindersley and the people of Turtleford and 
see if they're satisfied with your performance?  Madam Deputy Premier, why 
not let the people decide? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- Mr. Speaker, I believe that the people of Saskatchewan 
have clearly said, and will continue to say, that this province must 
diversify its economy and its resources so that we are no longer solely 
reliable on agriculture for the future.  You know, the member from Moose 
Jaw has mentioned the fertilizer plant and a few other things.  You know, 
he says, quit doing this, but he totally ignores some of the other things 
that have taken place. 
 
How about Phillips Cables in Moose Jaw?  What does the member feel about 
that? 
 
But he doesn't talk about those jobs, those jobs factors, and in fact, Mr. 
Speaker, that have helped to move away from agriculture into the 
manufacturing -- Babcock and Wilcox to Melville, Threadfast in Swift 
Current.  Mr. Speaker, there are dozens of those smaller units around the 
province, and we will continue to put the emphasis on that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Madam Deputy Premier, let me repeat my question.  You appear 
to have ignored and chosen not to have heard it.  Madam Deputy Premier, 
there are two vacancies in this House.  There will be another one at the 
end of the month.  Madam Deputy Premier, why not let the people of those 
three constituencies exercise judgement in your government?  Why not go to 
the people and let the people decide for the province of Saskatchewan, 
Madam Deputy Premier? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, is he truly worried about the 
population loss?  Is he worried about job opportunities?  Or what's he 
worried about?  Election campaigning?  If he's worried about an election, 
he's going to have to sit and stew a little while longer because that is up 
to the Premier to make that call, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Occupational Health and Safety for Government Employees 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my question 
is to the Minister of Labour and it concerns your recent statements 
declaring this Occupational Health and Safety Week.  In a June 4 press 
release you stated: 
 

 Safety is everyone's responsibility.  The costs of occupational accidents 
and disease are immeasurable in terms of human suffering and financial 
loss. 

 
The release went on to say, Mr. Minister: 
 

 The minister challenged all employers, employees and occupational health 
and safety committees to put the highest priority and commitment on 
improving work place safety, not only during Safety Week but throughout 



 

 

the year. 
 

Nice sentiments, Mr. Minister, but can you tell this House, do they apply 
to your government the same as to any other employee or employer in the 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan has an 
excellent safety record, excellent safety programs.  In addition we are 
currently hiring an additional six occupational health and safety officers 
in Saskatchewan.  Everything that can be done is being done.  That doesn't 
mean that there aren't accidents from time to time, and we have to learn 
from those. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  A new question.  Mr. 
Minister, your poor record in occupational health and safety was 
demonstrated in last week's estimates, so the people of Saskatchewan know 
differently, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have here a submission by the Department of Justice for 
operations at the Regina Correctional Centre in the fiscal year 1991-92.  
Now this proposal suggests that correctional centres, as a cost-cutting 
measure, be exempted from occupational health and safety laws in this 
province -- that they be exempted, Mr. Minister.  Now why do you feel that 
employees of your government should be entitled to less protection on the 
work place than what other employees in the private sector? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Speaker, what exemption?  My department has ruled 
against the government in their preliminary ruling on this matter.  So I 
say, what exemption?  What nonsense.  Stop bringing such garbage to the 
Assembly.  Didn't my department rule against the Department of Justice?  I 
cannot help it if the Department of Justice is not happy with that ruling.  
That will have to be worked out between them, but don't bring in garbage 
like this of proposal from Justice.  The ruling is public and it's quite 
clear. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: --  Mr. Minister, a new question, Mr. Speaker.  You're calling 
the . . . your colleagues' proposal trash, Mr. Minister, garbage.  That's 
what you said.  Now if you don't agree with his action, you should talk to 
him and get things sorted out in your cabinet. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Now, Mr. Minister, given your sentiments expressed in the 
June 4 news release, could you tell this House what cost your government 
puts on the injury or death of a corrections worker, and how that relates 



 

 

to the money you hope to save by this action? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Speaker, the NDP are here in the House today on a 
matter that is being discussed between the union and the employer: the 
Department of Justice.  They are here on a matter that has already been 
ruled on by my department.  What the NDP are doing here in the Assembly is 
they are trying to do the bargaining on behalf of the union here in the 
Assembly when it should be done at the negotiation table. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- New question, Mr. Speaker.  What we're trying to do is 
we're trying to expose that there's a difference between what you say and 
what you practise.  That's the point here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- And, Mr. Minister, this is a classic case.  While you talk 
about the need for attendance to work place safety, your government is 
preparing in this report to put corrections staff in a precarious position 
by cutting staff, and then by exempting the centres from occupational 
health and safety legislation.  Now that's what you're attempting to do. 
 
That, Mr. Minister, is blatant hypocrisy, and I wonder how you can explain 
it to the workers at the correction centres. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Speaker, the NDP is a mouthpiece for the union, 
and this proves it. 
 

Saskatchewan Commission on Directions in Health Care 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to the Associate 
Minister of Health, in the absence of the Minister of Health. 
 
Mr. Associate Minister, last week Mr. Walter Podiluk, the vice-chairman of 
the Murray commission or the executive director, and your former deputy, as 
I understand, spoke to a meeting of the Regina Community Clinic.  And he 
strongly defended the commission's recommendation to establish 15 regional 
boards across the province. 
 
Can the associate minister tell this House today whether or not Mr. Podiluk 
is representing the government, and whether or not the government is now 
prepared to accept that recommendation in the report? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Mr. Speaker, as I've said before, it amazes me to no end 
how the opposition critic is so amazed by the commission's recommendations. 
 



 

 

Mr. Speaker, we've said time and time again that the report is available to 
the public.  The report has been made available to all the health care 
groups across the province -- some 480 or 500 boards.  We've given them 
some time and we're going to give them some more time to look at the report 
and get back to us to have them express their feelings to us. 
 
This morning, Mr. Speaker, we had the opportunity to meet with the 
Saskatchewan Hospital Association.  They've had a chance to look at the 
report but they need more time to study that report, as do most of the 
other groups around the province.  It's an extensive report that speaks to 
health care, not only for today, but for the future.  It will take tine to 
look at it. 
 
Mr. Podiluk was a member of the commission and continues to work for the 
commission, as you're probably aware.  Mr. Podiluk is presently looking at 
the centres of excellence in Saskatoon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- New question, Mr. Speaker.  What amazes me, Mr. Associate 
Minister, is the fact that you have absolutely no opinion on a matter that 
has been discussed extensively across this province over that last two 
years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- But then, Mr. Speaker, I shouldn't be amazed because it is 
so typical of this government.  First they form a commission to address 
what they perceive to be problems in the health care area, and then they 
don't even know if they're going to listen to their commission.  No wonder 
Saskatchewan people don't believe that you will follow any of the 
recommendations of Consensus Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Minister, Mr. Associate Minister, you must have your own 
opinion, and the public has the right to know.  Now will you tell this 
House today whether or not you personally support that particular 
recommendation of the commission?  Let us know, Mr. Associate Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Mr. Speaker, we have said time and time again that this 
is an extensive report.  It took two years to put it together.  There is 
people from across the province that had an opportunity to make 
representation to the report.  These groups and all the groups, Mr. 
Speaker, around the province will need time to study the report, to give it 
the justice that it deserves.  They've asked for time and we will give them 
that time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We know all about the opposition member.  We all know about the 
opposition's critic -- you know, eagerness to respond and eagerness to 
criticize.  The report wasn't even made public in a proper manner and the 



 

 

opposition critic had condemned it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- New question, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Associate Minister, your 
government is being totally unfair to the people of this province.  All 
over Saskatchewan, concerned citizens are raising money to help pay for 
health care facilities in their community and they don't know whether or 
not your government intends to take the ownership of these health 
facilities away and put it in a regional board a p√† la the Murray 
commission. 
 
And if it is your intention to change the rules on these people, why not 
show your true colours at this point?  Show some courage.  Tell them now so 
that they'll at least know what rules they're playing under, Mr. Associate 
Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Mr. Speaker, the opposition critic talks about 
unfairness, and I would really like to speak to that at this time.  If we 
really want to talk about unfairness, what would be more unfair than to 
take a stance, to take an immediate stance on a commission's report that 
deals with health care in this province?  We have one of the best health 
care systems in the whole world, Mr. Speaker.  We will make sure that it's 
one of the best health care systems in the whole world. 
 
We've said that we will take time to consult, Mr. Speaker, and we will take 
time to consult.  It will be fair.  We will take that time to make sure 
that it's fair.  We will not take the kinds of tactics that the opposition 
has: mediscare, politics, scare, fear tactics, Mr. Speaker.  We refuse to 
do that, Mr. Speaker.  We refuse to do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Environmental Impact Study on Cargill Fertilizer Plant 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have a question directed to 
the Minister of the Environment.  Mr. Minister, in the Star-Phoenix in the 
editorial recently, dealing with the Cargill fertilizer plant, the 
editorial said the following: 
 

 . . . the real purpose of the study is to allow the government to 
backtrack, ensuring that all its environmental bases are covered. 

 
Regarding your recently announced environmental impact study -- after the 
fact.  It went on to say that: 
 

 The reliability of this study is also in question -- its premise seems 
concocted to ensure the project goes ahead, no matter what the 
environmental outcome (might be). 

 
Saferco, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, has said, "much more detail will be 



 

 

contained in the new impact study," admitting that the old study was 
inadequate. 
 
So I ask you, Mr. Minister, in light of this, why did you authorize 
construction of the Cargill fertilizer plant when the study which was 
provided to you by Cargill in the first place was inadequate, and you 
shouldn't have been able to authorize it based on the information they 
provided? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite will hold up one 
editorial in one newspaper, and I respect that that does represent one 
man's opinion. 
 
I want to reaffirm, Mr. Speaker, what the decision was and what the 
decision-making process was all about.  The detailed proposal -- 70 pages, 
detailed proposal tabled in the legislature -- that was submitted to our 
department, we found to be acceptable, Mr. Speaker.  We found that the 
project was safe environmentally and that a very thorough review had taken 
place.  Mr. Speaker, that was to the satisfaction of the ministers 
involved.  It was to the satisfaction of the department, and we found it 
acceptable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have already stated that in general terms we want to make 
certain that all people have input into the process.  Concerns were raised 
in the general sense of the word -- no specific concerns, but in a general 
sense of the word -- about the process which is currently under review and 
will be changed.  And, Mr. Speaker, to ensure, ensure that all people felt 
overly comfortable with this project, Mr. Speaker, we have asked the 
company, who has voluntarily submitted to a thorough analysis of the 
project. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, a new question to the minister.  Mr. 
Minister, I have looked at the documentation which you provided which was 
selectively chosen and incomplete and inadequate.  That documentation which 
you tabled in the House showed that with regard to nitrous oxide emissions, 
it was a best case scenario, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister -- hardly a 
justification for approval. 
 
It showed that with regard to concerns by the water quality branch of your 
department and waste management sections, they were not satisfied with the 
information contained in the final report. 
 
None of the responses to those concerns and several others was provided in 
the information which you tabled, Mr. Minister.  How can you therefore 
justify approving the construction of this plant and then finally -- after 
the facts, just as in Rafferty -- asking for an environmental impact study 
when the plant's already being constructed, Mr. Minister.  How can you 
justify that? 
 



 

 

Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member uses the words 
"selectively taking information out of a report."  Mr. Speaker, I submit 
that the hon. member is selectively taking information out of the report 
that has no fundamental basis in fact, regarding environmental problems. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have already stated, this has gone through a thorough 
review, but it will go through a more thorough review as part and parcel of 
that agreement.  If there are real concerns, genuine concerns brought up, 
Mr. Speaker, I have the authority and I commit to you that that project 
will stop.  If there are changes that are required, Mr. Speaker, those 
changes will be made. 
 
But thus far, Mr. Speaker, the opposition has not brought up one, not one, 
single, specific environmental concern, Mr. Speaker.  It's pure politics.  
It has nothing to do with the environment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 45 -- An Act to amend The Land Titles Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The Land Titles Amendment Act, 
1990 will introduce several amendments to that Act which are required to 
adjust perceived shortcomings in the existing legislation.  Each amendment 
addresses a specific issue and the changes being made are not 
interdependent. 
 
One amendment will address a problem which has arisen as a result of the 
high number of Saskatchewan farmers who have chosen to exercise their right 
of first refusal under The Saskatchewan Farm Security Act.  This amendment 
will provide for the withdrawal of writs of execution against specific land 
owned by farmers in order to facilitate settlements under The Saskatchewan 
Farm Security Act without forcing disclosures.  Writ-holding creditors will 
now be able to provide clear title on a farmer's property, which is to be 
voluntarily transferred to his mortgagor pursuant to a settlement 
agreement, without losing the effect of that writ on the land in the case 
of a right of first refusal repurchased by that farmer. 
 
This amendment will facilitate settlements between farmers and lenders by 
removing a significant impediment to co-operation which currently exists 
between mortgagers and writ-holding creditors. 
 
In another area, a change made to the Act in 1987 to accommodate financing 
for the NewGrade project will be made a general concept of the Act.  That 
provision states that a right to enter upon land in order to sever and 
remove fixtures attached to the land is an interest in the land to which 



 

 

the fixtures are attached.  It will therefore be possible to register a 
caveat to protect this interest. 
 
The proposed amendment is consistent with a resolution passed in 1989 by 
The Law Society of Saskatchewan requesting the provision be expanded for 
the benefit of all persons using the land title system. 
 
In order to facilitate the rural gasification program, another amendment 
will provide a statutory right of way for SaskEnergy's rural gas 
distribution lines as an implied condition on certificates of title outside 
of urban municipalities.  This amendment will ensure that easements for 
pipelines for the rural gasification program will not have to be 
registered.  The provision is similar to an existing provision exempting 
SaskPower from registering easements for the rural power distribution 
program.  The amendment will assist the rural gas distribution program by 
keeping the cost at the present level. 
 
Another amendment will provide that an owner of land or other person who 
claims an interest in land and who wishes to remove a caveat on that land 
is required to notify the caveator of the intent to lapse the caveat.  
Presently the land titles offices must send these notices out. 
 
As a result of the proposed change, those with an interest in removing the 
caveat will be responsible for this step in the process.  This approach is 
consistent with similar amendments to the tax enforcement procedure in 
1987. 
 
A provision will also be added to The Land Titles Act to clarify that 
easements for portions of pipelines that were obtained by expropriation can 
be mortgaged for financing purposes. 
 
This amendment complements an existing provision in The Public Utilities 
Easements Act which provide that easements obtained pursuant to an 
agreement can be mortgaged. 
 
This amendment will benefit pipeline companies by ensuring that they have 
legislative authority to mortgage the easements respecting the entire 
length of a relevant pipeline. 
 
Finally, an amendment will be made to allow for the transfer of caveats 
between parties without a loss in priority and without requiring the 
registration of a new caveat following the change of ownership of an 
interest in land. 
 
Under the existing system, no transfer of caveat is possible.  Upon a 
change in ownership of an interest in land, which is evidenced by a caveat, 
it is necessary to file a new caveat for that same interest.  This has led 
to an unnecessary proliferation of caveats in title, as well as an 
unnecessary expense for those individuals whose interests are protected by 
that caveat. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The Land Titles Act. 
 



 

 

Mr. Koskie: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister . . . Mr. Speaker, rather.  I want 
an opportunity to take a look at this Bill.  It was only printed, I 
believe, on Friday.  And as a consequence, I think it's only right that we 
have an opportunity to have a look at the . . . and also to get some legal 
interpretation in respect to it.  And therefore I beg leave to adjourn the 
debate at this time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Bill No. 47 -- An Act respecting the Saskatchewan Association of 
Speech-Language Pathologists and Audiologists 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to explain the intent of The 
Speech-Language Pathologists and Audiologists Act, 1990, which will provide 
for the regulation of speech-language pathologists and audiologists in this 
province. 
 
Previous to this Act, speech-language pathologists and audiologists were 
not regulated in this province.  This legislation will ensure the public 
receives services from qualified professionals.  These professionals have 
demonstrated the maturity to manage the affairs of their own profession. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Act will allow the Saskatchewan Association of Speech 
Language Pathologists and Audiologists to register, set standards of 
conduct for, and discipline their members.  The Act is consistent with 
legislation for other regulated health care professions in the province, 
and I'd like to outline some of those features. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it will be mandatory for all those who provide services as a 
speech-language pathologist or audiologist to registered with the 
association.  The term "speech-language pathologist," "audiologist," and 
similar titles are reserved for qualified practitioners under this Act.  
These clauses will protect the public from receiving services from 
unqualified practitioners. 
 
The Act also specifies that up to two public representatives may be 
appointed to the council of the association by the Lieutenant Governor in 
Council.  This type of public participation by members of the public is of 
benefit to the association as well as to the public. 
 
Speech-language pathologists and audiologists will be responsible for 
registering their own members.  The Act will ensure that those 
professionals currently entitled to practise as speech-language 
pathologists or audiologists are eligible to become members. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Act provides the association with the power to make 
by-laws.  However, consistent with other regulated professions, by-laws 
that could potentially impact the public require the approval of the 
Minister of Health before taking effect. 
 
The Act ensures that public complaints about incompetence or misconduct are 
acted upon in an effective manner.  The discipline provisions of the Act 
outline the manner in which complaints are investigated and discipline 



 

 

hearings are conducted.  The complainant shall also be informed of the 
outcome of the association's actions upon a complaint. 
 
To assist in protecting the public, employers will be required to report to 
the association dismissals of speech-language pathologists and audiologists 
for reasons of misconduct or incompetence.  The association can then take 
the appropriate disciplinary action.  The Saskatchewan speech-language 
pathologists and audiologists association has been fully consulted on the 
Act and looks forward to taking on their new regulatory responsibilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to move second reading of The Speech-Language 
Pathologists and Audiologists Act. 
 
(1445) 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to take this 
opportunity to welcome the speech and language pathologists and 
audiologists who are present here today.  I was not aware that they were 
coming in.  We had not been advised.  But I'm really pleased to see them 
taking such an interest. 
 
I will be very interested in considering further the comments of the 
Associate Minister of Health.  We have raised the issue of speech and 
language pathologists -- the shortage in the province -- on numerous 
occasions with the government, recognizing that there is a drastic shortage 
and that steps should be taken to increase the numbers of speech and 
language pathologists and audiologists in the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I am wondering whether this Bill addresses that particular issue.  We just 
received the Bill on Friday, the printed Bill, I should point out.  I've 
been through it once, Mr. Speaker, but I have not had an opportunity to 
review it in detail.  We have managed in that period of time to touch base 
with the professional association and I understand that they're pleased 
with the legislation.  So that goes a long way in assisting us in making a 
decision as to whether or not we'll support the legislation, but I do need 
an opportunity to review it in more detail.  I can't just take a look at it 
and say, let it go. 
 
So I am going to ask for an adjournment on this matter and hopefully we can 
bring it up once again in the very near future. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 29 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the 
Hon. Mr. Swenson that Bill No. 29 -- An Act to amend The Crown Minerals Act 
be now read a second time. 
 



 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee 
of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 7 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the 
Hon. Mr. Lane that Bill No. 7 -- An Act to amend The Intestate Succession 
Act be now read a second time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee 
of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 8 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the 
Hon. Mr. Lane that Bill No. 8 -- An Act respecting the Survival of Certain 
Causes of Action be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want only to make very brief 
comments in respect to it.  And this Bill here has been essentially drawn 
up by the Law Reform Commission who have looked at some of their 
difficulties in respect to the survival of certain causes of actions.  And 
they basically made four recommendations in the Bill that has been brought 
forward by the minister. 
 
The Law Reform Commission indicated four basic principles, as I said.  
First of all, that an action should survive the death of a victim, whether 
or not the death resulted from injuries inflicted by the wrongdoer; 
secondly, the estate should not have a claim for non-pecuniary loss of the 
deceased; and third, an estate should not have a claim for loss of future 
earnings of the deceased; and four, an action should survive the death of 
the wrongdoer but a claim for exemplary damages should not survive unless 
it's a purpose to strip the estate of profits of wrongdoing. 
 
Those are the four basic principles that were set forth by the Law Reform 
Commission.  They have supported their recommendations by a considerable 
amount of research and case law in drawing up the Bill.  This Bill then 
reflects that which the Law Reform Commission have drawn and we are in 
support of the general thrust of the Bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee 
of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 39 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the 
Hon. Mr. Lane that Bill No. 39 -- An Act respecting Summary Offences 
Procedure and Certain consequential amendments resulting from the enactment 
of this Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  We've had an opportunity to review 
in some detail the new summary procedures . . . or The Summary Offences 
Procedure Act and has had been indicated by the minister, it really 



 

 

re-enacts two procedures: a summary procedure under the Criminal Code and 
the present system under The Highway Traffic Act for a summons. 
 
The Act essentially puts in place a new procedure which is called the 
notice ticket summary procedure, and the significance of this is that a 
number of acts, a number of offences, are going to be designated that will 
be commenced in accordance with the new procedure. 
 
The one difficulty that we have in dealing with it in specific is that the 
offences which are going to come under the offence notice ticket summary 
procedure method have not been set out in regulations.  It is generally 
indicated that they will relate to highway traffic offences, and we agree 
in respect to the problem that we have had in enforcing summonses or 
previously of highway traffic offences.  I am told that a large number of 
highway traffic offences, individuals have been charged and have neglected 
or refused to pay their fine; and as a consequence, there are a large 
number of warrants outstanding for those offences. 
 
The essence of this is to really put in a new procedure that in the event 
that the fine is not paid, that the licence or the driver's licence may be 
refused to be renewed.  They have, I guess, put this into place in several 
of the other provinces of Canada and it has been deemed to be fairly 
effective. 
 
There are a couple of questions in respect to the enforcement.  We find now 
that anyone with a traffic ticket violation can voluntarily pay their fine.  
If they don't, then there is a surcharge for late payment which is going to 
be set by regulations.  We don't know exactly or precisely what amount of 
charge that is, and we will be asking the minister to clarify that because 
it's also set by regulations.  They indicate that it's somewhere in the 
neighbourhood of 20 to $30 for a late payment of a ticket, a voluntary 
fine. 
 
It goes on to indicate that in the event that that's not paid, that the 
next step that can be taken is that there be no renewal of a driver's 
licence unless that fine is paid. 
 
There is going to be a very significant amount of additional revenue 
raised, and certainly I think that if there is additional moneys raised 
either by late payment charge and/or by the greater enforcement, I think 
that a part of this should be further driver training, and law-abiding 
driving procedures should be a part of the government's thrust as well as 
the collection of fines. 
 
Basically we are in agreement with the legislation, Mr. Speaker, and 
accordingly, we are prepared to allow this to go to committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee 
of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 42 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane that Bill No. 42 -- An Act respecting the Legal Profession, 
the Law Foundation and the Law Society of Saskatchewan be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Just a few brief comments in 
respect to the new legal professions Act. 
 
I understand that it is in general agreement with the lawyers as to the new 
Act.  There are a number of positive changes that we concur with.  It 
indicates that the governing body of the legal profession, the benchers, 
will now have two lay persons that will be appointed by the Lieutenant 
Governor in . . . or by order in council. 
 
It also indicates that in respect to the discipline of members -- and I 
think it would be a welcome addition to the general public -- that the 
legal . . . the benchers now may discipline members, and it's not confined 
solely to the conduct unbecoming of a barrister and solicitor, but the new 
Act enables the benchers to deal with the issue of competency.  And I think 
this is the recommendation of the benchers and I think a general approval 
of the law society.  I note also that there's some adjustment in respect to 
fines which I think is in concurrence with the legal profession of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Generally we are in agreement with it, Mr. Speaker.  We're prepared to 
allow this to proceed to committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee 
of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 33 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf that Bill No. 33 -- An Act respecting the Administration 
of Young Offenders' Services be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, this is 
basically enabling legislation to allow the government to run existing 
young offenders' programs.  Some of this legislation and the authority to 
run these programs, which have been in effect now for at least seven years 
in Saskatchewan, previously existed under The Family Services Act. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, basically we support this Bill.  I want to raise a few 
concerns that we have about the Bill in terms of general principles that 
are established in the Bill. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I might say that the first is that . . . If I might make 
a comment on the government's general record in the area of young offenders 
as it pertains to this Bill, Mr. Speaker, one of the things I think it can 
be safely said is that the government has basically put most of its 
resources, Mr. Speaker, into the young offenders' programs as they are 
generally perceived by the public, in effect, open or closed custody of 
young offenders.  In many cases, Mr. Speaker, the case of closed custody of 
course in effect we're talking about a jail for people under the age of 18 



 

 

years. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think the government has put very little resources into 
what I would describe as preventive programming.  And I'm thinking here, 
Mr. Speaker, of identifying -- as the government is entitled to under the 
federal legislation -- identifying young people who are at risk in terms of 
breaking the law, and working with them to ensure, Mr. Speaker, that they 
get their lives in order and that they don't run into problems with the 
criminal system.  Or, Mr. Speaker, identifying young people who've had a 
brush with the law but haven't gotten into serious trouble, and again 
giving them the same kind of assistance. 
 
Because, Mr. Speaker, the record with respect to the fact that it's 
relatively easy to identify young people who are likely to get into trouble 
with the law, is pretty clear.  People who are in the school system and in 
the justice system who are working with these young people, are usually 
able to identify young persons who are likely to return and likely at some 
point to be imprisoned, Mr. Speaker, if corrective action isn't taken.  And 
yet the government has put very limited resources into that kind of 
preventive programming. 
 
(1500) 
 
Similarly, Mr. Speaker, the government has failed to implement a system of 
youth justice committees that it is entitled to under the federal 
legislation.  And I was looking for some sign in this Bill, Mr. Speaker, 
that they might, as they are entitled to under federal law, implement a 
system of youth justice committees in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The province of Manitoba, for instance, Mr. Speaker, has done this very 
effectively.  And these are volunteer committees, Mr. Speaker, that are set 
up in Manitoba, of people who are concerned about the future of young 
people who are having difficulty with the law and getting into trouble, and 
who work with them, Mr. Speaker, in delivering services for young offenders 
to attempt to rehabilitate them before they get into serious trouble. 
 
Now the Government of Manitoba and many other provincial governments in 
Canada have effectively set up a system of youth justice committees in 
their province, and yet the Government of Saskatchewan has failed to take 
any action in that area whatsoever, Mr. Speaker.  We were hoping to see 
some action in this Bill.  We didn't see it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are some other concerns, more specific concerns that I 
have about the Bill that I will leave to discussion in Committee of the 
Whole, but I want to identify a couple of concerns here that I just want to 
put on the record and give notice to the minister that I'll be asking 
questions about these in committee, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One, Mr. Speaker, relates to a principle in the Bill that in effect if a 
young person is held in custody, that wherever practical they should be 
kept separate from persons over the age of 18 years who are being held in 
custody. 
 



 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a principle that we agree with, but I think that the 
principle as enunciated in the Act could be stronger.  I would like to see 
legislation, Mr. Speaker, that in effect provides encouragement and 
incentive to ensure that everywhere in Saskatchewan where young people are 
in correctional facilities, whether it be under remand or after sentencing, 
Mr. Speaker, that they will be kept separate; that young people under the 
age of 18 will be kept separate from adults. 
 
And I don't just think it's a matter of doing it where practical, Mr. 
Speaker.  I think it's a matter of the provincial legislation enunciating 
as a principle that this shall be done, and that where facilities are not 
currently set up, they shall be put in place, Mr. Speaker.  So the 
provision is not strong enough and that's something that I want to ask the 
Minister of Justice about in . . . and the Minister of Social Services 
about in Committee of the  
 DWhole. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, another concern I had as I reviewed the Bill is the 
provisions that relate to liability.  And again I don't want to get in 
specifics here except to note that the general principle is that people who 
are undertaking responsibilities under this Bill -- youth Justice workers 
as an example, or anybody else who is working in a young offenders' 
facility, Mr. Speaker -- anybody who is undertaking their responsibilities 
as they pertain to the authority granted by this Bill are provided with 
limitations on liability, in effect no liability for actions that are taken 
while they perform their duties.  In other words, they can't be sued, 
shortly put, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the Bill has a rather unusual provision in that it extends the 
guarantee of no liability, freedom from suit in effect, to people who are 
undertaking their responsibilities as authorized by the Bill or who believe 
they are taking on responsibilities that are in effect not authorized by 
the Bill, Mr. Speaker, and that to extend a privilege of no liability to 
people who are working in the young offenders' system and are in effect not 
performing duties related to this Act although they believe they are, Mr. 
Speaker, seems to me to be very unusual and not a good precedent for this 
House, not a good precedent for legislation in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  And so we will be taking objection to that and 
asking the Minister of Social Services questions about that in Committee of 
the Whole. 
 
The final point I want to make, Mr. Speaker, with respect to this Bill 
which as I mentioned in general we will be supporting, is that there is 
another set of provisions that in effect deal with situations under which 
the federal corrections Act will apply to people working under this 
provincial legislation, the new young offenders' legislation, Mr. Speaker.  
And one of the things that is granted under the federal legislation 
pertaining to young offenders and pertaining to corrections is of course 
powers of arrest.  And I notice, Mr. Speaker, in the Bill that operators of 
private service homes are to be given powers of arrest, in effect to have 
the same rights as police officers. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, again seems to me to be rather unusual.  We're not 



 

 

here talking of course about young people who are in closed custody or in 
what one might call a jail.  Nor, Mr. Speaker, are we talking about most of 
the regular open-custody facilities in the province.  We're talking here 
about private service operators who likely have little training related to 
police functions.  And I will have some questions in committee, Mr. 
Speaker, about why these operators are being given powers of arrest, in 
effect the right to operate as police officers do. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, those are some of the reservations we have about the Bill.  
We'll be supporting it in principle, and therefore I'm prepared at this 
point on behalf of members on this side on the House to indicate that we're 
ready for it to move into committee.  Thank you very much. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee 
of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 40 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the 
Hon. Mr. Petersen that Bill No. 40 -- An Act to amend The Dangerous Goods 
Transportation Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'll just take a few moments 
to raise a point of concern on this Bill.  I notice in the minister's 
second reading comments on the Bill, the minister did not specify whether 
groups that might be impacted by the application of this Bill had been 
contacted and what their response to the Bill was.  And perhaps the 
minister in committee or in closing remarks, if he feels that's necessary, 
can indicate that. 
 
One other point I want to raise with regard to the Bill before us is the 
exclusion with regard to the transportation of dangerous goods that are 
moved under the sole direction and control of the Minister of National 
Defence of Canada.  I would like the enlargement on that particular clause 
or that particular section of the Bill.  And further to that, Mr. Speaker, 
I would in due course and probably in committee, be able to ask more 
questions about the enforcement provisions -- who does the enforcing? 
federal, provincial, or whatever. 
 
And I would expect that would about sum up the comments I have on second 
reading, Mr. Speaker, and I expect that most of the questions that I have 
can be answered in committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee 
of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 41 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the 
Hon. Mr. Petersen that Bill No. 41 -- An Act to amend The Highway Traffic 
Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  This Bill, I suppose in its 



 

 

essence, could almost have been sent to the Non-Controversial Bills 
Committee.  However, it is passing through a second reading of the House.  
The question arises in my mind again, Mr. Speaker, with regard to the 
application of these amendments to The Highway Traffic Act, they will bear 
on the commercial operators of trucks and buses in Saskatchewan. 
 
I suppose the question can be pursued in committee about the minister's 
discussions with the organizations upon which the Bill will impact.  I 
would be prepared to follow it up, but I just give the minster notice that 
I would like to, at that time, hear some discussion with regard to the 
people that are affected by the Bill.  Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee 
of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 35 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth that Bill No. 35 -- An Act to amend The Income Tax Act be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise really for no other purpose than to 
state that this Bill can go to committee.  We will have some questions on 
it, but those questions can be better put in committee than the comments 
made now. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee 
of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No 24 -- An Act to amend The Municipal Revenue Sharing Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Chairman, we will not require officials for this 
Bill.  It is a Bill that is straightforward, and because of the familiarity 
with crop insurance in rural areas, the Associate Minister of Health will 
look after this Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think the opposition's 
fairly well versed on the amendments that are made to municipal hail.  If 
they've got any questions, I'd gladly entertain them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Chairman, I apologize for the confusion.  I 
misrepresented to you; I had said municipal hail.  What I meant was 
municipal revenue sharing.  You're quite correct with Bill No. 24. 
 
Clauses 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 15 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Embalmers Act 
 
Clause 1 



 

 

 
Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.  Mr. Chair, what this Bill 
does is it changes the existing legislation on advertising by the embalmers 
association and the legislation regarding the displaying of signs and 
advertising for business.  My question to the Associate Minister of Health 
is: what is the problem that the amendments are intended to overcome with 
respect to advertising? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Mr. Chairman, it's my understanding that the amendments 
are to enable the profession to better regulate advertising. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- In what manner, Mr. Chair, will it be better regulated? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Well it will give council the authority to make by-laws, 
rules, and regulations, and in that way better regulate advertising. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Chair, that doesn't answer my question.  In what way are 
they going to better regulate?  What by-laws will be passed?  What will be 
the substance of these by-laws?  What will be the substance of the 
regulations?  I'm sure the associate minister knows. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Mr. Chairman, the council will be able to make by-laws, 
rules, and regulations providing for the establishment of new or the 
approval of existing schools of embalming and governing special courses of 
instruction in embalming and the preparation of the remains of deceased 
persons for interment. 
 
They will also be able to make by-laws, rules, and regulations for 
providing for the registration of students and fees payable thereon.  
They'll also be able to make by-laws, rules, and regulations prescribing 
the course of training and instruction of students. 
 
They'll also be able to make by-laws, rules, and regulations prescribing 
the conditions as to the notice, place of hearing, representation of 
parties by counsel, manner of taking evidence, and the effect of any order 
made on a hearing following a refusal to register any person or the 
suspension or revocation of a licence or permit. 
 
They'll also be able to make by-laws, rules, and regulations governing the 
issue of certificates of qualification, licences, and permits, and the 
renewal of licences and permits and prescribing of fees payable thereon. 
 
They'll also be able to make by-laws, rules, and regulations specifying the 
circumstances and conditions under which certificates of qualification and 
licences to carry on business as an embalmer may be cancelled, and 
prescribing the procedure for the cancellation thereof. 
 
They'll also be able to make by-laws, rules, and regulations governing the 
inspection and regulation of the premises, accommodation, and equipment of 
embalmers. 
 
They'll also be able to make by-laws, rules, and regulations prescribing 
the duties of the secretary or any other employee of the association. 



 

 

 
They'll also be able to make by-laws, rules, and regulations specifying 
what shall be deemed to be unprofessional, infamous, or disgraceful conduct 
on the part of an embalmer. 
 
They'll also be able to make those by-laws, rules, and regulations 
providing for engaging and paying for any services deemed necessary by 
council, and also for providing generally for the direction and management 
of the association and for the better carrying out of the provisions of the 
Act. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Chair, I'm not sure . . . I'm looking . . . and this is 
Bill 15 we're talking about, is it?  Because what Bill 15 says to me is 
that they're going to amend subsection 19(1) to add the following clause: 
"regulating advertising."  It doesn't say, Mr. Chair, that they're going to 
amend it to do all these other things. 
 
I thought the Bill just spoke to advertising.  Now I'm not sure what the 
associate minister was reading from.  Perhaps he's reading from the powers 
that are already existing in the legislation.  But my question is related 
to the amendment in the Bill, and my question remains the same: how are 
they going to legislate advertising, Mr. Chair, as compared to what was 
done before? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Mr. Chairman, there will be an amendment that will be 
made to the second last thing that I addressed.  As you are aware, section 
19(1) reads: 
 

 The council may make bylaws, rules and regulations: 
 
 (j) providing for engaging and paying 

for any services deemed necessary by the council; 
 

And the amendment will be an add-on as I understand it, regulating 
advertising. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Am I correct then in stating that what this Bill does is add 
a new power for the council to regulate advertising, and that's all that 
this Bill does? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- The amendment will in effect enable council to make 
regulations regarding advertising, that's correct. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Is that all that the Bill does? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- It allows council to make regulations regarding 
advertising.  Sections 38 and 39 will be withdrawn. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- And what do sections 38 and 39 provide? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- I'll read them briefly for the member opposite.  Section 
38 in the existing legislation says: 
 



 

 

 No embalmer shall adopt any form of advertising other than a professional 
card or announcement, stating only his name, the fact he is duly licensed, 
his business address, telephone numbers, and the name, address and 
telephone number of his manager, if any.  Such card or announcement shall 
not be larger than ten square inches; it shall not appear in more than one 
place in any newspaper, journal, magazine or other publication; and it 
shall not be attached to any calendar, souvenir or any other advertising 
object or device. 

 
Section 39 is: 
 

 The sign used by the embalmers at his place of business may be of any size 
but shall contain only the particulars mentioned in section 38. 

 
Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  Now I've established that we are both 
talking about the same Bill -- Bill No. 15 -- and obviously the associate 
minister wasn't completely aware as to the fact that this Bill is limited 
to regulating advertising. 
 
So I come back to my original question: how does it change sections 38 and 
39?  What are in, or will be in the by-laws of the association? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- If you've had a chance to think about section 38 and 
section 39, you'll see that those sections that I read off to you 
previously are very restrictive and really don't give council the ability 
to regulate advertising as much as they would like. 
 
The new provisions will give them a more encompassing ability to regulate 
advertising -- it was very, very restrictive before.  And as I said earlier 
it was the amendments to the Bill and there was some communications or 
misunderstanding about what we were talking about the Bill or the 
amendment, but I hope that's clarified for you now. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Minister, I didn't have any misunderstanding about what 
we were talking about.  However, you still haven't answered my question.  
Do you have a copy of the by-laws or proposed by-laws in rules and 
regulations the association's going to put forward under this new 
subclause? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- I don't have the by-laws here, and it'll give council 
the ability to regulate advertising.  As I understand it, the by-laws will 
be made available to the legislature through the Regulations Committee at a 
later time. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Obviously the legislature has the final say with respect to 
by-laws or the Minister of Health does because, Mr. Associate Minister, 
that is what usually happens in legislation.  By-laws are made and they're 
approved either by the Regulations Committee or by the Minister of Health 
or by both in the final result.  And I'm assuming that's the case here.  
And that's obviously . . . you said they go to the Regulations Committee.  
Obviously they go there for approval. 
 
Do you know what is going to be in those by-laws?  You said you don't have 



 

 

them here.  Do you have a copy of the proposed by-laws?  Or at the very 
least do you know what is going to go into those by-laws? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- The council, as I understand it, is presently drafting 
those by-laws.  I haven't seen them.  They've done a survey to try to get 
input from their members, but as I understand it, it will be much more 
improved over what they currently have and they would like to proceed. 
 
(1530) 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Have you had any discussions with them as to the content of 
the by-laws, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- My officials have discussed various aspects of 
advertising and possible things that they might include in their by-laws. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Then what is the problem that they are intending to 
overcome?  Is there a specific problem?  Or what is exactly the problem? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- As I explained earlier, section 38 and 39 are very, very 
restrictive and don't really give council the ability that they need to 
regulate advertising in an appropriate manner.  So this would give them 
more ability to regulate advertising. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Associate Minister, I just can't believe what I'm 
hearing.  You're amending the legislation to regulate advertising and you 
aren't even sure in what way these by-laws are going to be expanded.  You 
don't even have a general idea because you can't give me any sort of 
specific suggestion as to what is going to be in there. 
 
Now this is an area, Mr. Minister, that is very sensitive with respect to 
advertising, very sensitive.  And I'm sure the associate minister 
understands what I'm talking about.  And I feel it would be incumbent on 
the government to get some kind of idea as to the general direction or how 
far, how much advertising they're going to allow and what sort of manner 
they're going to allow the advertising, what form they're going to allow it 
to take.  Surely the government has some responsibility to check that out 
to the public of Saskatchewan.  Can the minister give me more information 
than what he has so far? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Well just to give you an example of how restrictive this 
advertising is, and I'm going to refer back to section 38.  I'm not sure if 
you've got it in front of you, but the way it reads at the present time 
it's: 
 

 No embalmer shall adopt any form of advertising other than a professional 
card (you know, like the little business cards?) or announcement, stating 
only his name, the fact that he is duly licensed, his business address, 
telephone numbers . . . manager, if any. 

 
So it only really says that embalmers are able to use that form of 
advertising.  So you can see how restrictive that section is.  So if you 
think about it -- and I'm sure you've been to a funeral or two -- think 



 

 

about the memorial book that one signs when one enters the church; well if 
the embalmer's name or the pastoral service, if it was associated with the 
embalmer, was on the cover of that book, that might be deemed as 
advertising. 
 
So what this legislation does is it allows council the ability to draft a 
set of by-laws which are appropriate.  The present legislation is very, 
very restrictive, and that's the problem.  So what we were trying to do is 
trying to give council the ability to regulate advertising.  And we feel 
that council, since it represents its members, will do that and do justice 
to their members and to the public at the same time. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Minister, I agree with you that 38 and 39 are 
restricted; that's not the issue.  I also agree that there should be more 
flexibility; that's not the issue.  The issue here is that as the 
Government of Saskatchewan, you have an obligation on the part of the 
public to inquire as to how far they wish to go with respect to their 
advertising and have some idea and some indication, because you're passing 
this legislation and ultimately the government or the Regulations Committee 
approves the regulations. 
 
So could you please tell me whether you have some idea as to how far the 
council wishes to go with respect to advertising? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Well, I guess my comment, Mr. Chairman, is how far do 
the members wish to go, does council wish to go?  If you really take a look 
at 38 and 39, and you suggested that they are very restrictive, what it 
will do is allow them to regulate in a proper manner, advertising.  At the 
present time it's so restrictive, and they don't have the ability to 
regulate advertising over and above that, that a lot of their members are 
having trouble complying with the legislation. 
 
I'm going to give you an example from their survey that was done.  And I'm 
not sure of the date the survey was done, but this information was sent to 
the department, I believe, in April of this year. 
 
And as an example, the thing that I mentioned to you earlier, funeral home 
name imprinted on memorial book.  Out of the members that were surveyed, 47 
thought that that was tasteful while only one thought it was distasteful.  
So that's an example of what they thought was tasteful. 
 
As far as an example of things that they felt weren't tasteful or felt were 
distasteful, one of the ones that they mentioned was television 
advertising.  Seven members responded saying it was tasteful; 41 responded 
saying that it was distasteful.  Advertising on cookbooks or in cookbooks 
-- 15 felt that it was tasteful; 17 felt that it was distasteful. 
 
So you can see the perplexing situation that they have under the current 
legislation.  I think that the member's concerns are legitimate, and I do 
think that we serve the profession and the public very well by giving them 
the ability to regulate such things as cookbooks. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Thank you.  That shed some light on the issue.  I just want 



 

 

to remind you, Mr. Associate Minister, that it's not simply a question of 
the council having full and complete authority over this.  There's a public 
policy issue here and that's why it's in front of the legislature. 
 
And the issue is, is that this is a sensitive area in terms of advertising 
because the customers of this sort of business often find themselves in a 
vulnerable position when there's been a death in the family.  And therefore 
the government has an obligation to look into the matter, to get some idea 
of the direction the council . . . Of course the council has the right to 
self-determine its advertising, but the government has an obligation when 
it comes before the legislature to have some idea of the direction the 
council wishes to go. 
 
So there is a public policy issue as well, and I'm quite disappointed that 
the government doesn't seem to have fulfilled its responsibilities in that 
regard to the extent that it should have in getting some direction from the 
council. 
 
The saving grace, I suppose, is the fact that the regulations and the 
by-laws will come forward and the government will have an opportunity to 
make one final review of what comes forward.  And therefore I'm going to 
ask the associate minister whether or not he will promise that I personally 
get a copy of the proposed by-laws and regulations before they are approved 
and in adequate time to make any sort of a response that I may feel is 
necessary. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- I can give the member opposite the reassurance that 
she'll have the opportunity to look at the by-laws before they move 
forward.  And I'd appreciate hearing her comments about some of the 
advertising that's currently in place.  Maybe she'd have some suggestions 
for the membership as to the kinds of things that they should be looking at 
when they're drafting their by-laws. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Bill No. 10 -- An Act respecting the Manufacture, Sale, Use, Consumption, 
Collection, Storage, Recycling and Disposal of Ozone-depleting Substances 
and Products 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Would ask the minister to introduce his officials please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  On my left I have Tom 
Galimberti with the Department of the Environment; behind him, Larry Kratt; 
and we have Aniko Szojka; and Rick Knoll. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Welcome to the officials as 
well.  Mr. Minister, I have several questions that I want to address on 



 

 

this Bill.  I notice that you have an amendment to propose.  We will want 
to look at it.  And I also have an amendment which I will want to propose 
on section 11 as well.  In fact I should probably send a copy over to the 
minister in advance before we get around to it, if I can have a page.  
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Minister, I do not intend to take a great deal of time because, as I 
indicated in second reading, this is a Bill which we have promoted and 
supported in principle for some time in the opposition.  As a matter of 
fact,  
 Dearlier in the session I introduced a Bill which is much like this one 
and I did so, Mr. Minister, because last year in both the throne speech and 
in the budget your government, over a year ago, indicated that in the last 
session there would be this legislation introduced.  But it was not.  I 
found that regrettable, but I welcome the fact that it's introduced now.  I 
also found it somewhat bewildering because the last session was, I believe, 
the longest session in the history of this legislature, and so there seems 
to have . . . should have been enough time to introduce the promised Bill 
in the last session as it was indicated would be done. 
 
So I ask you, Mr. Minister, since the Bill was announced in the last . . . 
a year ago in the throne speech and the budget: what is it that held up the 
introduction of the Bill in the last session so that by now we could have 
already had regulations in place and maybe some of the ozone-depleting 
substances eliminated?  And that would have been important because I don't 
think that there is a great deal of time that we have left when it comes to 
dealing with the destruction of the ozone layer and with global warming and 
many of those things which we shall get into when we consider your 
estimates, your department's estimates. 
 
Why is it, Mr. Minister, that although the government promised -- obviously 
for public relations purposes -- in the budget and the throne speech of 
1989, the Bill never came forward and took until this year to be 
introduced, and I might add, introduced even though in this year's throne 
speech and in the budget there was no mention of this legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Chairman, I think that you would agree and I think 
the opposition would agree, in looking at the whole issue of ozone 
depletion, that it's an extremely complex issue.  It is an issue that is 
not unique to Saskatchewan.  In fact, what we are dealing with here is a 
planet issue, a world issue, an earth issue. 
 
If you will have noticed over the last couple of years, you have seen the 
federal government introduce legislation.  We have worked very closely with 
the federal government ensuring that our legislation conforms to their 
standards and is synchronized with the federal legislation.  Our time frame 
is actually ahead of most provinces in the country.  I believe at the time 
this was introduced there were only a few provinces who had introduced this 
legislation prior to us -- Ontario, British Columbia, Nova Scotia -- but 
the rest of the country is now in the process of doing exactly what we are 
doing here today. 
 
I think you would agree that on an issue of this complexity, you would want 



 

 

to make sure that all the i's are dotted and the t's are crossed.  And we 
have taken a great deal of care with this issue and have introduced it at 
this time. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Minister, I assume that you had taken a great deal 
of care on this issue when you announced it in the budget and the throne 
speech of 1989.  Are you saying to the House that at that time you weren't 
serious about introducing the Bill -- the former minister and you on the 
Executive Council -- and you simply put it in the throne speech for 
purposes of public relations?  There had to be a reason why you had it.  
Did you not have a Bill prepared, Mr. Minister, when you announced to the 
world that the province of Saskatchewan, over a year ago, was going to make 
this important move? 
 
I agree with you, it's not unique to Saskatchewan.  That's a fact.  It's 
not unique to anybody.  It is a world crisis.  It is a crisis for this 
planet.  And every time any jurisdiction, for whatever reasons, delays 
doing something about it, I think that that jurisdiction deserves some 
criticism.  I'm not going to be harsh in my criticism of you today; in 
fact, I'm not even going to be critical.  I'm just wondering why would you 
have announced it in the throne speech and the budget in 1989 when you 
weren't prepared to have it introduced? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Chairman, I don't think there's much more that I 
can really say to the hon. member other than to stress the fact that this 
is an issue that is complex.  It is an issue that we would hope to have a 
great deal of conformity across the country so that our legislation is very 
similar to that in other provinces and that it does conform to the federal 
guide-lines and that we go forth with a unified approach across this 
country.  And those things took time. 
 
Perhaps it was too optimistic of us last year to think that we could get 
all of the details worked out, but I want to stress that we have taken a 
great deal of care and time and attention with this particular Act and that 
I believe the public will find it satisfactory.  And it will indeed be 
doing a great service to the environment, and we would be doing a great 
disservice if we did not introduce it at this time. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Minister, I agree that there is importance in a 
country like Canada to have a unified approach to the extent that that's 
possible, so I was listening with some care to what you were saying. 
 
Am I to therefore conclude that there is an agreement which you as the 
Minister of the Environment in Saskatchewan have with all of the other 
provinces, that they will be soon introducing such legislation?  You must 
have had consultations about this important unified approach.  Is there an 
agreement with the other provinces?  If there is, what is their intention, 
Mr. Minister? 
 
I know one province, Ontario, was way ahead of Saskatchewan and ahead of 
the federal government and indeed introduced this kind of legislation, I 



 

 

believe, two years ago.  Now that certainly . . . the complexity of the 
whole issue, should affect Ontario more than any other jurisdiction in 
Canada, because of the fact that much of the industry that manufactures 
ozone-depleting substances which are found in different kind of materials, 
are manufactured in that province.  So it was not too complex for Ontario 
to get this legislation in a year ago, but it seemed to have been too 
complex here. 
 
But putting that aside, I don't want to get into that argument.  I simply 
want to know -- because I think it's important and you mentioned it -- that 
the uniformity be something that's done and in fact that all of the 
provinces of Canada move on this.  Is there such an agreement?  And in what 
form does it exist, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- I can tell the hon. member that there is no formal 
agreement among all provinces, but there was consultations with the federal 
government.  This has been on the agenda of the Canadian Council of 
Ministers of Environment on a number of different occasions, and it was the 
general feeling amongst all ministers of the environment across this 
country that we proceed with legislation respecting the ozone layer and 
that we do attempt to be as consistent as is possible across the country. 
 
I remind the hon. member that at the time this legislation was introduced, 
there were only three other provinces in Canada who had introduced similar 
legislation.  I wish we could have moved quicker, but I don't think we are 
tardy in a relative sense to other provinces across the country. 
 
Certainly we can be accused of being tardy with the overall issue.  There 
are many, and I would agree with many, that legislation like this could 
have and should have taken place a number of years ago.  But if you want to 
stack us up with other provinces, other jurisdictions across the country, I 
think we are ahead of most of them, with only three of them beating us to 
the punch. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Minister, I am tempted to take up your invitation 
to talk about your tardiness and to how you stack up and how this 
government stacks up to other jurisdictions, but I think your estimates 
will be a better forum in which to do that.  So I won't do that on this 
Bill.  But I want to pursue some more specific questions. 
 
Since you took an additional year to prepare yourself for something that's 
been studied for many, many years and on which there is undeniable 
evidence, scientific evidence which indicates what the problem is; and even 
if we act now, even if every jurisdiction in Canada acts today, the damage 
is done; that in 75 years all the stuff that's up there which is depleting 
our ozone layer, will continue to do what it's doing. 
 
I was shocked to hear today in some news reports -- and I don't have all of 
the correct statistics -- but shocked to hear that there has been a massive 
increase in the incidences of cancer in Canada because of environmental 
reasons.  And one of those mentioned today, out of the study that was 
reported on, was that the incidence of skin cancer caused due to the 
depletion of the ozone layer has increased almost most of all. 



 

 

 
So we should not be tardy even in our own small way in Saskatchewan.  We're 
not a big contributor, but we are a contributor.  So I'm pleased that this 
Bill is here. 
 
I will not be totally confident that all of the intention of this Bill will 
be done until I see things starting to happen which actually delete certain 
ozone-depleting substances.  So I want to ask you: since you had a year, an 
additional year to prepare yourself, can you inform the House today which 
products you intend to take off of the market this year, once this 
legislation is in? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Chairman, there will be some products that upon 
proclamation of this Bill will immediately become banned or prohibited or 
taken off the shelves, to use the member opposite's wording.  And the 
products that I would use as examples would be, firstly, aerosol 
propellants.  Such things as hair sprays would immediately come off the 
shelves. 
 
The other general area has to do with packaging or wrapping.  And to put 
that into everyday language, such things as the styrofoam containers that 
contained CFCs (chlorofluorocarbons) that you would perhaps buy hamburgers 
in or some type of fast-food products that contain . . . styrofoam 
containers that have CFCs in them.  Those types of products. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, Mr. Minister, on the aerosol sprays you will not 
be accomplishing very much because the industry is already in the process 
of eliminating most of that.  As a matter of fact, many have converted.  I 
have letters and documentation here from the industry which indicates what 
they've already done and in fact have urged governments -- surprisingly 
enough but I think to their credit -- that governments need to act quicker. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, are you saying that after having studied it all of this 
time, all that you're going to be dealing with in the immediate sense are 
aerosol sprays and wrappers and containers?  Is that the best you can do? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Chairman, as I stated in my introductory remarks, 
the legislation that we have before us in detail is very consistent with 
legislation across the country, a few provinces of which who have 
introduced similar legislation.  And the two primary products that we're 
talking about are aerosol cans and packaging containing CFCs. 
 
The hon. member will make the argument that, well some businesses, some 
corporations have moved quicker than this legislation.  And frankly, Mr. 
Chairman, I applaud those businesses.  I applaud those corporations who 
have shown to their consumers and to the general populace that they are 
indeed good corporate citizens.  We need more corporations like that that 
are willing on a voluntary basis to come forth with voluntary restrictions 
on themselves. 
 
What this legislation does is for those corporations or those business 
people who either are not knowledgeable about this issue or unwilling to go 
along with it, these products will be banned.  Very similar to what's 



 

 

taking place across this entire country. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Minister, I think clearly what's happening here is 
that you're indicating that all you're intending to do with this 
legislation, and I really regret that, is to try to do a public relations 
exercise.  Because for Pete's sake, let's take a look at what you're doing. 
 
There are all kinds of ozone-depleting substances that can be found in the 
economy and in society today.  You took an extra year to get your act 
together.  You went through a public relations exercise a year ago and you 
announced this legislation which you had no intention of introducing at 
that time.  You went through the PR (public relations) process.  Now you 
finally have legislation.  You took all this extra time to prepare and you 
can't even inform the House and the public what you're going to do with it. 
 
You didn't need legislation to tell us that you're going to do away with 
aerosol sprays and wrappers and containers because the industry is already 
moving in that direction.  And good for them. 
 
What are you going to do about insulation, Mr. Minister?  That shouldn't be 
too difficult.  It includes in it CFCs and other ozone-depleting 
substances.  What are you intentions with regard to refrigeration and 
air-conditioning fluids, which are really a very serious problem?  What are 
your intentions under this legislation to do, for example, with those two, 
Mr. Minister?  During this extra year did you bother doing any work in 
preparing yourself for that at least? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Chairman, I want to clarify for the legislature 
the issue of whether or not this legislation is encompassing legislation.  
The hon. member had previously asked me which products are immediately 
banned or taken off the shelves under this legislation.  I gave the hon. 
member a couple of examples, the examples that are very similar in other 
jurisdictions across the country, examples that ministers agreed should be 
first priority.  And that is firmly written into this legislation that 
those products will immediately be banned from use. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member would warrant or represent to this 
Assembly that what should be done is an immediate ban of every single 
product that does contain CFCs in small, moderate, or large amounts.  I 
think, Mr. Chairman, that you and I would both recognize that that would be 
a difficult position to take for a variety of reasons. 
 
(1600) 
 
And I would like to talk a little bit about some of the other products that 
do have dates of phase-outs in them.  I'll talk about the Halons that are 
used in fire extinguishers.  There's a date on there of December 31, 1990.  
The manufacture or sale of rigid foam insulation would be December 31, 
1993.  We would also talk about cleaning solvents for commercial use; that 
date is December 31, '91.  We talk about the release agents that are used 
in moulds. That has a date of December 31, '91.  Lubricants that are used 
in the mining operations have a phase-out date of December 31, 1991.  CFCs 
in refrigerators, air conditioners, and coolers to be phased out by 



 

 

December 31, 1998. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the hon. member may take issue with some of the specific 
dates.  They are, to the best of our knowledge, fair dates, practical 
dates, common-sense dates, to phase out these different products.  I 
respect that this is an extremely serious issue, and I want to make it 
abundantly clear today to the opposition that there will be follow-up 
discussions with the federal government and with my colleagues on the issue 
of speeding up or changing some of these dates.  I think the entire country 
has recognized and the hon. member has pointed out that this issue is 
perhaps even more serious than most would think. 
 
And I want the hon. member to know that these dates are certainly subject 
to change, but I will want to work with my colleagues across the country 
and with  
 Dthe federal government to ensure that we can move as rapidly as possible. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  That's a little more 
substantial answer than you'd earlier given.  I welcome it. 
 
But since you have this information -- and I won't take the time of the 
House; we can do it in another way -- you must, I therefore conclude, have 
a list of the products that your department has prepared which need 
addressing.  And on some of them, as you have just outlined, you will have 
target dates. 
 
Will you undertake, not today, but will you undertake to provide me with a 
list of those products that you know of that your department has prepared 
which need dealing with?  And also the targets that you've just outlined, 
and any others that you have for those products, to be able to deal with? 
 
Will you undertake to provide that for me, not in September, but sometime 
before the next two weeks or so?  Because it can't be that difficult.  And 
if you give me that undertaking, then I will go on to something else. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Chairman, I would gladly compile the complete list 
of the products together with the phase-out dates.  I would send that very 
quickly to the hon. member opposite, and I would welcome his comments on 
any specific products that he may want to take note of. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I wonder 
if you can indicate to us with respect to this Bill, and specifically with 
respect to the sections of the Bill relating to the recycling of material, 
first of all, when you anticipate these sections coming into effect; and 
secondly, what provisions you are going to be assisting municipalities with 
to put in place with respect to the recycling of ozone-depleting materials.  
Will there be municipal . . . will there be funding from your government to 
assist municipalities in ensuring that these recycling operations are in 
place?  Where will they be located, and when do you expect that to be in 
effect? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Chairman, I think when we look at this whole 
issue, it is an issue that has been created out in the market-place.  It is 



 

 

a problem that primarily must . . . well must firstly be addressed by 
governments by taking firm action and passing laws such as the ones that we 
have here.  But a great deal of the responsibility does fall on the part of 
the specific industries that are involved in this. 
 
And I can inform the hon. member that we have consulted at length with many 
of the industries in Saskatchewan.  I think of the automotive industry, for 
example, the Freon used in the air-conditioners in automobiles.  The 
automotive industry will very much look after this problem and will have to 
respond to that consumer demand and this law to put systems in place that 
will recover and recycle or store the materials that they collect. 
 
The other major area is the general refrigeration business.  That industry 
we have consulted with as well, and they will in putting in -- in fact some 
are in place today, and that will be expanded as time goes on -- a full 
system to recycle and recover the products that by law must be recovered. 
 
The other area is the fire extinguisher business; it's a business 
widespread throughout Saskatchewan.  And similar comments with respect to 
that, that those businesses as well will look after the recycling, 
recovering of these materials. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Mr. Minister, that's not good enough.  First of all, are 
you telling us that you have no plans for assistance . . . of financial 
assistance to municipalities and other forms of assistance to 
municipalities to ensure these kind of recycling operations that are 
required will be available on a province-wide basis?  I mean surely you 
must know, for instance, that already in British Columbia municipalities 
like Burnaby, just as an example, are passing by-laws requiring . . . in 
fact I think they have one in place already that requires the recycling of 
ozone-depleting materials that come from things like automobile 
air-conditioners. 
 
When will this be in place in Saskatchewan?  Will you be providing 
financial assistance to municipalities to get this in place?  And what 
deadline will your provincial legislation and regulations set in terms of 
when this recycling will be mandatory in the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Chairman, I once again want to stress that this 
legislation will put the onus on the private sector in Saskatchewan to 
conform with this legislation.  And I think that the member, if he were to 
consult with the automotive industry, would be made very much aware by the 
automotive industry that they will, by law, have to look after the recovery 
and recycling of Freons out of air-conditioners, for instance. 
 
So I don't think municipalities will have a big problem.  If you're talking 
about their fleet of vehicles, that will be looked after by private sector.  
I believe this is a very prime example of where the polluter pays, if you 
like; that private sector will have to respond to this issue. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Mr. Minister, that's not a very adequate answer.  And I 
take it from your answer that you're not planning to provide municipalities 
with financial assistance.  I take it from your answer that you've not set 



 

 

a date with respect to when this kind of recycling has to be in place.  And 
I think that that's inadequate, Mr. Minister. 
 
I want to ask you two other brief questions, Mr. Minister.  One relates to 
the overall target for the reduction of ozone-depleting materials that you 
have set.  I think it's fairly well established, sir, that in order to 
prevent further depletion of the ozone layer, we must reduce the current 
emissions of ozone . . . of CFCs into the atmosphere by about 85 per cent. 
 
Can you tell me when that 85 per cent target will be achieved in the 
province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- The current target date by this legislation would be a 
50 per cent reduction by the year 1998.  I do want the member to know that 
this is an issue that I will be bringing forward to the next ministerial 
meeting.  The Canadian Council of Ministers of the Environment will meet, I 
believe it is in August or September of this year.  And in some of my 
discussions with those ministers, we will have on the agenda the whole 
issue of a target date. 
 
And I respect what the member opposite is saying that perhaps 1998 is too 
far away, that we may have to revise that target date and speed up the 
phase-out of these particular products. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Yes, Mr. Minister, I think that . . . I say unequivocally 
that that is inadequate.  A 50 per cent reduction by 1998 is just not good 
enough, sir, because in light of the crisis that we face, my colleague, our 
Environment critic, indicated that, for instance, the rapid escalation in 
skin cancer.  You will know that there are many other serious environmental 
implications associated with ozone-depleting substances that I don't need 
to outline at this point.  But for instance Friends of the Earth (Canada) 
having studied this has proposed as a guide-line for provincial governments 
the elimination of all CFCs in Canada by 1995. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, surely at least you could set as a target that after 
1995 Saskatchewan as a province, the Saskatchewan people will no longer add 
and accelerate to the depletion of the ozone layer in the world at a global 
level.  And what you're telling me, Mr. Minister, is that by 1998 
Saskatchewan will still not have reached the point where we are not further 
depleting the ozone layer.  That's what you're telling this House.  That, 
Mr. Minister, is unacceptable. 
 
And I'm asking you now, will you give us a commitment this afternoon that 
you will by 1995 have in place a target of having eliminated 85 per cent of 
the current contribution that Saskatchewan makes to the depletion of the 
ozone layer?  Because that, Mr. Minister, is the target that is required, 
that is a minimal target.  And I ask you will you give us your commitment 
on that today, Mr. Minister? 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Chairman, I can give the hon. member the assurance 
that I will take that position forward to the canadian council of ministers 



 

 

at our next meeting.  I have to stress once again the consistent approach 
that we must take across the country and the fact that the majority of CFCs 
are produced and manufactured in eastern Canada. 
 
I know how strongly the hon. member feels about this particular subject, 
and I want the hon. member to rest assured that when I walk into the next 
meeting of the CCME (Canadian Council of Ministers of the Environment) that 
I will take a very strong Saskatchewan stance, on behalf of Saskatchewan 
people, to ensure that those who are doing the polluting, those who are 
aiding and abetting and actually manufacturing these products, primarily in 
eastern Canada, will know that Saskatchewan people do feel strongly about 
this issue, and that we will do our very best to speed up the elimination 
of these products. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- The point is though, Mr. Minister, that we have the ability 
in Saskatchewan to set Saskatchewan laws that will achieve this 85 per cent 
target by 1995, and what you're telling the House is that you're not 
prepared to do that, Mr. Minister.  And I just don't think that's 
acceptable. 
 
I want to ask one other very brief question before I turn this back to our 
environment critic.  And that is, Mr. Minister, with respect to the bromine 
that is contained in Halons, I heard you make reference to the fact that 
you were looking at the phasing out of Halon products by December 31, 1990.  
Now, I'm concerned, Mr. Minister, about the bromine in these Halons because 
it is many times more potent in terms of its depletion effect of the ozone 
layer than are the CFCs. 
 
And so I want clarification on this matter.  Will you give us your 
assurance that by December 31, 1990, no products will be sold in 
Saskatchewan which contain the Halons and which contain bromines, Mr. 
Minister?  And can you indicate, if that's not the case, when all Halons 
containing bromines will be phased out in this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Chairman, to clarify the issue, the amendment that 
we have put forth in this legislation is to do precisely what the hon. 
member is asking for.  Just a minor technicality.  I had stated December 
31, 1990; it is actually January 1 of '91.  But for all intents and 
purposes, I will represent to the hon. member that the products that you 
spoke of, fire extinguishers with bromines and Halons in them, will not be 
sold in the year 1991. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Chairman.  Mr. Minister, just so that I do 
not misinterpret what you said, did you say that your target for 
elimination of ozone-depleting substances is to eliminate 50 per cent of 
those substances by 1998?  Am I correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Yes, that is the original date.  Yes. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Minister, you've just confirmed something I said 
earlier that you're really once again doing nothing but a public relations 
exercise.  Sure you're going to pick some small item here and some small 
item there, and you're going to make a big, splashy announcement. 



 

 

 
But I'm telling you, Mr. Minister, with all the sincerity that I can 
muster, that this serious situation is beyond public relations.  Even in 
Saskatchewan we have got to make a commitment to deal with this.  The 
survival of a lot of things including human life may very well be dependent 
on how we handle these things.  And you've made it very clear in the House 
here today that you're going to continue dragging your feet. 
 
Other examples have been set.  Now, Mr. Minister, in Ontario . . . Well 
let's talk about the federal government.  You say 50 per cent by 1998.  The 
federal government has said it's setting a target of 85 per cent 
elimination by 1999.  The Ontario government which introduced legislation 
-- and it's already in place -- has said that they're going to . . . let me 
just make sure that I read it accurately for you.  I'll read it: 
 

 It was a sweeping declaration of the Ontario Minister of the Environment, 
James Bradley, last week that would see all Ontario emissions of the 
troublesome chemicals eliminated by 1998. 

 
Now in Ontario, which is probably . . . If you talk about what industry 
will say -- oh this is terrible economically.  I don't buy that, but that's 
what some of them will say.  If Ontario which is going to be impacted more 
than anywhere else, they can eliminate 100 per cent by 1998, why in 
heaven's name do you have to set a target of only 50 per cent of 1998, Mr. 
Minister?  Can you explain that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Chairman, just to shed some light on this.  The 
target of which I speak was a target that the federal government and most 
jurisdictions across the country at a meeting some months ago decided would 
be a fair and reasonable target to shoot for.  In Saskatchewan we feel that 
it is a very conservative estimate, that it is a target that is very, very 
achievable, very achievable. 
 
And in fact I will accept the hon. member's arguments that that target is 
not good enough.  I want the hon. member to know that we will do everything 
we can to achieve a much higher target.  And in my discussions with my 
counterparts across the country, we may well end up reaching agreement -- 
and this is what I would propose -- reach an agreement across the country 
where we formalize this target.  Rather than just having a general target 
of, oh, let's say 50 per cent or others can talk about 80 per cent, I would 
propose a formal agreement be reached and that a much higher target level 
be associated with it. 
 
But I once again get back to the fact that this was an original target that 
we all shot for.  Some others have come out and stated that they will do 
much better than that.  I want the hon. member to rest assured that we in 
Saskatchewan will reach our target and much higher targets as quick as any 
place does in the country. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Minister, I don't want to take all day on this.  
But I repeat again, that when it comes to a lot of important issues -- and 
environmental issues is one of those -- governments have to be proactive.  
I mean, for Pete's sake, let's provide some leadership in Saskatchewan, the 



 

 

likes of which we used to provide on a lot of important issues. 
 
You're like the tail that's being wagged by the dog -- not you personally, 
but the government.  You're saying that you're going to meet with other 
jurisdictions to see if you can formalize the 50 per cent target. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Higher target.  Higher. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well even higher.  Well I'm telling you that Ontario 
has already established a target of 100 per cent.  And they're busily 
implementing by 1998.  Now, Mr. Minister, if you're going to formalize 
anything, and one would have thought that you would have spent some time 
thinking about that when you were bringing this legislation forward, that 
you at least would have set your target equal to the best target that 
exists in Canada today. 
 
I ask you then, Mr. Minister: are you prepared to bring in an amendment to 
this Bill which will establish 1998 the target for which 100 per cent 
emissions will be the target in Saskatchewan? 
 
 DSome Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Chairman, this legislation does not formalize the 
target date.  The target date, once again, was a target date that most 
ministers across the country agreed to.  We are in a very changing 
environment.  Since that time there has been a great deal more discussion 
on the subject.  I think the hon. member may have even watched a little bit 
of it on television the other night. 
 
And I can only respond to the hon. member by saying that we agree that this 
target is a modest target, that it is not acceptable; we would hope to 
achieve a much better record than this target currently.  But I have to 
express, Mr. Chairman, that talk is cheap and it's very easy to say, oh 
well, we'll have a target, and then you miss it. 
 
And I just want the hon. member to know that we will take this issue very 
seriously.  We will speed up as best we can the elimination of these 
products.  But for me to quickly jump in and say, well yes, we're going to 
change that target date regardless of what they do across the country, 
would not be practical and I hesitate to do so. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, Mr. Minister, talk may be cheap but commitment 
and action is the price that governments have to pay in order to make sure 
that the job is done.  And we have no commitment from you and we have no 
indications of actions from you.  You said a moment ago that your target is 
50 per cent.  You were very definitive.  Now you're back-pedalling again, 
just as you've done on so many other issues.  You're now saying, oh but 
maybe that's not a real target.  Maybe we're going to have to address some 
other targets.  We're going to talk to the other provinces. 
 
Well the target's already set, Mr. Minister.  Ontario has set the target -- 
100 per cent elimination, 1998.  I won't pursue that with you any further.  
I mean the point has been made.  You are not really serious about this, Mr. 



 

 

Minister, other than the public relations exercise.  You bring a Bill in 
the House so you can tell the world, oh aren't we acting, although it's a 
year late from your commitment.  But you don't have the faintest idea what 
you're going to do with it because it's only public relations with you.  
Environment means nothing.  The life sustaining systems of our planet mean 
nothing.  Public relations, because some advertising agency has told you 
that the environmental issues are high on the pollster's charts, is what 
this is all about. 
 
At least, Mr. Minister, will you answer this specific question, because you 
should know: when is it your intention to proclaim this Bill so that you 
can get on with what you're doing, because a Bill passed through this House 
means nothing until it's proclaimed.  When is it your intention to proclaim 
this Bill? 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Chairman, I would propose to the hon. member that 
immediately following some further consultations with many of the 
industries who are affected by this piece of legislation and many of the 
interest groups, that we would proclaim this Bill.  I would commit to the 
opposition that we would work with great speed to continue these 
consultations and that September would be a realistic time frame by when we 
could have that accomplished. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 7 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- There's a House amendment to Clause 7, moved by the 
Minister of Environment: 
 

 Amend section 7 of the printed Bill by striking out "No person" and 
substituting "On and after a prescribed day, no person." 

 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Minister, you now indicate that on and after a 
prescribed day, no person shall manufacture for sale or sell any portable, 
hand-held fire extinguisher. 
 
Can you just again reassure the House that you have a prescribed date 
already.  I think you did that, and I forget.  Can you remind us what that 
date is. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- That date will be prescribed in regulation.  It will 
be January 1, 1991. 
 
Clause 7 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 8 to 10 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 11 



 

 

 
Mr. Chairman: -- House amendment to clause 11, moved by the member for 
Regina North East to: 
 

 Amend section 11 of the printed Bill: 
 
 (a) by renumbering the section as 

subsection (1); and 
 
 (b) by adding immediately after 

subsection (1) thereof the following subsection: 
 
  (2) Except in circumstances that are considered by the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council to be an emergency, the Lieutenant Governor in 
Council shall seek advice and recommendations from the public on any 
proposed regulation or on any proposed amendment to a regulation made 
under this Act. 

 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I would urge the minister to accept this 
amendment.  It is not intended to do anything other than to assure that 
there is public consultation, and in fact I was surprised it was not in the 
original Bill.  The Bill that I had introduced for first reading some 
months ago in fact had that provision, and this brings that same provision 
to this section. 
 
I'm really quite surprised that in section 11 where the minister says that 
the Lieutenant Governor and Council may make regulations, there is not a 
provision for public consultation.  The amendment which I have proposed 
would leave, as government needs to have, the ability in emergency 
situations for the government to be able to act and deal with those 
expeditiously.  I think that that's fair and reasonable. 
 
But I think that the public, industry, consumers, and others who may have 
an interest . . . small-business people . . . I have a letter which I 
received from a small-business operation in Moose Jaw expressing some 
concerns, D & L Refrigeration Service Ltd., which confirms the fact that 
there needs to be public consultation. 
 
So I really think, Mr. Chairman, and I urge the minister to take a serious 
look, and that's why I gave him the amendment earlier, accepting this 
amendment . . . And if he's not prepared to accept it, I would like to have 
him explain why it is not important for the government to consult with the 
public on this or any other issues in light of the fact that the government 
has made a great to-do about Consensus Saskatchewan, expensive operation of 
100 people; in spite of the fact that the government has made a to-do about 
the new openness which the Premier has spoken about. 
 
Surely when governments say those things, one should be able to expect the 
government to be consistent.  This is consistent with in fact what the 
government has been saying.  It's consistent with what the minister said a 
moment ago, in which he said they will be consulting with industry about 
proclamation and so on. 
 



 

 

Let's back it up.  Let's put it in legislation.  Let's agree to this 
amendment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Chairman, I want the hon. member opposite to know 
that I very much agree with the amendment put forth by the New Democratic 
Party, and I would commend members opposite for putting an amendment 
forward such as this. 
 
I think this is probably one of the first proposals that I've seen from the 
opposition of any concrete nature, albeit a small amendment to this Bill, 
but I want you to know that I very much agree. 
 
I think what this does, Mr. Chairman, is really formalize something that 
has been the hallmark of this administration and that is consultation, Mr. 
Speaker, and I heartily accept the hon. member's amendment.  He may rest 
assured that we very much agree with the consultation.  The hon. member can 
say, well, you know, why did you take so long, on the one hand.  And on the 
other hand he says, but we want public consultation.  Well, Mr. Chairman, 
the realities are that it does take time to consult, but it's an extremely 
worthwhile exercise and we heartily accept this amendment. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I thank the minister for that, but I want to make sure 
that he understands what our expectations are.  Now that he's being so 
benevolent and understanding on something which he should have had in the 
Bill in the first place, I hope that he will also be just as understanding 
and just as forthcoming when we demand in his estimates that he provide 
public consultation on major projects on which the environmental assessment 
studies and statements are prepared. 
 
And what I mean by that, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Chairman, is a public 
hearing, an inquiry process in the Millar Western mill situation; a public 
hearing and public inquiry in the Cargill fertilizer plant, an 
environmental impact statement which you have announced after the fact. 
 
Now I will be pursuing that, Mr. Minister, and I will be using the words 
which you have just used here today, which I welcome, in impressing on you 
that the government better come clean and that the government better be 
open in all situations, not only in situations which is convenient to the 
government and is suitable to the government.  It should be situations 
which are important to the public, and I thank the minister for supporting 
our amendment.  And with that, I think we can proceed with the Bill. 
 
Clause 11 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 12 and 13 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 
Bill No. 36 -- An Act respecting a Report on the State of the Environment 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I wish that were so.  But, Mr. Chairman, I have fewer 



 

 

questions, but nevertheless some questions. 
 
Mr. Minister, I in this case again indicated that we were supporting this 
Bill, and that we did that because in our opinion it's long overdue.  I 
indicated in my second reading speech that a lot of what you're going to be 
reporting on is already being done -- in annual reports and in the 
estimates when you appear before the House, and in committee, and so on. 
 
My concern about the Bill is still what it was when I spoke in second 
reading, and that is, although the principle is correct and important and 
necessary, there are some provisions which I think are major shortcomings.  
Once again I don't want to be overly critical, but I'm not convinced that 
much will change simply because the Bill is now there, as long as it is in 
the hands of the minister, whether it's you or somebody else or another 
party in government.  I'm not convinced that as long as it's in the hands 
of the minister to prepare the report, who then will put his own editorial 
content on it, or hers, that it will do anything different than what's 
already being done. 
 
And so, Mr. Minister, I repeat again what the position of the opposition 
is, the New Democratic Party, and that is that we need to have a State of 
the Environment Report; that it's important that it be done and it be done 
regularly and on time and expeditiously, and that it be done independently. 
 
And that can be helpful to governments; it shouldn't be a hindrance.  It 
can be helpful to governments because ultimately the governments will 
decide, but they will have a measure by which to decide. 
 
This report, Mr. Minister, should be done independently.  So I ask you, why 
did you not consider that instead of having it being a report of the 
minister who is under -- I'm not being critical here -- but under stress 
and pull from every side . . . He is being pushed by environmentalists; 
you're being pushed by the industry; you're being pushed by your cabinet 
colleagues who have political projects like the Rafferty-Alameda ones that 
they want accomplished.  Why would you not have considered that this report 
be done in some independent way and instead left it in your hands to do 
with it whatever suits the government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd like to respond to the hon. member.  
Firstly, on the hon. member's point that much of this data is already in 
existence in such things as our annual reports, that is not totally true, 
Mr. Chairman.  In fact this report will bring brand-new information to the 
Saskatchewan people.  It will bring very objective information to the 
Saskatchewan people.  And it will create in fact indexes or statistics that 
I would compare to such things as the unemployment rate across the country. 
 
Those figures are gathered by government; they are very objective; they are 
very well-known to people.  I'd use the analogy of gross domestic product.  
Gross domestic product is calculated by government agencies.  It is an 
index which is objective, very quantitative in nature, and really beyond a 
great deal of question. 



 

 

 
So I want to stress, Mr. Chairman, that the essence of this report is 
something new for Saskatchewan, something that objectively gives indexes or 
figures or statistics on what is the state of our environment.  And it is 
not in fact a report card on the government's record, as it is more so a 
report card on what is the state of the environment out there in specific 
quantitative measures.  And I hope the hon. member recognizes some of the 
differences with respect to those. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Minister, who's going to prepare this report?  I 
mean the minister, we know, does not prepare the report.  Who will prepare 
it?  Will it be your officials?  Will it be some other group that you will 
appoint, that you will hand-pick?  Will it be the Saskatchewan Research 
Council or some body like that?  Who's going to be doing the preparation of 
such a report and doing the research that's necessary to back it up? 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Chairman, the finished product or the state of the 
environment report that the public of Saskatchewan will have access to, and 
open access to, will be the result of the compilation of a great deal of 
information from, not only within government but from outside of 
government.  We expect a great deal of co-operation from many of the 
environmental groups in Saskatchewan, who we welcome their advice and their 
assistance in preparing this report.  We will not only be looking within 
government for information, but also to some of the outside laboratories or 
agencies that have technical expertise at their availability. 
 
And I would view it, Mr. Chairman, as a very comprehensive document, a very 
co-operatively marked document that will be the result of a great deal of 
work and compiled from many different areas, not only within government but 
outside government as well. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Minister, is your department going to sit back and 
wait for all these people to submit information?  Are you going to give 
them an opportunity in some formal way to make submissions?  And then 
what's the structure to bring it all together and make scientific sense out 
of it? 
 
This is not just an essay you're going to write here.  I mean, it's going 
to have to be a very scientific document.  What's the process that you have 
in mind in order that this input in fact will: one, have an opportunity to 
be made; and two, be seriously considered; and three, be incorporated in 
the final report which you're going to have to table? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Chairman, I would like to emphasize that this most 
certainly is not an essay like you and I perhaps did in high school or in 
university.  This will be an extremely comprehensive document.  It will not 
be put together and be the product of one person's objective or subjective 
opinions. 
 
In fact we have, as we speak, a committee who is working and that committee 
consists of 20 different individuals from throughout government, 



 

 

representing some 15 different agencies.  This group of professional men 
and women will be gathering this information.  And to use an example from 
the outside world, where they may gather some of these statistics, I would 
use an example of an organization well-known throughout Canada and the 
United States and that's Ducks Unlimited. 
 
Ducks Unlimited has access to a great deal of information and we would be 
using that type of information from organizations such as Ducks Unlimited.  
We'd be using information gathered from such groups as the Saskatchewan 
Environmental Society who are at present cataloguing an abundance of 
information and this will be a very serious report.  We hope that it will 
be extremely well done and well received by Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, Mr. Minister, this is going to be a big job.  I 
don't think you'll disagree with that.  It's not going to be something that 
can be done without some expenditure of money.  I have looked at your 
budget and I find nothing in your budget allocated for that preparation of 
this first annual report on the state of the environment. 
 
Can you tell me, Mr. Minister, have I not looked in the right place?  Or if 
so, where should I be looking and how much money is allocated, or resources 
is allocated in order that this first report -- because this will be the 
most important one because it will set a certain base line -- where is the 
provision in your budget for this to happen, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Chairman, I've been advised by my officials that 
this will not be an extremely large cost to government; firstly, because we 
have the technical expertise and professionals within our department.  The 
20 different men and women that I spoke of are all government employees, 
either from the Department of the Environment or from other departments 
such as Parks and Renewable Resources.  So these people are already on the 
payroll working hard for the people of Saskatchewan as civil servants, and 
they will simply allocate a period of their time to work on this very 
important project. 
 
So as far as being a large expenditure of money, labour-wise, this is done 
within our budget, within the forces that are now available to us.  The 
hon. member will note that there are communications dollars allocated in 
our budget, and the actual printing costs of this report will come either 
from that communications budget or in fact may well come from the 
Environmental Protection Fund, one or the other place. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Minister, it is well-known that your department is 
understaffed already.  The people in that department have been cut back 
since 1982 in a massive way.  They're doing the best they can.  I don't 
question that. 
 
What you have just said now is that -- because this is not something that 
you can do on the weekend -- you have just said that you're going to load 
down the officials of your department, who already have more to do than one 
should expect of them, with a full-time project to prepare an annual 
environmental statement report.  It's got to be full-time, Mr. Minister, or 
what you're proposing here is a waste of time. 



 

 

 
That's what you said.  You can't be serious.  How much, Mr. Minister, is it 
going to cost to have this prepared? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Chairman, we expect that this document would cost 
in the neighbourhood of $25,000 to produce.  I want to stress to the hon. 
member that not all of the people that we spoke of were in the Department 
of the Environment who sit on this committee.  It is a interdepartmental 
committee.  Indeed, officials in our department do work hard; they do have 
heavy work loads.  But, Mr. Chairman, you will know that we have a planning 
branch in our department that undertakes initiatives such as this, and it 
is not just an initiative of the Department of the Environment.  As I 
stressed before, this is a co-operative type of a project -- co-operation 
both within government and outside of government. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Minister, I assume that this legislation will 
provide for a report of 1990.  You agree, okay.  And, Mr. Minister, when 
will the 1990 report be ready?  It's for the calendar year.  When will it 
be ready and prepared in 1991 for 1990? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- We expect that it will be produced and ready by June, 
1991. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, Mr. Minister, that leads to my final question or 
two.  One of the shortcomings in this Bill, the second one, is that it does 
not provide a timetable.  You could have a report for 1990, Mr. Minister, 
but it might not be ready, at your discretion or some other minister's 
discretion, until December, 1991. 
 
So then it doesn't have to be tabled for the public until 1992, a year 
and-then-some late.  So the whole process of what we're trying to 
accomplish here -- where you set indices and base line and in future years 
you measure to those indices and the base line to see how we're doing -- is 
really a useless exercise.  Why would you not have put into this Bill a 
certain date by which a report has to be ready, in which you have to make 
it public to the public? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Chairman, this particular Bill provides that 
reports will be released annually to the public of Saskatchewan.  Because 
the legislature at times has been brought in later in the year, this piece 
of legislation would give us the ability to actually produce the report 
earlier than some reports who have traditionally waited for the legislature 
to be called or resumed. 
 
I can give the hon. member the assurance that starting next year, for the 
very first time in the history of Saskatchewan, there will be a state of 
environment report laid out to the public of Saskatchewan, and that will 
continue on on an annual basis, every year. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, my final comment is this: that the two 
problems which I have raised with this Bill are real.  And although the 
government is not prepared to back up its rhetoric with some substance, I 
can tell you for the record, Mr. Chairman, this opposition and this New 



 

 

Democratic Party is.  We are committed -- although we're going to vote for 
the principle of this Bill -- we are committed, when the opportunity 
presents itself to us, to make this report an independent report, prepared 
independently; not at the discretion and the editorializing by a minister 
of the Crown.  That's our first commitment. 
 
Secondly, we're committed to making sure that this legislation will have in 
it a specific time by which it is required that the report be ready and 
prepared and be released to the public, whether the House is sitting or 
not. 
 
I wish it had been in this legislation; it's not.  But the principle of the 
Bill is good, something we have actually proposed, and therefore we'll be 
supporting the Bill because we agree with the principle.  But if and when . 
. . or maybe I should say when the opportunity presents itself, we'll be 
making some major changes to make sure that the Bill is really what it 
ought to be and not simply another cosmetic piece of legislation that can 
be used for the government's purpose for public relations and cosmetic 
purposes at its will. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 12 -- An Act to amend The Municipal Hail Insurance Act 
 
Clauses 1 to 23 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


