





























































Hansard: May 28, 1991


 

 

May 28/91 
 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, pursuant to rule 11, I 
wish to table a petition here today concerning the expanded provincial GST 
(goods and services tax).  On behalf of the residents of Watrous, 
Saskatchewan, I table this petition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  On behalf of some 20 
residents of Maple Creek, Saskatchewan -- Maple Creek and surrounding 
district that is -- I'm pleased to present a petition summed up in one 
sentence:  we urge the provincial government to reverse its decision to 
impose this unfair GST. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise also pursuant to rule 
11 to present a number of names on a petition.  These people are neighbours 
of mine in the constituency of Elphinstone, and they would ask the 
provincial government does not have the mandate from the people of 
Saskatchewan to impose the major tax increase which would result from its 
proposed provincial GST.  And I hereby submit this petition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too rise pursuant to rule 11 
to present these petitions on behalf of people who have signed them urging 
the provincial government to stop the provincial GST.  They join the many 
thousands who have already expressed that view through petitions in this 
House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Mr. Speaker, I also rise pursuant to rule 11 to provide the 
House with a petition of a number of individuals from the town of Watrous 
who are opposed to the imposition of the provinciial sales tax.  I so 
present this petition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would seek leave of the 
Assembly to extend our introductions to guests seated in the gallery. 
 
Leave granted. 
 



 

 

The Speaker: -- Leave to all members who wish to introduce guests. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce to you, and 
through you to all members of the legislature, some 26 grade 4 and 5 
students from Souris School in Weyburn.  They're accompanied today by their 
teacher, Ms. Morrelljohnson; as well as chaperons, Lorraine Lanz, Joanne 
Carpenter, Carol LaCharlie, Faith Kohonick; and bus driver, Vance Pederson. 
 
I'll be meeting with them at about 2:30, Mr. Speaker, for pictures and 
hopefully to join them later for some refreshments and answer any questions 
that they might have.  And I would just ask all members of the legislature 
to join with me in welcoming these grade 4 and 5 students from Weyburn, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to introduce to you, sir, 
and to all members of the Assembly, seated in your gallery are 14 recent 
immigrants and residents of the province of Saskatchewan who are attending 
a course at the English as a second language centre of the SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) campus. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be meeting with these 14 adults after question period 
today for pictures and refreshments.  And I'd like to ask all members of 
this Assembly to welcome these new arrivals to Saskatchewan, not only a 
welcome to this Assembly but to our province. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is my pleasure to welcome 
through you and ask members to join me in welcoming some special guests who 
are here with us today from Kiev in the Ukraine.  They are here to perform 
at the Mosaic. 
 
I want to point out to the House an item of interest and that is that this 
will be the 15th consecutive year in which there have been entertainers who 
have come to Regina during Mosaic from the Ukraine to perform at this very 
significant cultural, multicultural event in our city. 
 
I want to draw your attention, Mr. Speaker, to your gallery where these 
guests are seated and introduce them and ask them to rise as I do that.  
First of all Iryba Datz, who is a vocal soloist with the Kiev Opera and 
Ballet Theatre;  also Hryhoriy Havkusha, vocal soloist with the Kiev 
Philharmonic; Bohdan Parumba, head of the department of folk instruments of 
the Ivano Frankivsk Musical College; and also Ivan Sporadenko who is editor 
of the newspaper Silski Visti. 
 
I would like to ask members of the House to join with me in welcoming our 
special guests and wishing them well during their stay in Regina and in 
Saskatchewan. 
 



 

 

Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too would like to introduce some 
guests to you, Mr. Speaker, and to the other members through you.  From 
Deshaye School, grades 4 and 5, I think there are some 29 students sitting 
in the east gallery, Mr. Speaker.  They are accompanied by their teacher, 
Mrs. Gwen Falconer; and chaperons, Mrs. Lang, Mrs. Deadman, Mrs. Sherman, 
and Mrs. Lionetti.  I would ask you to join me in welcoming them and I'll 
be meeting them later. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- Mr. Speaker, I would also like to welcome the students 
from Deshaye School.  My niece is up there as one of the chaperons and I 
know that her daughter is in the crowd as well.  I would also like everyone 
to join me in wishing them have a good day in the legislature, and I'm sure 
you'll enjoy meeting with the MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) a 
little later on. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you.  Mr. Speaker, I want to join the member in 
extending a welcome to the group of students just introduced because as I 
came into the building today I ran into one of the parents, and it was kind 
if a special meeting because it so happens -- but one of the parents who 
used to be Annette Lang is now Annette Williams, who is escorting the 
school, was a student of mine when I was a teacher in Humboldt.  It was 
very special having Annette come up and say hello and introducing herself.  
She hasn't changed at all.  And I just wanted to say welcome to the 
students along with the member and the members of the House. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS (continued) 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I also rise under rule 11 to 
present a petition signed by a number of petitioners from the village . . . 
or town of Watrous.  I so lay these on the Table. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise also under 11(2) rules 
of this Assembly to put a petition before the Assembly.  The prayer of the 
petition says: 
 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Honourable Assembly may 
be pleased to urge the Provincial Government to stop the provincial GST 
until the people of the province have an opportunity to pass judgement on 
it in a provincial election. 

 
A number of people have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, mainly from 
rural Saskatchewan, such diverse areas as Tisdale, Watrous, and Saskatoon 
the city of Saskatoon as well.  And it's with a great deal of pleasure I 



 

 

lay this petition on the Table, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I also rise under rule 11 to 
present a petition to the Assembly.  The petitioners urge the provincial 
government to stop the provincial GST until the people of the province have 
an opportunity to pass judgement on it in a provincial election. 
 
The petitioners are from the city of Prince Albert and district, Mr. 
Speaker, including Weldon, Birch Hills, and Whelan Bay.  And I have the 
honour to present this petition to the Assembly on their behalf. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I also wish to table a petition 
under rule 11 which requests the provincial government not to impose the 
major tax increase known as the provincial goods and services tax inasmuch 
as it doesn't have a mandate to impose that increase.  The petitioners who 
have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Regina.  There is one 
signature however from Sedley.  Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm presenting a petition on 
behalf of several residents in south-western Saskatchewan from Maple Creek, 
Consul, Golden Prairie, Tompkins, and Fox Valley.  And they are all asking 
that the government not implement the 7 per cent GST.  Particularly they 
are stating their opposition to the tax on books, magazines, and 
newspapers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise pursuant to rule 11 to 
present to the Legislative Assembly on behalf of many residents of the 
province of Saskatchewan.  Mr. Speaker, these residents are urging the 
provincial government to stop the provincial GST until the people of the 
province have had an opportunity to pass judgement on it in a provincial 
election.  Mr. Speaker, these residents are from many parts of Regina, in 
particular from the constituency of Regina North West which is an area I 
represent.  I'm pleased on their behalf to present this petition, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I rise pursuant to rule 
11 to table in this Assembly a petition signed by several residents of the 
city of Saskatoon who oppose the provincial government's planned goods and 
services tax.  They are indicting that the Government of Saskatchewan does 
not have a mandate from them to impose this unfair provincial goods and 
services tax, and I'm pleased to be able to lay this petition on the Table. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 



 

 

 
Mr. Anguish: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise also pursuant to rule 11 to 
present a petition to the Assembly here this afternoon on behalf of the S & 
M Family Restaurant at Radisson, Saskatchewan.  The owner of that business 
realizes that the petition may not be in the form that would be ruled in 
order, but I'll let the Clerks at the Table make that determination. 
 
The petitioners are asking this Legislative Assembly to find a remedy to a 
situation that the government has imposed.  It's unfair to the S & M Family 
Restaurant.  And the several hundred petitioners gathered by the owner of 
the S & M restaurant are asking the Assembly to find a remedy to the unfair 
treatment that has been received by the proprietor of that establishment 
because of a service road that was built that has inconvenienced his 
business to a great extent.  And I'll present that petition here this 
afternoon, Mr. Speaker.  Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- I'd just like to make a comment on that.  The hon. member 
make a curious statement where he felt that the petition he was presenting 
may not be in order.  And one would have thought that he would have taken 
care prior to coming here to see that it is or it isn't.  I just found that 
a curious statement. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, in accordance with rule 11, I present the 
petition.  And the petition basically reads, Mr. Speaker, that people from 
these particular communities are opposed to the provincial GST.  Basically 
they are saying that the government has no mandate until after an election.  
The people exercising their democratic right, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Saskatoon and area. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Pursuant to rule 11, I 
join my colleagues in bringing a petition to the Assembly from residents of 
the town of Eyebrow as well as many citizens of my home community of Moose 
Jaw.  Mr. Speaker, these people are opposed to the government's 
introduction of the goods and services tax, provincial goods and services 
tax, without the mandate that it can earn in an election.  On their behalf 
I'm very honoured to lay this on the Table of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I rise and 
join my colleagues pursuant to rule 11 to present a petition on behalf of 
citizens of Weyburn, Saskatchewan.  The citizens of Weyburn are saying that 
they support the Alliance Against Tax on books, magazines, and newspapers. 
 
These residents of Weyburn believe that the tax on knowledge and 
information is detrimental to learning and therefore they feel that they 
would like the government to withdraw that tax, Mr. Speaker, saying that 
this tax would be the only one of its kind in Canada and that then 
Saskatchewan would be among the highest taxed on books in all of Canada.  



 

 

And it's my pleasure to present this petition, Mr. Speaker.  It is my 
pleasure to present this petition and ask the government to reverse its 
decision from the citizens of Weyburn, Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it's my 
honour today to rise pursuant to rule 11 to present the petition on behalf 
of the 20 petitioners resident in the province of Saskatchewan.  These 
petitioners humbly pray that the Honourable Assembly may be pleased to urge 
the Provincial Government to stop the provincial GST until the people of 
the province have an opportunity to pass judgement on it -- that is the 
provincial government -- in a provincial election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these petitioners come mostly from the city of Prince Albert, 
from 7th Street East, from Bliss Crescent, 4th Avenue West, and so on and 
so forth, although I do notice that as well there is a petitioner from the 
city of Saskatoon.  And, Mr. Speaker, I've checked this petition.  I 
believe that it's in order although it will be up to the Clerk to finally 
make that determination.  I'd like to lay it on the Table at this time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, pursuant to rule 11, 
I too have a petition to present, to lay on the Table today.  It's a 
petition. Mr. Speaker, signed by people who are particularly angry with 
this government's attempt to tax reading materials.  Mr. Speaker, these 
petitioners pray that your honourable Assembly may be pleased to urge the 
provincial government to reverse its decision to impose this unfair tax.  
And, Mr. Speaker, these petitioners all make their home in the beautiful 
community of Avonlea. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I too rise pursuant 
to rule 11 to present this petition on behalf of a number of Saskatchewan 
residents.  Mr. Speaker, these petitioners are asking the provincial 
government to stop the implementation of the provincial goods and services 
tax before they've had an opportunity to pass judgement on it in a 
provincial election.  Mr. Speaker, the majority of these petitioners are 
from Watrous.  I notice one from Regina here, as well as other areas 
through the province.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise pursuant to rule 11.  I too 
have a petition urging the provincial government to stop the provincial GST 
until the people of Saskatchewan have an opportunity to pass judgement on 
it in a provincial election.  These petitioners, Mr. Speaker, come from 
Edenwold, Melville, Tisdale, Saskatoon, Punnichy, and the city of Regina.  
It is my duty, pleasure, and honour to present this petition on their 
behalf. 
 



 

 

Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I rise too 
pursuant to rule 11 to present a petition to the Assembly on behalf of the 
20 residents of Moose Jaw.  These petitioners are urging the government to 
reverse its decision to impose the 7 per cent provincial GST.  And it's my 
honour, sir, to lay these names on the Table on top of the many hundreds . 
. . or thousands that have also expressed their opposition to this massive 
unpopular tax. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
 DMr. Koenker: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too rise pursuant to rule 11 
to present a petition against the GST, the provincial GST.  It's signed by 
20 residents of Saskatoon including residents of my constituency.  And it's 
a pleasure to give voice to their concerns. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I believe it important for Mr. 
Speaker to note the filing of petitions today.  Mr. Speaker, I believe we 
had 20-some in 20 minutes.  The proper process was established today, Mr. 
Speaker, as to the proper filing of petitions, and I would hope, Mr. 
Speaker, that a ruling would be in order as to the precedent established by 
the opposition today as to the proper form and delivery of oral petitions, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order, order.  Order, order, order.  I have 
taken note of the hon. member's comments.  The comments as presented are 
not a point of order. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: -- According to order, I have reviewed the following petitions that 
were presented on May 21, 22, 23, 24, and 27, and under rule 11(7) find 
them to be in order.  They are hereby read and received: 
 

 Of certain residents of the Province of Saskatchewan praying that your 
Honourable Assembly may be pleased to refuse to extend the PST to goods 
and services. 

 
 Of certain residents of the Province of Saskatchewan praying that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to urge the Provincial Government to 
reverse its decision to tax reading materials. 

 
 And of certain residents of the Province of Saskatchewan praying that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to urge the Provincial Government to 
stop the provincial GST. 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Effects of PST on Employment 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- My question, Mr. Speaker, is addressed to the Minister 
of Finance.  Mr. Minister, in April the number of unemployed people in 
Saskatchewan was 3,000 higher than last year.  The rate of unemployment 
went from 7.6 per cent to 8.2 per cent.  The problem, Mr. Minister, is 
business investment.  Business investment, as you well know, is a factor of 
business confidence, and the business community in this province is saying 
en masse, as is the public, that the PST (provincial sales tax) isn't going 
to create 5,000 jobs, it's going to destroy several times that number. 
 
Mr. Minister, how long are you going to continue to deny the obvious?  This 
tax is a mistake and should be withdrawn.  Surely that's apparent even to 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, as it relates to unemployment or 
employment numbers in Saskatchewan, I think it's worth noting that for some 
several years now Saskatchewan has consistently ranked as having one of the 
lowest unemployment levels across Canada, Mr. Speaker.  And indeed the 
Conference Board of Canada, for example, has confirmed that in recent days 
and are predicting similar trends on into the future. 
 
In this province, Mr. Speaker, a healthy primary resource sector, whether 
it be agriculture, forestry, the mining sector, and a healthy manufacturing 
and processing sector can lead to a healthy service sector. 
 
Under harmonization, Mr. Speaker, we will see real growth in those sectors, 
Mr. Speaker, because they will be more competitive because the tax that 
they now pay will be coming off their inputs, Mr. Speaker.  We stand by our 
economic analysis of the impact on harmonization.  We didn't pick numbers 
out of the air, Mr. Speaker, as the caucus researchers have done, Mr. 
Speaker, and the NDP (New Democratic Party), Mr. Speaker. 
 
Yes, some sectors will feel a challenge as they move into harmonization.  
But, Mr. Speaker, part and parcel of our plan to stabilize and revitalize 
the economy of Saskatchewan is harmonization.  Part and parcel of our plan, 
Mr. Speaker, is a $1.3 billion payment for GRIP (gross revenue insurance 
plan) and NISA (net income stabilization account), and we stand by our 
plan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
 DMr. Shillington: -- Mr. Minister, you stated that this province would 
experience real growth.  To put it mildly, Mr. Minister, there's some 
sceptics. 
 
One of the group of sceptics is the Saskatchewan business alliance who said 
the following last week: Sales in the general retail service sector are 
down sharply.  As a result, people have lost their jobs or have had their 



 

 

hours of work cut back due to these lower sales.  PST is the last straw in 
an already underperforming provincial economy. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question is: your Premier met with these people, told them 
there was going to be some changes.  Mr. Minister, what changes are you 
considering for the PST. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, as it relates . . . when the hon. member 
makes the general comment about business, I think he would be incorrect to 
draw a lot of conclusions and generalize about business in that way.  We 
have never ever tried to suggest, Mr. Speaker, that there aren't some 
sectors in business that are now faced with collecting a tax that they did 
not collect before from consumers.  One of those sectors, for example, the 
fast food industry, restaurants -- no question their consumers are now 
faced with a second tax within three or four months. 
 
It is worth noting though, Mr. Speaker, that every province with the 
exception of Alberta and B.C. do charge restaurant . . . have tax on 
restaurant meals now.  So this is not some strange phenomena across Canada, 
Mr. Speaker.  That would be the first point that I would make. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, I gave the business people last week that I met 
with, the assurance that as we moved towards full implementation of 
harmonization on January 1, 1992, whether the issue was the municipal, 
university, tourism sector, the border shopping issue, that we would 
continue to work with and dialogue with these groups to make that 
implementation as smooth as possible, Mr. Speaker.  That we have been 
doing.  That's been part of the plan all along, Mr. Speaker.  And that will 
continue to be the plan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Minister, in making this statement that the Premier 
did to this business group -- that changes were being considered -- he was 
clearly operating under the assumption or on the basis that not all the 
money which you said was necessary is necessary.  And he was clearly saying 
to them, we can get some money somewhere else. 
 
Mr. Minister, is there just the faintest possibility that you might now be 
looking to some elimination of waste and mismanagement for the extra money 
or is that too much to ever expect of this government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- For example, Mr. Speaker, one of the kinds of issues 
that we identified some time ago and then reiterated about 10 days ago that 
had to be dealt with as we move to the January 1, '92 harmonization date, 
is the whole question of tourism, the tourism industry, and the potential 
for a tourism rebate not unlike the federal GST has for tourists, Mr. 
Speaker.  We outlined that issue in our impact analysis study and I've 
referred that to some who have called about it.  But that would be one 



 

 

example of the kind of issue that has to be addressed under full 
harmonization, Mr. Speaker.  And we intend to do that because . . . and 
tourism is important to us and we do want to see (a) the jobs that are 
there maintained; and (b) new jobs created, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- New questions. Mr. Minister, it is apparent to 
everyone, including I think many of your long-suffering caucus colleagues, 
that your Premier said something different to the business alliance than 
you're saying here today.  Short question, Mr. Minister: was it the 
business alliance who were misled, or is it us today who are being misled? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- No, Mr. Speaker, what's been said inside or outside 
this legislature or what's said in Saskatoon versus Moose Jaw versus Prince 
Albert, unlike the NDP and unlike your leader, our leader doesn't say one 
thing in Harris and another thing to the labour convention in Regina.  He 
doesn't say one thing in Prince Albert about Cargill and another thing in 
Moose Jaw about Weyerhaeuser. 
 
We are consistent, Mr. Speaker, and we don't go around just playing to the 
crowd, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- And on the issue of harmonization, it has been no 
different.  Now at last count the NDP had something like 14 or 15 positions 
on this tax, Mr. Speaker.  The latest one is that if they're elected, Mr. 
Speaker, which will never happen, that they'll repeal this tax.  They've 
given us no indication of where they'll get the money from the GRIP and 
NISA, no indication of how they'll balance the books. 
 
The plan stands, Mr. Speaker, and the plan is Bill 61 will be passed and 
full harmonization will come into effect on January 1, 1992, Mr. Speaker.  
That's our plan. 
 
I say to the NDP opposite: come clean with business and come clean with 
farmers -- what is your plan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Opposition to PST 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I have a question as well to 
the Minister of Finance who so desperately is trying to defend the 
Premier's reversal on this particular issue. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question deals with the growing opposition throughout 
Saskatchewan to this tax.  Every day there is growing evidence that shows 
people are organizing to urge you to withdraw this Bill and this tax 
proposal. 



 

 

 
I just have here your information a story from the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix 
of yesterday which reads as follows.  It said in the story today that 
border crossing at Portal alone have increased by 38 per cent over last 
year to this time, Mr. Minister.  That surely is evidence to you that 
thousands are voting with their feet by taking their shopping dollars cross 
the border, damaging our economy. 
 
And further to that, Mr. Minister, there have now been over 100,000 
citizens who've signed petitions saying that they can't afford your tax.  
In view of this and in view of the fact that local governments and chambers 
of commerce and libraries and virtually every Saskatchewan organization is 
writing you asking you to remove this tax, what more do people have to do 
in this province to make you hear what they are saying?  And will you 
finally listen and withdraw this tax before it does more damage to the 
Saskatchewan economy, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, we've been through the reasons as to why 
we are taking these budget measures a number of times.  I will be the first 
to say again, Mr. Speaker, and to recognize that any time that you're 
making tax changes, especially tax increase, revenue increase, they are not 
popular, Mr. Speaker.  I recognize that. 
 
All of the decision, where you're cutting spending or raising taxes, are 
difficult kinds of choices, Mr. Speaker.  And we've tried to do them in a 
fair and reasonable way.  Why are we doing them, Mr. Speaker?  We are doing 
them because it is imperative that we stabilize . . . We are doing them, 
Mr. Speaker, if the hon. members would permit me, we are doing them 
because, Mr. Speaker, we recognize that the economy of Saskatchewan because 
of trade . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order, order.  Order, order.  Number 
one, hon. members are not giving the Minister of Finance the opportunity to 
speak.  Number two, there are two members in the midst of involving our 
guests in the gallery which we've asked members not to do even if you're 
sitting in your seats.  Number three, questions and answers are getting 
somewhat long and I ask for the co-operation of members on both sides.  Let 
us continue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, as I was saying, why are we doing this?  
We are doing this because it's important, because of trade wars and low 
grain prices and the importance of agriculture in our entire economy, to 
stabilize and revitalize that rural economy and in so doing, our entire 
economy. 
 
To do that requires this government to raise $125 million to trigger $1.3 
billion in payments that will end up in businesses all over this province.  
That's why we are doing this.  Anything else . . . any body who suggests 
they can cut spending and balance the books are being irresponsible, Mr. 
Speaker, and there's no other word for it. 
 



 

 

Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Now I'm going to ask hon. members one more time.  Clearly 
this isn't question period; it's clearly almost what one might term 
extensive debate.  And I'm going to once more bring it to the attention of 
members.  And if you don't co-operate, which will make for a better 
question period, I'm afraid I'll have to do what needs to be done. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the Minister of 
Finance who has yet to address the real reason why the government is 
imposing this tax, and that is the government's waste and mismanagement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Minister, we have had small-business operators in 
Saskatoon who have formed a coalition to fight your tax.  Automobile 
dealers and suppliers have formed a coalition to fight your tax.  Yesterday 
members of the opposition met with an organization from border communities 
near the United States border in this province who are saying stop this 
tax, because it's destroying their businesses. 
 
In an editorial on Saturday . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  I have just asked for the 
co-operation of hon. members.  The hon. member is well into a lengthy 
preamble which, quite frankly, with no end in sight.  And I'm asking him to 
put his question and then I will ask the Minister of Finance to respond 
also in a reasonable manner. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I was about to ask my 
question, and my question is this.  Mr. Minister, in view of what the 
editorial in Saskatoon Star-Phoenix said yesterday, which said, having our 
socks taxed off, with every piggy bank in the province empty . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Order, order.  Order? Order, order.  I'm going to ask 
the hon. member once more to put the question, and you may be getting there 
but I can't assume that.  Put the question, please. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Minister, where do we get the money to spend and 
create all these jobs?  And in view of all this, Mr. Minister, in view of 
the evidence against your tax, will you once and for all provide the 
evidence that supports your tax instead of giving us a bunch of jingoism 
and rhetoric which means nothing and cannot be supported by any meaningful 
statistics? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, once again we see the NDP coming 
forward with their favourite old saw, and that is, Mr. Speaker . . . 
they've come forward with the same line that they've used in this House 
some several months now, and that is, when the issue is we need more money 
for health and education, when they said three and a half per cent this 
year wasn't enough, and they said we should spend more on health and 



 

 

education, they said, and where will we find it? -- cut down on waste and 
mismanagement. 
 
When the issue was we should lower the deficit and we should go further, 
they said, we'll find the money with waste and mismanagement.  When the 
issue was GRIP and NISA, Mr. Speaker, they said, we'll find it through 
waste and mismanagement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these dollars that they apparently believe that can be saved 
by cutting down on paper and paper-clips have been spent so many times -- 
so many times, Mr. Speaker.  And I say to the opposition members, if they 
think that you can balance the books, reduce the deficit, fund the farm 
programs by cutting down on paper and paper-clips, I say that member is 
living in fantasy land, Mr. Speaker, because that's the reality, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- A new question to the minister, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 
Minister, I'm not here talking about paper-clips; I'm talking about the 
overwhelming opposition by people of Saskatchewan against your tax. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Business people and farm people who don't believe your 
argument and workers are saying to you that they can't afford this tax and 
our economy can't afford it.  That being the case, Mr. Minister, who then 
is this tax in aid of?  Just who are you serving by forcing this new and 
this unfair and this unwanted tax on Saskatchewan people, and when will you 
start hearing what they've got to say and stop proceeding with this tax, 
Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, the question that we have to put to the 
opposition is where do they stand, Mr. Speaker?  When the issue is 
operating guide-lines for hospitals and schools, when we've said three and 
a half per cent is all the economy has to give and all the taxpayer has to 
give, they say, do more. 
 
When the issue, Mr. Speaker, was funding for farmers and our Premier 
negotiated GRIP and NISA, they said, and we must do more.  And, Mr. 
Speaker, when we put in place wage guide-lines, they have been ominously 
silent or the story has been one thing in Harris and another thing at the 
SFL (Saskatchewan Federation of Labour) convention, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a plan to balance the books, to stabilize and 
revitalize this economy.  Our plan is unchanged, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I say to the opposition, come clean with the public, come clean with the 
taxpayers.  They are going to raise income taxes, Mr. Speaker, by 23 per 
cent if they are going to balance the books and fund those farm programs.  
That's what their plan is, Mr. Speaker. 



 

 

 
Penalties for Non-Collection of PST 

 
Mr. Koenker: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to the Minister of 
Finance.  Mr. Minister, you talked a few moments ago, just a very few 
moments ago about consulting with Saskatchewan small businesses and working 
with them regarding this provincial PST.  Why then are you putting the gun 
to their heads with a 10 per cent fine and 16 per cent interest charges for 
taxes not submitted, when this tax isn't even law yet? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, as I said probably a month or two ago in 
this legislature, the process relative to tax arrears is unchanged and does 
not change in this Bill, Mr. Speaker.  So I would just reiterate that 
point. 
 
Secondly, as it relates to the outside expert advice, the business people 
that have helped us deal with the question of when GST became a reality and 
the whole harmonization question, Mr. Speaker, we put together an expert 
advisory committee that included people like Dale Botting from the Canadian 
Federation of Independent Business, Mr. Speaker, who in fact, even though I 
see his name on the NDP's report, who himself as I understand it, was 
surprised that it ended up in that context, and quite frankly is in support 
of harmonization as are everyone who sat on that advisory committee, Mr. 
Speaker.  And I think if you use words like, do not support harmonization, 
Mr. Speaker, would be to do damage to the primary and secondary sectors of 
our economy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- A supplementary, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, why are you 
fining Saskatchewan business people when you have no legal or moral 
authority to do so, when your PST is not yet the law of the land? 
 
(1445) 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, the legal and moral . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, the legal and moral authority to collect 
this tax is the same as it always has been.  Very often Finance ministers 
very often on budget night will announce tax changes effective a certain 
time and day -- very often midnight that night.  At some later time in the 
session the legislation comes forward, is amended, Mr. Speaker, to reflect 
the tax changes that were announced. 
 
We're doing precisely the same here.  And if we weren't having bell-ringing 
and quorum calls and reading of petitions, the tax Bill would be passed, 
Mr. Speaker. 



 

 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Tax Revenue INcreases 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is also to the 
Minister of Finance and it has to do with your tax record of your 
government. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you'll look at the record, it shows that since 1986 the 
personal income tax by your government has been increased by 337.9 million, 
sales tax revenue has increased by 298.2 million, gas tax has increased by 
171.1 million.  That's a total of $807.2 million since '86.  Now, Mr. 
Minister, add 440 million of this PST, that comes out to $1.25 billion or 
$1,250 for every man, woman, and child in this province since 1986. 
 
Mr. Minister, people have reached the breaking point.  When will you 
realize, Mr. Minister, that there is a limit to the amount people will pay 
in taxes in this province to your government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, there have been revenue increases over 
the last five years; there's no question about it, Mr. Speaker.  And I 
would refer the hon. member to the budget document that was tabled entitled 
. . . 
The Speaker: -- Order.  Order, order.  Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- This document shows, Mr. Speaker, in terms of where 
did that extra revenue go that was raised, what it clearly shows, Mr. 
Speaker, is the very large bar graph here shows by far and away . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order, order, order.  Order.  Perhaps 
all hon. members could just follow the rules.  Let the minister continue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, in summary, what this chart says in the 
budget document for all to see is that of the total increase in spending 
from '86 to '92, and the total increase was 1.191 billion, nearly 700 
million went to health care, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, over 200 million 
went to education and over 145 million went to agriculture. 
 
And I'll tell you why it went to those areas, Mr. Speaker.  Because health 
and education and stabilizing our rural economy are important to this 
government and this party.  That's why it went there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, due to some significant delays in the 
Assembly over the last number of days in getting to government business, 
I'd ask leave of this Assembly to move directly to government motion. 
 
Leave not granted. 
 



 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, in order to accommodate the government, 
I, with leave, would move that notwithstanding the rules of the Assembly 
and following the adoption of this motion, that this Assembly now proceed 
directly to consideration of Bill No. 55, An Act respecting Programs to 
Stabilize the Income of Agricultural Producers. 
 
And I do that in order that we could move through this Bill today and help 
out the farmers with the GRIP and NISA program. 
 
Leave not granted. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. 
 

POINT OF PRIVILEGE 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Before orders of the day, Mr. 
Speaker, I rise to raise a question of privilege in accordance with the 
rules of this Assembly and in accordance with the parliamentary 
authorities.  In conformity with the rules of this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, I 
provided to you earlier today advance notice of my intention to raise this 
matter.  I would now like to state this matter before the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the current session began on April 11 and shortly thereafter 
on April 23, the legislative Public Accounts Committee began its work as is 
the normal course of events in the Assembly.  The Crown Corporations 
Committee has also normally begun its review of the financial statements of 
the Crown corporations shortly after the session has begun.  This has been 
the practice, Mr. Speaker, traditionally and regularly since the committee 
was first created many years ago. 
 
To date, Mr. Speaker, the official opposition has made repeated verbal and 
written requests to the chairman of this committee regarding the immediate 
convening of the committee.  The chairman has refused to schedule meetings 
of the committee in order to begin its review of the financial statements 
of the Crown corporations of Saskatchewan. 
 
The current session is now at day 34 and the government still has not given 
opposition members any indication of when the committee will meet to begin 
its review. 
 
I remind members of the Assembly and the public that during the meetings of 
the Crown Corporations Committee, Crown corporations' officials attend with 
the minister responsible for that particular corporation to advise the 
minister on questions asked by opposition members regarding the expenditure 
of public money, taxpayers' money in essence, under the authority of each 
Crown corporation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this process has been a public accountability process and has 
been the procedure for three or four decades.  Opposition members have 
raised important questions on behalf of taxpayers concerning the fiscal 
mismanagement and program accountability of the Crown corporations in 
question period on previous occasions.  And government ministers, including 
the Deputy Premier, have referred those questions to the Crown Corporations 



 

 

Committee. 
 
Crown corporations account for a significant percentage of government 
expenditure -- about half of all government expenditures -- and it's 
therefore imperative that their financial statements be reviewed in a 
timely way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I submit that members of this Assembly have a clear right to 
scrutinize the government's financial management of the Crown sector.  And 
I submit that by denying members that right, the chairman and member for 
the constituency of Pelly has committed a breach of privilege. 
 
I refer, Mr. Speaker, to Beauchesne's 5th Edition, article 16, which 
defines privilege as, and I quote: 
 

 . . . the sum of the peculiar rights enjoyed by each House collectively . 
. and by Members of each House individually, without which they could not 
discharge their functions . . . 

 
He states further, and I quote: 
 

 The privileges of Parliament are rights which are "absolutely necessary 
for the due execution of its powers."  They are enjoyed by individual 
Members, because the House cannot perform its functions without the 
unimpeded use of the services of its Members; 

 
Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I respectfully urge you to find that there is in 
this case a prima facie case of privilege, after which I shall move an 
appropriate motion in order that the legislature itself may take the 
appropriate action. 
 
It would be as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

 That this Assembly censure the member for Pelly for having breached the 
privileges of this legislature by preventing members from exercising their 
right to scrutinize the financial statements of the Crown corporations in 
the Crown Corporations Committee. 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- I have received the hon. member's statement in my office, 
and I have prepared a response to it.  However, I'm going to give the hon. 
member for Moosomin an opportunity to also state his views. 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, as vice-chairman I'd 
like to add a few words and make a few comments regarding the motion 
presented by the member this afternoon, a motion which I do not believe is 
actually a question of privilege. 
 
But I would like to comment on the fact that recently, Mr. Speaker, we've 
been called upon to make different rules and the Speaker of this Assembly 
certainly has the option and the leadership to give guide-lines and 
guidance to this House. 



 

 

 
And also we've seen over the past number of weeks the attempts made by the 
Government House Leader to give some direction to the House, and the 
direction given by the Opposition House Leader as well.  And when it comes 
to Crown Corporations Committee, I see no difference. 
 
And I'd like to bring to your attention that the . . . I'd like to bring to 
your attention, Mr. Speaker, that the member from Pelly has been in 
discussion with the opposition leader for Crown Corporations and certainly 
has laid out a number of options and a number of rules and a number of 
guide-lines that they could work together with. 
 
And to my knowledge, to my knowledge . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order.  Order. 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker I would suggest it is in the . . . or the proper 
channels are for the two members, the chairman of the committee as well as 
the opposition committee chairman, to sit down and draw out the guide-lines 
for Crown Corporations to proceed.  Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- I shall be brief, Mr. Speaker.  Suffice it to say that 
the facts related by the member from Moosomin are not accurate -- just not 
accurate.  We will table the reports as soon as copies of the letters can 
be made. 
 
I will make . . . want to comment, and that is that the member in his 
opening statement in some way related the failure to call Crown Corporation 
to the impasse over the PST.  If the member is saying that they are using 
Crown Corporations as a lever to get the PST passed, then you've made our 
point.  That is a gross abuse. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to inform the Assembly that I do 
know that the member for Pelly has been working hard trying to get the 
Crown Corporations Committee to commence.  I know that he has approached 
me, as minister of SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) and SGI Canada, 
about appearing before the committee, and I'd indicated to him that I was 
ready to proceed at any time.  And he indicated that if I was ready to 
proceed, that he would offer to the opposition that we proceed with SGI and 
SGI Canada.  He indicated to me . . . and I truly believe that the 
opposition had some difficulty in that they were quibbling about who should 
proceed first.  And I think that what you have here, Mr. Speaker, is not 
normal circumstances, not normal times.  You have obstructionism, and I 
think they are bringing it in here again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(1500) 
 



 

 

The Speaker: -- I have heard members from both sides.  I have heard members 
from both sides.  I have received the hon. member's note, as I indicated 
earlier, and I have this response which I will now read at this time. 
 
This morning I received from the member for Regina North West notice of the 
question of privilege which he is now raising.  I thank the hon. member for 
giving the Chair notice pursuant to rule 6. 
 
The issue raised pertains to the fact that the Crown Corporations Committee 
has held no meetings since the Assembly has reconvened its sittings on 
April 11, 1991, thereby allegedly breaching the privilege of committee 
members by denying them the right of scrutinizing the government's 
management of the Crown sector. 
 
There are many instances in the past practice of this Assembly where 
standing and special committees have not held meetings for what some may 
construe as prolonged periods.  This has never been, nor should it be, 
interpreted as an intention of committees not to meet. 
 
The Chair is reluctant to intervene in proceedings and practices -- Order?  
The member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg and the member for Quill Lakes.  The 
Chair is reluctant to intervene in proceedings and practices of committees 
unless the matter is before the Assembly . . . Order, order, order.  The 
Chair is reluctant to intervene in proceedings and practices of committees 
unless the matter is before the Assembly through a report from the 
committee. 
 
While there may be no report from the committee for the Chair to consider 
in this case, it is my view that this situation is not a matter upon which 
the Chair can or should take a position. 
 
Once a committee has received a reference from the House, it is the 
responsibility of the committee to carry out its business as it sees fit.  
While the member may be concerned in the present circumstances, I have 
difficulty to find a breach of privilege of hon. members in the fact that 
the Crown Corporations Committee has not been meeting.  The solution to 
this problem perhaps lies in negotiations among parties, which the Chair 
would encourage. 
 
I therefore find that no prima facie case of privilege has been 
established. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Mr. Speaker, with leave I would ask this Assembly to direct 
the Crown Corporations Committee to meet this Thursday morning at 9 o'clock 
to pursue the business of the Crown Corporations Committee. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Leave not granted. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Member for Battlefords, order.  Order, 
order.  Member for Wascana, order, order. 
 



 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

MOTIONS 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  I am having great difficulty hearing 
the Clerk, and I need to be able to hear . . . The member for Regina North 
East -- I need to be able to hear the Clerk -- and the member for Regina 
Elphinstone.  And I ask for your co-operation, as is usual in these 
matters. 
 
Now I'm going to ask the Clerk to continue. 
 
Resolution No. 13 -- Role of School Boards in Combating Child Hunger in 
Regina and Saskatoon 
 
Mr. Swan: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for the . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order?  Order, order, order. 
 
Mr. Swan: -- Mr. Speaker, at the end of my remarks, I will be moving a 
motion commending the government's positive role in facing the challenges 
of child hunger in our province. 
 
Saskatchewan is well known for the sense of community, the sense of caring 
that we have for each other.  It comes from our history and is part of our 
heritage.  From a time . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  I'm going to have to once more 
intervene.  Hon. members are not co-operating.  They are not allowing the 
member who has the floor to proceed.  I'm going to ask for their 
co-operation once again. 
 
Mr. Swan: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  From a time when people homesteaded 
here and families came from across the ocean and across the country to make 
a life in Saskatchewan, from the times during the dirty thirties when 
Saskatchewan families suffered incredibly harsh economic conditions, 
Saskatchewan people have developed a sense of caring and compassion for 
each other, and possess an underlying desire to see their friends and 
neighbours live in dignity. 
 
And so the issue of child hunger in this province is of great concern to a 
lot of people.  It is of such concern, Mr. Speaker, because people 
recognize that the hunger issue itself is a symptom of a far more complex 
problem.  People recognize that a hungry child is a symptom of a much 
deeper social and economic problem.  And the growing number of hungry 
children in this province shows us that the self-sufficiency and the 
dignity that comes with it are being threatened. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this motion that I will be placing before the House today 
speaks to the role of our government in addressing the root cause of the 
hunger problem in Saskatchewan.  It speaks to the steps that we have taken 
to help families in Saskatchewan become independent, to create a future for 
themselves.  It speaks to the hard work and dedication of groups and 



 

 

individuals working with government in the battle against the root cause of 
hunger.  And it speaks to the steps that we have taken to address the 
immediate problem at hand, which is hungry children. 
 
The way we have addressed this issue seems highly appropriate and I think 
will prove to be effective.  As I mentioned, we have addressed the 
immediate challenges of feeding hungry children.  As members of this 
Assembly will know, communities across Saskatchewan have taken action to 
fight child hunger on their own.  There have been innovative and courageous 
programs started in Saskatchewan, in the cities of Regina, Saskatoon, 
Prince Albert, Moose Jaw, and indeed all over the province.  And those 
people know their communities and they know what works best in those 
communities to help the people that they are serving.  So we felt that it 
was best to let those communities decide what would work for them, with the 
provincial government providing funding. 
 
And I would like to take a moment, Mr. Speaker, to mention a few of the 
programs that are working in our communities to feed hungry children.  The 
community schools nutrition project in Regina, Saskatoon, and Prince 
Albert, receives $351,000 to establish and support daily school feeding 
programs in 18 inner city schools.  The Prince Albert share-a-meal program 
which receives $15,000 to hire a cook for Monsignor Ulinski's daily hot 
meal program; the inner city pre-school program in Saskatoon which received 
over $11,000 to implement a pre-school pilot project for inner city 
children, and offering them a nutritious snack and lunch; the Regina Native 
Awareness Inc. or, as it is more popularly known, Chili for Children, 
receive $9,100 to meet the immediate needs of their funding program. 
 
The list goes on, Mr. Speaker, and includes funding for the other and 
perhaps more important component in our strategy to combat hunger in our 
province, that is the education and training component. 
 
In addition to directing funds toward community administered feeding 
programs across the province, we have engaged in a long-term program of 
welfare reform -- life skills counselling and job training to really fight 
the root cause of hunger in our society.  The root cause can only be dealt 
with through encouraging and assisting the less fortunate in our society to 
become independent and self-sufficient. 
 
By strengthening our families and providing people with the tools to 
improve their lives and the lives of their families, we can hope to combat 
hunger.  The PC (Progressive Conservative) government has always been 
committed to this goal of independence and self-sufficiency. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this commitment to the future of Saskatchewan people from 
all parts of our society is part of the plan that we have for this province 
-- a plan to stabilize our communities and create jobs and a future for 
Saskatchewan families; a plan to diversify and develop our economy and 
prepare Saskatchewan to fully benefit from the prosperity that lies ahead; 
and a plan that embraces -- in fact demands -- that all Saskatchewan people 
have the opportunity to lead productive and rewarding lives. That is why 
the second component of our battle against hunger is so important. 
 



 

 

It is one thing to feed a child today.  It is more important to ensure that 
future generations and future Saskatchewan families are given the tools to 
avoid repeating this situation. 
 
So our response to child hunger has included more than just feeding 
programs.  It has included an increase in the minimum wage last July from 
4.50 per hour to $5 per hour, to put more money in the pockets of low wage 
earners. 
 
It has included an increase in the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan rates for 
children in June of last year.  I has also included a $200 per child family 
tax credit for low income earners.  And it has included the establishment 
of school-based family centres in five urban communities. 
 
We have also attacked the problem of chronic poverty through an innovative 
welfare reform project called Saskatchewan Works.  This program has 
provided valuable employment and training for thousands of Saskatchewan 
Assistance Plan recipients across the province. 
 
I just received some recent figures from my colleague, the member for 
Rosthern, and I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, they are quite impressive.  Since 
this ambitious program of welfare reform was initiated in 1984, over 2,900 
projects have been approved creating some 95,000 jobs -- or 9,500 jobs.  
I'm sorry, Mr. Speaker -- jobs for about 11,000 social assistance 
recipients in our province. 
 
Those numbers are even more impressive when you consider the long-term 
effects.  It's not just a matter of putting people to work for a few days 
or a a few weeks; it's a matter of giving them the tools and the skills to 
find gainful, permanent employment. 
 
A recent study done by the department showed that over a three-year period, 
only 14 per cent of the people who have been involved in Saskatchewan Works 
went back on to social assistance programs.  So we're looking at an 86 per 
cent success rate -- 86 per cent of the people involved went on to have 
productive lives and permanent jobs -- and that is really the goal, Mr. 
Speaker.  And I believe that any time you have an 86 per cent success rate 
in any program, it is indeed far beyond the average.  Self-sufficiency, Mr. 
Speaker: a future, and an end to the bitter cycle of poverty. 
 
Our approach to the problems that cause hunger in Saskatchewan is one of 
the long-term solutions, not just a short-term band-aid.  Our approach is 
realistic.  It's fair, and it offers real hope to the victims of poverty. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite spend a great deal of their time 
criticizing and complaining about any effort that the government makes to 
address problems in Saskatchewan.  And I would say that it is very 
unfortunate that the NDP has chosen to play politics and play on the hopes 
of people in need when dealing with this important and sensitive issue. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Speaker, what have we seen from those members opposite in 
response to the cries of needy people? 
 



 

 

Well as the member from Rosthern, our Minister of Social Services outlined 
so effectively in his budget debate, we saw an irresponsible member from 
Saskatoon University, the NDP Social Services critic, promising the sun, 
the moon, and the stars.  And we heard a detailed list of promises that 
could not be kept -- empty promises to people in need, Mr. Speaker.  
Promises that were worth approximately $1 billion, Mr. Speaker, $1 billion.  
And I say that is shameful; that is unforgivable, and that is so unfair, to 
hold out empty promises to people who are looking for hope. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I must say that I am proud to belong to a government 
that offers real hope to people and not empty promises -- real hope of a 
job, real hope of a future, real hope of dignity and self-sufficiency, and 
real hope for a productive life for themselves and for their families. 
 
(1515) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I will tell you, and people across this province will 
tell you, real hope is worth more than a billion dollars worth of hot air 
any day. 
 
With those remarks, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move the following motion.  
I move, seconded by the member for Shaunavon: 
 

 That this Assembly commend the Government of Saskatchewan for joining with 
the Saskatoon and Regina public and separate school boards to combat the 
root cause of hunger among children and other social problems of inner 
city families by providing life skills counselling and education, job 
training, legal aid, child and youth services, and by promoting self-help 
and community co-operation. 

 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this House do now move to government 
motions. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  It doesn't require leave when it's in the 
middle of a motion that is superseding.  A superseding motion does not need 
leave.  Standing vote.  Call in the members. 
 
The division bells rang from 3:18 p.m. until 9:59 p.m. 
 
The Speaker: -- It being 10 o'clock, the House stands adjourned until 
tomorrow at 2 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10 p.m. 
 


