





























































Hansard: May 07, 1991


 

 

May 7/91 
 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Petersen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to introduce to you 
44 grade 4 students from the Wadena Elementary School who are seated in the 
west gallery.  And as part of their regular class-room instructions that 
have gone on every year, Mr. Reg Glennie has once again brought his class 
here. 
 
They're accompanied as well by Denise Nelson, Betty McPherson, Ardyce 
Burseth, Pat Nowakowski, and Florence Christianson, and their bus driver 
Tony Lipinski. 
 
I'll be meeting with them later for some pictures and some refreshments and 
some questions.  And I look forward to finding out what their impressions 
of the Assembly are. 
 
About 2:30 we shall see you on the front steps for a photo; 2:35, room 218.  
I'd ask all members to help me welcome these guests today. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  In your gallery I 
would like to welcome some grade 7 and 8 students from Connaught School.  
They're accompanied by their teachers, Wynne Edwards and Helen Sunshine.  
Particularly I think we want to welcome Danis Goulet whose father sits in 
this Assembly and is the member from Cumberland. 
 
I'd ask all members to join me in welcoming all these students. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to introduce to you, 
and through you to this Assembly, 31 high school students that are 
representing Indian Head High School, and they have with them exchange 
students from Quebec.  So you have two high school classes visiting at the 
same time. 
 
They're in grade 10 to 12; their total number is 31.  They are with their 
teachers, Jennifer Bieber of Indian Head and Roger Caughlin, Quebec; their 
chaperons, Jean Doyon and Leon Parent from Quebec City; and they have their 
bus driver, Roger Caughlin, according to the information. 
 
I look forward to meeting with these students at 2:30 and explaining to 
them how our Assembly works and how the legislature works in Saskatchewan.  
I'm certain the students from Indian Head and from Quebec will have an 
interesting day here, and I ask the members to welcome them. 



 

 

 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure to introduce 
to you and to all members of the House, Wesley Sunshine, who was . . . I'll 
say two things about Wesley first of all.  Also with him of course, is 
Frank Fiacco who is a referee and judge. 
 
Last night Wesley Sunshine won a split decision in a competition against 
the American team that was in here last night.  He is a fine young athlete 
and a fine young man, I must add, Mr. Speaker.  He is a boxer and has done 
extremely well on the national scene for Saskatchewan and for himself. 
 
In addition to his victory last night, Wesley is also one of the chosen 
few, I suppose you might say. There have been five natives who have been 
chosen for the native role model event.  It's a program that was started 
last December, and a number of natives across the province have been chosen 
for this.  He was the latest one, had the opportunity yesterday to 
introduce it to him. 
 
There are already posters around the province.  The one with Wesley will be 
seen very shortly.  It's now available, Mr. Speaker.  I'll make sure that 
you get one. 
 
So I would like to ask Wesley Sunshine to please stand, and along with him 
is Frank Fiacco.  Wesley and Frank, please stand.  These two people are 
involved in the boxing program in this province, Mr. Speaker, and they're 
fine gentlemen.  Please welcome them to the House. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, I too would like to welcome the two special 
guests in the House. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
We are very proud of what you are able to achieve.  Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Effects of PST on Tourism Industry 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my question 
today in the absence of the Premier is to the Minister of Finance.  Mr. 
Speaker, some of today's newspapers are reporting that Canada's convention 
trade -- hotels and the like -- have lost $67 million in the first three 
months as the result of the federal GST (goods and services tax). 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, therefore to the Minister of Finance is this.  
Mr. Minister, isn't it correct to conclude that our 7 per cent provincial 
GST, or the PST (provincial sales tax) as some are calling it, added to the 



 

 

federal GST, is going to further cripple, if not totally destroy, 
Saskatchewan's convention and tourist business?  Aren't you really saying 
by this tax to conventions that Saskatchewan's closed for business? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- There is no question, Mr. Speaker, and members of the 
legislature, that the 7 per cent tax in the food and beverage industry that 
we've put in place on April 1 has meant that that industry has faced two 
new taxes to collect within three months.  And there's no question that 
that's a challenging situation for them. 
 
Over and above that, there is the other factor as relates to conventions 
and that speaks to the health of the economy in general and the 
difficulties in our economy.  I think anything that we can do to get the 
economy back on track, to get interest rates down, Mr. Speaker, to 
stabilize and revitalize our provincial economy will be helpful to 
hoteliers, those in the food and beverage industry, and indeed all 
businesses in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the Minister of 
Finance.  Mr. Minister, how in the world is it thought by the government 
that at a time of difficult economic activity in the province of 
Saskatchewan, as your answer implied, that a 7 per cent, a new 7 per cent 
harmonized PST is going to help the convention trade.  Has your government 
prepared any studies which would show, demonstrate, that in fact the hotel 
convention trade is not going to be hurt and hurt badly by this particular 
tax?  And if you've got those studies, why not table them? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I have sent across to the hon. 
member the estimated growth in real GDP (gross domestic product) as it 
relates to the food and beverage industry.  Of all the sectors it is 
probably the one that experiences the smallest growth under full 
harmonization.  I think the number is 0.2 per cent.  So obviously not a big 
boost, Mr. Speaker, and we acknowledge that. 
 
The larger issue here is how do we kick start the entire economy?  How do 
we create new wealth, Mr. Speaker?  How do we make sure economic expansion 
occurs in Saskatchewan, indeed in Canada?  Well one of the ways that this 
government is looking to stabilize and revitalize our entire economy so 
hoteliers and others will enjoy good economic times is first by getting 
cash into farmers' hands -- $1.3 billion.  And that's the kind of money 
that'll be spent in businesses, hoteliers, and others all across this 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So that's our first part of the plan, Mr. Speaker.  The second part 
obviously is economic diversification and how we can create new wealth 
across the province as well, Mr. Chairman. 
 



 

 

Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the Minister of 
Finance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, last week in question period, I revealed the 
fact that the Saskatchewan professional photographers were contemplating a 
decision to move their convention out of Saskatchewan as I recall, as I 
believe it, all the way to North Dakota, out of the country. 
 
In the light of my report today -- which is respect to The Globe and Mail 
and the cost on the tourists and the impact to the tourist and convention 
trade -- in light of the photographers' consideration of their actions, can 
the minister advise the House whether or not he has any studies or any 
indication about how many other Saskatchewan and perhaps non-Saskatchewan 
organizations are considering doing the same thing that the photographers 
are, namely not having their convention here because of your tax? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, we can skirt around the issue here, and 
I have never tried to, nor has any member of this government tried to, 
suggest for a moment that the food and beverage industry -- because they 
are faced with collecting a new tax in Saskatchewan within three months of 
each other -- that that isn't somehow going to have some consumer impact.  
We recognize that, Mr. Chairman. 
 
But it is also our responsibility to look at the economy as a whole, and by 
reducing the input costs of businesses, all businesses across this province 
by $260 million, we are going to see economic expansion and new jobs -- 1.6 
per cent growth in the economy, Mr. Speaker, 5,000 new jobs. 
 
Now are our hotel and food and beverage industry, are they competitive?  I 
would argue, even with this, Mr. Speaker, in a healthy economy they are 
very competitive, thank you.  Why do I say that?  Well first and and 
foremost I'm advised that in North Dakota they already have a hotel tax and 
food taxes.  In Manitoba and in Ontario and in Quebec and in New Brunswick 
and in P.E.I. there is taxes on restaurant meals.  I would argue we are 
competitive here, and with the business input tax credit, we will be more 
competitive, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the Minister of 
Finance.  And, Mr. Speaker, I might preface my remarks by saying that I 
find it absolutely incredible that the Minister of Finance seems to always 
phrase his answers in the face of the stark reality such as the motions by 
the photographers' association, by the hoteliers, by those involved in 
children's clothing.  I mean, that's the reality.  Maidstone, Estevan, all 
these questions -- he simply ignores these. 
 



 

 

Mr. Speaker, what the people of Saskatchewan need is a kick-start in the 
economy all right, but what they need first is to kick this government out 
so the economy can get going. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Minister, will you table your economic studies, if you 
have any, as to the economic impact on the economy as a whole.  And please 
do not refer the opposition again to this short little hand-out which is 
there basically for propaganda purposes.  I want the internal economic 
impact study on the economy of this provincial PST because we say, the 
people say, that it is a body-blow, a serious body-blow to the economic 
wealth and health of Saskatchewan.  Table those studies to back up your 
words. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member raises some sectors, 
particularly as it relates to hotels, the food and beverage industry -- 
I've already said that they face a challenging time during the transition 
period. 
 
And it's notable that he doesn't ask, Mr. Speaker, he doesn't ask about 
what the input tax credit means for farmers, for the oil and gas industry, 
for the potash industry, for the uranium industry, for the mining industry, 
for the machinery manufacturing industry, Mr. Speaker, for the 
transportation sector.  He doesn't ask what it means to those sectors 
because he doesn't want to hear the answer.  And the answer is in the book 
I sent over to him.  And what that talks about there, Mr. Speaker, in those 
sectors is a 2.8 per cent growth in real GDP, economic expansion, and new 
jobs. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, at least this government here and this party have a plan 
to stabilize and revitalize Saskatchewan to control the debt and the 
deficit.  The NDP (New Democratic Party) are bankrupt of ideas on how to 
stimulate and revitalize and stabilize the economy of this province, Mr. 
Speaker.  We are not. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Questions on Interim Supply 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- I'd like to say just in passing, Mr. Speaker, this 
government ought to have no difficulty in recognizing bankruptcy when you 
see it. 
 
My question however is not to the beleaguered Minister of Finance but to 
the Deputy Premier.  Mr. Deputy Premier, the government of which you were a 
part in 1975 . . . 1985 following the North East by-election promised a 
more open responsive government; 1989 you promised your government would 
represent a new era of openness; 1990 you unveiled your new realities 
program, and you promised to be honest and responsible. 
 



 

 

In 1991 you promised again that the legislature would be a listening 
institution.  Why in the face of those repeated promises, Mr. Deputy 
Premier, are you introducing closure on interim supply? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Well first of all, Mr. Speaker, let us know about what 
we speak here.  Interim supply Bill is a Bill which is a routine procedure 
in this House.  It's a routine procedure in the House.  It has gone on 
every year that I've been here, every year the hon. member has been here. 
Interim supply normally takes one day, normally takes a few hours of a 
single day.  Interim supply on occasion has gone into the second day.  
Interim supply, in the case of which we speak and the present circumstance, 
is that we've finished four days of debate on interim supply. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan and the Minister of Finance is 
coming forward with a routine Bill asking for interim supply from the 
legislature to be able to pay the bills of the Government of Saskatchewan.  
It's a normal process. We went forward for four days of debate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the House Leader on the government side has taken the measure 
which is the only appropriate measure, given the circumstance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- A new question, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Deputy Premier, let 
me remind you of just a sampling of the questions you won't answer. 
 
We have asked for your detail studies on the impact of the PST.  No answer.  
We've asked what portion of the money is being spent on advertising.  No 
answer.  We've asked what portion of this money is being spent on polling.  
No answer.  We've asked what portion of this money is spent on image 
consultants  No answer.  Mr. Deputy Premier, why are you trying to hide the 
answer to these questions? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker. . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order, order!  Order.  Order.  Allow 
the Deputy Premier to respond. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, the process . . . The hon. members from 
their seats will talk about the amount in what I have characterized as a 
routine Bill, and it is that.  Interim supply is a routine procedure of 
this House as we go forward with the budget process.  And before the total 
budget is passed, interim supply is necessary.  The hon. members across 
there know that.  The members of the press gallery know that.  Anybody who 
follows the procedures of this House knows that, Mr. Speaker.  It's a 
process that takes one day in a normal process or some portion of a single 
day.  We have finished four days now.  Mr. Speaker, the House Leader has 
taken a reasonable procedure. 
 



 

 

Mr. Speaker, the hon. member refers to the fact that questions are not 
answered in this process of interim supply over the past four days.  The 
hon. members opposite have talked about and have stated clearly, openly, 
and publicly that they intend to delay the proceedings, normal proceedings 
of this House. 
 
The House Leader of the opposition yesterday in debate, when he was quoted 
numbers from the Estimates book, I point out, the Estimates book, was 
yelling from his seat with all of his clappy gang over there yelling -- 
yelling -- please table the document.  Please table the . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order, order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- New question, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Deputy Premier, prior 
to the 1986 election, you introduced a budget which called for a deficit of 
some $300 million and the actual deficit was l.2 billion.  Evidently, Mr. 
Deputy Premier, we didn't ask enough questions. 
 
Mr. Deputy Premier, my question concerns the fact that on February 20, 
behind closed doors, you authorized virtually a budget, the expenditure of 
hundreds of millions of dollars.  Now you ask for further authorization to 
spend an additional $800 million. 
 
The public, Mr. Deputy Premier, are asking, where has all the money gone?  
Why, Mr. Deputy Premier, do you feel it necessary to hide the answer from 
them? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. members in the NDP in their 
political rhetoric will say:  where has all the money gone?  They say: 
where has all the money gone? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- The hon. member, the Minister of Finance, last night 
was reading from the Estimates book of the budget -- Mr. Speaker, the 
Estimates book which was tabled the night of the budget debate here, tabled 
by the Minister of Finance, every member received a copy of it. 
 
The House Leader on the other side, who calls himself a House Leader, who 
is yelling:  please table it, table that secretive document that you've got 
there . . . Last night's debate, Mr. Speaker . . . and the hon. members 
over there will tell us that it's a routine procedure for them to carry 
forward with their delaying and obstructionist tactics.  Mr. Speaker, it's 
unacceptable what they are doing and what the House Leader is doing is the 
only thing he has at his disposal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they mention other examples.  The member from Prince Albert, a 
couple of days ago, pulling numbers out of the air, yelling in this House 
to get big points about 75 cents a copy for some kind of xerox duplicating 



 

 

copies.  Mr. Speaker, the members will pull any number out of the air at 
any time.  Only it does not have to be true.  It's obvious to them that it 
does not have to be true, just politics. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Strategic Plan for STC 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is to the same minister in his 
capacity as being responsible for Saskatchewan Transportation Company.  Mr. 
Minister, I have here a document entitled, 1991-1992 Strategic Plan for 
STC.  And according to this document, the Corporation was to have spent the 
month of April evaluating what routes could be dropped and which ones could 
be privatized.  This month, Minister, you are supposed to be holding 
meetings with the affected communities and to start the process of 
attracting private route operators.  How far along are you and STC 
(Saskatchewan Transportation Company) with your plans to privatize and cut 
routes? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member is the critic for STC, I 
presume.  I have said publicly a matter of several weeks ago that the 
strategic plan of STC at the time of the release of the annual report that 
he took great exception to . . . I said that the management at STC has been 
going through an extensive process and a strategic plan for that company to 
serve the public of this province, a far-flung population, into the year 
2000. 
 
And many of the routes in this province have little use in terms of the 
number of people that use them, but have a significant use as it relates to 
the service to the communities that they serve. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what the corporation is doing as it relates to the routes, is 
to define those two routes, those two kinds of routes into two separate 
things: one, the routes that are profitable, the routes that are 
commercially viable; and two, the routes which are a necessary service to 
the public and ways in which that necessary service can be provided. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- I don't like to interrupt the minister but I just ask him 
to keep his answers if they are . . . He's got a great deal of information, 
I understand that, but try to keep his answers within reason. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have another question to the same 
minister.  Minister, another part of this plan calls for STC to look at 
privatizing bus depot operations in Moose Jaw, Prince Albert, Melfort, and 
Regina.  It also calls for you to seek government permission to deregulate 
the freight business.  How far along are you, Minister, on these 
privatization and deregulation plans? 



 

 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, I would say to the critic, what the book 
refers to is the need for capital construction, the need for capital 
construction at the bus depots.  I invite the critic, if he's going to 
stand here, will he stand and defend that the condition of the bus depots 
in P.A. and Moose Jaw and Regina . . . those bus depots are in poor 
condition, Mr. Speaker.  They are not the kind of condition that they 
should be in.  And, Mr. Speaker, what the management of STC is doing 
through the strategic plan is looking at ways in which new bus depots, more 
appropriate bus depots for the 1990s and the year 2000 could be developed. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, one other point, one more point for the hon. member.  
When the annual report was released of STC, that hon. member was raising 
questions of the deficit of STC. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Oh, come on. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Well he raised the question of the annual report, Mr. 
Speaker.  I'm giving him a short answer.  That hon. member also raised the 
point of a 500,000, $700,000 payment to Sean Quinlan, a business man in 
Regina.  Mr. Speaker, that hon. member, like his colleague, pulls numbers 
out of the air with no basis in . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Typical of the government members -- let it get run down and 
then see what you can privatize and hive off. 
 
New question, Mr. Speaker, to the same minister.  Minister, the report 
talks about these moves in terms of efficiencies and cost savings.  Now the 
way your government has run up a nearly $30 million deficit in STC, 
certainly you have to look at efficiencies and cost savings. 
 
But, Minister, can you tell the people of Saskatchewan how you can talk 
about shutting down, cutting bus routes, selling off depots as a way to 
save money, when you pay $2.3 million to paint the STC buses, and further, 
when you spend an additional $500,000 on a patronage contract to the 
Premier's former press secretary, Sean Quinlan, to tell us that green and 
yellow are prettier than red and silver? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, the strategic plan that the member refers 
to, the strategic plan that every employee of STC has a copy of and is 
involved in, the strategic plan that every member has a copy of -- it's not 
some document that the hon. member thinks he found in some brown envelope 
-- every employee has it and it's a very public document. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are no plans in that strategic plan to cut routes.  Mr. 
Speaker, let's make it clear.  The member said in his wild way that there 
are plans to cut routes.  There are no plans to cut routes.  And there are 



 

 

no plans to close depots, as he said here in the House as well.  They're 
not going to close depots, not going to cut routes.  But he has said that 
that's what that plan says.  I invite him to read it carefully. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the credibility of the member who said in this House -- in 
this House and outside -- that a small-business person in Regina received 
$700,000, he yelled across here, 500,000, 350,000 -- he was using those 
numbers.  The small-business man in question had to answer for himself in 
the newspaper that he received something in the order of 25 to 30,000. 
 
Twenty-five to 30,000 is a reasonable expenditure, Mr. Speaker.  What that 
member was yelling here, $700,000 -- he pulled a number out of the air, and 
all of his group over here, yelling and cheering.  Mr. Speaker, nothing but 
politics.  They don't care about individuals that they hurt, citizens out 
in the province, anything.  Politics for the NDP and that's it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

New Businesses Locating in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to the Minister of 
Economic Diversification and Trade.  Mr. Minister, yesterday you had a news 
conference in which you invited Saskatchewan communities to submit to you 
their proposals for a community bond corporation, and then bid for one of 
five factories you said you have to dole out.  Now that's not quite a 
factory in every town, as your Premier promised, but what we'd really like 
to know, Mr. Minister, is whether or not these new companies are like the 
furniture manufacturer you promised Saskatoon earlier this year.  Are they 
like that plant, Mr. Minister, or do these five actually exist? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm pleased that the member 
has asked that question to give me an opportunity to explain to him and to 
this Assembly that it was I who said we would build a factory in every 
town, and the Premier is not quoted as having said that.  I said it.  I 
expect that the Premier agrees that it is acceptable to create jobs in all 
parts of Saskatchewan, and I don't doubt that the Premier absolutely agrees 
with that particular statement that I made. 
 
However with respect to the five factories I referred to yesterday, Mr. 
Speaker, yes indeed there are five factories prepared to come to 
Saskatchewan:  three of them from Ontario, one from British Columbia, and 
one from Alberta. 
 
And I am writing the mayors of all the communities indicating what 
requirements these businesses have.  And if the town can meet those 
requirements, we're asking them to write us a simple letter indicating that 
yes, they think they could meet the requirements for a particular type of 
enterprise. 
 
Let me conclude by saying with respect, Mr. Speaker, to the factory in 
Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker . . . 



 

 

 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 
MOTION UNDER RULE 16 

 
Government Management Practices 

 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I'm pleased today to 
rise under rule 16 to speak to a motion that I think amply describes an 
example of which was shown in this legislature during question period 
today.  And I say this motion amply describes the actions and what this 
government has been about since 1982.  And I want to read it into the 
record, Mr. Speaker.  The motion is: 
 

 That this Assembly condemns the Government of Saskatchewan for its many 
practices of waste, mismanagement, concealment and corruption, especially 
those carried on by the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation 
throughout the provincial government. 

 
 DMr. Speaker, I intend to move this motion at the end of my remarks.  But 
first, let me say that nothing could be clearer today than in question 
period, and in days previous to this, when we've watched the actions of 
this government during interim supply when they've been asking for in the 
neighbourhood of $800 million. 
 
And I see the Minister of . . . the Finance minister, even though he isn't 
speaking, he's chirping from his chair.  He can't quit I guess after his 
tirades that he goes on with respect to interim supply . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  Order, order, order.  We've come to an agreement at 
my urging that we will not refer to members who are present, even though 
they may be making an odd comment.  For the good of the House.  And I would 
like to ask the Minister of Finance not to intervene unduly as he has been 
doing up to this point. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, let me refer specifically to one of 
the ways we describe this government.  And one of the words we used was 
concealment.  And I want to talk about that, Mr. Speaker, in the context of 
interim supply and this motion.  And I want to talk about what this Finance 
Minister's been doing in the last four days during interim supply.  He's 
been trying to conceal where they're going to expend some $800 million. 
 
I want to talk about four specific questions that he was asked about.  One, 
he was asked about detailed studies with respect to the effect of the 
provincial goods and services tax on the economy of this province, which he 
couldn't table or wouldn't table.  And that's one of the reasons why this 
motion is here. 
 
We asked what portion of it was for advertising.  He wouldn't answer us.  
We asked what portion was for polling.  He wouldn't answer us.  We asked 
him how much he was spending on image consulting in this portion of this 
year's expenditures and he refused to answer us.  And I say to you, Mr. 
Speaker, that this is one of the reasons that there is such mistrust with 



 

 

this government, that there is so much mistrust and that this Premier and 
his cabinet and the back-benchers have lost credibility. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that these are the reasons that we're 
standing in our places in this legislature now instead of being out on the 
hustings and in the middle of an election which is where we should be 
because this government has far exceeded its mandate. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the people of this province no longer 
believe this government.  They no longer believe in the democratic reform. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- And let me, Mr. Speaker, give you some reasons, some 
examples why people don't believe this government when they talk about 
openness and democratic reform. 
 
There are some orders for return, which are questions put forth to this 
government with respect to different expenditures, different departmental 
expenditures, that we've had on the order paper since 1986, '87 and '88 
that have not yet come back to this House.  And the people are asking, 
where did all the money go?  Well I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, this 
government isn't telling us. 
 
And let me give you some of the things that come from '86, '87 and '88.  
We've asked how much D-Mail Services, Inc. got in contracts from April 1, 
1986.  No answer . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And one of my 
colleagues asked me who D-Mail is.  Well, I'll tell you who D-Mail is.  
It's a company that's owned by one David Tkachuk, an EA to the Premier, a 
former executive assistant to the Premier. 
 
And we asked as well how much D-Mail got during 1985-86.  No answer.  We 
asked how much D-Mail got in '89 and '90.  No answer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are the reasons that this government has lost 
credibility.  And when they talk about open government, no one longer 
believes them. 
 
They talk about fiscal management when they built up in the Consolidated 
Fund a debt of over $5 billion.  They talk about business-like running of 
the Crown corporations when they've increased that debt to $9 billion.  Mr. 
Speaker, it's a lack of credibility and it's caused by members on that 
side.  It's caused by their own actions. 
 
You know, we've been sitting here almost three weeks in this session, Mr. 
Speaker.  Any thinking government, any caring government, at a time when 
they're talking about openness, would want to bring before the people of 
Saskatchewan, the Crown Corporations estimates. 
 
And my colleague, the member from Regina, asks the chairman of the Crown 
Corporations just this morning, when are we going to be having Crown 
Corporations estimates?  And he says, oh well, we don't know. 
 



 

 

So here we sit, Mr. Speaker, members of the Crown Corporations Committee 
willing to scrutinize in detail the expenditures of those Crown 
corporations and the chairman of that Crown Corporations . . . a member of 
PC (Progressive Conservative) government, doesn't know when they're going 
to call Crown Corporations back. 
 
My colleague asks about questions with respect to Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company.  The minister stands up and says: well, you can ask 
them in Crown Corporations.  Well, Mr. Speaker, if Crown Corporations don't 
sit, there is no forum from which to ask these questions other than 
question period. 
 
And that's why I say, Mr. Speaker, the people of this province are ready 
for an election.  Because they're ready to make a choice as to whether they 
want another nine years of mismanagement and incompetence or whether in 
fact there is another way, whether there are some new ideas and whether 
there is a group of men and women who are ready to take the reins of 
government and not just talk about open and fair and honest government, but 
to deliver open and honest, fair government.  And I would suggest to you, 
Mr. Speaker, that the day after the election or the day after the new 
premier is sworn in, that that is in fact what's going to happen here in 
Saskatchewan under an NDP government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about the credibility of 
this Finance minister and of this Premier and of the cabinet.  And I want 
to make a comparison to what they're saying about Fair Share Saskatchewan.  
And I know I've said this in this House before --  I know I've said this in 
this House before. 
 
They talk on one hand about putting jobs to rural Saskatchewan, and on the 
other hand they cut jobs just north of Prince Albert.  And I ask, where is 
the member from Shellbrook-Torch River?  And the member over there asks me 
if I support Fair Share.  I'll tell you what I don't support.  I don't 
support a government that will stand up and misrepresent what is actually 
happening in this province.  And that's exactly what you're doing.  At the 
same time you're cutting jobs out of rural Saskatchewan, you're talking 
about moving urban jobs to rural Saskatchewan.  And I say to that member, 
shame on you.  It's no wonder you're not running again, because I believe 
you're ashamed of your government as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, this government is just in the throes of 
putting in one of the largest tax grabs that's ever happened in this 
province.  And that same Finance minister . . . and I remember his speech 
so well, when he so impassionately stood up and talked about people have 
said, enough is enough -- no more taxes.  Well I say, Mr. Speaker, less 
than a year later, outside of this forum in a press release budget, he 
announces the biggest tax grab and the biggest crippler of our economy that 
could ever take place in this province. 
 



 

 

And I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, that's why we're asking these 
questions in interim supply.  When he talks about this big tax increasing 
the number of jobs by 5,000 but yet he can't stand and document or 
articulate where those jobs are going to come from, that's why we're 
debating interim supply for four days. 
 
And I want to tell you as well, Mr. Speaker, that members on this side of 
the House are going to speak on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan who 
have in fact said enough is enough -- enough of this government, enough 
taxation, enough corruption and mismanagement.  And I say to you, Mr. 
Speaker, they'll show that they feel very strongly about that when the 
election comes shortly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I spoke before about Crown corporation estimates and the fact 
that there are some of the Crowns that do need close scrutiny.  Because 
when you've increased the debt in those Crown corporations to over $9 
billion, the people are asking where in the world has all this money gone.  
Where in the world has all this money gone when they've been privatizing 
all of the revenue-generating Crowns. 
 
They've sold, by the member from Regina Elphinstone's figures, over a 
billion and a half dollars worth of assets.  Well where did that money go?  
It's gone.  We're a billion and a half short of assets according to the 
government's own figures.  But yet the debt's increased. 
 
That's why, Mr. Speaker, there is a lack of credibility and people no 
longer believe that this government has the right to govern in our 
province. 
 
When they see, Mr. Speaker, that non-governmental programs are cut back, 
but at the same time the heads of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 
receives $1.631 billion . . . $1.631 million in salaries last year, they 
ask where the priorities are. 
 
And when they see this government spending 597,000 to clean up the images 
of members on this side of the government -- she's an image consultant -- 
they ask, why are they making these choices? 
 
And when they see the head of the . . . chairman of the Liquor Board making 
$115,000 and then increased six months later to $119,600, when by law 
they're only allowed to pay $60,000, people say, why are they making these 
choices. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there's a reason why they're making these choices.  Because 
the members on that side of the House, the members of this PC government 
are no longer fit to govern because they don't have the capacity to come 
clean, to be honest with the people of this province, and deliver a 
government for the people as opposed to a government for their friends.  
And that's the bottom line. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I go through the list of money that this government has 
poured into Dome Advertising and into Roberts & Poole for self-serving ads, 
I tell you, it makes me sick and it makes people I know in this province 



 

 

sick that so much money could be squandered just to keep an inefficient and 
an incompetent government in power. 
 
I look at Dome Advertising through the different government departments, in 
a one-year period, $7.432 million.  Mr. Speaker, at a commission of 20 per 
cent, which is what I understand advertising consultants are paid, that 
means around 1.4 million -- 1.4 million that could go to education, that 
could go to delivering health-care programs, that could go to building 
roads, that could go to job-creation programs to put people back to work. 
 
(1445) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when I talk about job-creation programs, I want to quote 
from an article, a headline from an article:  Devine's office tracking 
student job applications. 
 
You know, I say to you, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan in 1991, when a 
university student's job application has to be screened through a political 
hack in the Premier's office, then I say, sir, it's time for an election 
and it's time to shed ourselves of the Premier because he shouldn't be 
allowing this kind of government to happen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could go on, and if time permitted I would like to share yet 
more experiences that we've had in the legislature and more examples of why 
this government needs to be turfed.  I could share more examples of why we 
members on this side of the House have put forth this motion. 
 
But you know something?  I think, Mr. Speaker, it's coming to the point 
where we don't need to be reminding the people of this province.  They've 
been reminded enough because they've seen their neighbours leave because of 
what this government has done.  They've seen their kids unemployed.  
They've seen their neighbours move away from their farms because they can 
no longer afford to farm.  They've seen the friends of the PC Party do very 
well financially.  They've seen the kind of favouritism that this Premier 
of this province has allowed. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, we've come to the point where the people of the 
province no longer want to debate the issues.  I think what they want is an 
election.  I think what they want is an opportunity to pass judgement on a 
government that has hurt so many people.  And I think they want a chance to 
say to this Premier, who promised so much in 1982, that he no longer has a 
place in government because he has misrepresented what he planned to do, 
and that he has destroyed the economy of this province and along with that 
economy, hundreds of families.  
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, when I look down the street I live on, it tells me 
that the people who have had to leave would support this motion if they 
were here.  So therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

 That this Assembly condemns the Government of Saskatchewan for its many 
practices of waste, mismanagement, concealment, and corruption, especially 
those carried on by the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation 
throughout the provincial government. 



 

 

 
This is seconded by the member from The Battlefords. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm pleased to enter into the 
debate on this motion put forward by the member from Prince Albert-Duck 
Lake.  And I'd like to add some of my words to the dismal record of this 
current government that we have in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to give a couple of examples so those people who are listening here 
this afternoon might see some depth with which this government has brought 
disrespect upon not only this Assembly but upon the province of 
Saskatchewan.  And I'm not going to talk about the more common examples, 
Mr. Speaker, because we all know about the GigaText, the Joytec, the 
Saskatchewan Transportation bus scandal, the Eagle Bus of Texas; we know 
about Supercart, and many of the other ones that have been publicized 
through the media. 
 
We also know about salaries that are paid to people like Chuck Childers to 
head up the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, and we know that he gets in 
the ballpark of about $700,000 a year, Mr. Speaker -- $700,000 a year.  
They can't even find that much money to feed the hungry in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, through the Minister of the Family who says, so 
what, when you bring up issues like that.  So what, he says. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if you look at the contract with Mr. Childers, which 
many members of this Assembly have seen a copy of, we know that there's 
items in there that are unheard of in the history of the province of 
Saskatchewan.  For example, in Chuck Childers' contract, Mr. Speaker, he 
gets paid by the province, the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, the difference 
between what he would pay in income tax from the American scale to the 
Canadian scale. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- So what? 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- We pay part of his income tax.  And members say, so what, 
Mr. Speaker.  It just shows their lack of respect and the integrity they 
should have in running governments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to go on to an example that I think more people should 
be aware of.  That's the Silver Lake farm up by Green Lake, which 
traditionally was one of the Metis farms in that community.  There were two 
farms there, the central farm and the Silver Lake farm.  Well this 
government, Mr. Speaker, decided to privatize those operations.  And some 
people thought, well maybe it would be better to be privatized.  But let's 
look at what happened, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The families that worked there from the community of Green Lake and the 
surrounding area no longer have work, Mr. Speaker.  Because you know what 
happened with the new owners?  The transaction took place at the end of 
June.  By the beginning of July, semi-trailers had moved in and moved out 
all of the livestock out of the operation, Mr. Speaker.  And basically 



 

 

there was somewhere in the area -- it depends on whose figures you listen 
to -- but a low of 1,500 head of livestock to a high of almost 2,000 head 
of livestock. 
 
What did they do, the new owners?  They didn't intend to make it a viable, 
ongoing operation like it's been in the past.  They wanted to reap the 
profit immediately off of the assets that were there and turn the land back 
over to the government. 
 
What happened on April 20, Mr. Speaker?  They sold off all the machinery at 
the Silver Lake farm at Green Lake -- all the families unemployed, the farm 
was not operational.  And we hear now, Mr. Speaker, that the government 
can't deliver clear title to the buyers of the Silver Lake farm so the 
Silver Lake farm owners at the current time are going after the government 
so the government gives them back their money for the land. 
 
They just pillaged the resources of that farming operation, Mr. Speaker.  
Families are now there without work.  The government does not have an asset 
any more.  And the privatized owners of the Silver Lake farm don't want to 
run it as a farming operation and now want their money back from the 
government after having likely recovered every single cent they put in 
because they sold off all the assets of the Silver Lake farm.  That's a 
shameful, dismal record, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another not so commonly known issue is the issue of the Blue Bell gravel 
pit which used to be owned by the Department of Highways, Mr. Speaker.  And 
a couple of years ago, what did the Department of Highways do?  Through 
some finagling by some of the cabinet ministers opposite, Mr. Speaker, that 
gravel pit went to private operators in the Meadow Lake area, Mr. Speaker.  
And you know it's not very often that Department of Highways gives away a 
gravel pit and they did give it away.  The new owners didn't pay one single 
cent for that gravel pit, Mr. Speaker, not one cent. 
 
What normally happens in the rare instance where the Department of Highways 
gets rid of a gravel pit is it first goes to local government, usually a 
rural municipality, to see if they want the gravel pit.  But the gravel pit 
wasn't even offered to the rural municipality of Meadow Lake, Mr. Speaker, 
wasn't even offered to them. 
 
The RM (rural municipality) of Meadow Lake found out that the gravel pit 
was being given away to private individuals and they intervened and they 
were angry about it, Mr. Speaker, because the RM had a scarcity of gravel.  
And the Minister of Energy and Mines knew about it, the Minister of Rural 
Development knew about it, and the current Deputy Premier knew about it, 
Mr. Speaker.  They all knew about it but they wanted to pad the nest of 
their friends. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the private individuals got the gravel pit and did you 
know that within days they were hauling gravel from that pit because they 
had had a contract set up with the Millar Western pulp mill at Meadow Lake?  
And as far as I know, to this day they're still hauling gravel from that 
pit to the Millar Western mill at Meadow Lake, Mr. Speaker.  Who got the 
benefit of that?  Certainly not the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 



 

 

 
And to make it worse, do you know what happened?  Mr. Speaker, these big 
trucks hauling the gravel over the roadways, the 30-some miles from the 
gravel pit to the Millar Western pulp mill, they beat holes in the road. 
 
And do you know where the Department of Highways had to get their gravel 
from, Mr. Speaker, to repair the roads?  They purchased their own gravel 
back from the private individuals, Mr. Speaker.  That is fact and that's 
what these people have done with honesty and integrity in the government in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
They've wasted and they squandered the heritage of this province.  And more 
than anything else, Mr. Speaker, through the transactions that they've 
conducted, especially over the past four and a half years, is that they've 
destroyed the sense of community in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  There is a 
sense of desperation that I have certainly never experienced before in this 
province.  And there is a sense of desperation that even the eldest 
generation in our society say they have never experienced before, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
These villains on the opposite side of the House, Mr. Speaker, have 
destroyed the sense of Saskatchewan community.  There has to be a new 
government put in place, Mr. Speaker, by the electorate to restore 
confidence, to stop people from leaving this province, to give people some 
hope in the future, to make sure that young people once they've completed 
their high school education can go on to university.  If they have the 
ability to learn, it shouldn't be restricted because they don't have the 
ability to pay, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The seniors in this province who worry about the younger generations; about 
the businesses that are going bankrupt every day in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, because the consumer dollar has dried up, Mr. Speaker.  Because 
people are having to make decisions about their future that they thought 
they'd never have to make -- thought they'd never have to make those kinds 
of decisions, Mr. Speaker, because they thought they were in the land of 
opportunity. 
 
And when that land of opportunity started to disappear, the sense of 
Saskatchewan community has started to disappear, Mr. Speaker.  And that 
sense of Saskatchewan community more than anything else has to be restored 
so that Saskatchewan people can go forward and build the community and have 
the desire and the aspirations and the faith in the future that they 
deserve to have, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Instead of building a sense of self-sufficiency in the province, Mr. 
Speaker, instead of trying to build communities or regions of 
self-sufficiency to work towards that goal, this government has allowed the 
global economy and outside interests to overrun the interests of people in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
They would rather help the Chuck Childers of International Mineral and 
Chemicals in the United States.  They'd rather help the Cargills, the 
multinationals of the world.  They'd rather help the Peter Pocklingtons and 



 

 

the Weyerhaeusers and all the big corporate entities of the world, Mr. 
Speaker.  They'd rather help them than to help the Saskatchewan community 
and keep faith with the Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They've done more to destroy that sense of Saskatchewan community than any 
government in the history of the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  
And there is a great legacy that will be left behind from this government 
of the homes that have been broken, the people who have been destroyed, the 
businesses that have been lost, and the total sense of despair that many 
people feel. 
 
The only point that people feel some hope towards the future in today in 
the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is the sense that if there isn't 
an election called by November 12 the monarch has to step in and declare 
the writs issued and call an election in the province of Saskatchewan.  
Because many people have the thought today, this government won't call an 
election unless they're forced and compelled to by the monarch of our 
country, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think that too is a sad testimony of this government that's gone well 
into the fifth year of their mandate.  They're into their fifth year of 
governing this province and they have no confidence left.  There's nothing 
that indicates that they should be bringing in a budget.  There's nothing 
to indicate that they have the authority to bring in new taxation measures 
on people.  And, Mr. Speaker, that's why when this government goes to the 
polls . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, at the conclusion of my remarks I will be moving 
the following amendment to the motion: 
 

 That all the words after the word "Assembly" be deleted and the following 
substituted therefor: 

 
 recognizing the existing crisis in agriculture and the direct impact of 

that crisis on both urban and rural Saskatchewan, commend the Government 
of Saskatchewan for acting to protect Saskatchewan families, stabilize the 
rural economy, and promote growth and diversification of Saskatchewan's 
industries while at the same time following an internal restraint program 
and strong fiscal management policies through vehicles like the 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation which has brought market 
discipline to government spending. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the amendment I have just read better reflects the true state 
of affairs in the province and a truer record of the government of this 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Certainly there is a crisis in agriculture, a crisis that in many ways is 
more serious than any other challenge Saskatchewan has ever faced.  The 
Department of Agriculture estimates that 40 per cent of all Saskatchewan 
jobs are either directly or indirectly related to agriculture.  What that 
means is that if we do not save rural Saskatchewan, we will not have a 



 

 

province left.  One farm that goes under means two jobs in centres like 
Regina or Saskatoon that would disappear.  One small town deserted means 
possibly two or three stores closing in large urban centres like the 
Reginas or the Saskatoons. 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Speaker, it would appear that the members opposite do not understand 
that.  They call protecting and stabilizing rural Saskatchewan criminal.  I 
believe, Mr. Speaker, that statement is the only thing that is criminal.  
That statement, made by the so-called Finance critic, shows a criminal lack 
of understanding of what makes Saskatchewan work and Saskatchewan tick, a 
total lack of understanding of our way of life. 
 
And it shows that the members opposite have no idea what should be done to 
meet the challenges the people of this province face.  It would appear that 
they certainly do not have a plan for this province.  Well, Mr. Speaker, 
that's okay because this government does have a plan and we will be around, 
I would suggest, for a good many years yet to see that that plan is indeed 
carried out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that as the day approaches and the Premier calls the 
election, when the election is called, this government will be ready to 
take their plan to the people.  And the people will certainly show favour 
to the government and indeed give the government the mandate to carry out 
that plan, that plan that will be doing one thing, Mr. Speaker, and that is 
protecting agriculture. 
 
There's a long list of things we have done and are continuing to do.  When 
we look at agriculture, Mr. Speaker, we think back over the last almost 10 
years since the Conservative government was elected under the member from 
Estevan.  Well over $1 billion has been put into agriculture in this 
province by this government.  And since 1984 over $7 billion has come from 
the federal treasury, a commitment not only by the present government 
provincially, but also federally to agriculture in Saskatchewan and in 
Canada -- research programs to develop new and better farming practices and 
crops -- and now, Mr. Speaker, GRIP (gross revenue insurance plan) and NISA 
(net income stabilization account) which will give farmers a long-term, 
stable program to fight drought and low prices with.  If there's anything 
that the farming community and the rural community of this province needs, 
Mr. Speaker, it's a more stable rural economy.  All of these things and 
more, Mr. Speaker, have been done, because to protect all Saskatchewan we 
must protect agriculture. 
 
The second thing we are doing is stabilizing the rural economy.  Programs 
like community bonds are helping Saskatchewan people invest in new 
industries and jobs for their home towns.  Fair Share Saskatchewan is 
returning the tax dollars back to the people who paid them.  Rural natural 
gas, underground telephone and power lines are giving rural communities the 
infrastructure they need to develop the industries and way of life they 
want and desire. 
 
And the third part of our plan is to diversify the economy, to get out 



 

 

there and find new industries and develop them.  And we've certainly heard 
this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, of more opportunities that are making 
themselves available to our province.  Five new industries that are 
certainly looking quite favourably at moving to this province.  It's a 
matter of diversifying the economy. 
 
Our success in this area has been the best in Canada, I would suggest, Mr. 
Speaker.  In fact look at the record.  A full 700 per cent increase in 
manufacturing investment since 1982.  In 1982 the Premier of the province 
said we were going to build, and indeed we have.  Never before has the 
province been so well positioned to compete with the rest of the world.  
Never before has there been such growth in our industries. 
 
Take a look around the province, Mr. Speaker, and what do we find?  One of 
the finest paper mills you'll find anywhere in the world; oil upgraders, in 
fact one right here in Regina and one presently being built at 
Lloydminster; fertilizer plants, recreational vehicle factories, bacon 
plants, computer companies, boiler factories -- and the list goes on and 
on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what does that say, Mr. Speaker?  It tells me that there are jobs and 
have been jobs created in this province for the young people of this 
province in order that they may continue to live in the province that 
they've grown up in.  Mr. Speaker, we are building Saskatchewan -- creating 
jobs and a solid future for this province. 
 
The fourth thing we are doing is introducing democratic  
 Dreform -- reforms that give the people more voice in government so that 
they can take a more active role protecting their way of life and building 
for the future; reforms that keep our system of government in line with the 
requirements and the demands and meeting the needs of the people. 
 
Now, Mr, Speaker, none of these things would be possible without careful 
management of our finances.  And so of course the government has followed a 
program of strict fiscal control since day one.  Mr. Speaker, I do not, and 
we do not, believe in wasteful spending. 
 
When we look back when the people of Saskatchewan were hurting from drought 
and high interest rates, what did members of the opposition do?  Did they 
care?  Did they do anything?  No.  But what did the present Premier do, and 
that government do?  They made a commitment to help people, to help people 
fight high interest rates and to fight drought on the farms.  We've spent 
money to help protect people. 
 
And when they had no hospitals or nursing homes -- because it seems, Mr. 
Speaker, the members opposite chose to purchase land and holes in the 
ground rather than build health-care facilities -- what did the present 
government do?  Mr. Speaker, they spent the money to repair our health-care 
system, to build new facilities, to replace old, beaten and run-down 
facilities, to build new facilities, to add new care homes, care homes in 
small communities around Saskatchewan, so the pioneers of our time could 
continue to remain close to the area or the home, their home place where 
they'd resided all their life. 



 

 

 
But at the same time, while we were building care homes and hospitals and 
other structures and certainly schools around the province, we've been very 
careful with the public purse. 
 
Since 1982, Mr. Speaker, over 2,300 civil service positions have been 
eliminated.  Cabinet ministers and Legislative Secretary salaries have been 
frozen at 1989 levels.  And all MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) 
in this Legislative Assembly have been informed by the Minister of Finance 
that there will not be a wage increase until there is a balanced budget in 
this province, a balanced budget that this government has made a commitment 
to achieve within the next three years. 
 
Departments have been consolidated and eliminated.  New vehicle purchases 
have been stopped, and restrictions have been put on government office 
equipment purchases and government travel.  Through these and other 
measures, Mr. Speaker, we have made sure that Saskatchewan has the 
resources to protect our way of life, stabilize our communities, and build 
our economy, through measures like the creation of the Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation, for example. 
 
Of course members opposite have tried to make a political issue out of 
simple accounting procedures.  But there is no issue.  Except perhaps at 
the fact that the NDP do not understand accounting and for that matter do 
not understand the difference between 75 cents and 7.5 cents.  Imagine 
that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Not only do members not understand Saskatchewan's economy and way of life, 
they also do not understand the difference between 75 and 7.5.  Mr. 
Speaker, the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation is one very 
important step the government has taken to . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: -- Order, order.  The member's time has expired. 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, I will close by moving this amendment: 
 

 That all the words after the word "Assembly" be deleted, and the following 
substituted therefor: 

 
 recognizing the existing crisis in agriculture and the direct impact of 

that crisis on both urban and rural Saskatchewan, commend the Government 
of Saskatchewan for acting to protect Saskatchewan families, stabilize the 
rural economy, and promote growth and diversification of Saskatchewan's 
industries, while at the same time following an internal restraint program 
and strong fiscal management policies through vehicles like the 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation which has brought market 
discipline to government spending. 

 
This is seconded by the member from Shaunavon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gleim: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It gives me great pleasure today to 



 

 

second the amendment of the member from Moosomin. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I stand here amazed today.  Amazed, Mr. Speaker, at the 
utter, I might say nonsense coming from the member from North Battleford 
and the member from Prince Albert. 
 
And I must say it's absolutely nonsense, Mr. Speaker, but those members 
over there and their party are finally being taken to task for the 
deceitful misleading of the people of this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, maybe the members opposite should stop to spend some time 
attending and maybe not trying to act, putting on the act, as they have 
been trying to do.  And maybe they should try and spend more time finding 
out the facts. 
 
In some cases maybe they should be reading the facts.  A perfect example as 
was mentioned by the member from Moosomin here, my colleague, was given to 
us the other day when the member from Prince Albert got up to attack the 
SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation).  Gouging the 
taxpayers, he says, because they were paying 75 cents a copy, and my 
colleague from Moosomin has mentioned this.  But I would advise that member 
that 75 cents a copy . . . when it was only a matter of 7.5 cents, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And well, Mr. Speaker, that member should have paid more attention to . . . 
I guess I don't know what grade it was in but I think it was in grade 5 
that they taught you where to put the decimal point.  They do it in 
kindergarten nowadays, Mr. Speaker, and I think maybe the member should 
start all over again.  When you get that kind of a mix-up in where to put 
the decimal point, Mr. Speaker, there's not much credibility coming from 
that member, I'm sure of that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gleim: -- And you listen to things like the member from Riversdale has 
accused the government of spending $2 million a month on advertising, Mr. 
Speaker.  I would say oops to that one, Mr. Speaker, claiming that they're 
spending $2 million a month on tourism, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Then the member from Regina North got up just in question period and 
mentioned something about STC bus lines, spending $700,000 for painting 
buses.  Does he not read the paper?  I'm sure the decimal point got in the 
wrong position there again, Mr. Speaker.  So I guess it just depends, like 
the Finance minister has said, how you wet your finger and where you put it 
and which way the wind comes from.  That's where you put the dot. 
 
And we also have, the other day, the billion dollar man was asked by the 
media to defend his outrageous promises -- $1 billion, Mr. Speaker.  Well, 
Mr. Speaker, he replied with the NDP equivalent to the United States fifth 
amendment, Mr. Speaker -- I won't tell you my figures. 
 
The problem is, Mr. Speaker, in United States the fifth amendment is a 
constitutional right.  In Saskatchewan people expect to be told the truth, 



 

 

Mr. Speaker, and they deserve to be told the truth by someone who claims to 
have their best interests at heart. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I understand the NDP's reluctance to tell the real facts, 
Mr. Speaker.  It is to their benefit not to tell the real facts.  But it's 
going to catch up to them.  Like the member opposite said, Mr. Speaker, 
call an election.  Well, Mr. Speaker, there will be a big surprise for you 
people across the way when they do call an election, Mr. Speaker.  People 
are waiting out there to . . . Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, they like to talk about waste and mismanagement, Mr. 
Speaker.  Well, Mr. Speaker, it's understandable since their party has so 
much experience with the matter of waste and mismanagement, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Devine government has increased the health-care spending 
by 92 per cent -- built cancer clinics, quadrupled loans assistance to 
students, increased education funding to build schools, build paper mills 
and fertilizer plants.  Talking about paper mills, are you still against it 
or for it, Mr. Speaker, the member from Prince Albert?  Built filtration 
plants so people can have clean drinking water; brought underground 
telephone and power lines, like my colleague had mentioned here; put 
underground gas lines to all the farms, Mr. Speaker; protected farms from 
high interest rates that made some of their payments just about near 
impossible; developed programs like community bonds to strengthen our 
communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could go on.  There's a definite pattern here, Mr. Speaker, 
in the track record of this government: a plan building, protecting, 
stabilizing, and securing -- a plan that is working, Mr. Speaker.  And I 
have to say, if these accomplishments are considered by the member from 
Riversdale to be waste and mismanagement, I guess he should invest in a 
dictionary. 
 
(1515) 
 
Better yet, Mr. Speaker, let's take a look at the NDP's idea of good 
management.  They never mentioned Nabu, a $6 million blunder, I guess I 
would call it -- $6 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Pro-Star Mills, another loss of $5.6 million.  Spending $1.13 billion in 
taxpayers' money to pay too much for potash mines that somebody else had 
owned -- jobs were there, Mr. Speaker, created no new jobs.  Spent $185 
million on land, Mr. Speaker, outbidding my neighbours, Mr. Speaker.  I 
don't know if you're proud of yourself over that or not, but my neighbours 
aren't. 
 
Taxing widows and their children on their inheritances.  I hear that's 
coming back in if they ever get in -- if they ever get in.  Department of 
northern Saskatchewan.  Most of all they even went into the motel business 
in Moose Jaw  
_- they lost that one.  I believe it was from Moose Jaw, and a few other 
ones. 
 



 

 

And there's something they never mentioned across the way, Mr. Speaker, is 
the one five billion dollars underfunded liability in the teachers' pension 
fund, Mr. Speaker, that we're still paying for and that we are going to pay 
for till the year of 2035, if we're lucky.  The member from . . . is he 
still in here?  Yes, sorry about that, Mr. Speaker.  Providing they not 
only want to own all the farm land, they also wanted to own the bed that 
you sleep in, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the member from Prince Albert, maybe he's interested in this one here, 
losing $91,000 a day in the Prince Albert paper mill. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Pulp mill. 
 
Mr. Gleim: -- Or pulp mill.  The paper mill has been built since then, Mr. 
Speaker, not under that administration but this administration, Mr. 
Speaker.  Which I might add, since being sold to Weyerhaeuser they have 
added over $65 million to provincial coffers and employ over a thousand 
people.  A $5 billion deficit while other provinces were banking money 
through for the tough times. 
 
Given a billion dollars to Rogers Lumber on the day the company went into 
receivership.  Very sad, Mr. Speaker.  That's what you call retiring -- $1 
billion the day they went into receivership, Mr. Speaker -- $1 billion, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Then the member from North Battleford talks about they want to be 
government.  And he talked about the big corporations.  We're helping the 
big corporations.  What have you got against somebody supplying jobs to the 
people in Saskatchewan?  What is so wrong with jobs as . . . Weyerhaeusers?  
What is wrong with the fertilizer plant?  What is wrong with upgraders in 
Lloydminster and in Regina, Mr. Speaker?  That's what I call building, not 
buying, Mr. Speaker.  Take heed.  The people are going to take you to task 
on that one in North Battleford; leave alone not only the people but the 
chamber of commerce, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, there is a pattern here, too -- a pattern of reckless 
abandonment, a pattern of irresponsibility and hard-headed-hearted 
decisions, a pattern of hiding from the issues, and hiding from people, and 
keeping the honest beliefs behind caucus doors -- a pattern, Mr. Speaker, 
that speaks to the lack of caring, and the lust for power that those 
members possess as their only weapon.  I guess a pattern, Mr. Speaker, of 
waste and mismanagement. 
 
What we have a group of people who have no solutions and have no vision, a 
group of people who are afraid to be honest with the public, Mr. Speaker.  
And when I say that, Mr. Speaker, I have yet to hear a plan.  I have yet to 
hear a plan from those people opposite.  We would like to hear your plan.  
Maybe there is something in your plan that the people will like. 
 
But from what we hear right now, the plan you have in agriculture -- my 
people just love that one.  They really love the moratorium people. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- . . . (inaudible) . . . have a plan. 



 

 

 
Mr. Gleim: -- The hon. member from North Battleford says they don't have a 
plan.  Well your people out there don't call that a plan, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 
Speaker, the member, my colleague here just gave me . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  I'm afraid your time has elapsed, 
sir. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to announce today that I have 
here in the legislature a copy of the M.A.S. book of knowledge -- the 
M.A.S. book of knowledge.  This is volume one.  And this concerns the sorry 
saga of the scam that took place in my constituency of Saskatoon Sutherland 
last year with respect to Medical Associated Services Limited, otherwise 
known as M.A.S., that was incorporated by one Michael Simpson from the 
United States of America. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this company came to Saskatoon and Saskatchewan with 
great fanfare on June 25 of last year.  The Minister for Economic 
Diversification and Trade put out a press release that announced that: 
 

 Medical Manufacturer Moves to Saskatoon. 
 

Lots of great fanfare.  And this press release concludes with the Minister 
of Economic Development and Trade saying that: 
 

 "The assistance does not represent a net financial gain to the company but 
rather helps defray the costs of relocating in Saskatchewan." 

 
 Schmidt added that this assistance is consistent with the government's 

long-term strategy for continued diversification and economic growth by 
encouraging new manufacturing jobs for the province. 

 
I just hope to heaven that this isn't true, that this is consistent with 
the government's long-term strategy, Mr. Speaker.  Because M.A.S. Medical, 
within three months of coming to Saskatoon and to my constituency, is gone 
with about half a million dollars of taxpayers' money, Mr. Speaker -- in 
three short months. 
 
Now the members opposite have changed the amendment before us this 
afternoon to talk about this strong fiscal management policies, quote, that 
the government has in place.  Well I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, about 
the sorry saga where almost $2 million of public money was put at risk here 
in Saskatchewan into this M.A.S. Medical venture and we have little, if 
anything, to show for it right now. 
 
And this is very interesting, Mr. Speaker, because on March 29 of last year 
the Minister of Finance for the government had announced that he was going 
to eliminate business grants with his budget that was announced on that 
day.  That business grants would be cut out entirely, and yet what do we 
have?  A matter of two or three months later, but M.A.S. Medical getting 
grants totalling almost $2 million worth of assistance and walking off in 



 

 

the end with a half a million dollars of provincial taxpayers' money in 
their pocket. 
 
Now this is interesting, doubly interesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because 
M.A.S. Medical wasn't the only company seeking to come to Saskatoon.  They 
were going to bring 10 . . . or 12 jobs -- excuse me -- 12 jobs, a whole 12 
jobs to Saskatoon.  And there was another company called Oracle Audio from 
Quebec City that was going to bring 55 jobs to Saskatoon. 
 
They wanted a quarter of a million dollars worth of relocation assistance 
to move from Quebec City to Saskatoon.  Could they get it?  No.  Canadian 
company that had been negotiating long and hard with the city and the 
provincial government -- they couldn't get it for 55 jobs.  M.A.S. gets it 
for 12 jobs.  And the city of Saskatoon's economic development manager was 
amazed by this decision because he was told that there were no grants 
available.  Well so M.A.S. gets the assistance of a cool quarter of a 
million dollars to come to Saskatoon. 
 
And three months later, what do we find out, Mr. Speaker?  Well we find out 
that on the Friday of the Thanksgiving long weekend, lo and behold, there 
are moving vans parked up in front of the loading docks of what was M.A.S. 
Medical in Saskatoon.  And, Mr. Speaker, I saw that with my own eyes. 
 
And I want to share with you the results of a conversation that's part of 
the M.A.S. book of knowledge here, that was a phone call that was placed 
from my office on Friday, October 5 to M.A.S. Medical.  We'd been phoning 
for the last month, you see, and could never get an answer from this 
company.  In fact, Mr. Speaker, on my way to my constituency office every 
day or every other day I would take a little detour and go by M.A.S. 
Medical to see what was there. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Well what was there? 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- There was nothing there but locked doors and pulled drapes 
and mail, junk mail, accumulating in the mail slot between the two doors.  
Here's the phone conversation that took place from my office.  We phoned 
and said: Hello, is this M.A.S. Medical?  The answer was yes.  Well what 
are your office hours?  They don't have office hours; they're out of 
business.  Question:  How long has that been?  Answer:  Oh two or three 
days.  A few days.  Question:  Is there a forwarding address?  Answer:  No.  
I don't know.  Question: Why are you answering the phones?  Answer: Oh, 
we're just in and out.  Question: Are you cleaning up?  Answer: Yes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Did they ever clean up, Mr. Speaker!  Now that telephone 
conversation, Mr. Speaker -- this is from the M.A.S. book of knowledge 
here, volume I -- took place at 2:40 on Friday, October 5, 1990. 
 
And I want to tell you that at 2:50 I was over there at the offices of 
M.A.S. Medical in the Sutherland Industrial Park in Saskatoon, and there 
were two United Van Lines and three cars cleaning out M.A.S. Medical. 
 



 

 

And they cleaned out pathetically few assets.  There was a little lift of 
-- maybe a half a lift, I should say, of two by fours that was there in the 
warehouse.  And there were a couple of little hospital dolly carts.  This 
was the company that was supposed to make and manufacture in Saskatoon 
high-tech cardio-pulmonary monitoring machines for pediatric use across the 
world. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Out of wood. 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Out of wood, yes.  The people who approved this loan must 
have had wooden heads, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As far as we know to date -- and the government hasn't been forthcoming 
about this scam -- the taxpayers lost $300,000 in repayable loans that were 
to have been repaid, and we think about $33,000 worth of equipment loans, 
and, we were told for sure, $125,000 worth of relocation money.  But we 
suspect that the government isn't telling the truth there, that they got a 
half a million dollars worth of relocation assistance.  But that's beside 
the point.  They're into the government's pocket, the taxpayers' pocket, 
for about a half a million dollars. 
 
Now that's not including the federal money that they took, a total of 
$1.128 million federal money that M.A.S. was promised through the western 
diversification office, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the saga doesn't end there.  Lo and behold! can you believe it, M.A.S. 
Medical was into the Government of Nova Scotia six months earlier to the 
tune of a million dollars with exactly the same scam.  And this government 
wants us to commend them for their strong fiscal management programs and 
not to condemn their waste, mismanagement, and corruption, particularly as 
it's carried out by their government departments.  This is just symptomatic 
of the kind of problems we have. 
 
And I want to say parenthetically here, Mr. Speaker, that in Saskatoon, 
less than a mile from M.A.S. Medical, or what used to be M.A.S. Medical, we 
have the Toxicology Research Centre which has been . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Another one? 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Not another one.  This operation has been on the campus of 
the University of Saskatchewan for about 10 years now, doing important 
environmental toxicological work for the people of Saskatchewan and western 
Canada.  And this government, in it's most recent budget, cuts a quarter of 
a million dollars funding for the Toxicology Centre when it had a half a 
million dollars to blow on M.A.S. Medical. 
 
Now we have to ask ourselves, who is minding the store?  How could this 
happen?  Well, Mr. Speaker, we know in part how this happened because one 
of the employees of M.A.S. Medical . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  Time has elapsed, time has elapsed. 



 

 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it gives me a lot of 
pride to be able to speak on behalf of my constituents and indeed entering 
into this particular debate. 
 
I'd like to begin my remarks though, sir, by indicating from just the 
previous members, the members before from the NDP as they were stating 
about some of the failures of government . . . I guess probably the member 
wanted me to tell him something about M.A.S. and others.  I guess probably 
yes, there has been some failures in government, and I guess I would be one 
to be the last to state that there haven't been some failures to the public 
of this province. 
 
I'd like to indicate to you that this year there's been something like in 
the neighbourhood of $19 million loss from the government or from SEDCO 
(Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation) in the province of 
Saskatchewan on some of the business failures here in the province.  I 
don't believe we should be hiding any of those failures to the public that 
seem to be watching these proceedings. 
 
I'd like to say this though, Mr. Speaker, is that the NDP, they love 
bathing in failure.  That's their way of success -- bathing in failures and 
bathing in negatives.  I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, I've never met such a 
bunch of NDP people in my whole life that have never, ever . . . put the 
first step forward ever and stubbed their toe themselves.  I'll tell  
 Dyou, you know, it must be nice to be super superhuman or something like 
that, where mistakes have never been made.  But enough is enough, Mr. 
Speaker, on that. 
 
I'd just like to indicate to you, sir, that they are the masters of bathing 
in failure and negatives.  Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate the kinds of 
people that we're dealing with from the NDP opposition.  Here's an example.  
The member from The Battlefords, sir, in speaking to his chamber of 
commerce in The Battlefords, it says here in an article from the paper out 
of The Battlefords is: "Anguish warns Chamber". 
 
Now, I was just going to say here, Mr. Speaker, that when we're talking 
about this, I want the people . . . I want the NDP to listen very 
carefully.  Their credibility and believability is being questioned, Mr. 
Speaker, by the public and it's because of their threats and hysterics and 
blatantly misleading the House and the public.  It just doesn't cut any 
more, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But here in this paper, "Anguish warns the Chamber", in his home riding: 
 

 Battlefords MLA Doug Anguish warned local Chamber of Commerce officials 
recently he might be a cabinet minister after the next . . . election and 
it would be in their best interests to maintain a good working 
relationship with him. 

 
Now I'll tell you, I'll tell all the people in the provinces, those are the 



 

 

kinds of threats and intimidation that the NDP opposition would bestow upon 
all good citizens in this province.  If you don't agree with what I say and 
all this kind of thing, you won't be able to come and talk to me.  That's 
what the member from The Battlefords is saying.  I'll tell you, anybody 
that would vote for a member like that ought to be . . . well, they ought 
to take just a second look, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But condemning and criticizing the government isn't good enough, Mr. 
Speaker.  The NDP have to do better than that.  And, Mr. Speaker, I am 
proud to represent and be a member of government that has done better than 
just that.  We have done so much better and the NDP can't even begin to 
compare. 
 
We have worked and we have fought since 1982 to build this province, to 
develop our potential and to stabilize our communities.  We have worked and 
we have fought for a vision of Saskatchewan that is strong and vibrant and 
ready to enjoy prosperity in the future.  We have worked and we have fought 
to promote growth and diversification in this province so we will be ready 
to face the next century as a strong economic force. 
 
We have worked and we have fought to preserve and protect the backbone of 
our province, and that's agriculture, Mr. Speaker.  We have worked and we 
have fought for the kind of growth and progress that doesn't happen 
overnight.  It takes time and it takes foresight and it takes a plan. 
 
If you go back and look, Mr. Speaker, it's as plain as day.  We have been 
working toward a specific goal and we have taken deliberate steps to reach 
that goal.  And because of that plan, through drought and low prices and 
trade wars, through the toughest 10 years this province has ever seen, 
Saskatchewan grew.  There are more people living here today than during the 
heydays of the '70s, even after all the hardships and even after all the 
bad times. 
 
There are some who have left the province, and of course that worries us 
all.  That is why, Mr. Speaker, it is so important to build and protect and 
prepare this province for the future so this never happens again. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the NDP like to keep secrets.  They keep their plan 
secret; we all know that.  But that's not the only thing they don't want to 
talk about.  Even when we talk about population there is something the NDP 
would like to hide.  The NDP doesn't want anybody to know that the largest 
recorded out-migration in Saskatchewan's history happened under their 
administration in 1974.  They were responsible for the largest 
out-migration in our history. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can understand why the NDP would want to keep that piece of 
information out of the public eye.  But I can't understand why they are so 
afraid to tell the people of Saskatchewan what they would do if this 
province . . . if they ever got elected -- what they would do if they ever 
got elected. 
 
Why won't they put their plan up for the scrutiny?  Could it be, Mr. 
Speaker, that they don't have one?  Or are they ashamed of the one that 



 

 

they might have?  Their leader, the member from Riversdale, keeps saying 
he'll let us know.  They'll unveil their plan when an election is called.  
Well, Mr. Speaker, I really have to ask, is four weeks enough time for the 
people to scrutinize this plan, this 28-day plan?  Is 28 days long enough 
for the people, I ask you, to decide?  Well I don't believe a scant month 
is time enough for the people to look at their options, weigh them out, and 
decide.  I really think not, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We're proud of our record and we have been up front with our record and our 
plan all along.  But we understand what we stand for, Mr. Speaker, and what 
we are working towards has never been a secret.  Because, Mr. Speaker, we 
understand and we respond. 
 
We love this province, Mr. Speaker.  We love Saskatchewan.  We understand 
that the crisis in agriculture affects all parts of the provincial economy, 
and we have responded with diversification efforts and stabilizing the 
effort like community bonds. 
 
We understand that Saskatchewan must be competitive to survive the modern 
business world, and we have responded with a world class telecommunications 
system that all of the people of this province have access to.  We 
understand that education must remain a priority if our children are to be 
prepared for their future, and we have responded with an innovative 
education program and capital projects.  We understand that our seniors 
need and deserve decent and proper care in their older years, and we have 
responded with nursing homes all across this province. 
 
We spent when and where it was needed.  And when the spending threatened 
the very things we hold dear, we cut back when it was necessary. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we know what we are doing.  We understand and we have 
responded and we have been there for the Saskatchewan people when they 
needed us.  And we have never been ashamed to tell the people of this 
province exactly where we are and exactly where we're going. 
 
But the members opposite, specifically their ringleader, won't tell 
Saskatchewan people anything.  There has been example after example, 
headline after headline.  And I'll quote a few.  From the Star-Phoenix: 
Romanow won't divulge any of the NDP election plans.  From the Shellbrook 
Chronicle: I won't give you my position, he stated.  And most recently in 
this article: NDP silent on PST plan. 
 
Now in this article we get a clearer picture of the kind of guy, kind of 
NDP guy we're dealing with.  He was talking about the NDP position on the 
expanded E&H (education and health) tax and this is . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  The member's time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'm proud 
to support the motion as introduced by my colleague from P.A.-Duck Lake and 
the motion that reads: 



 

 

 
 That this Assembly condemns the Government of Saskatchewan for its many 

practices of waste, mismanagement, concealment and corruption, especially 
those carried out by the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation 
throughout the provincial government. 

 
Now I support that motion, Mr. Speaker, not the amendment which in the face 
of all the evidence doesn't make any sense with due respect to members 
opposite.  This motion, Mr. Speaker, is an excellent motion because if you 
go door-to-door in my riding of Saskatoon Eastview or Cut Knife-Lloyd, I 
would say, or Moosomin, that would be how the average voter would typify 
this government's record over the last nine years, Mr. Speaker.  That's how 
eight out of ten business . . . small-business men and women would describe 
this government's record over the last nine years. 
 
Now the members kept raising that 75 cents a copy error of last week.  
Well, Mr. Speaker, 75 cents is a long, long way from $5.5 billion or, in 
the case of the overall debt, about $14 billion.  So that's just a 
diversion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The colleague from Moosomin and from Shaunavon, obviously they didn't write 
those speeches.  They were couched in negative advertising, in personal 
attacks on the Leader of the Opposition and members over here, and 
American-style politics, and that wasn't . . . that's not characteristic of 
those two members, Mr. Speaker.  So I know that they didn't write those 
speeches and they had trouble engaging in those personal kinds of attacks 
and to their credit they were very uneasy about that. 
 
Now the member from Cut Knife-Lloyd is used to it so that didn't bother 
him, but here's the member from Shaunavon says that the opposition has no 
plan.  Mr. Speaker, this is the government that didn't even introduce a 
throne speech in this session.  They didn't even have the ability, as has 
been the practice every spring, not only in Saskatchewan but throughout 
Canada for a hundred years, to every spring lay out your plan over the next 
year and the year after before the public of your province, to say what 
your plans are and what your priorities are and your intentions.  This 
government is so bankrupt of ideas they didn't even have the ability to 
produce a throne speech, Mr. Speaker.  So talk about having no plan. 
 
(1545) 
 
Now the member from Moosomin -- again I have a lot of respect for that 
member. One thing that I agree with him, with what he said -- he said, the 
member from Moosomin said, and you'll see this in Hansard tomorrow -- he 
said the government needs a mandate to do what it's doing.  That's what he 
said.  Now the public of Saskatchewan agrees with him, that this government 
needs a mandate in order to do what it's doing. 
 
Why then, I would ask that member in the face of what he said, would he 
have voted for this very, very unethical budget last week?  That kind of 
surprised me.  And I guess the member from Moosomin can redeem himself when 
the Bill for the biggest tax grab in the history of the province comes up 
-- the PST Bill.  He can vote against it if he believes that the Government 



 

 

of Saskatchewan needs a mandate for what it's doing.  It doesn't have one 
now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Again the member from Moosomin says that this government, this opposition 
doesn't understand accounting.  Well, Mr. Speaker, I would say that the 
auditor that has just left the province, the provincial scene, and the new 
auditor are saying that this government does not understand accounting.  
And I think the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, will clearly believe 
the two auditors as to who understands accounting and who doesn't. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- They're using those GigaText calculators. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- As my colleague from Regina Rosemont says, the government 
members are using those GigaText calculators, and they just don't seem to 
work.  They don't translate very well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I go door to door in my riding, and I've made about 1,500 
calls in that riding -- now I don't know whether I've gone to the right 
doors or not because this government has also brought us into a 
constitutional mess where we don't know what boundaries we have -- but I've 
gone to about 1,500 doors in Saskatoon and people can't believe, I mean if 
this record is so great, people can't believe the objective facts, the 
objective facts being the highest per capita debt in all of Canada, Mr. 
Speaker; the highest per capita family taxes in all of Canada; the highest 
or the second highest rate of family poverty in all of Canada, Mr. Speaker; 
the highest per capita number of bankruptcies, percentage of bankruptcies 
per capita, Mr. Speaker; the lowest job-creation record in all of Canada in 
1990. 
 
I mean those are the objective facts.  How on earth in the face of that 
information can those members commend the Government of Saskatchewan for 
its economic performance?  Those are the objective indicators, Mr. Speaker.  
This legacy that the member from Moosomin and Cut Knife-Lloyd and Shaunavon 
were so glad to endorse, this legacy is one of a province that is in an 
economic mess. 
 
We've also got record numbers of out-migration.  The member from Cut 
Knife-Lloyd says a few people have left the province.  Well, Mr. Speaker, 
you know that that few people has been somewhere near 80,000 net 
out-migration and growing in the last five years.  Now that's half of the 
population of this city of Regina, Mr. Speaker, have left this province in 
the last five years. 
 
The member from Cut Knife-Lloyd says that we keep talking about negative 
things.  What we do keep talking about, Mr. Speaker, is this government's 
record.  It's not our fault that it's a negative record.  It's their fault. 
 
We keep talking about the record because that's what the public of 
Saskatchewan is concerned about -- that this government has got the 
province into a financial mess; they've got us into an economic mess; 
they've got us into a political mess and a constitutional mess.  Mr. 
Speaker, they have botched up everything that they've attempted to deal 
with.  And that's a matter of public record, Mr. Speaker.  It's a matter of 



 

 

public record and it's clear to everybody. 
 
With regard to the motion spelling out waste and mismanagement, Mr. 
Speaker, nowhere is that more evident than in Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation.  This is the arm of the cabinet that was 
established in 1986 after the reorganization Bill that allows cabinet to 
reorganize government departments and Crown corporations without even 
coming into the legislature.  This is a creature of the cabinet that allows 
some $260 million to be spent every year without the scrutiny of this 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Now the members keep saying when we ask questions on interim supply that, 
well you can ask those questions in Crown Corporations Committee.  But, Mr. 
Speaker, as I understand it, as of today the government has not told us 
when that committee will meet.  They keep putting that meeting off and off 
and off, Mr. Speaker.  So what are they trying to hide? -- is what the 
public of Saskatchewan is asking. 
 
Here's a government that's trying to -- at the tail-end of its mandate -- 
create this image that they're somehow open and accountable and that 
information is accessible, and they will not tell us when they're going to 
have Crown Corporations Committee be reconvened, nor will they answer 
questions in this Assembly with regard to the interim supply Bill. 
 
And they say, well you're not asking the right questions.  Well, Mr. 
Speaker, that is our job to determine what the relevant questions are with 
regard to the expenditures by this government of taxpayers' funds.  We're 
duly elected.  That's another example of their arrogance and their feeling 
that they're not accountable to anybody and their disdain for the 
parliamentary process, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And this erosion of accountability and this closed and secretive government 
in Saskatchewan is unparalleled anywhere in the history of the 
Commonwealth, Mr. Speaker.  I'm not aware that any other provincial auditor 
has written a special report just to talk about the way in which this 
government breaks its own laws, by failing to provide information that the 
auditor has a right to see by law, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This government, they claim that they're not spending $2 million a month on 
the Maxwell Smart ads.  Well what are they spending, Mr. Speaker?  The 
public of Saskatchewan is convinced that this government is spending 
millions and millions of dollars in useless government advertising and 
glossy brochures.  Yet the Minister of the Family there didn't go to bat 
for hungry kids and make sure that there was enough money in the budget to 
feed hungry kids.  And his response to that is so what.  Mr. Speaker, that 
ought to be enough for him to resign on that point alone.  But he hasn't 
got the decency to do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Speaker, this government pretends to be the friend of 
small business.  Well, Mr. Speaker, I've done . . . just recently completed 
a survey, my third annual survey of small businesses . . . 



 

 

 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, order.  Seventy-five minutes has elapsed. 
 

MOTIONS 
 
Resolution No. 14 -- Use of Taxpayers' Dollars in Patronage and Corruption 

 
Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It gives me a pleasure to 
be able to address the Assembly on this issue today, the issue before us 
being: 
 

 That this Assembly condemns the unprecedented waste of taxpayers' dollars 
resulting from government practices of patronage and corruption. 

 
An Hon. Member: -- You can say that again. 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- And I say that again, as the member says, that we want to 
condemn this government's practice of unprecedented, absolutely 
unprecedented examples of waste, of patronage and corruption in this 
legislature. 
 
When I say that it gives me some pleasure to rise here, I do it in the 
sense that it gives me pleasure to rise to be able to exercise my right as 
a member of this legislature to be able to say it.  But it gives me 
absolutely no pleasure, it gives me absolutely no pleasure, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, to have to be able to talk about this particular issue of 
patronage, waste, mismanagement, and corruption here in the final days of  
 Dthis government's mandate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, everybody, everybody in this province knows that this 
government has to go.  It has to vacate its office.  It has to get on its 
way.  It has to pack up.  It has to put its record before the people of 
Saskatchewan in a provincial general election, Mr. Speaker.  That's what 
the people want.  They don't want me . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Mr. Speaker, they don't want myself or any other member of 
this legislature to be here.  The people of Saskatchewan want to go to the 
polls.  The people of Saskatchewan say, we have had enough, we have had way 
too much, we do not want these people around here, we want to be able to 
exercise our democratic right by putting our judgement on their record of 
nine years, nine long and sorrowful years of waste and mismanagement. 
 
And those nine long years, Mr. Speaker, those nine long years have been 
painful years for the people of Saskatchewan.  Those nine long years have 
been years in which the confidence of each and every citizen in this 
province has eroded, has been eroded.  Their ability to place confidence in 
the government, to place trust, the most elemental form of the democratic 
contract between the governed and the governing, that that elemental form 
has been broken, has been severed, has been ripped apart, has been totally 
demolished, Mr. Speaker. 
 



 

 

And it gives me no pleasure to say that, because the actions of that 
government, the actions of that government have eroded not only the 
people's confidence in them as a government, but have created a great deal 
of cynicism, have in fact developed a level of cynicism at the political 
level in this province which I would say, submit to you, sir, is 
unprecedent.  People do not trust their political leaders any more.  And 
the reason they don't trust their political leaders any more is because 
they have seen what nine years of Progressive Conservative corruption and 
patronage have done. 
 
Now let's, Mr. Speaker . . . When I say that, that's not just political 
rhetoric.  We've got nine years of a record of patronage in this province.  
Nine years in which we can look at the facts, not the political rhetoric, 
but the facts.  Let's look, Mr. Speaker, let's look at some of that kind of 
patronage, the kind of patronage for which this government has become 
world-famous.  You know, Mr. Speaker, in 1982, they said they were going to 
become world class, and they have.  They've become the world class 
patronage people ever to hit the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Let's start, Mr. Speaker.  We can look for example at the appointments to 
the trade office and the trade commissioners of former members of the 
legislature, former cabinet ministers, members of Executive Council -- Mr. 
Andrew to Minneapolis, and Mr. Taylor to Hong Kong.  Now, Mr. Speaker, some 
people might argue that, well, why shouldn't we appoint people with some 
background and with some knowledge to positions in which their positions 
and continued public service would serve the public interest.  And, Mr. 
Speaker, that's a fair enough argument. 
 
But I submit, Mr. Speaker, what does Graham Taylor know about Hong Kong?  
Does he speak Chinese?  Has he had experience as business in that market?  
Has he developed in anything in the Pacific Rim?  Has he had that kind of 
political experience there to deal, to develop the kind of contracts out 
there that would help the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Well the record since he's been appointed to that position says no.  That 
what it was was nothing more than a political plum for somebody who wanted 
to get out, who wanted to jump off the sinking Tory ship, who wanted to 
leave.  And not only that, Mr. Speaker, not only did he get this political 
plum at the salary two or three times in excess of the average salary of 
people here in the province of Saskatchewan, not only did he pick up this 
political plum out there, enjoying the golf courses and enjoying the yacht 
clubs of Hong Kong, of having the ability to mix and mingle with those 
folks, not only do that -- he also took a severance package.  He also took 
a severance package, unashamedly took a severance package which exceeded by 
almost twice, Mr. Speaker, exceeded by almost twice the average salary of 
people who work in this province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, tell me -- I want you or the government to tell me -- 
that that doesn't create an air of cynicism and an air of disgust in the 
province. 
 
But who did it, Mr. Speaker, who did it?  That government over there set it 
up, set up the system so that Graham Taylor could walk away, not only with 



 

 

the big political plum despite the fact that there is absolutely nothing in 
his record which would qualify him for that particular trade office 
appointment; but not only does he take the political plum, he takes the 
cream and pours it on top of the plums and eats it.  And the people of 
Saskatchewan are going hungry, and they're going hungry for political 
leadership. 
 
(1600) 
 
They're going hungry in this . . . They're going hungry.  There are hungry 
children in this city to whom 78,000, to whose families 78,000 or $80,000 
in a severance package would . . . seems like an enormous amount of money, 
because to them, Mr. Speaker, it is enormous amount of money. 
 
No wonder that they get cynical.  No wonder that those people who are 
living at the poverty line and below get cynical about the actions of 
politicians. 
 
We can use the example again of Mr. Taylor, pardon me, Mr. Andrew in 
Minneapolis.  Now some people might argue that Mr. Andrew has had a 
background in economic development.  And that's true; he did serve in that 
portfolio.  But I just . . . the record of that has to speak for itself. 
 
The record for that shows not an increase, not a development of the 
diversification opportunities in Saskatchewan, but in fact showed a 
decrease, showed a drop, in decline, showed a drop in activity in this 
province, in economic activity; ended up not in a growth of population but 
a decline in population, and so on -- economic indicators seeing 
Saskatchewan slide down the hill, slide down the hill from a province of 
prosperity, a have province to a have-not province. 
 
And it was during Mr. Andrew's days when the province shifted from a have 
province to a have-not province.  Well so he gets appointed to this 
political plum in Minneapolis.  And what does he do?  Does that instil 
confidence in political leadership in this province?  No it doesn't, Mr. 
Speaker, because Mr. Andrew grabbed onto the severance package, took it 
away despite the fact that he wasn't going out into the job market looking 
for a job.  Or he didn't use it as a bridge to allow him to go back into 
life in the private sector.  No.  What did he do?  He grabbed that 
severance package, poured more cream on top of the political plum, and ate 
it up with relish -- unabashedly, absolutely not a pretence of apologia, 
but in fact took it and said: what's wrong with taking it? 
 
Well I tell you, Mr. Speaker, what's wrong with taking it is actions like 
that feed the political cynicism in this province.  No wonder that the 
people of Saskatchewan see this government for what it is: the government 
of patronage and corruption. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, I can go on.  The list is endless.  We can do an 
analysis, for example, of Sean Quinlan.  Now here we had Sean Quinlan, 
worked in the Premier's office, close Tory connections, decides to go into 
the private sector to seek opportunities.  And what kind of opportunities 
did he seek in the private sector?  Did he go out and work and hustle to do 



 

 

up business to put together . . . to build and to diversify this province? 
 
Not a chance, Mr. Speaker.  What did he do?  He went and stuck his nose 
back into the public trough and got -- how many? -- 300, 400, $500,000, 
taxpayers' dollars to sell the notion that buses in Saskatchewan should be 
green and yellow. 
 
I tell you, Mr. Speaker, there are a lot of people unemployed in this 
province who would jump at the chance of getting a tenth of that, one-tenth 
of $500,000 to tell people that yes, buses should be green, yellow, and 
white.  Right, Mr. Speaker?  How about putting 10 people to work going 
around the province paying them $50,000 each and say: this is a good paint 
scheme. 
 
But no, what do we find?  We find Mr. Quinlan with his nose in the public 
trough, another Tory with his nose in the trough out there advocating the 
virtues of free enterprise.  Well if you're a Tory in this province, it's 
free. You don't have to be very enterprising, but let me tell you, it's 
free.  Taxpayers' money is free if you're a Tory in this province.  If 
you're a small-business person, if you're out there trying to make a living 
working 14 or 15 or 16 hours a day in a restaurant and seeing your retail 
trade go down the tubes because of the provincial PST and because of the 
GST and you're having to find that your business is going under because of 
the taxation policy of this government, well there's no help for you.  But 
boy, if you're a Tory, you can stick your nose in the trough and that free 
enterprise is real good because those free dollars, those free dollars that 
come from this government aren't free from the pockets of the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- How about Tkachuk? 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- My colleague from Saskatoon Eastview says, how about Tkachuk?  
Well how about Tkachuk?  Here we have Dave Tkachuk, another close confidant 
of the Premier -- worked in the Premier's office, right?  A very, very, 
very prominent Conservative in this province, right.  A spokesperson on 
television for them, right? -- appears every week. 
 
Now Mr. Tkachuk is another one of these people who talk about the virtues, 
who talk about the virtues of free enterprise; talk about the virtues of 
entrepreneurship; talk about the virtues of that individual liberty which 
allows you to go out in the market-place and hustle for the bucks. 
 
Is that the record of Mr. Tkachuk?  No.  No.  Mr. Tkachuk, did he go out 
and hustle in the market-place?  No.  Mr. Tkachuk used his contacts as a 
former staff member of the Premier's office to set up a little organization 
called D-Mail.  I don't know what the D stands for.  Perhaps it means 
deceit mail; perhaps it means debt mail.  Nobody knows what the D stands 
for.  But be that as it may, Mr. Tkachuk finds himself out there as a 
recipient -- not of all the hard work and the sweat of his brow, but, 
because of his political connections with the Tory government -- hundreds 
of thousands of dollars.  Hundreds of thousands of dollars of taxpayers' 
money into the pocket of Mr. Tkachuk.  Meanwhile we've got hungry kids in 
the province; we've got cut-backs in education; we've got cut-backs in 



 

 

health; we've got business bankruptcies at an all-time high.  So it's no 
wonder, here we have Dave Tkachuk raking in the bucks and everybody else 
going broke in the province. 
 
No wonder.  No wonder, Mr. Speaker, it is that people of Saskatchewan see 
this government as fundamentally a government of patronage and corruption, 
because they know . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Because they know, Mr. Speaker, they know that's where the 
social and political basis of this government comes from.  They know that 
far from having any economic diversification plans, just prior to the 
election they'll come up with schemes.  They'll come up with little scams.  
They'll come with the Joytecs; they'll come up with the GigaTexts; they'll 
come up with the Supercarts; they'll come up with the M.A.S. Medicals; 
they'll come up with the -- what's the new one? -- I don't know, maybe a 
telephone company that doesn't manufacture telephones, maybe bus painting 
companies that don't paint buses. 
 
We've seen this before, Mr. Speaker.  People in Saskatchewan have seen this 
before and they know that all these phoney economic development initiatives 
that this government puts forward has got nothing to do with reality.  The 
only reality that these people on the other side of the House know is 
patronage. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, let's take a look again at the record.  This is not 
political rhetoric.  You just have to look at the record.  You can see, for 
example, former members of the legislature of the Tory Party all living off 
the public  
 Dpurse.  Well we see Mr. John Gormley, Member of Parliament, noted Tory, 
formerly of The Battlefords, no longer there.  Now he's privatized himself 
into the public sector.  He's got himself privatized into the public 
sector.  And we can look at Mr. Rousseau in his plush job, sitting over in 
the trade office in London.  Another former Tory member of the legislature 
living off the public purse. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, it would be okay if these people said to themselves 
. . . It might be okay if they wouldn't be so hypocritical about it.  These 
are all the people who talk about down-sizing government, cutting services, 
getting governments off the backs of the people, but these are also the 
first people to go and stick their snouts into the trough.  Right? 
 
And it's the hypocrisy, it's the hypocrisy of that kind of attitude, Mr. 
Speaker.  Look, for example, here we have a former president of the 
Conservative Party of Saskatchewan, Mr. George Hill, and Mr. Hill has 
ensconced himself at the top of the power structure at Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation.  There he is, during the long years of the Tory reign in this 
province, feeding off the public enterprise, feeding off public enterprise.  
Mr. Hill is one of the people belonging to this Institute for Saskatchewan 
Enterprise.  Some call it the institute for Saskatchewan free-loaders 
because that's the hypocrisy. 
 



 

 

While they preach the line about going out and creating jobs and creating 
wealth and doing things in the private sector, where do you find these 
people?  Living off the public purse, living off the trough, living off the 
trough. 
 
The former member from Rosthern, Ralph Katzman, another perfect example.  
Here's this member who's been tramping around the province working for the 
re-election of the Conservative Party, preaching the virtues of free 
enterprise, mouthing the ideology of the right wing, and where's Mr. 
Katzman?  Where do we find him?  Is he out there working in the private 
sector to create wealth, to create jobs, to create diversification?  Not a 
chance, Mr. Speaker.  Where do we find Mr. Katzman?  Living off the public 
trough.  There he is, another snout in the trough, another snout in the 
trough.  Right? 
 
We can talk about the record of Mr. Sandberg.  Right?  Another former 
Conservative, right?  Mr. Speaker, we can talk about a lot of people that 
were former members of this legislature, preached the right-wing gospel, 
talked about private enterprise, and there we find them. 
 
I hesitate to mention my former opponent in Regina Rosemont, Mr. Gordon 
Dirks, but he was one of the people who talked about how we had to get 
government off the backs of the people and how we had to promote private 
initiative because private initiative led to private individuality.  What 
was the first thing Gordon Dirks did after he was defeated in 1986?  Where 
did he go?  Where did he go?  He stuck his snout into the public purse. 
 
So it's no wonder, Mr. Speaker, it's no wonder that people in this province 
are incredibly cynical when it comes to the credibility of anything those 
people over there have to say.  Because there's a double standard, there's 
a double standard, and that double standard extends even down to the level 
of hiring students. 
 
Now it used to be, Mr. Speaker, it used to be that it didn't matter what 
political persuasion that you got when you were a student in university.  
It used to be that you had an equal opportunity and equal chance to get the 
job working either for one of the Crown corporations or one of the 
government departments or on an initiative sponsored by the provincial 
government.  It used to be that way.  Everybody had a fair chance at it.  
Not now. 
 
What happens now?  Now they have to vet.  Now they have to submit names to 
a special secret committee of the cabinet, the patronage committee.  They 
have to submit the names so that students who need access to money to go to 
university -- and I'm not going to get into the fact of the lowering of 
accessibility to university because of this government's unfair and 
unconscionable fiscal policies at the university, the quotas and so on and 
so forth.  But it used to be that students, Mr. Speaker, would have the 
right to go to university and the right to get a job in the province 
regardless of their political belief. 
 
But what happens with the Tories?  No, no.  They've even turned student 
hiring, student hiring -- student hiring in this province, they've turned 



 

 

it into a political patronage exercise. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, it is no wonder that the people of Saskatchewan have 
the perception of this government because they know the reality of this 
government, and that reality of this is a government of patronage and a 
government of corruption.  It's not what you know . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Mr. Speaker, and it's not a question of this person or that 
person making a mistake, or this person or that person developing a policy 
independent of that of the government.  This is a policy which extends from 
the Premier's office on downward.  This is a political strategy. 
 
This is a political strategy of this government to try to set up a certain 
number of political friends which will do their work -- political, dirty, 
or otherwise -- out among the community of Saskatchewan.  This has been 
well-defined, well thought out, in so far as any initiative of this 
government is thought out. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, one would hesitate to suggest, in fact one might 
suggest that the only thing that they did think out over the last nine 
years is how they're going to enrich themselves and how they're going to 
enrich their friends.  Because when it comes to carrying through, when it 
comes to carrying through on the question of economic opportunities, let me 
tell you, Mr. Speaker, let me tell you there has been economic 
opportunities for a select group of Tories and Tory supporters in this 
province.  There has been no lack of them.  Meanwhile the rest of the 
province is going suffering. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, you just have to look at, for example, the friends of the 
Tories ensconced in the advertising agencies of Dome Advertising and 
Roberts & Poole.  You look at some of the kinds of money that these people 
have siphoned out of the public purse to enrich themselves to be able to go 
around and buy their condominiums in Hawaii and their winter homes in 
Arizona, to drive their Jaguars here and to build new condominiums in this 
city so that they can impress all their friends and neighbours. 
 
(1615) 
 
If you start to look at the list, Roberts & Poole, for example, siphoned 
off $289,728 from Agriculture.  Dome took $118,768 from the same 
department. 
 
Economic Development and Tourism, now this is an interesting figure, 
because for Dome Advertising and Roberts & Poole this was a great 
initiative in their own economic development.  Let me tell you, the owners 
of Dome Advertising have certainly got a fair bit of economic development 
out of this.  Economic Development and Tourism paid Dome Advertising 
$1,462,354.  Not a bad little perk for economic development if you happen 
to be the owner of Dome Advertising. 
 
The list goes on and on.  The Parks department, $133,028 to Dome, $53,513 



 

 

to Roberts & Poole.  The Public Participation, that ill-fated department, 
that department is no longer with us.  That department is no longer with 
us. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Where'd it go? 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Well it used to be an integral part of the government's plan 
that in order to build and diversify in this province we had to sell 
everything off.  We've seen the success of that particular plan.  We've 
seen the success in the fact that they've disbanded the department.  But 
while it was running, they received $316,154 . . . they paid, I should say, 
$316,154 to Dome Advertising.  Again, a nice economic development job 
opportunity for people, friends of the Tory Party. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it's not just a question of patronage.  It's not just a 
patronage question in the abstract.  What we have here is the systematic 
looting of the public treasury.  It's been a systematic looting of the 
public treasury for the benefit of the few at the expense of the many. 
 
People all across Saskatchewan ask us this question: where did all the 
money go?  That's what they ask over and over and over again.  And the 
reason they ask that question, the reason they ask where did all the money 
go, is because in every nook and cranny of this province there is somebody 
with a story to tell of the Tory who is on the take -- the person who got 
the gratuity, the person that was able to wheel and get the deal without 
tendering. 
 
Even at the level of summer employment jobs, it doesn't matter if you're a 
student trying to get a job over the summer or whether you're a friend of 
the Premier's, somebody is there on the take, out of the Tory trough.  And 
everybody in this province knows it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Everybody in this province knows that this government is built on 
patronage.  And everybody in this province knows that if you want a job 
with the government or you want a contract with the government, it's not a 
question of fairness, it's not a question of ability, it's not a question 
of how well you do the job, but it's a question of which Tories you know, 
of what Tories you know. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I suspect that after the next general election, when the 
books of the province are open, when we get the opportunity to reveal the 
files, you're going to see in department after department after department, 
direct interference by minister after minister after minister in the hiring 
process within those departments. 
 
I suspect, Mr. Speaker, that in Social Services for example, you're going 
to find some people who would be acceptable to the government and some 
people who would be unacceptable.  Not because of their ability, not 
because of their qualifications, but because of their political stripe, Mr. 
Speaker, right? 
 
Department after department after department.  I mean there's a joke in the 
province.  It's a question of do you have a blue card or don't you?  



 

 

Everybody in Saskatchewan knows that that's the way this government 
operates.  It's a sick joke, but they make it a joke because it's the 
revulsion of that kind of patronage. 
 
They know, everyone in Saskatchewan knows that this government operates on 
the basis of whether or not you hold a blue card or not.  And I tell you, 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are absolutely sick and tired of 
that method of operating. 
 
If you're a small-business person who wants to compete in the market-place, 
you want to compete for tendering, you want to compete for contracts and 
you've got a service to offer the Government of Saskatchewan, they know 
that it takes a little bit of nudge, nudge, wink, wink, a little bit of 
money and a blue card.  They know that that's the way this government 
operates. 
 
But I tell you, Mr. Speaker, the small-business community which provides 
those services is saying enough is enough.  They're fed up.  And I tell 
you, Mr. Speaker, they're saying no more. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- And I also say, Mr. Speaker, that the business community in 
this province knows that as part of the New Democratic Party's plan for the 
future that there is going to be fair tendering.  It will be what you can 
do, how hard you work, what you know, and not whether you've got a blue 
card or whether you're making a kickback for the Tory Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- That's the big difference.  Summer school students at the 
university, students in this province will know, Mr. Speaker, they know 
that you have to go see one of the MLAs, the Tory MLAs, or go and talk to 
somebody or go to the Premier's office if you want to get a job. 
 
Well I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that as part of the New Democratic 
Party plan, after the next general election students in this province will 
no longer have to go on their hands and knees and try to wheedle a job out 
of some Tory political hack in the legislature.  They know that they're 
going to be able to go on the basis of their own  
 Dqualifications, the basis of their own ability, the basis of their own 
willingness to work, and that they will have a job on that basis, not a 
question of the political affiliation, Mr. Speaker. Students in the 
province know that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- And, Mr. Speaker, they will know.  The people of this 
province will know that patronage which has reached unprecedented levels in 
this province will, if not abolished, at least be reduced and put into such 
a legal framework that it is recognized as such, and that as in all 
political patronage positions that those who, as they used to say, live by 
the OC (order in council) will die by the OC. 



 

 

 
And that in order for an order to carry on the good governance of this 
province, that the Public Service Commission of Saskatchewan will be 
brought back into a respectable position, will be brought back into a 
position of respect that anybody seeking to work with the Government of 
Saskatchewan as part of the New Democratic Party's plan for the future, 
that anybody that wants to work for the Government of Saskatchewan will be 
judged on their merits, their ability, their willingness to work, and not 
their politics, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- We are going to restore integrity into the hiring process in 
the civil service and the Crown corporations because, Mr. Speaker, as I 
said earlier, the people of Saskatchewan are incredibly cynical about the 
way in which government operates.  This government has brought the whole 
notion of good governance into disrepute.  It has brought the cynicism with 
political process to a new level and it's become that way, Mr. Speaker, as 
I said before, it has reached that level precisely because of the type of 
patronage and corrupt practices that this government has engaged in. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, there are some who say that the activities of the 
Progressive Conservative government have been designed deliberately to 
bring all politicians into disrepute.  There are some who say that this is 
part of an overall strategy to get it into the minds of Saskatchewan people 
that somehow politicians are all the same. 
 
And I want to say this, Mr. Speaker, that it's not true and the record 
speaks for itself.  The record speaks for itself.  I want the people of 
Saskatchewan when they start to think, oh all politicians are the same, to 
ask themselves this question:  how many Conservatives have been put before 
the courts of law?  How many Conservatives had been sent to jail?  How many 
Conservative politicians have lost their seats?  You ask them that question 
and then ask the corollary to that.  How many New Democrats have ever found 
themselves, how many New Democratic politicians have found themselves in 
the same place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, two years ago the member from Regina Victoria made a statement 
in this House that I support.  He stood up and said that he would support, 
that he would stand by any New Democrat who found himself into -- and I 
want to get this quote right and maybe the member will help me out -- that 
he would stand by any New Democrat anywhere if the members on the opposite 
side of this House, the members of the PC government, would stand by every 
grifter, crook, and con artist that has wormed themselves way into the 
Progressive Conservative Party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those are harsh words, I realize that.  But the record speaks 
for itself.  On the one hand you've got a government which constantly finds 
itself before the courts.  And it doesn't matter whether it's Rafferty, it 
doesn't matter whether it's electoral boundaries.  The joke out there, the 
sick joke again, Mr. Speaker, is these guys are so incompetent they can't 
even rig an election.  That's what the people of Saskatchewan are saying.  
But they find themselves before the Supreme Court because of their 



 

 

gerrymandering. 
 
They find themselves before the court on SaskEnergy.  They find themselves 
before the court on Rafferty-Alameda.  They find themselves before the 
court on STC.  They find themselves before the court on SGI (Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance).  The list goes on and on and on and on and on. 
 
And I ask you, Mr. Speaker, you compare those nine years of Tories in the 
courts versus the record of between 1971 and 1982.  Mr. Speaker, that 
record speaks for itself.  That record speaks for itself. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as to the future.  Our leader has talked about, the 
member from Riversdale has talked about opening the books.  And one of the 
reasons that the people of Saskatchewan are demanding that we open the 
books -- if we gain their confidence to form the next government -- one of 
the reasons they want those books open is because they don't trust the 
accounting members of the government on the opposite side.  They want an 
inquiry to look into where their taxpayers' dollars went. They want to know 
who benefitted by the expenditures of public money. They want to know who 
gained at their expense. And they want to know, Mr. Speaker, most of all, 
where did all the money go? 
 
And let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, let me tell you this, that we will 
conduct, as part of the New Democratic Party's plan after the next 
election, we will conduct that independent audit because the people of 
Saskatchewan have the right to know where all the money went and who got 
it, who stuffed the money into their pockets. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- They want an answer to that, Mr. Speaker.  That's why, Mr. 
Speaker, I would move the following motion and it's seconded by the member 
from Regina North West: 
 

 That this Assembly condemns the unprecedented waste of taxpayers' dollars 
resulting from government practices of patronage and corruption. 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm very pleased to join with my 
colleague, the member from Regina Rosemont, in supporting this motion that 
the Assembly condemns the unprecedented waste of taxpayers' dollars 
resulting from this Conservative government's practices of patronage and 
corruption. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have heard from the member from Rosemont.  He's outlined 
very clearly a number of key factors that have resulted in this government 
bringing the province to the brink of bankruptcy as well as bringing the 
credibility of this government to the record low that it exists in today's 
polls. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to share with you an experience about this government's 
performance over the last number of years.  And I relate specifically to a 



 

 

public meeting which I participated in back a couple of months in the 
community of Pangman, Saskatchewan. 
 
We had, Mr. Speaker, an opportunity . . . my colleague, the member from 
Regina North, was with me that evening to speak with a number of residents 
from Pangman and surrounding district about this government's record.  We 
were speaking about the government's waste and mismanagement and their 
trail of patronage and corruption.  And we wanted to know, as the people 
who attended that meeting, Mr. Speaker, wanted to know, where has all the 
money gone. 
 
(1630) 
 
When this government took over in 1982 from the New Democratic Party 
government, there was a surplus operating budget of $132 million.  As well, 
Mr. Speaker, there was a modest self-liquidating Crown corporation capital 
debt of between 2.3 and $3 billion.  On top of that a Heritage Fund surplus 
of about $1 billion Canadian, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what happened in the last nine years, as this government has wasted 
taxpayers' dollars, is that they have built a deficit, Mr. Speaker, in the 
vicinity of $5.2 billion in operating debt as well as a Crown corporation 
capital debt of over $9 billion.  And, Mr. Speaker, this is a very, very 
sad circumstance. 
 
But the people in the province of Saskatchewan, particularly those in 
Pangman that evening, wanted to know where all the money has gone.  And the 
interesting thing about the meeting, Mr. Speaker, is that we had among the 
crowd the Minister of Finance.  It was a public meeting and it was nearby 
his constituency of Weyburn, but in the crowd in stumbled the Minister of 
Finance, the member from Weyburn, on April 14 on Valentine's Day, to find 
out what the New Democratic Party was saying with respect to their record. 
 
We talked about a number of issues, Mr. Speaker, but it was almost a 
bizarre kind of meeting.  Here there was a crowd of about a hundred people 
in Pangman and the Minister of Finance shows up.  We went through our 
dissertation, our speech, and discussed all the details and raised all the 
questions -- many of which my colleague, the member from Regina Rosemont, 
raised today -- the questions pertaining to patronage and abuse of the 
taxpayers' money by this government. 
 
And you know what, Mr. Speaker?  This minister sat in silence as we went 
over the sorry record of this government and he never asked any questions.  
I took the opportunity to introduce him to the crowd, and I called upon the 
Minister of Finance at that time to answer any questions that may be asked 
during the question and answer period and to perhaps challenge some of the 
statements that we made, because we would appreciate hearing from him on 
the major issues of the day on Valentine's Day, February 14. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we went through our presentation.  We had a question and 
answer period that followed.  And we talked about a host of things 
including all of the cabinet members' abusive trips around the world, and 
we can visit as to where they've been.  I'll get to that later, Mr. 



 

 

Speaker. 
 
But basically we presented the record as it is in place in the various 
Provincial Auditor's documents in this province, in the various budget 
documents that the Minister of Finance himself has tabled and his 
predecessor has tabled. 
 
But in that meeting, Mr. Speaker, the bizarre thing was that during the 
question and answer period, when the questions came from the floor about 
how many trips they took and how much money they've spent hiring political 
people on contracts for five-year terms at two and three times the amount 
the private sector pays those very same people for providing the same 
services, instead of standing up and defending his government's record, Mr. 
Speaker, the Minister of Finance was totally silent.  He never said one 
word. 
 
During the course of the 40-minute presentation and the one and a half hour 
question and answer period, the Minister of Finance sat in his place flush 
red from the neck up.  That's all I could see because he was wearing a 
sport coat. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, this Minister of Finance did not once defend the record 
of the government.  He was called upon by myself as chairperson and he was 
asked the questions from the floor, and he refused to respond to questions 
of the taxpayers that were present there. 
 
At first, Mr. Speaker, I thought his presence would intimidate the crowd; 
they wouldn't ask any questions.  But in fact the opposite occurred.  The 
people from Pangman and district asked so many questions we had to finally 
cut the question period off after one and a half hours after the 40-minute 
presentation. 
 
But the other interesting thing was, Mr. Speaker, is that the Minister of 
Finance, he couldn't wait to get out of that place when the lights went 
back on.  After the meeting was adjourned he scrambled over these chairs 
that were between him and the door and he knocked the chairs over.  He 
couldn't get out of there fast enough.  And not really surprising, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The other aspect of our meeting that night where we talked about the waste 
and mismanagement and the patronage and corruption of this government and 
the  
 Dreason for the huge deficit and the reason for their lack of credibility 
before the people of this province was that we wanted to know, Mr. Speaker, 
what the government was going to do in response to these things.  But the 
Minister of Finance, he got out of that hall so quickly, he would not share 
his information with us.  We also wanted to provide alternatives and 
suggestions as to what a New Democratic Party government might do. 
 
We offered those alternatives, Mr. Speaker.  We offered those proposals and 
recommendations and, lo and behold, the next day he issues a press release 
saying that things that we were saying were not entirely true, but indeed 
he told the people of Saskatchewan where the money had gone. 



 

 

 
But he didn't answer all the questions.  They were a few billion dollars 
out.  So when the press asked him about this few billion dollars, where the 
money has gone, the Minister of Finance of course didn't answer and said 
that many reports that had to be tabled would not be tabled because he felt 
it was not in the public interest. 
 
So we see, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance attending a public meeting, 
being asked questions from the floor by taxpayers in his own neighbourhood, 
refusing to respond to those questions, Mr. Speaker.  And on top of that, 
in a cowardly fashion, sneaking or running out the door, stumbling over 
chairs, sneaking out the next morning issuing a press statement on 
Conservative Party letter-head saying, here's where some of the money has 
gone. And oh, by the way, we're going to be looking at some of the things 
that the member from Regina North West and the member from Regina North had 
stated the previous night, and we're going to incorporate them into our 
government's budget and our program. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we've seen many, many instances where the Minister of 
Finance did not respond to members in this House when he was asked 
questions.  And we've seen again, Mr. Speaker, the minister's lack of 
courtesy in not responding to questions asked by people in his own 
neighbourhood in the nearby constituency of Bengough-Milestone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have here a resolution which clearly condemns the 
government for their record.  People of Saskatchewan are telling us that we 
simply can't afford four more years of PC mismanagement and waste. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to just go over a number of things that we feel 
are the reason for this waste and mismanagement, and where has some of the 
money gone. 
 
Well we've talked about privatization, Mr. Speaker.  This privatization is 
fondly referred to on this side of the House as the P-word.  And we call it 
that because it's a word that the government opposite has refused to 
elucidate on, has refused to repeat in public or even indeed inside this 
House.  Privatization, Mr. Speaker, was their number one economic program 
just five short years ago. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is where some of the money has gone.  They've 
privatized a wide range of public assets and public services -- things like 
the children's dental program, Highways maintenance operations, and 
facilities and services in provincial parks.  And they've also privatized 
things like Saskoil, Sask Minerals, the Poplar River coal mine, the Potash 
Corporation, the natural gas reserves, and the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation, the Prince Albert Pulp Company, and parts of SaskTel. 
 
And Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, remember the promises that were made 
about the benefits that were supposed to be accruing from privatization, 
but the results clearly have not lived up to their promises.  We can 
examine, for example, the privatization of Saskoil in 1985. 
 
Within one year of the privatization, Mr. Speaker, of Saskoil, 75 per cent 



 

 

of all of the outstanding shares were owned by people outside of this 
province.  Initially they cut jobs.  They then went into other parts of the 
country and indeed were exploring and purchasing assets outside of the 
province of Saskatchewan and Alberta and elsewhere and spending taxpayers' 
money from Saskatchewan supporting jobs in other districts. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we have seen as a result of the Saskoil, an example of 
mismanaging and wasting taxpayers' money.  The government claimed that it 
needed to privatize Saskoil so it could use the profits to help reduce the 
deficit.  However, the PC government has had a budget deficit in every 
single year since it privatized Saskoil, and it's been growing, Mr. 
Speaker, dramatically in a cumulative sense since that time.  As a matter 
of fact, every time they've privatized a corporation, be it Sask Minerals 
or the Potash Corporation, the fact of the matter is that the money that 
this government has taken in the privatizations has disappeared. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people of this province want to know where that money 
has gone.  It hasn't gone toward deficit reduction as they promised.  It 
hasn't gone towards job creation as it's promised.  It hasn't gone to 
reducing taxes as they have promised.  And the people of this province want 
to know when they will be forthcoming in announcing where this money has 
gone, and they can hardly wait to pass judgement on this government, Mr. 
Speaker, come the next election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we can also look at the example of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan.  When the government privatized PCS (Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan Inc.) in 1989, it promised economic and financial benefits for 
the people of this province. 
 
Well it didn't quite turn out that way . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
The member from Thunder Creek is interested in knowing about it.  Well I 
know the member from Thunder Creek wouldn't remember the sorry facts 
because it was, after all, almost two years ago. 
 
In fact when the financial statements of the Potash Corporation were tabled 
in this legislature, Mr. Speaker, it became clear that the government lost 
$442 million of Saskatchewan's hard earned tax dollars.  The privatization 
of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan has cost this province almost 
half a billion dollars -- $442 million. 
 
 DAnd there's also the example, Mr. Speaker, of the Prince Albert Pulp 
Company, sold off to the giant American forestry corporation, Weyerhaeuser.  
And we've heard about this wonderful sweetheart deal for Weyerhaeuser, 
where the government advanced $248 million, or I should say they sold it 
for that but never received any money from Weyerhaeuser.  And they are to 
receive money from Weyerhaeuser only if the corporation makes a net profit 
on an annual basis of over 12 per cent. 
 
Anyone who's been in business can tell you that if you want to manipulate 
or use your equity and your retained earnings and your profits, you can do 
so to reduce the net profit on your bottom line. 
 
So here we've seen a government extending this kind of an asset of $248 



 

 

million, wasting this money, giving it to an out-of-province, 
out-of-country American corporation to come in here and to use the 
interest-free loan -- what taxpayers have to pay for on a regular basis, 
Mr. Speaker -- to use that money and to charge Saskatchewan citizens 
increased taxes at unprecedented levels.  And we've seen the tax increases.  
We'll get to them later, Mr. Speaker.  But, Mr. Speaker, this deal as well 
was a very bad deal for the people of this province. 
 
And we can talk about other corporations as well.  And I want to touch on 
one other.  The other corporation that I think is worth mentioning is a 
prime example of this government's sweetheart deals, it's a prime example 
of what the government has done with respect to taxpayers' money and the 
nature of their policies in terms of the economy. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk for a minute about Cargill.  Now everyone 
knows about this Cargill Saferco plant.  The government opposite who has 
very close friends to the Cargill people, they are very close friends.  
Kerry Hawkins has annually contributed over a thousand dollars a year.  
Cargill has given annually over 10 or $12,000 a year to the Conservative 
Party.  And Kerry Hawkins, for those who don't know, is the president of 
Cargill Canada. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this government has extended and put at risk $369 million 
of taxpayers' dollars with Cargill in this Cargill deal over at Belle 
Plaine.  Now I say and the people of this province, Mr. Speaker, say that 
it's a sweetheart deal for Cargill and it's a bad deal for the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan.  Because it potentially, Mr. Speaker, puts at risk about $369 
million of Saskatchewan taxpayers' money at the moment, and could put at 
risk, Mr. Speaker, substantially more, somewhere between 100 and $200 
million more on top of that. 
 
(1645) 
 
And we've seen this deal over the last year or two develop, Mr. Speaker, in 
a very peculiar way.  We saw the deal put together during a press 
conference in a very incompetent kind of fashion by the Premier, saying 
that we want to announce this deal; we want to, through a press conference 
and a press release, say to the people of this province, this is one of our 
megaprojects, one of our economic programs, and we believe it'll be the 
salvation of the province of Saskatchewan.  And the Premier said, Mr. 
Speaker, that it's going to cost the people of this province about half of 
$350 million. 
 
Now this was all done, Mr. Speaker, in a very pressured, high pressure time 
for the government.  This was during the SaskEnergy walk-out in this 
Assembly, where the opposition opposed the privatization of SaskEnergy and 
SaskPower.  And we walked out for 17 days in opposition to that, while we 
were out visiting people in this province, getting their support and 
explaining the issue to them. 
 
And to deflect the heat from the Premier and the government, the Premier 
calls this press conference, announces this press conference project.  Well 
he says the details will be forthcoming in the next couple of months.  This 



 

 

was in May of 1987.  So what happens?  We wait for two, three, four, five, 
six months; nothing happens.  Eight months later, nine months later, ten 
months later, finally the Premier announces another deal. 
 
It's not a 350 million deal where the taxpayers of the province pay half -- 
not at all, Mr. Speaker.  What the deal ended up being was $64 million in 
cash and $270 million, Mr. Speaker, of bank guarantees by the taxpayers of 
this province to a corporation that in 1988 had sales of 47 billion -- not 
million, but $47 billion Canadian, which was larger than the four western 
provinces' annual budget that year.  And here we have the province of 
Saskatchewan putting at risk this money. 
 
Now the member from Thunder Creek who supports this project as he supported 
all of these wasteful and mismanaged projects like GigaText and High R 
Doors and Supercart, now he says that this project was a good deal.  Well, 
Mr. Speaker, if it was such a good deal, why hasn't the government upon 
being asked many, many times, or in response to being asked many, many 
times to table the feasibility studies which shows that it's a good deal 
and make those feasibility studies public so that people of Saskatchewan 
can judge them as they are, why hasn't he done that, Mr. Speaker?  Why 
hasn't the Premier done that?  Why hasn't the minister responsible for the 
Crown Investments Corporation done that? 
 
The reason is, Mr. Speaker, because it's a sweetheart deal for Cargill and 
it's a very bad deal for the taxpayers of Saskatchewan.  And that 
feasibility study which has not been produced in this House or in the 
public, shows that they're hiding these facts from the people of this 
province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the other aspect of this deal is that we have some very 
secretive things going on.  Cargill has another little sweetheart deal with 
this Saferco plant.  For example, there's a marketing fee which was 
initially reported at between $2 and $3 a tonne.  Cargill, regardless of 
whether or not the company made money, would get $3 a tonne, which is about 
10 to $12,000 a day for marketing the production.  That was the reported 
numbers. 
 
We hear that, Mr. Speaker, that may not be $3 a tonne marketing fee; it may 
be as high as $10 a tonne marketing fee, which means that Cargill could 
pull down between 30,000 and $40,000 a day for marketing a product that has 
no market.  It doesn't matter if they sell it; they will get that $10 a 
tonne marketing fee, Mr. Speaker.  This is what we hear -- $10 a tonne. 
 
And the other aspect of the deal, Mr. Speaker, which they won't make 
public, which is a waste of taxpayers' money -- another example of waste 
and mismanagement of taxpayers' dollars -- is that not only the marketing 
fee is in question but the fact that any future liabilities of Saferco will 
be paid for, will be the responsibility, Mr. Speaker, of the taxpayers of 
this province. 
 
Now a company by the name . . . a fertilizer consulting company by the name 
of Blue, Johnson and Associates recently produced a report -- and they're 
one of the three most prestigious consulting firms in the fertilizer 



 

 

business in the world -- which showed that this plant in its first 10 years 
can lose between 100 and $160 million. 
 
So here we have another 100 to $160 million future liability of the 
taxpayers of this province.  And, Mr. Speaker, there are so many unanswered 
questions that we can't imagine what the document could actually tell us.  
Those are just two very important aspects. 
 
We've also seen a number of questions, Mr. Speaker, a number of issues in 
the Cargill deal which clearly illustrates that taxpayers' dollars are at 
risk.  And the fact this government has cut these sweetheart deals makes 
people wonder where has all the money gone because they've made this deal 
very secretive. 
 
Another aspect of their mismanagement and their corruption, Mr. Speaker, 
pertains not only to privatization but indeed to the Premier's own flippant 
attitude towards managing the economy.  In 1983, Mr. Speaker, the Premier 
said and I quote: we can afford to mismanage the economy and still break 
even.  That was in 1983. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the sad, sorry detail for the people of this province is 
that he's mismanaged the economy, but he hasn't broken even.  As a matter 
of fact he's $14 billion or more into the glue to the bankers and the bond 
dealers around this world.  What that means, Mr. Speaker, is the 
handcuffing and the handicapping of what a government can do in the 
province of Saskatchewan with respect to programs, with respect to 
services, and certainly with respect to taxation. 
 
In essence what happens, Mr. Speaker, when you get in that situation is 
that the government is compelled to follow the instructions and the orders 
and the marching orders of the bankers and bond dealers in New York and 
Chicago and Toronto.  They tell this government in Saskatchewan from many, 
many thousands of miles away what kind of programs they can put forward, 
what kind of services they can provide and certainly what kind of taxes 
they must charge the people of this province to service that debt. 
 
Fourteen billion dollars, Mr. Speaker, is about $1.4 billion annually in 
interest payments alone.  And we have, Mr. Speaker, a very, very sorry 
government record with respect to their deficit, and we believe as an 
opposition that they have to open the books and tell the people where this 
money has gone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the sad things that the people of this province have 
paid for, one of the very sad practices of the government that I want to 
share this afternoon with you, is their extravagant travel habits. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they have wasted money.  The cabinet members in this 
government have wasted money that is almost incalculable.  We don't know 
how much all of these trips cost, Mr. Speaker, but we have lists of trips 
they've taken.  And this is just a sampling of trips, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They've taken trips to Minneapolis, Minnesota; Dublin, Ireland.  They've 
been to New York.  They've been to Ottawa hundreds of times; Hong Kong a 



 

 

number of times; Rapid City, South Dakota; Vancouver a number of times; 
Atlanta, Georgia; Helsinki, Finland; Reno, Nevada; Toronto many, many 
times; Athens, Greece; Winnipeg, Manitoba many times; London, England a 
host of times.  They've been to Calgary. 
 
They've been to Australia, a place called Cairns, Australia.  I'm not 
familiar with where that's located.  Maybe some of my colleagues might know 
where that is . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . My colleague says that 
there's a great beach in Cairns, Australia.  I suppose they tried out the 
beach when they were there at taxpayers' expense. 
 
They've been to Edmonton, Alberta.  They've been to Brasilia, Brazil.  
They've been to Montreal a host of times, and Fredericton, New Brunswick.  
They've been to Washington, D.C. and we've seen the outcome of their trips 
to Washington, D.C. 
 
They've been to Phoenix, Arizona; Quebec City; Miami, Florida; 
Port-of-Spain; New Orleans, Louisiana.  And I suppose they were there 
during the wonderful -- what's the thing at New Orleans called? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- The Mardi Gras. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- The Mardi Gras in New Orleans as well as Rio de Janeiro.  
They've travelled everywhere.  They've been to Zu pürich, Switzerland; 
Whitehorse, Yukon a number of times, checking on the NDP government up 
there and seeing what a great job they're doing.  They've been to San 
Francisco; Saint John; New Delhi; Kansas City; Jackson, Mississippi. 
They've been to  Beijing, China a number of times. 
 
They've been to Grand Falls; Newfoundland a host of times; Chicoutimi, 
Quebec; Palm Springs, California -- only in the winter-time though; Geneva, 
Switzerland in skiing time. They've been to Victoria, British Columbia in 
the winter-time. They've been to Cleveland, Ohio.  They've been to 
Thailand, they've been to Thailand, Mr. Speaker.  They've been to Columbus, 
Ohio.  They've been to Manila, the Philippines.  They've been to Denver, 
Colorado. 
 
They've been to Oakland, California to watch the Athletics baseball games.  
They've been to Chong Chun, China.  They've been to Bakersfield, California 
to watch the races and to watch the beach fair there.  They've been to 
Honolulu, Hawaii.  They have been to Hawaii, Mr. Speaker; St. John's, 
Newfoundland; Frankfurt, Germany; Charlottetown, Prince Edward Island a 
number of times. 
 
And my colleague from Elphinstone says that a former cabinet minister was 
there and said he never got very much sleep when he was there.  He was too 
busy working 24 hours a day. 
 
And they've been to Galway, Ireland, Mr. Speaker.  They've been to Halifax, 
Nova Scotia a number of times.  They've been to a place called Saigen, 
Germany.  They've been to Val David, Quebec.  They've been to Banff, 
Alberta during the ski season and the golf season.  They've been to Digby, 
Nova Scotia to try their scallops, Mr. Speaker. 



 

 

 
They've been to Waterloo, Ontario, to check out the university campuses.  
They've been to Los Angeles, California, Mr. Speaker, to watch the Kings' 
games.  They've been to Jasper, Alberta, in skiing and golfing season.  
They've been to Florida during the winter-time, a place called Winter 
Haven.  They've been to Kananaskis in the summer-time, although I think 
that was probably a private trip.  He's the only one that could get away 
with it because at Kananaskis all there really is is skiing and golfing. 
 
They've been to East Germany, they've been to West Germany, they've been to 
Corner Brook, they've been to Spain.  They've been to Digby Pines, Nova 
Scotia, a beautiful resort in Digby Pines, Mr. Speaker.  They've got a 
wonderful putting green in front of this great resort called the Digby 
Pines resort and they've got a little golf course up there, and they've got 
a championship Olympic swimming pool that's half enclosed, Mr. Speaker.  
These are great trips on the taxpayers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They've been to Moncton, New Brunswick.  They've been to Chicago, Illinois 
to try out the golf membership of Chuck Childers in the Potash Corporation.  
They've been to Ingonish, Nova Scotia to check out the beautiful scenery 
there and the golf course. 
 
They've been to Hecla, Manitoba, Mr. Speaker, a wonderful place, Hecla, 
Manitoba.  My brother-in-law even got a hole in one there once -- on his 
own expense, by the way. 
 
They've been to Fairmont, British Columbia, Mr. Speaker.  Great Fairmont 
Springs golf course and ski resort.  They've been to Colorado Springs, Mr. 
Speaker.  They've been to Rio de Janeiro again, Mr. Speaker, for the Mardi 
Gras.  They've been to Seattle, Washington to watch the baseball and the 
football games there.  They've been to St. Andrews, New Brunswick.  There's 
a beautiful resort in St. Andrews by the sea, a beautiful golf course, 
wonderful scenery, Mr. Speaker.  And I'm sure they weren't there in the 
winter-time either. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they were in Paris, France.  They were in Prince Rupert, 
British Columbia.  Prince Rupert -- that must have been one of the business 
trips. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they've been to Bulgaria.  They've been to Brussels, Belgium.  
They've been to London, Ontario --  London, Ontario, that must have been 
another business trip.  They've been to Houston, Texas.  They've been to 
New Zealand; they've been to Vienna, Austria. 
 
They've been to New Zealand.  I remember the member from Qu'Appelle-Lumsden 
was in New Zealand.  He was there studying the issues of aboriginal peoples 
of New Zealand and that was a very, very well enjoyed trip, I hear.  He 
went for two weeks, Mr. Speaker, and he came back and has not once in this 
House, stood and described what benefits it provided to the taxpayers of 
the government of this province or the people of this province. 
 
They've been to Inverness, Scotland -- is that where they have that Loch 
Ness?  Is that nearby?  Great golf course in Inverness as well.  They've 



 

 

been to Hull, Quebec, they've been to Singapore, they've been to Dartmouth; 
they've been to Hull and back and they're going back there again. 
 
They've been to Dartmouth, Nova Scotia.  They've been to Lake Louise, Mr. 
Speaker.  There's beautiful scenery in Lake Louise.  There's a wonderful 
ski facility there and a wonderful golf course as well. 
 
They've been to Lincoln, Nebraska, Mr. Speaker.  They've been to Sao Paulo, 
Brazil.  They've been to Tokyo, Japan, Mr. Speaker.  They've been to 
Moscow.  They've been everywhere between Moscow and East Germany.  They've 
been to Vernon, British Columbia -- Vernon, British Columbia -- that must 
have been another business trip.  That's about four in this whole list. 
 
They've been to Berlin to look at the Berlin Wall, Mr. Speaker, as it was 
being torn down.  As a matter of fact, I remember a story, Mr. Speaker, if 
you'll just give me 30 seconds, about the Berlin Wall.  The Premier was in 
Berlin . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Okay.  Well I have a great 
story about Berlin and the Premier of this province but I'll save that for 
another day, Mr. Speaker.  And they've been to Cyprus and they've been to 
Amsterdam to look at the facilities there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Sorry, carry on. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have a host of other places 
they've been to, destinations, but we'll save that for another day, Mr. 
Speaker.  I appreciate having this opportunity to talk about this 
government's travels around the world.  They've been everywhere, but the 
taxpayers have got the bill in every circumstance, Mr. Speaker, and come 
the next election, they're going to tell this government where their next 
trip is going to be. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, before I move adjournment of the House, 
could I just get it clarified from the opposition that they have actually 
adjourned the last debate? 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- I'd like to adjourn the debate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: -- Is leave granted for the hon. member? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:01 p.m. 
 
 


