





























































Hansard: May 27, 1991


 

 

May 27/91 
 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, pursuant to 
rule 11, it is my privilege to present to this Legislative Assembly today a 
series of petitions that come from people all across the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These petitioners, Mr. Speaker, are asking for the provincial government to 
withdraw its legislation providing for the introduction of the provincial 
GST (goods and services tax) and not proceeding until it has the mandate to 
go forward with this proposed tax by calling a provincial election. 
 
For the information of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, let me read the prayer to 
the Assembly: 
 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Honourable Assembly may 
be pleased to urge the Provincial Government to stop the provincial GST 
until the people of the province have an opportunity to pass judgement on 
it in a provincial election. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these petitioners that I present now are from . . . all of 
them are from Regina.  I see petitioners here, Mr. Speaker, from Forget 
Street, Dale Crescent, Demarco Drive.  And on their behalf and in defence 
of the democratic right of Saskatchewan people to petition their 
government, it is my honour to present them to this Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Speaker, it is a special privilege for me to present this 
next petition all of which, or the bulk of which, Mr. Speaker, come from my 
home community of Moose Jaw.  I see in addition to those listing as their 
address Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker, there are petitioners here from the town of 
Mossbank, from the city of Estevan, from Bengough.  And, Mr. Speaker, there 
are also some here from Hall Street East in Moose Jaw. 
 
On their behalf, Mr. Speaker -- with the same prayer -- it is my privilege 
to extend their wishes to their provincial government by way of petition to 
the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these petitioners with the same prayer urging that the 
provincial GST not proceed without an election are all from the city of 
Regina, and these come from streets such as Argyle and Queen and Princess, 
Mr. Speaker.  And on their behalf, I present their petition to their 
provincial government in this their Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I present another petition.  These people are from Moose Jaw 



 

 

and area, I'm pleased to see, Mr. Speaker.  I see petitioners again with 
the same prayer as previously mentioned.  Mr. Speaker, these petitioners 
come from communities like Mortlach and from all across . . . Craik as 
well, Briercrest, and Assiniboia, Tompkins, and then the remainder of these 
petitioners are from Moose Jaw, various parts of Moose Jaw, from both 
constituencies within Moose Jaw, from Bogue Avenue, Athabasca Street East, 
Fairford Street, and several that just simply list their address as Moose 
Jaw.  I recognize several of these people, Mr. Speaker.  And it is a 
privilege for me to present their wishes to this their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'd like to present another petition on behalf of residents; 
these are all residents from the city of Regina.  It looks as though this 
is a petition that was completed by somebody going up and down the street, 
Mr. Speaker, as they come from Connaught and also from 4th Avenue here in 
Regina -- and with the same prayer, Mr. Speaker, urging that the provincial 
GST not proceed without an election call.  It is my honour to present their 
wishes to this their Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure again to introduce to this Assembly another 
petition which is largely made up of constituents from my home community of 
Moose Jaw, as well as petitioners who have signed this from the city of 
Regina.  However I'm very pleased that the large majority of these, some 20 
or 25 petitioners, Mr. Speaker, are from the city of Moose Jaw, to make 
their wishes known to this their Legislative Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- I wonder if I might have leave of the Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
The Speaker: -- Agreed, and I believe it's fair to say that we'll continue 
the same format as previous days and leave will be granted to all who wish 
to introduce guests. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and to the member 
for Moose Jaw North for allowing me to interrupt his petitioning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it's with a great deal of pleasure today that I have a number 
of introductions to the Assembly.  This week and earlier this day I had the 
opportunity to proclaim Mining Week in Saskatchewan.  I have a couple of 
guests in the west gallery who I'd like to introduce to the members of the 
Assembly and I would ask them to stand. 
 
We have Dave Kelland who is with IMC Canada (International Minerals and 
Chemical Corporation (Canada) Ltd.) and is their chairman and chief 
executive officer for IMC Canada.  And with him is Pearce Bowman who is the 
past president of the Saskatchewan Mining Association and is the 
vice-president of Estevan Coal company. 



 

 

 
These two gentlemen have been instrumental in working with the Saskatchewan 
Mining Association and bringing it forward, educating the public of our 
province of what an important industry mining is in this province.  And 
they will be working with many people around the province as we go through 
this week, culminating in the mine safety competitions next Saturday, I 
believe, in Estevan. 
 
So I would ask all members of the Assembly to join with me in welcoming our 
two guests from the Saskatchewan Mining Association. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- While I'm on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I have the distinct 
honour today to have a class from Central Butte High School in your 
gallery, Mr. Speaker.  They are 18 in number and they're visiting the 
legislature today as part of their tour of Regina.  They have with them 
their teacher Mr. Ron Wostradowski, and bus driver Brenda Berry. 
 
I hope you enjoy your stay in the Assembly.  It is probably a little 
different than what you expected, but I will look forward to meeting with 
you a little later for pictures and a refreshment and to discuss some of 
the things that you've seen or heard while you were in here. 
 
So I would ask all members of the Assembly to please help me welcome the 
students from Central Butte. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As Energy and Mines critic for the 
opposition, I would like to join the Minister of Energy and Mines in 
welcoming Pearce Bowman, the past president of the Saskatchewan Mining 
Association and the current president of the Estevan Coal operation, as 
well as Mr. Dave Kelland from IMC. 
 
The Saskatchewan Mining Association is sponsoring the Mining Awareness Week 
which is being undertaken all of this week.  I attended the brief 
educational function and luncheon this morning and this afternoon and 
received a great deal of information with respect to the importance of 
mining in this province. 
 
So it's with a great deal of pleasure, Mr. Speaker, that I join with the 
minister in welcoming these individuals and supporting the educational 
function of the Saskatchewan Mining Association and their initiatives in 
making their function and their occupation more aware in the province of 
Saskatchewan.  Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muller: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It gives me a great deal of 
pleasure today to introduce through you and to the members of the 
Legislative Assembly 29 grade 8 students from Turtleford, and they're 
sitting in the west gallery.  The teacher is Bill Kresowaty.  You'll have 



 

 

to excuse me on the pronunciation of that.  You'll have to fill me on it 
later.  Shelley Bloom is one of the chaperons -- Sharon Shepherd and Angie 
Vallentgoed.  I didn't do too good on that one, eh? 
 
Anyway, I want to welcome them here today.  I know they come from one of 
the most beautiful parts of the province.  There's lots of lakes and 
fishing and it's just a beautiful part of the country.  I'll be meeting 
with them later for pictures and drinks and certainly to answer some 
questions for them. 
 
I'd ask all members to welcome them here from Turtleford. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The groups get better and better.  I 
have a group of 23 grade 12 students from Robert Usher Collegiate in 
Regina, visiting.  They're seated in your gallery, the Speaker's gallery.  
They are brought here by their teacher, Todd Miller. 
 
I look forward to meeting this group at 2:30 for pictures and hopefully, a 
discussion after that.  And I very much look forward to meeting with this 
group of 23 students from Robert Usher.  I ask all members to join me in 
giving them a warm welcome to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I think it's important that 
the people from Turtleford constituency that are here today understand that 
they are warmly welcomed by this Assembly from both sides of the House, 
since unfortunately they don't have a member in the Assembly and haven't 
had for some time.  So I want to join the member who's standing in from 
Shellbrook on this introduction of the students from Turtleford and also 
welcome them to this Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS (continued) 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I would also join all 
other members in welcoming guests to the Assembly today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, respecting a previous decision you made, I will be presenting, 
while I'm on my feet, two different petitions.  However, I'll present 
petitions of the same prayer together, and I will continue presenting 
petitions, Mr. Speaker, with the same prayer as I have been since the House 
adjourned, or House convened, I should say. 
 
And just for the information of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, the prayer here 
is urging the provincial government to stop the provincial GST until the 
people of the province have an opportunity to pass judgement on it in a 
provincial election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, then with that same prayer it is my pleasure to bring to the 



 

 

Assembly the names of some 20 to 25 further petitioners.  Mr. Speaker, it 
appears to me as though all of these petitioners are from the city of 
Regina, and, Mr. Speaker, with the prayer that I've just stated, Mr. 
Speaker, it is my honour on their behalf to present their petition to this 
the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, proceeding with the petition with the same prayer, it is my 
honour again to bring to the Assembly some 20 to 25 names of citizens of 
the province of Saskatchewan, all of whom but two live in the city of Moose 
Jaw.  In addition to Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker, there are petitioners here 
from the town of Findlater, as well as Brownlee.  And, Mr. Speaker, on 
their behalf it is my honour to bring their opposition to the provincial 
GST and the call for a provincial election for the government to have a 
mandate to introduce it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm moving right along.  It is my pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to 
introduce another petition to the Assembly.  These petitioners, Mr. 
Speaker, some 20 to 25, are all from the city of Regina.  They come from 
various places such as Park and Helmsing and Windsor Place and Harding, 
Janzen, 11th Avenue, and several addresses of those streets as well as 
others, Mr. Speaker.  On their behalf I bring their petition to this their 
Legislative Assembly.  Thank you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with the same prayer, it is my honour again to bring to the 
Assembly lists of signatures of petitioners with the same prayer.  These 
people, Mr. Speaker, come largely from my home city of Moose Jaw.  In 
addition to that I see signatures here, Mr. Speaker, from Mortlach as well 
as Ormiston; and from within the city of Moose Jaw places such Prince 
Crescent and Spadina and Hall Street and Simcoe and Stadacona and Hochelaga 
and Sioux and Francis and King and Henry and Ominica, as well as others, 
Mr. Speaker.  It is a particular pleasure and an honour for me to present 
their petition to this their Legislative Assembly. 
 
Moving right along, Mr. Speaker, from the city of Regina -- and I would say 
all of these are petitioners from the city of Regina.  These petitioners, 
many from Bond Street, some 20 to 25, as well as Francis and Dewdney and 
Broad Street; as well, Mr. Speaker, with the same prayer, urging the 
provincial government to stop the provincial GST until it has the mandate 
to call an election . . . by calling an election, Mr. Speaker. It's my 
honour to present their petition.  Thank you very much. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a further petition, and again I'm proud to say that it is my 
honour to present these on behalf of largely constituents of Moose Jaw 
again.  In addition to Moose Jaw residents there is also a signature on 
this petition from the town of Tuxford, just a few miles north of Moose 
Jaw, Mr. Speaker.  Petitioners from within the city come from various 
places all over the city, and those who list street addresses:  2nd Avenue 
North East, Normandy Drive, Duffield, Grace Crescent, and Main Street, and 
so on, 7th Avenue North West.  Mr. Speaker, it is my honour to present 
their petition to this their Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is my honour again to present yet another petition from 
citizens -- these would be citizens entirely, again some 20 to 25 citizens 



 

 

from the city of Regina, from several places throughout the city ranging 
from Elphinstone to Rupert to Regent to St. John to Dewdney and Lacon 
Street -- I believe I'm saying that correctly, Mr. Speaker -- with the same 
prayer calling for the provincial government to earn a mandate to introduce 
the provincial GST by calling an election.  It is my honour to present 
their petition. 
 
Once again, Mr. Speaker, largely from my home city of Moose Jaw, I see in 
addition to signatories from Moose Jaw, from the towns of Pasqua and 
Parkbeg, Ernfold, and Regina, as well as many Moose Jaw citizens, Mr. 
Speaker, their opposition to the provincial GST and urging that a mandate 
be gotten by calling a provincial election.  It is my honour to introduce 
this petition to the Legislative Assembly.  Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure as well to introduce a 
petition from people who are residents of Regina.  These petitioners come 
from places such as Rupert Street and 10th Avenue and 7th Avenue, as well 
as others, Mr. Speaker, with the same prayer as I've previously mentioned.  
Mr. Speaker, my honour to present their wishes to their government through 
the format of presentation of petition.  Thank you very much. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again it is an honour for me to present yet more petitioners 
from the city of Moose Jaw and area.  In addition to Moose Jaw, Mr. 
Speaker, on this petition it includes the expression of the will of 
citizens of the towns of Tuxford and Boharm, Mr. Speaker, which you'll 
recognize as towns in the Moose Jaw area.  This is again some 20 to 25 
petitioners, Mr. Speaker, and again with the same prayer as I've previously 
read.  And once again, Mr. Speaker, it is my honour as member of the 
Assembly for Moose Jaw North to present their wishes to this, their 
Legislative Assembly.  Thank you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are petitioners again.  It would look to me, Mr. 
Speaker, these are exclusively from my home city of Moose Jaw.  These 
petitioners, Mr. Speaker, come from areas in Moose Jaw such as Hochelaga 
and Ominica, Algoma, High, Grafton, 4th Avenue North East, several from 
each of those streets, again some 20 to 25 petitioners, Mr. Speaker.  The 
prayer on this petition is identical to those that I've already introduced 
and it is my honour once again to present these petitions to this, their 
Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan.  Thank you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure again to introduce yet additional petitions 
with the same prayer from the city of Moose Jaw again, from Grayson 
Crescent and Corman Crescent, and as well one of the apartment buildings in 
Moose Jaw and with the same prayer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to introduce a petition to the Assembly from 
people from several communities around Saskatchewan.  This is from the more 
northern part of the province.  These are largely from Saskatoon, areas 
such as Central Avenue, Cree Crescent, but also from other communities, Mr. 
Speaker, such as Wynyard.  Mr. Speaker, I see Kingsmere Avenue and Avenue 
Y.  Again I recognize those as Saskatoon addresses, Mr. Speaker, and it is 



 

 

my honour and my pleasure to express their wishes through the presentation 
of their petition to this their Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'll present another three petitions with the same prayer.  
And then I will move to a different prayer and then I'll allow other 
members of my colleagues, Mr. Speaker, who I know will want to present 
petitions to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again I hate to be repetitive but there are a lot  
 Dof people in Moose Jaw opposed obviously, and so I present again with 
respect, Mr. Speaker, and honour, petitions signed by another 20 to 25 
people.  This was obviously a petition that was signed within the 
boundaries of the city of Moose Jaw, although I see signatories here, Mr. 
Speaker, from communities such as Coderre and Assiniboia.  And I see 
signatories from within the city of Moose Jaw from 12th Avenue South West, 
and Hawthorne, and Cree, and Grandview, from Manitou Crescent, and 
Edelweiss Crescent, Mr. Speaker, as well as Calypso, and several that 
indicate a rural address, Mr. Speaker, by use of a postal box number as 
their address.  On their behalf, Mr. Speaker, I proudly present their right 
to petition, by virtue of this petition, to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have petitions . . . another petition.  This is a petition 
with the same prayer again, calling for the government to seek a mandate to 
introduce the provincial GST through a provincial election.  These come 
from a variety of places including Swift Current, Regina, Moose Jaw.  And, 
Mr. Speaker, on their behalf again it is my honour to present these to the 
Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, with the same prayer and then I'll move to another 
prayer.  Mr. Speaker, I just would like to bring the attention of the 
Clerks of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, and in saying this I do understand 
that the regulations of the Assembly require that petitions have three 
names or more on them. 
 
As you may be aware, Mr. Speaker, there have been a number of people who 
have picked up a petition, signed it themselves, and returned it.  And so 
to facilitate presentation of their petition, Mr. Speaker, what I've done 
is attach them together.  These are identical prayer, and I submit them as 
a single petition in order to ensure that their will be expressed to the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these petitioners come from Moose Jaw -- Duffield and 16th 
Avenue; as well as Argyle Street here in Regina, and a rural address in 
Moose Jaw by box number.  And, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of these people as 
well, it is my honour to present this petition to this their Legislative 
Assembly.  Thank you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'd like to conclude by presenting four pages of petitions and 
this is with a different prayer, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, these people 
outline in detail in the introduction of the petition their opposition to 
the 7 per cent tax being placed on reading materials.  And, Mr. Speaker, 
the prayer, the formal prayer, I need to say that first part in order to 
have the prayer be understood.  They pray to the Assembly, Mr. Speaker: 



 

 

 
 Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Honourable Assembly may 

be pleased to urge the Provincial Government to reverse its decision to 
impose this unfair tax. 

 
And by way of explanation then, Mr. Speaker, what they're meaning is the 7 
per cent GST on reading materials.  These petitioners opposed to the tax on 
reading materials, Mr. Speaker, come largely from the city of Moose Jaw -- 
some rural addresses by way of box number -- from Avens Road, and Crocus 
Road, and Prince, and Alder, and Monk, Redland.  I see from the town of 
Mazenod, Mr. Speaker, Gordon Road in Moose Jaw, Grey Avenue, and others, 
Mr. Speaker, some 20 to 25 petitioners.  And on their behalf, I present 
this petition expressing their opposition to the tax on reading. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with the same prayer in opposition to the same tax on reading, 
this is signed by 25 petitioners, Mr. Speaker.  These petitioners come from 
other parts of the province -- several from the town of Ituna, from 
Springside, Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker; from Homefield, Saskatchewan; from 
Hubbard, Saskatchewan; as well as Parkerview, Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  
Most of these people are from Ituna actually. And it is my honour, Mr. 
Speaker, on their behalf to present this petition opposing the tax on 
reading.  Thank you. 
 
Also opposed to the tax on reading, Mr. Speaker, with the same prayer, 
these petitioners, Mr. Speaker, come largely from Swift Current.  In fact 
it looks to me as though they . . . I'm not familiar with some of these but 
I believe them all to be Swift Current addresses, Mr. Speaker, including 
North Railway, and Burke Crescent, 11th Avenue North West, Jubilee Drive, 
and North Hill. 
 
If they're watching, Mr. Speaker, or do subscribe to Hansard, I'm sure 
these signatories to this petition will recognize them and I hope I'm 
accurately presenting them as from the city of Swift Current.  And on their 
behalf, Mr. Speaker, I present them to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, the final petition I wish to present this 
afternoon, and then I'll take my place and let others of my colleagues 
present petitions as I know they wish to do.  These are again with the same 
prayer, identical, Mr. Speaker, opposing the tax on reading. 
 
And these people, Mr. Speaker, appear also all to be entirely from the city 
of Swift Current, some 20 petitioners from places such as MacDonald 
Crescent and Milburn and Central Avenue.  I see one here from Wymark, 
Saskatchewan, as well, Mr. Speaker; and 1st North East and Curry Crescent 
and Meath Park and Ashley Drive and several other streets within the city. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of these petitioners and all those petitioners who 
it's been my honour to present their will to this their Legislative 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker, and in preservation of this democratic right, it is 
my honour to bring these to the Assembly this afternoon.  Thank you very 
much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 



 

 

 
Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I rise this 
afternoon pursuant to rule 11 of this Assembly to lay before the Assembly a 
number of petitions that say in part . . . and I will now read the prayer 
and I'll read it this once in order not to take up the time of the 
Assembly.  The petition says: 
 

 That the Provincial Government does not have a mandate from the people of 
Saskatchewan to impose the major tax increase which result from its 
proposed provincial goods and services tax. 

 And wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Honourable Assembly 
may be pleased to urge the Provincial Government to stop the provincial 
GST until the people of the province have an opportunity to pass judgement 
on it in a provincial election. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this first petition represents residents of the province 
of Saskatchewan, and I noticed that there are 17 signatures from the 
community of Preeceville, one signature from the community of Tiny, one 
signature from Kelvington, and one signature from the community of 
Endeavour up in that fine north-east area of the province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to lay this petition on the Table at this time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Mr. Speaker, again a petition with a similar prayer urging 
the provincial government to stop the provincial GST.  And, Mr. Speaker, 
again this petition comes from residents up north-east Saskatchewan.  And I 
notice that there are 18 signatures on this petition from the community of 
Preeceville as well as two signatures from the community of Endeavour.  
And, Mr. Speaker, as I had earlier indicated, again this petition wants the 
government to stop the provincial GST.  And I would . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  I'm going to ask the hon. member 
early, not to repeat the prayer or make reference to it.  I'll be frank 
with you; on past days I have repeatedly brought this to the attention of 
hon. members but today I intend to be somewhat stricter on this.  And I 
will not be making the multitude of appeals, and I will simply be moving to 
another member.  I wish to forewarn you. 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you very much for your direction, Mr. Speaker.  From 
now on, I'll refer to them just as the anti-GST petition in line with your 
ruling -- with the same prayer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said, there are 18 signatures on this petition -- 18 
signatures on this petition from Preeceville, two from Endeavour.  And I'd 
like to at this time lay this petition on the Table representing the people 
from those communities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Mr. Speaker, I have here another petition.  This one not from 
the north-east part of the province but from the city of Regina and 



 

 

outlying areas.  And I notice, Mr. Speaker, that these people are from all 
across Regina, not from any particular political constituency, from places 
such as Dewdney Avenue and Lacon Street, Rothwell Crescent, Froom Crescent, 
from the constituency of Regina Rosemont that I have the opportunity to 
represent, from Dewdney Avenue. 
 
I notice, Mr. Speaker, that they're as well from Broder Street, Gordon 
Road, and a couple just indicated that their address as being in the city 
of Regina.  Mr. Speaker, on behalf of these people who oppose the GST, I 
would lay this on the Table as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a petition here from, again from the city 
of Regina, and again from all parts of the city.  These people who oppose 
the GST are from Mollard Crescent, from Pasqua Street . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order, order.  Now the hon. member is 
once more making reference to the prayer.  Now I understand it's almost 
normal for you to do that when you're handing in petitions sheet by sheet, 
but you, sir, have made the decision to hand in petitions sheet by sheet, 
and therefore it's also your responsibility to adhere to the rules. 
 
And therefore you've read the prayer; you can make no reference to it; you 
simply present your petitions. 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you very much for your ruling, Mr. Speaker.  This is an 
anti-GST petition, I guess, is the only way I can refer to it.  And these 
people who . . . Can I have just maybe have a clarification . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Let me just demonstrate to you if you don't 
mind.  Perhaps that'll help you.  And if you wouldn't mind listening to me 
rather than the member from Moose Jaw North, then perhaps we wouldn't get 
confused at this time.  I'm trying to clarify my position. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Just trying to help us. 
 
The Speaker: -- Yes, I realize that. 
 
"Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray . . ." etc.  You have made . . . 
you have presented the prayer.  You have read the prayer.  Now from this 
point on you require no further references to the prayer.  You have chosen 
to submit the petitions page by page; then you also must accept the 
responsibility of not making reference to the prayer as you go along.  I 
hope that's clear. 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- It is, Mr. Speaker.  Thank you very much.  It is clear. 
 
With the same prayer, Mr. Speaker, these additional petitioners are from 
Mollard Crescent, which is in the constituency of Regina Rosemont.  In fact 
there are several here from Mollard Crescent and from other parts of the 
city of Regina.  Mr. Speaker, I'd like to at this time present this 
petition and lay it on the Table. 



 

 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Now, Mr. Speaker, again with the same prayer as previously 
referred to, I'd like to present this petition on behalf of some 20 
residents of the province of Saskatchewan.  These residents are from the 
communities including Moose Jaw, the city of Regina -- I notice there are 
several from the constituency of Regina Rosemont -- as well as the city of 
Prince Albert and one from Stony Beach, Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 
Speaker, at this time I would like to place this petition on the Table. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Mr. Speaker, an additional petition with the same prayer -- 
these petitioners are residents of the province of Saskatchewan.  They come 
from all areas of the city of Regina, including a great many from the 
constituency that I have the honour to represent, of Regina Rosemont. 
 
I notice as well, Mr. Speaker, that some are from other parts of the city, 
most of them in the north end of Regina.  And, Mr. Speaker, at this time I 
would like to place this table on behalf of these residents of Saskatchewan 
on the Table. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to at this time put forward another 
petition with the similar prayer as previously indicated.  This petition 
comes signed by residents across Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  I notice there 
are probably half of them from the city of Regina.  As well there are 
people here from the city of Saskatoon, Saskatchewan.  And at this time I 
would like to on behalf of these people place this petition on the Table. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have here another petition again from citizens of the 
province of Saskatchewan, including the city of Regina, as well as 
communities such as Esterhazy, Saskatchewan.  And, Mr. Speaker, I'd like at 
this time to present this petition.  It contains a similar prayer to the 
petitions already referred to, and I'd like to on behalf of these 
petitioners place it on the Table. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have here another petition, a petition with the similar 
prayer as that which is already indicated.  Most of these petitions, Mr. 
Speaker, come from north-west Regina.  In fact most of them are from the 
constituency of Regina Rosemont.  But I notice as well, Mr. Speaker, that 
we have a petitioner from R.R. 2 outside Saskatoon, Saskatchewan.  And as 
well there's another petitioner here from Blaine Lake, Saskatchewan.  And 
on behalf of these petitioners, Mr. Speaker, I would at this time lay this 
petition on the Table. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have here an additional petition with the similar prayer as 
the prayer already indicated.  These petitioners, Mr. Speaker, I notice 
from the names and the addresses, come from the north-west part of Regina.  
Indeed many of them are from the constituency of Regina Rosemont.  They 
number 18 . . . 17, excuse me, in number.  Mr. Speaker, on behalf of these 



 

 

petitioners I would at this time place the petition on the Table. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again I have another petition with the praying as the prayer 
already indicates.  These people are mostly from the city of Regina, 
including addresses from Connaught Crescent, Merritt Crescent, Dorothy 
Street here in Regina, north Callander Crescent, Mr. Speaker.  Many of them 
don't have their street address but do indicate that they are from the city 
of Regina.  And at this time, Mr. Speaker, I would like to place this 
petition on the Table. 
 
This is royal treatment.  Thank you very much.  Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- I'd like to, Mr. Speaker, thank the Sergeant-at-Arms for his 
kindness in delivering that petition. 
 
I have here, Mr. Speaker, another petition, this one signed by a great many 
citizens of the city of Regina.  Mr. Speaker, the names in fact exceed the 
list of spaces identified for names and addresses, and I hope, Mr. Speaker, 
that this petition will be ruled in order.  It prays for that thing which 
has already been mentioned, Mr. Speaker, the prayer that was originally 
referred to. 
 
I might say, Mr. Speaker, that besides the city of Regina, from places like 
Horace Street and Cleland Street, Froom Crescent, Read Avenue, Willoughby, 
Bruce Street, McKinley Avenue, that it also contains the signature of a 
resident from Ogema, Saskatchewan.  And at this time, Mr. Speaker, I should 
like to place this petition on the Table. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of a number of petitioners from the province of 
Saskatchewan, all of them praying for that thing which has been previously 
mentioned, most of them from the city of Regina, a great many of them in 
fact from McKinley Avenue, which just happens to be in the constituency of 
the Regina Rosemont, Mr. Speaker . . . But as well as some petitioners from 
Wascana and I guess that's it from Wascana and McKinley Avenue.  Mr. 
Speaker, on behalf of these petitioners, I should like to at this time 
present this petition before the House. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I have here a petitioner praying for that thing which has 
already been mentioned earlier in this House.  A number of petitioners, 
again most of them whom are from the city of Regina, from Empress Drive, 
from Krauss Street, from Castle Road in the south end of the city; from 7th 
Avenue North and from Whelan Drive in the north end of the city -- Mr. 
Speaker, on behalf of these particular petitioners I would at this time 
like to present the petition on the Table of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, I have here a petition with the same prayer as 
previously mentioned.  These petitioners are, Mr. Speaker, for the most 
part from the city of Regina.  The street names aren't given; just the city 
name is given, but I notice, Mr. Speaker, that as well as being from the 
city of Regina, there is a petitioner here from Kindersley, Saskatchewan.  
So on behalf of these particular petitioners, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of 



 

 

these petitioners, I should at this time like to lay this petition on the 
Table of the Legislative Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Again, Mr. Speaker, I have here a petition, Mr. Speaker, from 
residents of the province of Saskatchewan, many of whom happen to live by 
-- I see by their addresses -- in the constituency of Regina Rosemont.  
There are people here from Mollard Crescent, from Dewdney Avenue, from 
Sherwood Drive, from Clayton Street, from Dewdney Avenue again, from 8th 
Avenue, from Bowman Avenue.  Again most of these petitioners, Mr. Speaker, 
are from the city of Regina.  And at this time, on behalf of these 
petitioners, Mr. Speaker, I would like to lay this petition on the Table of 
the Legislative Assembly in the province of Saskatchewan, at this time. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I have here a petition which prays for that prayer 
already mentioned earlier on.  These people are from, mostly, from the city 
of Regina, Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, although I do note that there is a . 
. . one of the petitioners is from the rural community of Grand Coulee.  As 
I said earlier, most of them however are from the city of Regina; no 
addresses given.  So at this time on behalf of these petitioners, Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to lay this particular petition on the Table of the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have here a petition for the most part representing 
residents of the city of Regina, and in fact from the constituency of 
Regina Rosemont, although some are from the constituency of Regina North 
West.  As well, Mr. Speaker, I notice that besides from Regina with 
addresses like . . . a great many of them from Coldwell Road and Pasqua 
Street, Crowe Street, there's also several petitioners from the city of 
Saskatoon, from Gladmer Park in that fine city.  On behalf of these 
particular petitioners, Mr. Speaker, I should at this time like to lay this 
petition on the Table of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have here a petition whose prayer is similar to that already 
mentioned.  Mr. Speaker, these petitioners however come from . . . not from 
the city of Regina but from -- judging from the signatures -- in and about 
the city of Moose Jaw, Saskatchewan, including petitioners from 4th Avenue 
North, Ominica Street, Athabasca Street West, Riverhurst, 4th Avenue, 
Grandview, and Stadacona East.  Mr. Speaker, on behalf of these petitioners 
it's indeed a privilege and an honour to present this petition, lay it on 
the Table of the province of Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I have here another petition whose prayer is similar to 
that already indicated.  These people, however, come from a number of 
communities in the province of Saskatchewan.  There are some from the city 
of Regina, from Stinson Avenue, from Elphinstone Street, from Graham Road, 
from 23rd Avenue, from East Phaneuf Crescent, Lorimer Crescent.  But I 
notice as well, Mr. Speaker, that there are petitioners from the 
communities of Balgonie and from Lumsden and from the community of Kendal, 
Saskatchewan.  So on behalf of these petitioners, Mr. Speaker, I would at 



 

 

this time lay this petition on the Table of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I have here a petition signed by a great many residents 
of the province of Saskatchewan.  These petitioners pray for those things 
which have already been mentioned earlier, Mr. Speaker.  Every one of these 
petitioners however, Mr. Speaker, come from the constituency of Indian 
Head-Wolseley, from the community of Broadview.  And I might say, Mr. 
Speaker, that on behalf of these 20 petitioners from the community of 
Broadview, I shall at this time lay it on the Table of the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have here a petition signed by a great many residents of the 
city of Regina, praying for that which has already been mentioned in the 
prayer as earlier read.  These petitioners come from the north-east part of 
the city of Regina, including McTavish Street, Uplands, Normandy Avenue, 
Garnet Street, Dolphin Bay, Laubach Crescent.  In fact there's several from 
Laubach Crescent and Sturby Place.  Mr. Speaker, at this time on behalf of 
these people, these petitioners, I should like to place this petition on 
the Table of the Legislative Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have here a petition whose prayer is similar to the one 
mentioned earlier on.  Again this petition comes primarily from the city of 
Regina, from Pasqua Street, and McCallum Avenue, Assiniboine, the 4100 
block of McTavish, and so on.  And I notice, Mr. Speaker, that as well 
however there are signatures from the communities of Yorkton, Saskatchewan, 
as well as Springside, Saskatchewan.  So on behalf of these petitioners, 
Mr. Speaker, I would place this petition on the Table of the Legislative 
Assembly at this time. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have here a petition that I am hoping that will be 
ruled admissible.  Its prayer is similar to that which has been previously 
referred to and, Mr. Speaker, however the petition is in two parts.  One 
part of course contains the regular format and it represents petitioners 
primarily from the city of Regina, from Shannon Road and Andre Avenue and 
Athol Street and Retallack Street. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, there's an additional sheet attached to this petition 
and it represents people, not just from the city of Regina -- although I 
notice they're from Wells Street and Kings Street and Atkinson Street and 
Cornwall Street and Dewdney Avenue and Borden -- but as well, Mr. Speaker, 
from the communities of Moose Jaw, Saskatchewan, and from Odessa, 
Saskatchewan.  And as well I notice there is one signature here from 
Rouleau, Saskatchewan.  So at this time, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of these 
petitioners, I should like to present this petition and lay it on the Table 
at this time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have here a petition signed by a great many residents of the 
city of Saskatchewan . . . or city of Regina, Saskatchewan, from areas of 
the city all across the city including Dewdney Avenue and Kiev Bay, 
Montague Street, Argyle, Princess, Orchard Crescent, Dutton Avenue, 
Lockwood Road.  As well, Mr. Speaker, I notice that this petition is also 
signed by a resident of Rouleau, Saskatchewan.  So on behalf of these 
petitioners, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to lay this petition on the Table at 



 

 

this time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have here a petition signed by residents of the province of 
Saskatchewan indicating by way of the prayer, that thing which we've 
already mentioned earlier.  These petitioners, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
city of Moose Jaw, Saskatchewan.  And I say that they've indicated their 
community, Mr. Speaker, as Moose Jaw, however only several of them have 
indicated the street.  They're some from 8th Avenue North West and in fact 
there's three or four petitioners from 8th Avenue North West in that city.  
So on behalf of these petitioners, Mr. Speaker, I would at this time like 
to present this petition to the Legislative Assembly and lay it on the 
Table. 
 
 DI have here, Mr. Speaker, another petition whose prayer is similar to 
that as previously mentioned.  These petitioners, Mr. Speaker, looks like 
they're all from the city of Moose Jaw.  They include petitioners who live 
at Grandview, the Trans-Canada Trailer Court, Hastings, Normandy Drive, 
Arlington Drive, and so on.  So on behalf of these particular petitioners, 
Mr. Speaker, I would at this time like to lay this petition on the Table of 
the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have here a petition signed by residents of the province of 
Saskatchewan with a prayer which is similar to that which has already been 
mentioned.  These petitioners, Mr. Speaker, represent a number of 
communities from the province of Saskatchewan.  I notice that there are 
petitioners from Queen Crescent in the city of Moose Jaw, Hall Street West, 
as well as a number of others who've just indicated their community, and 
some petitioners who've indicated that they live in the city of Regina.  
So, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of these residents of the province of 
Saskatchewan, I should at this time like to present this petition and lay 
it on the Table of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I have here a petition primarily signed by residents of 
the city of Moose Jaw whose prayer is similar to that of the petitions 
presented somewhat earlier here.  I notice as well, Mr. Speaker, that 
besides living on Hochelaga in Moose Jaw, that there are petitioners from 
the city of Saskatoon as well as a petitioner from Marquis, Saskatchewan.  
So on behalf of these petitioners, Mr. Speaker, I have the honour to place 
this petition on the Table of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, again I have a petition signed by residents of the 
province of Saskatchewan, in this case all of whom are resident in the city 
of Regina.  They're praying for that thing which has been previously 
mentioned.  These petitioners live on Acadia Drive, Rae Street, Cameron 
Crescent, as well as other places in the city of Regina, Mr. Speaker.  So 
on behalf of these petitioners, I would like to at this time place this 
petition on the Table of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Mr. Speaker, I have here a petition from petitioners who are 
residents of the province of Saskatchewan, who are praying for that thing 
which has been previously mentioned.  Mr. Speaker, most of these 



 

 

petitioners, judging from their address, are from the city of Regina.  They 
include people who live at Howell Drive, Reed Avenue -- which is in the 
constituency of Regina Rosemont -- Cannon Street, Lawson Street.  I notice 
there's people from McCallum Avenue as well as James Crescent.  So on 
behalf of these people, Mr. Speaker, I would like to present this petition 
and lay it on the Table of their Legislative Assembly.  Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, I have here a petition which is signed by residents of 
the province of Saskatchewan, most of whom have indicated that they live in 
the city of Regina.  The addresses include Montague Street, Castle Road, 
North West Avenue, Athol Street, Regina Avenue, Angus Street, Parliament 
Avenue.  Mr. Speaker, these people pray . . . their prayer is similar to 
that which has already been mentioned earlier.  And on behalf of these 
petitioners, Mr. Speaker, at this time I would like to . . . it's my honour 
to present this petition and lay it on the Table of the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have here another petition whose prayer is similar to 
petitions which have been presented earlier.  These petitioners however, 
Mr. Speaker, are not from the city of Regina, but for the most part are 
from the area of Prince Albert and district.  I notice, Mr. Speaker, for 
example, one of the petitioners comes from Birch Hills as well as the 
others from the city of Prince Albert and the surrounding areas.  Mr. 
Speaker, these people pray for that thing which has been previously 
mentioned, and on behalf of these petitioners, Mr. Speaker, it's my honour 
to present the petition on their behalf and lay it on the Table of the 
Legislative Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, I have a different petition whose prayer is similar to 
that which has been mentioned earlier.  These petitioners, Mr. Speaker, 
come from the Prince Albert area.  I notice that there are residents of 
Riverside Drive.  As well, Mr. Speaker, there are also residents in the 
outlying area of Prince Albert.  I notice that they are from R.R. 5 and 
Site 25, and they're also from the communities of Shellbrook, Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So on behalf of these petitioners, I would at this time find it an honour 
to lay this petition on the Table in the Legislative Assembly in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have here a different petition whose prayer is similar to 
that which has been previously referred to.  These petitioners, Mr. 
Speaker, don't come from the city of Regina but they do come from the 
northern part of our province. 
 
I notice there are several petitioners here from 28th Street in Prince 
Albert, 13th Street West in Prince Albert, 32nd Street West in Prince 
Albert.  And as well, Mr. Speaker, from outlying areas of Prince Albert, 
from R.R. 2 as well as several petitioners from Spiritwood, Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker.  So on behalf of these people who have exercised their 
democratic right to petition the legislature, I lay this petition on the 
Table of the legislature for them at this time. 



 

 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have here again a petition which . . . a different 
petition but with a similar prayer.  These petitioners come again from the 
northern part of Saskatchewan.  There are several signatures here from 
Prince Albert, from 8th Street East in Prince Albert, as well as a 
petitioner from Debden, Saskatchewan.  And, Mr. Speaker, I notice that at 
this time I'd like to place this petition on the Table on behalf of these 
people who are exercising their democratic right to petition the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have here another petition, a different one but with a 
similar prayer to that which has already been mentioned.  These petitioners 
come from the northern part of Saskatchewan.  I notice that a great many of 
them are from the community of Prince Albert, although, Mr. Speaker, I do 
see some petitioners here from outside.  There's for example a signature 
from one of the residents of the province, from Holbein, Saskatchewan.  
And, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of these petitioners, I would at this time find 
it an honour to lay this petition on the Table of the Legislative Assembly 
of the province of Saskatchewan.  Thank you. 
 
(1500) 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, I have here a petition signed by a great many residents 
of the northern part of our province.  These petitioners come from the 
Prince Albert area.  I notice that some of them live on 1st Avenue East, in 
fact a great many of them live on 1st Avenue East in the city of Prince 
Albert.  As well, Mr. Speaker, I noticed that a great many come from 
Northcote in the Prince Albert district.  And so on behalf of these 
petitioners, Mr. Speaker, I would at this time find it an honour to lay 
this petition on the Table of the Legislative Assembly of the province, as 
these people have exercised their democratic right to do so. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have here another petition.  Again this petition is from the 
north part of our province, signed by a great many residents of 
Saskatchewan.  In fact the signatures exceed the spaces allocated to that.  
Mr. Speaker, these residents, in fact almost to a person, come from 1st 
Avenue East in the city of Prince Albert.  A quick tally indicates that 
there are some 23 or 24 residents of 1st Avenue East in Prince Albert.  
They pray for that thing which has already been mentioned earlier on, Mr. 
Speaker.  And so on behalf of these residents of 1st Avenue East in the 
city of Prince Albert, I would like to lay their petition on the Table of 
the Legislative Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, I have here a different petition but with a similar 
prayer as referred to earlier.  These petitioners, Mr. Speaker, come from 
the northern part of our province.  Some of them are from the community of 
Prince Albert but I noticed that there are petitioners here from Meath 
Park, Duck Lake, Tweedsmuir, Wakaw, and Christopher Lake.  And, Mr. 
Speaker, these petitioners have taken the opportunity to fill in not only 
the spaces indicated to them, but the other side of the petition as well.  
And I hope that this will be in order.  These petitioners as well, Mr. 
Speaker, as well as coming from Prince Albert, also come from the 
communities of Norquay, Emma Lake, and St. Louis. 



 

 

 
So on behalf of these petitioners, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to at this time 
put their petition and lay it on the Table of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have here a different petition but with a similar prayer to 
that which has already been mentioned earlier on.  These petitioners, a 
great many who appear to be senior citizens and residents of the province 
of Saskatchewan, come from the northern part of our province.  They appear 
to come from around the Prince Albert area. 
 
I notice here that there is, for example, in the Olive Diefenbaker Drive in 
the city of Prince Albert; Elmwood Place; 13th Street West.  As well, Mr. 
Speaker, from outside the city of Prince Albert there's some who are coming 
from rural route areas, as well as Bliss Crescent. 
 
And so on behalf of these petitioners who have taken the time to exercise 
their democratic right to petition the Legislative Assembly, I should like 
at this time to place this petition on the Table of the Legislative 
Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have here a petition, a different petition with a similar 
prayer to that which has already been mentioned.  These petitioners, Mr. 
Speaker, again come from the northern part of our fine province.  Most of 
the signatures or the communities indicated include Prince Albert, R.R. 5, 
the city of Prince Albert, as well as the community of Christopher Lake. 
 
So on behalf of these petitioners, Mr. Speaker, who have taken the time to 
exercise their democratic right, I would at this time like to place this 
petition on the Table of the Legislative Assembly of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have here, sir, another petition, this one again coming from 
the north part of our province.  Now the people who have signed the 
petition are praying for that thing which has been referred to earlier on 
here in this Legislative Assembly. 
 
These petitioners, Mr. Speaker, come again mostly from the community of 
Prince Albert, judging from their indication of where they live.  But I 
notice, Mr. Speaker, that there are also petitioners from the community of 
Christopher Lake as well as the city of Saskatoon. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of these petitioners who've taken the time to 
exercise the democratic right to petition the Legislative Assembly, I would 
at this time like to place this petition on the Table of the legislature of 
the province of Saskatchewan.  Thank you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again I have a petition from the northern part of our 
province.  These petitioners, Mr. Speaker, most of whom are resident in the 
community of Prince Albert, pray for that thing which we have already 
mentioned somewhat earlier on today.  I notice that these petitioners lived 
on 10th Street and Lacroix, 16th Avenue.  But, Mr. Speaker, I noticed as 
well that besides being from Prince Albert, there are petitioners here from 
St. Louis, Saskatchewan; from Canwood, Saskatchewan; and from Christopher 



 

 

Lake, Saskatchewan. 
 
So on behalf of these petitioners who have exercised their democratic right 
to petition the Legislative Assembly of our province, Mr. Speaker, I should 
at this time like to place this petition on the Table.  Thank you. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have just several more petitions to present today.  The 
first of these petitions, a different petition but with the similar prayer, 
comes from the northern part of our province.  Mr. Speaker, judging from 
their addresses of the people who have petitioned this legislature, some of 
whom live on 13th Street West or the Eastview Trailer Court or 12th Street 
West, and a number of post office boxes and so on. 
 
These petitioners, Mr. Speaker, pray for that which has already been 
mentioned earlier on today.  So on behalf of these petitioners from the 
community of Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker, I should like to at this time 
place their petition on the Table of their legislature. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, I have here a petition once again from the north 
part of our province, with some exceptions.  These petitioners, Mr. 
Speaker, pray for that which has already been referred to earlier on, and I 
won't bother repeating the prayer.  Mr. Speaker, again these petitioners 
who are residents of the province of Saskatchewan, live in the community . 
. . have indicated that they live in the community of Prince Albert and 
district, with the exception of one of the petitioners, Mr. Speaker, who 
comes from the community of Plunkett, Saskatchewan.  So on behalf, Mr. 
Speaker, of these petitioners, I would like at this time to present their 
petition and place it on the Table of their Legislative Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise pursuant to rule 11 to 
present to the Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly a petition on behalf of 
many Saskatchewan residents.  These petitioners, Mr. Speaker, have signed a 
petition with . . . Actually I have two petitions.  I'll go through the one 
prayer with a number of pages and I'll read the second prayer as I get to 
it. 
 
The first one, Mr. Speaker, addresses the Hon. Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan. 
 

 The Petition of the undersigned residents of the province of Saskatchewan 
humbly sheweth: 

 That we, the undersigned, support the Saskatchewan Alliance Against Tax on 
Reading in opposition to tax on books, magazines and newspapers. 

 
It goes on to say and I quote: 
 

 We believe that a tax on reading is a tax on knowledge and information, 
and is detrimental to our society.  Traditionally books, magazines and 
newspapers in Canada have been exempt from sales taxes because Canadians 
have recognized the cultural, social, educational values of the written 
word. 



 

 

 
The prayer continues, Mr. Speaker. 
 

 The proposed provincial tax on reading will be the only one of its kind in 
Canada.  The Saskatchewan government's proposal to add a 7% provincial tax 
on top of the new 7% GST on books and periodicals will mean that readers 
in Saskatchewan will be among the highest taxed in the world. 

 We urge the Saskatchewan government NOT to tax reading materials! 
 Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Honourable Assembly may 

be pleased to urge the Provincial Government to reverse its decision to 
impose this unfair tax. 

 And as in duty bound your petitioner will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I have a petition here indicating that prayer, and the people 
who have signed this petition reside in Gronlid, they reside in Lumsden, 
they reside in the community of Southey, as well as in the community of 
Regina.  They have asked me to present on their behalf this petition, both 
urban and rural residents co-operating and uniting to sign this petition, 
Mr. Speaker, to support the prayer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition with the same prayer from residents of 
the province of Saskatchewan residing in Balgonie, in Esterhazy, in 
Rouleau, in Craven, and in Regina.  I have residents living on Brown 
Street, on Wheeler Crescent, which is in the constituency of Regina North 
West; Merlin Crescent, 6th Avenue North, Oakview Drive in the North Albert 
riding, Broad Street North, Sangster Boulevard, Kennedy Crescent, Rochdale 
Boulevard, and Symons Place, Matheson Crescent, all four of which are in 
Regina North West; Garnet Street, Angus Boulevard, and Lawrence Drive.  
It's my pleasure to present on their behalf, Mr. Speaker, this petition. 
 
I have another petition, Mr. Speaker, from residents of Wilcox, 
Saskatchewan in the riding of Qu'Appelle-Lumsden; and from residents of 
Regina who reside on the streets of Rochdale Boulevard, Bowman Avenue, 
Argyle Street, Sangster Boulevard; Burgess, which is in my constituency; 
Fort Street; Church Drive, which is in my constituency; as well as from the 
communities of Kipling, Saskatchewan and Broadview, Saskatchewan. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, both rural and urban residents joining in unity in 
support of this petition.  I'm pleased to present to the Assembly on their 
behalf, that petition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition signed by residents from Nokomis, 
Saskatchewan and from Lumsden, Saskatchewan and from the community of 
Regina Beach.  As well, Mr. Speaker, from many addresses in the city of 
Regina -- Montague Street, Argyle Street, 14th Avenue, McGuiness Crescent, 
Bond Street, Ballantyne, Louise Crescent. 
 
In my constituency the following people have signed it: McCarthy Boulevard; 
they reside on Bard Crescent, also on the street of Rochdale Boulevard, and 
Lee-Grayson Crescent.  Also a resident, Mr. Speaker, from Buena Vista, 
Saskatchewan, which is just along the beaches.  And of course, residents 
from Ghandi Bay and Seymour Crescent, the latter being in the constituency 
of Regina North West. 



 

 

 
Mr. Speaker, it's my honour to present on their behalf this petition to the 
Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition which was signed by residents of 
Saskatchewan who live on Chase Crescent, Cavendish Street, Lorne Street 
North, Montague, Lorimer Crescent which is again in my constituency, 5th 
Avenue North, Shooter Drive, Fuhrmann Crescent, again in Regina North West, 
Lorne Street, Black Drive, Victoria Avenue, Sherwood Drive, Marshall 
Crescent and Trifunov Crescent, as well as citizens, Mr. Speaker, from the 
communities of Wolseley, Saskatchewan; from Whitewood, Saskatchewan; from 
Pilot Butte, from  
 DFindlater, from Lumsden, and from Govan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to present on their behalf this petition, both on 
behalf of the urban and rural constituents who live in Saskatchewan.  Thank 
you. 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition with the said prayer signed by 
residents of Sedley, Saskatchewan; residents of Lumsden, residents of 
Bethune, and residents of Craven, as well as some residents from the city 
of Regina, both from the constituency represented by the Minister of Human 
Resources and from constituents in Regina North West. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these residents, both urban and rural, have united their 
position in opposition . . . or in support of the prayer which I read 
earlier.  And it's my pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to present to the Assembly 
this petition on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition which list residents of Saskatchewan 
residing in Yorkton, in Kamsack, and in Veregin.  Mr. Speaker, as well I 
believe one or two or these individuals reside on one of the Indian 
reserves near Kamsack.  And they, Mr. Speaker, have signed this petition in 
support of the prayer.  And it is my honour and privilege to present this 
petition to the Assembly so that their ancient and historic rights of being 
heard in this Assembly can be completed.  Thank you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition signed by residents of Kamsack and 
Preeceville primarily.  Mr. Speaker, they are residents from the north-east 
part of the province in the constituency of Pelly who have signed this 
petition in support of the prayer.  And according to their ancient historic 
right, it is my privilege and honour to present to the Assembly on their 
behalf, their prayer.  Thank you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition signed by many residents of Kamsack, 
from residents of Keeseekoose Reserve, which is near Kamsack I understand, 
as well as the community of Veregin, which has a lot of historical 
experience, I guess, in the last number of years in Saskatchewan.  And, Mr. 
Speaker, it's my pleasure to present this petition on their behalf.  These 
residents support the prayer that was referred to earlier. 
 



 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have another petition with a different prayer on it, and I 
have many pages I'd like to present.  This petition is addressed as 
follows, and here is the prayer.  And I quote: 
 

 To the Honourable the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan in legislature 
assembled the petition of the undersigned residents of the province of 
Saskatchewan humbly sheweth that the Provincial Government does not have a 
mandate from the people of Saskatchewan to impose the major tax increase 
which would result from its proposed provincial GST. 

 
 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Honourable Assembly may 

be pleased to urge the Provincial Government to stop the provincial GST 
until the people of the province have an opportunity to pass judgement on 
it in a provincial election.  And as in duty bound your petitioners will 
ever pray Mr. Speaker. 

 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Mr. Speaker, these residents are exercising their ancient 
and traditional right to petition the Assembly.  They come from the 
community of Regina and from Saskatoon.  They reside on Montague Street, 
Grant Drive, which is in the south end of town, McTavish, which is in the 
central part of town, Montague, and Lakeview district, from Braemar 
Crescent in Saskatoon, Tobin Crescent, 9th Street East, Schweitzer Drive, 
Angus Boulevard, Hillsdale Street, Cross Place, Habkirk Drive, Cameron 
Crescent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it's my privilege to present to this Assembly this petition 
signed by those individuals residing in the province of Saskatchewan.  
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition signed by residents who reside in the 
communities of Craven, who reside along R.R. 3, and who reside in Regina 
and Saskatoon. 
 
These citizens, both urban and rural, are very supportive in their unity 
with respect to this petition.  They live in districts such as Wood 
Crescent, Patterson Drive, Argyle Street, Williston Drive, which is in the 
Regina North West constituency, Sangster Boulevard, Elphinstone Street, 
Russel Bay, Parkwood, Cameron, Sangster, King Street, Sherwood Drive again, 
Bole bay, Houston Road, Pasqua Street, and Marquis Crescent.  I am pleased 
to present on their behalf, Mr. Speaker, this petition. 
 
Another petition that I have, Mr. Speaker, is signed by it looks like 
almost all of the residents of Westgate Avenue and as well from a person 
from Moose Jaw who lives on Grandview.  And, Mr. Speaker, these individuals 
have asked us to present this petition on their behalf and I'm pleased to 
table this petition, Mr. Speaker, this afternoon on their behalf. 
 
I have another petition, Mr. Speaker, signed by residents of Saskatchewan 
who reside in Regina, mostly from L'Arche Crescent and Gordon Road.  I am 



 

 

pleased to table in the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, this petition on their 
behalf. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition signed by these residents of 
Saskatchewan who support the prayer which I read out earlier.  These 
residents live, Mr. Speaker, on Thornton Avenue, and I note that almost all 
the signatures here live on Thornton Avenue, consecutive addressed numbers 
I believe, so it seems that there's unanimity on Thornton Avenue and from 
Habkirk Drive as well, Mr. Speaker.  I am pleased to present to the 
Assembly on their behalf their ancient right to petition the Assembly.  
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition which is signed by several residents 
of the province of Saskatchewan.  These individuals appear to be residing 
in Regina.  They live on King Street in the south end of town, Heritage 
Place, Lorne Street North, Lindsay Street, Turgeon Crescent, Victoria 
Avenue, Hill Avenue and Lakeview Avenue and Cowburn Crescent, Mr. Speaker.  
I am pleased to present to the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan on 
their behalf this petition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition which I wish to present this 
afternoon.  This petition is signed by many residents of Regina as well as 
residents from Pilot Butte.  These individuals, Mr. Speaker, reside in the 
northern part of . . . central northern part of Regina as well as in the 
south end and the south-east end.  They'd be of interest to the government 
members opposite, I'm sure, who represent those two districts.  Mr. 
Speaker, it is my pleasure to present to this Assembly on their behalf this 
petition which supports the prayer mentioned earlier.  Thank you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition signed by residents of the province of 
Saskatchewan who reside in Saskatoon, who reside in Clavet, Saskatchewan, 
who reside in Vanscoy, and who reside in Colonsay.  Colonsay's a great 
place; I once spoke there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is presented to this Assembly through the 
opposition.  It is our honour to do so.  Again we see urban and rural 
residents uniting in support of the prayer aforementioned.  It's my honour 
to present this and table this in the Assembly. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- You're eradicating the urban-rural split here, John. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Exactly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition which basically eradicates the 
urban-rural split by having residents of Saskatchewan from the following 
number of communities:  the city of Saskatoon; the town of Watrous; the 
community of Eston, Saskatchewan, which is located in Kindersley 
constituency; the community of Vanscoy; the community of Humboldt; and the 
community of Hawarden -- that's spelled H-a-w-a-r-d-e-n. 
 
And these residents, Mr. Speaker, have again united both urban and rural 
residents in supporting the petition, in supporting the prayer.  It is 
certainly my privilege to present the Assembly and table this petition on 



 

 

their behalf. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition which is signed by many residents of 
the city of Saskatoon, and one which will be of interest to my colleague, 
the member from Athabasca, from La Loche.  We have residents from both 
central Saskatchewan and northern Saskatchewan uniting, Mr. Speaker, in 
support of this petition.  The question has been asked as to location -- it 
just says Saskatoon -- but it's my pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to present on 
their behalf from the residents of Saskatoon and from the community of La 
Loche this petition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Mr. Speaker, I have other petitions here.  This particular 
one is signed by residents of the city of Saskatoon; residents of the city 
of Regina; from Whitewood, Saskatchewan; from Turtleford, Saskatchewan, 
which is a constituency which is not represented in this Assembly at the 
moment; and from Cabri, Saskatchewan.  Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure on 
behalf of both urban and rural residing in these communities to support 
their ancient and historic right by presenting on their behalf this 
petition in the Assembly today.  Thank you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another petition I have is signed by many residents of the 
community of Saskatoon; from Demaine, Saskatchewan; and from Elbow.  These 
individuals, Mr. Speaker, have both urban and rural signed this petition in 
unity and in co-operation to support the prayer which was read earlier.  
It's my privilege, Mr. Speaker, to present on their behalf their petition 
to this Legislative Assembly, and I therefore table it for everyone's view.  
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition from residents of the city of 
Saskatoon; from residents of Kamsack; from residents of Allan, 
Saskatchewan, where there is a potash mine; and from residents of the city 
of Regina.  I see there's even one from my constituency on Mowat Crescent. 
 
Some of these residents live on Waterloo, on Reid Road, Kingsmere, 
Temperance, Cairns Avenue, Eastlake Avenue, Meglund Place, Christopher 
Lane, apparently, 109th Street, Main Street, Saskatoon, McKercher Drive, 
Sylvian Way, Brabant Place, East Place, and 15th Street East.  The 
residents of Regina, Saskatoon, Kamsack, and Allan have united again, Mr. 
Speaker, in signing this petition.  It's my honour to present it on their 
behalf.  Thank you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition here signed by residents of Saskatoon; 
residents of Colonsay, Saskatchewan; and residents of Wollaston Lake, which 
is located in the riding of Cumberland in northern Saskatchewan.  Mr. 
Speaker, again urban, rural, and northern residents uniting in one petition 
to support the prayer.  It's my honour, Mr. Speaker, to present on their 
behalf, this petition to the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition signed by many residents from the 
communities of St. Louis, Saskatchewan; from Wakaw, Saskatchewan; and from 
Prince Albert, Saskatchewan.  Again, rural residents and urban residents, 



 

 

Mr. Speaker, uniting in support of this prayer and support of this 
petition.  It is my honour and certainly a privilege to present to the 
Assembly on their behalf this petition, and I hereby table it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition signed by many residents of the city 
of Saskatoon.  These residents live on all the crescents, on Quance Avenue, 
I believe it is, Tobin Crescent, Steeves Avenue, Skeena Crescent, Arnason 
Crescent, 115th Street East, Spinks Drive, Laurentian Drive, and Kingsmere 
Boulevard, and other locations in the city of Saskatoon.  Mr. Speaker, it's 
my honour to present on their behalf the petition which they have signed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition to present to the Assembly on behalf 
of residents of Dundurn, Saskatchewan; residents of Saskatoon; residents of 
Clavet, Saskatchewan; residents of Allan, Saskatchewan;  
 Dand residents of Creighton, Saskatchewan.  Again both urban, rural, and 
northern residents uniting in support of this petition.  Mr. Speaker, it is 
my honour and certainly a privilege to present on their behalf to the 
Assembly this petition, and I hereby table it. 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition signed by the residents of the people 
of this province, some who reside in Saskatoon, some who reside on R.R. No. 
6 in Saskatoon, some who reside in Dundurn, Mr. Speaker.  These 
individuals, both rural and urban, have united in a co-operative way to 
sign this petition and they are unanimous in their support of the prayer 
which I read earlier, Mr. Speaker.  It is my honour and privilege to 
present on their behalf to the Assembly their signatures on this petition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition signed by many residents of the 
province of Saskatchewan.  These individuals reside in the community of 
Aberdeen, Saskatchewan; in the city of Saskatoon; and the community of 
Outlook, Saskatchewan.  All individuals again from rural and urban 
districts support the petition unanimously and are asking us to present on 
their behalf to this Assembly their signatures so that their ancient 
historic right is fulfilled.  Thank you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition signed by residents of the people of 
this province, residents of the province of Saskatchewan.  They reside in 
Regina, Saskatchewan.  They live on mostly Argyle Road, and there's one 
from Selby Place which is located in the constituency of Regina North West, 
and the Argyle Road or the south end of the city.  It's my privilege, Mr. 
Speaker, to present on their behalf this petition to the Assembly of the 
province of Saskatchewan.  Thank you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition to present to this Assembly on behalf 
of residents living in the communities of both Saskatoon and Allan, 
Saskatchewan, as well as residents who reside on R.R. No. 5.  I'm not sure 
where that is, somewhere around the city of Saskatoon, an acreage I 
presume.  Mr. Speaker, it's my honour to present on their behalf both urban 
and rural constituents uniting in this petition to the Assembly.  Thank 
you. 
 



 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have another petition signed by many residents of the city 
of Saskatoon and from the community of Hanley, Saskatchewan.  These 
residents, urban and rural, have united in signing this petition, Mr. 
Speaker, in support of the prayer which I mentioned earlier.  They've asked 
us to present to the Assembly on their behalf, their signatures with 
respect to the petition, and I hereby table it this afternoon.  Thank you. 
 
According, Mr. Speaker, to the ancient historic right of citizens of this 
province, I present another petition of residents of the province of 
Saskatchewan who reside in Kenaston, Saskatchewan, as well as Saskatoon. 
These individuals . . . as well as Prince Albert.  I guess there's another 
location there.  In Saskatoon the residents live on Chaben Place, on 
Sylvian Crescent, on Delaronde Road, 5th Avenue North, Catherwood Avenue, 
Acadia Drive, Kingsmere, 113th Street, Maple -- I believe it is.  And, Mr. 
Speaker, they have both rural and urban united in support of this petition 
and believe that they hope the government has some response to this, and I 
place it on the Table.  Thank you very much. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition which I'd like to present to the 
Assembly on behalf of residents of Saskatchewan who reside in basically 
Regina, White City, Saskatoon.  Mr. Speaker, the residents of Regina live 
on Quinn Drive, on Rodenbush, which is in the Uplands district I believe, 
on Garnet Street, the 3700 block on the south end of town.  I'm not sure of 
the . . . it looks like Wakaw Court in Saskatoon, Arbor Grove Drive in 
Regina, Blackfoot Drive in Regina, Hatton Crescent in Regina, Bothwell 
Crescent in Regina, Albert Street -- and it's signed Humpty's Family 
Restaurant -- and McCaul Crescent, which is located in the constituency of 
Regina North West, which I represent.  The 9 block McIntosh, Robinson 
Street, Bayda Crescent, and Atkinson Street -- Mr. Speaker, it appears 
these residents are from all over the city of Regina.  It is my honour and 
privilege to present on their behalf their petition in unity, both urban 
and rural, in support of this prayer.  Thank you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to present the following petition to the 
Assembly signed by some residents who reside in the constituency of Regina 
North West.  These individuals actually came to my constituency office to 
look for a petition, and signed it, and I'm duty-bound, Mr. Speaker, and 
privileged to present on their behalf this petition which supports the 
prayer aforementioned.  Thank you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition to present to the Assembly on behalf 
of residents of the city of Regina.  They, Mr. Speaker, have asked us to 
exercise their ancient and historic right by tabling their signatures in 
support of this petition.  And, Mr. Speaker, it is my honour and privilege 
to do so.  And I therefore place this petition on the Table in the 
Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly at this very moment.  Thank you very 
much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I rise pursuant to rule 11 to present a petition to the 
Legislative Assembly on behalf of a number of Saskatchewan residents.  Mr. 



 

 

Deputy Speaker, these residents are opposed to a 7 per cent provincial tax 
on reading.  They believe this to be a tax on knowledge and information 
that is detrimental to our society.  They point out that this provincial 
tax is the only one of its kind in Canada, and they ask that the provincial 
government reverse its decision to impose this unfair tax upon Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this petition is signed by residents of Montague Street 
in Regina, Marsh Crescent in Regina, Queen Street, Elphinstone Street, and 
McCallum Avenue in Regina.  I see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that there are also 
signatures here from Nipawin, Saskatchewan, and one signature from McMaster 
Crescent in Saskatoon.  On behalf of these Saskatchewan residents, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I present this petition to this their Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have another petition here with the same prayer.  
This one is signed by residents of Robinson Street in Regina, Hillsdale 
Avenue in Regina, Massey Road in Regina.  I also see signatures here from 
Grey Street, from Angus Street, from Pine Place, and from Laval Drive in 
the city of Regina. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have a third petition here, again with the same 
prayer, this time signed by residents of College drive, Shannon Road, and 
Garnet Street in the city of Regina.  There are also signatures here from 
residents on Princess avenue, 28th Avenue, Connaught Crescent, and Rae 
Street.  And on behalf of these residents, it's my honour to present this 
petition to the Legislative Assembly on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have a new petition with a new prayer.  This petition 
is from residents of the province who are opposed to the full-scale 
provincial GST.  They believe this is an unfair tax increase which the 
Government of Saskatchewan does not have a mandate to impose upon them, and 
they ask that this tax be removed at least until such time as the people of 
the province have had an opportunity to pass judgement on it in a 
provincial election.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, it's my honour to present this 
petition on behalf of some 22 signatories from the city of Saskatoon, my 
home city, and one signatory from Invermay, Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have a second petition with the same 
prayer as the one I've just read, this one signed by residents from 
Melfort; Pleasantdale; Naicam, Saskatchewan.  The bulk of the petitioners, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, are from Melfort -- some 20 signatures from Melfort. 
 
And once again another petition with the same prayer -- this time, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, signed by a number of Saskatoon residents from both the 
east and west side of the city, including East Heights, Edinburgh Place in 
my constituency, Kelvin Avenue, Summers Place in my constituency, and 
several residents from Colonsay, Saskatchewan have also signed this 
petition.  And on their behalf I'm very pleased to present it to the 
legislature. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, again the same prayer to this petition -- it is signed 



 

 

by residents in my riding from Waterloo Crescent and Guelph Crescent, as 
well as residents from Colonsay, Saskatchewan; Melfort, Saskatchewan; and 
La Loche, Saskatchewan.  And I see one Regina signature on this petition, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker.  It's my pleasure to present it to the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have another petition here with the same mandate and 
prayer.  This one is signed by residents of Morgan Avenue in Saskatoon, 
Jackson Avenue.  I see here a number of signatures from Edmund Park in my 
riding, as well as residents of Heise Crescent and East Heights who have 
signed this petition.  It's my pleasure to present it on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have a petition with a prayer similar to those I've 
just mentioned.  It is signed by residents of Kindersley, and as well as 
residents of Moose Jaw, Saskatchewan.  I see a number of west side 
signatures here in the city of Saskatoon, and on the east side of the city 
of Saskatoon there are signatures from Easthill Avenue, Degeer Street, a 
number of signatures here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, from the Eastview 
neighbourhood of Saskatoon.  And on behalf of those residents, it's my 
pleasure to present it to the legislature. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, a number of residents from Rosthern, Saskatchewan, have 
asked me to present their concerns about this tax to the legislature, and 
this includes some 16 signatures from Rosthern as well as a signatory from 
Hague, Saskatchewan -- two signatures from Hague.  On behalf of these 
residents, I'm pleased to present the petition to the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, another petition, again with the same mandate -- 
indicating the widespread opposition of residents in the province -- signed 
by residents from Mitchell Crescent in Saskatoon, Rink Avenue in Regina, 
Empress Street and Dewdney Avenue in the city of Regina.  I also see here 
signatures from Watrous, Saskatchewan and from Montague Street in Regina.  
And on behalf of these residents, I present this petition to this their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, several petitioners have asked to have their views 
presented to the Assembly again with the same prayer.  These are residents 
of Rae Street in Regina, Lloyd Crescent in Regina, Broad Street North in 
Regina.  I also see here signatures from Kleisinger Crescent, Cambridge 
Avenue, and there's a signatory here from Weyburn, Saskatchewan.  On their 
behalf it's my pleasure to present them to the legislature. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have here another petition with the same prayer 
signed by residents from Knight Crescent, Marshall Crescent and Park Street 
in the city of Regina, expressing their opposition to this major tax 
increase.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, residents from Wascana Street, from Athol 
Street in the city of Regina, and from Demarco Drive in the city of Regina, 
have again petitioned the legislature with the same prayer in mind, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have another petition with the same prayer, 



 

 

this time from residents in the 800 block of McTavish Street in Regina, and 
the 4000 block of Montague Street in the city of Regina.  And on their 
behalf it's my pleasure to present this petition to the legislature. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have some 25 signatures here from residents primarily 
of Regina, again petitioning the legislature on the same prayer that I've 
already mentioned.  These residents are from Hanover Avenue, Atkinson 
Street, Pasqua Street -- about 15 of them are from Pasqua Street, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker.  There's also signatures here from Fairview Road and Edward 
Street in the city of Regina, expressing their concern to the Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
 DMr. Prebble: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, it's my pleasure and honour to 
present another petition to the legislature, again with the same mandate.  
This is from residents of Normanview West in Regina, Mount Royal in Regina.  
I see a number of signatures here from the Cathedral area in Regina; I 
won't go through all the street addresses.  But there are also signatures 
here from Watrous, Saskatchewan and a number of signatures from Pasqua 
Avenue in the city of Regina.  This petition actually goes on to the back, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker.  And there are petitioners here from Walter Crescent 
and Alexandra Street and Broad Street in the city of Regina.  Some 35 
signatures in all, and on their behalf it's my pleasure to present these to 
the Legislative Assembly. 
 
This is another case, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where the signatories go well 
beyond the room provided on the page -- some 38 signatures from the city of 
Regina, again expressing opposition to this tax increase.  And on their 
behalf it's my pleasure to present this petition to the legislature. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, another petition with the same prayer, signed by 
residents of Queen Street and Knight Crescent in Regina, two residents from 
Saskatoon, and one resident from rural route Regina.  On behalf of these 10 
residents, it's my pleasure to present this petition to the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have here another sheet of petitions from Regina 
residents living on 4th Avenue, Dewdney Avenue, Coventry Road in Regina, 
and King Street.  And on their behalf it's my pleasure to present it to the 
Assembly. 
 
I have, Mr. Deputy Speaker, another petition with the same prayer, signed 
by residents from Montreal Street, Victoria Avenue, and Rothwell Street, 
all in the city of Regina.  And on their behalf I present it to the 
legislature. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have here a petition signed by a number of Saskatoon 
residents from the neighbourhoods of Greystone Heights and Grosvenor Park 
in my constituency.  I also see here three or four Regina signatures, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, from Athol Street and Cameron Street.  On behalf of these 
Saskatchewan residents it's my honour to present their concerns to the 
legislature.  Again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it's the same prayer as the one 
that I've been presenting now for the last several minutes. 



 

 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have another petition here, this one signed by five 
Regina signatories, largely from the constituency of Regina Elphinstone. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have some 20 signatories here from the city of Regina 
who have all asked me to present their concern about the provincial GST.  
And on their behalf I . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  The member has read the prayer.  And on 
presentation of petitions no debate on or in relation to the same shall be 
allowed. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I will be pleased to abide 
by your ruling.  I have here another petition with the same prayer, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, signed by residents of Atkinson Street, Park Street, and 
Lockwood Road, and Dewdney Avenue in the city of Regina, as well as a 
number of residents who've just indicated their address as being the city 
of Regina.  On behalf of these 21 residents, I'm pleased to present this 
petition to the legislature. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, a number of residents from Glen Elm Court in the city 
of Regina have asked me to present a petition expressing their concerns to 
the Assembly, again with the same mandate in mind.  And on their behalf 
it's my privilege to present it to the legislature. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have another petition here with the same mandate, but 
this time signed by residents from the Premier's riding in Estevan, 
Saskatchewan, as well as from Redvers, Saskatchewan; Bienfait, 
Saskatchewan; and Weyburn, Saskatchewan.  I also see here signatures from 
Semans and from Pilot Butte, and one person in my riding from McKercher 
Drive in Saskatoon.  And on their behalf, Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure to 
present this petition to the Assembly. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- I think that's your best petition.  I think that's the 
best one you've had. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- The member for Regina Centre says that that's an important 
petition and I agree with him, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I have here another set of petitioners.  Many of these are from the 
Humboldt area, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I also have several signatures here 
from Regina.  And on their behalf I'm pleased to present it to the 
Assembly. 
 
I have here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, three more petitions that I would like to 
present.  The first is from the city of Moose Jaw, and a number of 
residents from that city have expressed their concern, Mr. Speaker, along 
the lines of the same prayer that I've indicated earlier.  And on behalf of 
these Moose Jaw residents, I'm delighted to present their concerns to the 
legislature in the hope that the government would listen to their prayer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

Mr. Prebble: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have here . . . My colleagues are 
urging me on here, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I want to say that I have a number 
of signatures from Rothwell Street in the city of Regina, also from Lacon 
Street and Empress Street -- some 20 signatures in all from people again 
expressing concern along the lines of the prayer that I've already 
mentioned. 
 
And one final petition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that it's my privilege to 
present this afternoon on behalf of residents in Sedley, Saskatchewan, as 
well as some 17 Regina signatories.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, on their behalf I 
want to express their concern in opposition to the Provincial GST.  And on 
their behalf it's my pleasure to present this petition to the Assembly, and 
to conclude the presentation of my petitions this afternoon.  Thank you 
very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I too have a number of 
petitions to lay on the Table today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the first of the petitions I will lay on the Table today are 
signed by residents of our province who are exercising their democratic 
right to petition their legislature, and I count it my responsibility as an 
MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) to present their petitions.  
They've taken the time to sign these petitions, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
These petitions come under the prayer . . . these people have signed under 
the prayer which reads: 
 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Honourable Assembly may 
be pleased to urge the Provincial Government to stop the provincial GST 
until the people of the province have had an opportunity to pass judgement 
on it in a provincial election. 

 
And the first number of petitions that I will present today, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, all follow that basic prayer. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the very first petition I present, I'm honoured to 
present on behalf of citizens and residents of my own community of Moose 
Jaw, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  And as I see the names, I recognize some of the 
names who have signed this petition, and I recognize they come from all 
corners of the city of Moose Jaw.  It's my privilege to present this 
petition on behalf of these residents of the city of Moose Jaw. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, this petition I believe has been signed 
entirely by residents of this city of the home of the Legislative Assembly, 
the city of Regina.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don't know Regina well, but I 
see that the addresses here are from places like Lockwood Road, Chase 
Crescent, Hudson Drive, Victoria Avenue, 19th Avenue, Noonan Road, Halifax 
Street, and McKercher Drive -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, all of these petitioners 
from the city of Regina.  It's my responsibility and privilege to lay their 



 

 

names on the Table of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are signatories on this petition under the same prayer 
from both urban and rural Saskatchewan -- signatures here from communities 
like Loreburn, Saskatchewan; a community to the west and north of Moose 
Jaw, the community of Tugaske.  And, Mr. Speaker, I believe signatures from 
the city of Saskatoon, from addresses in Saskatoon like Lansdowne Avenue, 
Wiggins Avenue, Clark Crescent, Coldspring Avenue, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
which I believe is in Saskatoon; Nesbitt Crescent, and again another rural 
resident from Orkney, Saskatchewan. 
 
There are signatures here from Wilson Crescent, Glasgow Street, Bronson 
Crescent, Cameron Avenue, Whiteswan Drive -- which I believe is in 
Saskatoon -- Pinehouse Drive and again from Whiteswan Drive, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker.  It's my privilege to lay this petition on the Table.  Thanks. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I may need the assistance of some of my colleagues here.  
I believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, these signatories come again from the city 
of Saskatoon.  I recognize 8th Street East in Saskatoon, Davies Road, Simon 
Fraser Crescent, Reid Road, Hamilton Place, Tucker Crescent, Grosvenor 
Crescent, Cairns Avenue, Munroe Avenue, Stillwater Drive, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and again, Coldspring Crescent.  I assume these are from many 
areas of the city of Saskatoon. 
 
These signatories unite in signing this petition.  It's my privilege, on 
their behalf, to present this to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the number of petitions that I've 
presented, this one is in some ways unique.  I believe all of these 
residents of Saskatchewan who have signed the petition make their home in 
Saskatoon.  One of these signatories lives on Oakview Drive.  But, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, everyone of the other signatures on this petition make 
their home on Lloyd Crescent, which I believe is in Saskatoon -- everyone 
of these petitioners from Lloyd Crescent in the city of Saskatoon.  It's my 
privilege on behalf of these residents of Lloyd Crescent and Oakview Drive 
to lay this petition on the Table. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, this is indeed unique.  With the exception of 
a few signatures who make their home on Higgins Bay in Saskatoon, again 
every other signature on this petition is from a resident of Lloyd 
Crescent.  Another petition, Mr. Speaker, almost entirely signed by the 
residents of Lloyd Crescent in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, and it is my 
privilege to lay this petition on behalf of residents of Lloyd Crescent, 
again in Saskatoon, with some from Higgins Bay, on the Table of the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 



 

 

 
Mr. Calvert: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I have yet further signatures from Lloyd 
Crescent in Saskatoon, yet another petition with signatures from Lloyd 
Crescent in Saskatoon with, as I look over the list, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
with two exceptions, Mr. Speaker, and one signature from Upland Drive.  
And, Mr. Speaker, I'm not violating the rules of the Assembly here when I 
say one resident of Brockelbank Crescent.  So from Brockelbank Crescent and 
Lloyd Crescent in the city of Saskatoon, Mr. Deputy Speaker, these 
signatures, it's my privilege and responsibility to place them on the Table 
of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this petition, again under the prayer that I identified at the 
outset, is primarily from central Saskatchewan, residents of the city of 
Saskatoon, and again both rural and urban residents uniting and signing 
this petition.  Here is someone who makes her home in Elbow, Saskatchewan 
-- Elbow, Saskatchewan.  Others from Saskatoon -- Louise Avenue, Kingsmere, 
Davies Road, which I assume is also in the city of Saskatoon, who join in 
the same petition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, once more a petition signed by residents of both urban and 
rural Saskatchewan, from communities not in the near neighbourhood of one 
another actually.  A signature here from Dundurn, Saskatchewan, No. 11 
highway; someone who may be in the Dundurn area whose address is R.R. 
outside of Saskatoon, a signature here from someone who makes their home in 
Outlook, Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and others who make their home in the 
city of Saskatoon.  They too have signed this petition under the same 
prayer which I identified earlier.  Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege and 
responsibility to present their names to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that these signatories primarily make their home in 
Saskatoon; a signatory here is someone I know whose home is in Saskatoon, 
and as I look at the addresses I recognize many of them from the city of 
Saskatoon.  Here is someone from Lorne Avenue in Saskatoon, someone from 
Louise Avenue, Adelaide Street, Arlington Avenue, Sturgeon Drive.  But not 
only from Saskatoon, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a signatory on this petition makes 
her home in Viscount, Saskatchewan.  And it is my privilege and 
responsibility to present these names to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move with this petition from the city of Saskatoon 
primarily, to the city in which we meet this afternoon, the city of Regina.  
I believe all of these signatures are from residents of Regina by the 
addresses.  They're from Sunset Drive, from Lindsay, from Dale Crescent, 
from McDonald Street, from Embury, and Albert Street, Angus, Walden 
Crescent, from Robinson Street, from Fulton, and 5th Avenue -- another 20 
signatories, Mr. Deputy Speaker, under the same petition, the same prayer 
which I identified earlier. 
 
And it's my pleasure, on behalf of these residents of the city of Regina 
and with the help of the page, to place this on the Table. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we're back up and down the No. 11 Highway.  This petition, I 
believe the signatures are from in and around the city of Saskatoon.  I 
recognize Bateman Crescent, Louise Street, Anderson Crescent, Louise 



 

 

Avenue, Jackson Avenue, Cumberland Avenue, McKercher Drive.  But again, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, rural Saskatchewan and urban Saskatchewan unite in signing 
these petitions -- here a resident of the community of Allan, Saskatchewan, 
outside of Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again from both urban and rural Saskatchewan, signatures, 
another 20 signatures under the same prayer which I identified at the 
outset -- some of these, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I'm not sure of where all 
these addresses are.  I presume some are from Saskatoon.  Here is the 
signature of another resident of the community of Dundurn, south of 
Saskatoon.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, it's my privilege and responsibility to 
present this petition this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am always particularly honoured to place on the Table of the 
Legislative Assembly the signatures of residents from my own community, the 
community I share in representing with the member from Moose Jaw North, the 
city of Moose Jaw. 
 
But again, Mr. Speaker, while most of these signatures come from the city 
of Moose Jaw, while most of these people make their residence in the city 
of Moose Jaw, again there is a number of people who have signed who live 
outside the city of Moose Jaw.  Here for instance, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
someone who makes her home in Woodrow, Saskatchewan, a lovely community 
near the community of Lafleche.  These residents from Moose Jaw make their 
homes primarily in Moose Jaw North -- on Francis, on Grace, 2nd Avenue 
North West, Montgomery, on Grey Avenue, Gordon Road, and Cartier Street.  
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it's my privilege and responsibility to place this 
petition on the Table. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again primarily from the city of Moose Jaw, and this time from 
every corner of the city of Moose Jaw -- I can tell by the addresses -- 
from every corner of the city of Moose Jaw, from Hochelaga Street to 
Spadina to James Street, Clifton Avenue, Fairford Street, Avens Road, 
Oxford Street, from every corner of the city of Moose Jaw, people are 
petitioning this legislature.  But, Mr. Speaker, it's not only from the 
city of Moose Jaw -- a signature here of someone from the community of 
Davidson, a signature here of someone from the community of Tuxford, north 
of Moose Jaw.  And so it's my privilege, Mr. Speaker, to present the 
signatures of these Saskatchewan residents in petition on the Table of the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again, again from the city of Moose Jaw to join the thousands 
of others who have petitioned the legislature from the city of Moose Jaw, a 
full petition -- every one of these signatures, Mr. Deputy Speaker, from 
the city of Moose Jaw.  Mr. Speaker, again as I review the list of names, I 
see that these citizens, some of whom I know, come from all walks of life.  
There are professional people here; there are seniors; there are working 
people.  And they have united in signing the petition to this legislature, 
and it's my privilege to lay it on the Table. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, a signature on this petition that comes under the very 
same prayer as I identified at the outset of my remarks, is signed by 
someone who is perhaps a student or perhaps a resident of the community of 



 

 

Caronport, Mr. Deputy Speaker, west of Moose Jaw in the constituency of 
Thunder Creek, home of the Briercrest Bible College, Mr. Speaker.  Other 
signatures on this petition, again from the community that I am very proud 
to call home, and that's the city of Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker -- as one of 
the MLAs representing the community of Moose Jaw along with the member from 
Moose Jaw North, it is my privilege and it's our responsibility . . . our 
citizens have taken the time to voice their opinion to this Legislative 
Assembly by signing this petition, Mr. Speaker.  It's our responsibility as 
MLAs from the community of Moose Jaw to bring this petition to the House 
and present it.  I am proud to do so, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of both this 
resident of the community of Caronport and these residents of the city of 
Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I look at this petition I believe all of the signatories -- 
no, with the exception of one, with the exception of one -- all of the 
signatories on this petition make their home in the city of Saskatoon.  Mr. 
Speaker, I venture a guess, but I would assume that the signatures of this 
petition, some are seniors and some are young people, by the handwriting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, each one of these residents of Saskatchewan have signed this 
petition, have affixed their signature to this petition indicating their 
support for that petition, which I indicated at the outset.  And they've 
gone beyond to indicate in print their names so there can be no mistake 
about who they are and their intentions.  And they have gone further and 
indicated, in this case, each one has indicated their home address. 
 
And again as I look over this list of signatories, they come from every 
part of the city of Saskatoon.  Someone from Assiniboine Drive, someone who 
lives on Preston, someone who lives on Sturby Place, someone who lives on 
Estey Drive, Sylvian Way, MacDermid Crescent, Taylor Street, Main Street, 
Wiggins Avenue, Arlington, 2nd Street East, East Drive, Cairns Avenue, King 
Crescent, East Place, Porteous Crescent, all of which, I believe, Mr. 
Speaker, are home addresses in the city of Saskatoon.  There is one 
exception on this signature from someone who makes her home south of 
Saskatoon in the community of Blackstrap. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that residents from across our province, rural and 
urban, are petitioning their legislature through these petitions, and it's 
my privilege to lay this petition on the Table. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are number of petitioners on this petition again who 
make their home in and around Saskatoon.  I see a number of petitioners 
here from Grosvenor Crescent in Saskatoon.  The residents of Grosvenor 
Crescent in Saskatoon are petitioning the legislature through this 
petition, residents of Wiggins Avenue in Saskatoon; residents of Quill 
Crescent, which I assume is in Saskatoon. 
 
But then from beyond Saskatoon, residents of the community of Viscount, Mr. 
Speaker, Viscount, Saskatchewan; residents of the community of Colonsay, 
Saskatchewan -- and, Mr. Speaker, I may be making an assumption here, but 
it would be my guess that this petition we have was placed in a business 
establishment in Saskatoon.  And these residents of Viscount and Colonsay 
may well have been in Saskatoon and conducting business, and there had the 



 

 

opportunity to affix their signature to this petition petitioning this 
legislature, their legislature, with the same prayer that the others have, 
the prayer that I identified at the outset of presenting these petitions.  
Mr. Speaker, it's my privilege on behalf of these residents of Saskatoon, 
Viscount, Colonsay, and that whole Saskatoon area, to bring to this 
legislature this petition.  Thanks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again to a one, a full petition signed by residents of Moose 
Jaw.  Mr. Speaker, another petition fully signed by residents of Moose Jaw.  
Mr. Speaker, again some names that I recognize, others that I do not.  But 
all who have affixed their signature to this petition, then printed their 
name and indicated that their home is made in the city of Moose Jaw.  Now, 
Mr. Speaker, some of these have not included a street address.  Some have 
indicated only Moose Jaw, and that may well mean they live in the rural 
district surrounding Moose Jaw, because many of our rural neighbours around 
Moose Jaw, when asked for address, community, will simply indicate Moose 
Jaw, because they feel very much at home in the city of Moose Jaw.  Some 
may well be rural residents; they live in the Moose Jaw district, and 
they're proud of it.  But I do recognize some of these signatures, Mr. 
Speaker, as I indicated.  I do know they do make their home within the city 
of Moose Jaw. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest, as I have on other occasions while 
presenting petitions, that these petitions are being signed by citizens who 
share all political persuasions.  All political persuasions are represented 
in the signatures that are being presented on these petitions, Mr. Speaker.  
As one of the MLAs representing the city of Moose Jaw, it's my privilege 
and responsibility to present the signatures of these Moose Jaw residents 
who petitioned their legislature today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again I move to a petition that draws together both residents 
of rural Saskatchewan and residents of urban Saskatchewan.  Mr. Speaker, 
this petition, which is signed under the same prayer that I indicated at 
the outset, this petition has been signed by residents in Saskatoon. I 
believe Calder Crescent and Calder Avenue, Munroe Avenue, and Porteous 
Crescent are Saskatoon addresses.  But beyond the Saskatoon signatures, Mr. 
Speaker, I see on this particular petition someone who makes her home in 
Hanley, Saskatchewan. 
 
(1615) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I recognize a name on this petition, a woman who makes 
her home in Central Butte.  And I know we're certainly not reading names, 
Mr. Speaker, but this woman has played a role in the political life of the 
province, and she conducts much of her business and work out of Saskatoon, 
but her home is in Central Butte, Mr. Speaker.  She took the opportunity to 
sign this petition in Saskatoon. 
 
I am particularly honoured to present this petition with all of its names, 
and particularly this resident of Central Butte, Mr. Speaker, who I count 
to be a close friend.  So, Mr. Speaker, it is again my privilege to lay 
these signatures on the Table of the Legislative Assembly. 
 



 

 

Mr. Speaker, again a petition . . . all of the signatures on this petition, 
Mr. Speaker, do come from the city of Saskatoon.  It seems that the way it 
happens, the first person who will sign the petition seems to set the pace 
and this person indicated just Saskatoon as their community, and all the 
others followed in suit.  Each signatory of this petition again makes their 
home in Saskatoon. 
 
And again I'm guessing, Mr. Speaker, but by some of the handwriting, I 
would guess that this petition has been signed by a number of senior 
citizens who exercise their democratic right.  And they perhaps know it 
best of all, Mr. Speaker, these senior citizens who have signed this 
petition exercising their democratic right to petition their legislature, 
asking their government to heed their prayer.   
 DMr. Speaker, it's my privilege to place this petition on the Table. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased again to present a petition signed by residents 
of the city of Moose Jaw, in and around the city of Moose Jaw.  All of 
these residents I'm sure would consider Moose Jaw their home community.  I 
do recognize one signature who will be living outside the actual city 
limits, perhaps two outside the actual city limits, but I'm sure who would 
consider Moose Jaw their community, Mr. Speaker -- their home community. 
 
Again I recognize many of these names, Mr. Speaker.  They come from all 
walks of life and from every part of the city of Moose Jaw.  Mr. Speaker, 
it is my privilege and responsibility, on behalf of these residents of the 
city of Moose Jaw and district, to lay their signatures on the Table. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have three or four more petitions that I would like to place 
on the Table this afternoon.  And, Mr. Speaker, as I review these three or 
four petitions that I have remaining to present, Mr. Speaker, again they 
are all from the community of Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I look at this particular petition, I see that these 
signatories again come from every part of the city of Moose Jaw -- some 
signatures from Grandview Place, from Moose Square, Mr. Speaker -- a unique 
address in the city of Moose Jaw: Moose Square; from Connaught, from 
Caribou, Hochelaga, Vaughan Street, Hastings, Monk Avenue, 7th Avenue, 
Athabasca West, Hochelaga West, Ominica Street West, Fourth Avenue North 
West, Hochelaga Street West, Mr. Speaker.  The signatures are from both the 
constituencies of Moose Jaw North and Moose Jaw South.  And, Mr. Speaker, 
as one of the MLAs from the city of Moose Jaw, it is my privilege on behalf 
of the citizens of our city to present this petition, Mr. Speaker.  With 
the help of the page, I will do so.  Thanks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we very often in the city of Moose Jaw welcome visitors and 
shoppers from the districts surrounding Moose Jaw.  Here we have signatures 
from the community of Courval, south of Moose Jaw; signatures from the 
community of Assiniboia, again south of Moose Jaw; and then signatures of 
residents of Moose Jaw from Hastings Street, to Hochelaga, to James, to 
Hastings, Main Street North, Grafton, on Albert Street, Wood Lily Drive, 
Albert Street, a box number from Moose Jaw -- it may well be someone who 
lives in the Moose Jaw district -- Caribou Street, Athabasca Street, 
Caribou Street East.  Again, Mr. Speaker, from every corner of our 



 

 

community and from the districts surrounding Moose Jaw, the residents of 
this province petitioning their legislature under the prayer that I 
identified at the outset. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, the last prayer . . . the last petition that I 
would wish to present this afternoon.  The last one this afternoon, Mr. 
Speaker, but there are yet hundreds and thousands more to be presented in 
this legislature. 
 
Again all of these signatories from the community of Moose Jaw; many of 
them I recognize as residents of the constituency of Moose Jaw South.  They 
are from Home Street.  They're from Grandview Street, from Birch Street, 
Home Street, Hastings, Stadacona, Pine Crescent and Hochelaga Street West. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don't see a signatory here from Main Street, but I know in 
previous petitions I have presented hundred of signatories who live on Main 
Street and, Mr. Speaker, many of these Moose Jaw signatures you'd be 
interested to know, were collected in business places along Moose Jaw's 
Main Street, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it's part of my responsibility as a member representing the 
city of Moose Jaw, a member of this provincial legislature, to lay on the 
Table these signatories who join in the petition opposing the provincial 
government's goods and services tax. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Speaker, pursuant to rule 11 I rise to present a 
number of petitions and I want to read the petition into the record, and 
the petition reads as follows: 
 

 To the Honourable the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan in legislature 
assembled: 

 The petition of the undersigned residents of the province of Saskatchewan 
humbly sheweth: 

 That the Provincial Government does not have a mandate from the people of 
Saskatchewan to impose the major tax increase which would result from its 
proposed provincial GST. 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Honourable Assembly may 
be pleased to urge the Provincial Government to stop the provincial GST 
until the people of the province have had an opportunity to pass judgement 
on it in a provincial election. 

 And as in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the petitioners come from a number of addresses in the 
constituency that I represent.  I happen to know many of the people that 
have signed the petition.  We have citizens who reside on Lorne Avenue, Coy 
Avenue, Willow Street and Taylor, as well as 8th Street in the city of 
Saskatoon. 
 
These people have exercised their democratic right to present a petition 
through their elected member of the legislature to all legislators in this 
Assembly, and these petitioners are asking and urging the provincial 



 

 

government to stop the provincial goods and services tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to introduce this 
petition on behalf of all of the people living on Lorne Avenue, Willow 
Street and Taylor Street, as well as 2nd Street in the city of Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition that I want to present, and this 
petition is signed by several residents from the Weyburn constituency.  In 
fact, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance will be interested to know that 
a number of citizens living in his home town of Weyburn have exercised 
their democratic right and signed the petition opposing the goods and 
services tax. 
 
As well as citizens in Weyburn, we have people from McTaggart, as well as 
Griffin, Saskatchewan, and Radville, that have signed this petition.  These 
people are exercising their right to sign petitions in the province of 
Saskatchewan and I'm pleased to lay this particular petition on the Table. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to lay another petition on the 
Table.  These citizens come from the city of Saskatoon, and these citizens 
live on Lorne Avenue.  Once again, Mr. Speaker, they are exercising their 
democratic right to sign a petition in the province of Saskatchewan 
opposing the provincial goods and services tax.  And I'm pleased once 
again, Mr. Speaker, to lay this petition on the Table. 
 
The Speaker: -- I would like to bring the following to the hon, member's 
attention.  You have read the prayer; that is customary.  Now I should ask 
you to no longer make references to the content of the prayer as you 
present your petitions. 
 
I hope you understand what I'm asking you to do.  I've had to ask other 
members . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Thank you. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I understand exactly 
what you're saying and I want to lay some more petitions on the Table.  
These citizens once again come from the constituency that I represent.  
These citizens come from 6th Street, Kelvin Avenue, 7th Street, 3rd Street, 
East Hill, Avenue Q North, Dufferin, Maple Street, William Avenue, as well 
as 1st Street, 8th Street, and Edinburgh Place.  All of these citizens live 
in the constituency that I represent, Mr. Speaker, and these citizens have 
exercised their democratic right by signing the petition.  And I'm pleased 
to lay this particular petition on the Table, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition that I'm pleased to deliver to the 
Legislative Assembly.  These citizens have once again exercised their 
democratic right to sign a petition in the province of Saskatchewan.  These 
citizens come from the city of Saskatoon.  They live on 8th Street, 
Broadway, 4th Street, Gladmer Park, Hilliard Street, Clare Crescent, 4th 
Street, Taylor Street, Pinehouse Drive, Cumberland Avenue, Maple Street, 
William Avenue, 1st Street, and Wilson Crescent.  All of these citizens 
have exercised their democratic right.  And once again, Mr. Speaker, I'm 



 

 

pleased to lay their signatures on the Table. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition of 20 signatures that I want to 
deliver to the Legislative Assembly.  And these citizens come from Biggar, 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, some of the signatories come from Biggar.  
Biggar is the home of the first . . . one of the leaders of the New 
Democratic Party . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order, order.  Order, order.  The hon. 
member is introducing extraneous material to the petitions, and she's 
perhaps even provoking some debate.  And I would ask her to refrain. 
 
(1630) 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As well a number of the 
signatories come from the city of Saskatoon.  And I believe there are 
probably about 20 . . . or pardon me, 15 signatures, Mr. Speaker, from the 
city of Saskatoon, four signatures from Biggar, and one signature from 
Viscount, Saskatchewan.  Mr. Speaker, these people appear from their 
signatures to be senior citizens.  And I'm pleased to lay these signatures 
on the Table so that they have the opportunity to express their views on 
this matter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition that I want to lay on the Table.  
These citizens once again come from the constituency that I represent.  In 
fact I know many of the people who have signed the petition.  They come 
from Elm Street, Victoria Avenue -- it looks as though these signatures 
come out of one particular apartment block -- as well as Cumberland Avenue.  
And once again, Mr. Speaker, these citizens have exercised their democratic 
right by signing this petition, and I am pleased to lay these signatures on 
the Table. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition here and all of the people who have 
signed this particular petition come from the city of Prince Albert.  I 
believe all 20 signatories come from the city of Prince Albert.  And once 
again these citizens live on 25th Street West in P.A., 8th Street East, 4th 
Street East, 30th Street West, Conroy Place, as well as 18th Street West.  
And it looks as though we have one rural citizen of the Prince Albert 
district who's also signed this petition, Mr. Speaker.  And once again I'm 
pleased to lay this petition on the Table. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition that has been signed by citizens 
living in the Prince Albert area.  And it looks as though all of the 
signatories come from the city of Prince Albert.  Once again the 
signatories come from River Street, Grey Owl Crescent, Helm Crescent, 
Bennett Drive, 11th Street East, Bowerman Crescent, 1st Street East. 
 
Oh, Mr. Speaker, I see one signature here from Duck Lake.  As well there's 
a signature from 6th Street East in Prince Albert, McIntosh Drive, 12th 
Avenue East, Lacroix Crescent, Pereverzoff Place, 19th Street West, 17th 
Avenue East, another person from Lacroix Crescent, as well as 10th Street 
East, Mr. Speaker.  And I am pleased to lay these signatures on the Table. 
 



 

 

Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Speaker, I have another petition from the city of P.A.  
And some of the people didn't sign their addresses but many of the 
signatories did.  And once again, Mr. Speaker, these citizens come from 
River Street East, 23rd Street East, Sanderson Crescent, Branion Drive, 
23rd Street West again, Elmwood, Barton Drive, 6th Street East, McIntosh 
Drive, 13th Street West, and all of the other people didn't sign their 
address, Mr. Speaker.  But all of these citizens from the city of Prince 
Albert wanted their signatures to be presented to this House, and I'm 
pleased to be able to do that on their behalf. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Speaker, I have another petition here that I want to 
lay on the Table.  And once again, with the exception of one signatory, it 
looks as though all of the citizens -- pardon me, Mr. Speaker, two 
signatories -- all of the signatures come from the city of Prince Albert.  
These people live on 26th Street East, several people.  It looks as though 
someone walked around the block and had citizens sign.  As well it looks as 
though there has been several people in an apartment block that signed the 
petition, probably older people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As well we have citizens from Clark Place, and then we have two people from 
Spruce Home, which is a town right outside of the city of Prince Albert.  
But, Mr. Speaker, it looks as though all of these people come from a 
particular apartment block, and once again it looks as though the senior 
citizens of Prince Albert are signing this petition.  And I'm pleased to be 
able to enter these names into the record so that these people can have 
their views on this issue expressed through their legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Atkinson: -- Mr. Speaker, I have another petition that I am pleased to 
present to the legislature.  And once again all of these citizens appear to 
come from the city of Prince Albert.  In fact I recognize a few names on 
the petition.  Mr. Speaker, I believe there are 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 
10, 11, 12, 13 signatures from Prince Albert, one signatory from Saskatoon 
and one signatory from Birch Hills.  Now these people didn't sign their 
addresses so I don't know exactly where they live in the city of Prince 
Albert.  But once again I'm pleased to be able to present their signatures 
to this legislature so that they can exercise their democratic right on 
this particular petition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition here.  And once again the people 
who've signed this petition come from the city of Prince Albert.  These 
citizens come from 30th Street East, Lacroix Crescent, 15th Street West.  
One signature comes from the trailer court in Prince Albert -- I believe 
it's Brewster Trailer Court -- as well as 24th Street West, Gillmor 
Crescent, 32nd Street West.  And, Mr. Speaker, it looks as though two 
people come from the surrounding area of P.A. because they have box numbers 
in the city of Prince Albert.  And once again, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to 
present these particular signatures to the Legislative Assembly so that 



 

 

these people can exercise their democratic right in expressing their 
opinion on this petition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition from the city of Prince Albert.  As 
well, Mr. Speaker, a number of people on this petition have come from 
Shellbrook, Saskatchewan, as well as La Ronge, Saskatchewan, and Canwood, 
Saskatchewan.  And as well, Mr. Speaker, there is a person here that's 
signed from the Beardy Indian Reserve.  And, Mr. Speaker, these people once 
again are exercising their democratic right to have their views heard on 
this particular issue and I'm pleased to present their signatures to the 
Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, we're back to the city of Saskatoon.  I 
think that this petition probably was in a business because there are a 
number of different people that have signed this petition.  And they come 
from all over Saskatchewan as well as Saskatoon -- people who live on 
Preston Avenue in the city of Saskatoon, Delaronde Road, Diefenbaker, 
McMaster Crescent, as well as Arnason Crescent, 2nd Avenue West, Grant 
Street, Avenue K South, Redberry Road, Verbeke Crescent, as well as Avenue 
E, 14th Street, Munroe Avenue, 33rd Street, Douglas Crescent.  As well, Mr. 
Speaker, some people from the Lanigan area and Outlook have signed this 
petition. 
 
And once again, Mr. Speaker, I'm extremely please to be able to present 
these signatures to the Legislative Assembly so that these people can 
express their views on this issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition from the city of Saskatoon as well as 
surrounding area.  And these citizens come from all over Saskatoon and 
area.  They didn't indicate what streets they live on, but I can tell from 
some of the signatures, people I do know, live all over the city of 
Saskatoon. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, we have some out-of-town visitors that obviously 
signed the petition -- people coming from Grandora and Aberdeen.  And both 
of those centres are just outside of the city of Saskatoon.  And, Mr. 
Speaker, I'm pleased to lay these signatures on the Table for the 
government's consideration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have several more petitions that I want to present.  And 
this time, Mr. Speaker, I have a whole number of petitions from the city of 
Regina as well as surrounding area.  I note that two signatories come from 
rural route Regina and other signatories seem to come from Laird Crescent.  
It looks as though someone walked around the block and got a number of 
citizens to sign the petition.  As well we have people who live on 
Stapleford Crescent, Coldwell Road, McTavish, Whelan Drive, Rochdale, Lorne 
Street, Church Drive, 7th Avenue, 4th Avenue, 1st Avenue North, Rae Street, 
Spence Street, Hammond Road, Elmview Road, Cedar Meadow, 7th Street East, 
city of Saskatoon -- someone must have been down from the city into Regina 
and signed the petition -- as well as Radway Street, Mr. Speaker.  And once 
again I am extremely privileged as an elected member of the legislature to 



 

 

enter these signatures into the public record so that the government knows 
these people's views on this particular issue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, I have another petition that I'd like to enter into 
the record.  Once again, it looks as though all of these signatures, with 
the exception of one, come from the city of Regina.  And these people live 
on Blakeney Drive, Selby Crescent, Lakewood Drive.  Once again it looks as 
though someone may have walked around the block and had their friends and 
neighbours sign the petition, Mr. Speaker.  As well, Mr. Speaker, they come 
from Kennedy, Saskatchewan.  Once again, Mr. Speaker, I feel extremely 
privileged to be able to enter these names into the public record as a 
member of the Legislative Assembly.  These people are exercising their 
democratic right in this province to sign petitions, and I would like to 
lay these signatures on the Table. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a number of signatures from the city of Saskatoon and I 
know a lot of these people personally.   
 DAnd, Mr. Speaker, they reside in the constituency that I represent.  And 
once again, it looks as though someone went down Ewart Avenue and had their 
friends and neighbours sign the petition.  So for all the people on Ewart 
Avenue, your signatures are now being entered into the public record.  As 
well some people on 1st Street had the opportunity to sign the petition.  
And on behalf of the people I represent, because I do represent these 
people, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to be able to enter these signatures into 
the public record so that these folks can have the opportunity to put their 
views on this issue on the public record. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm now back to the city of Prince Albert and surrounding 
areas.  A number of citizens in the Prince Albert area have once again 
exercised their democratic right to sign petitions.  As well, Mr. Speaker, 
we have a number of folks from the Birch Hills area which is right outside 
of the city of P.A.  As well there's some people from the Duck Lake area 
that have signed the petition.  And, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to see that 
someone came down from Pelican Narrows to sign the petition.  They were 
obviously in Prince Albert visiting.  And I want to put their views on this 
important public issue on the record, Mr. Speaker, and I am going to do 
that as an elected member of the legislature.  So I'm pleased to lay this 
on the Table. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition from the city of Regina and it looks 
as though the folks over on Cunningham Drive have signed the petition as 
well McCusker, I think it is, Mr. Speaker.  They have obviously gone out 
and had people in that area, those two streets, sign the petition.  And, 
Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to enter their signatures onto the public record 
so that these folks have the opportunity to present their views on this 
important public issue to the legislature.  Thank you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, once again I have a petition from . . . it looks as though 
most of the signatures are from the city of Regina.  We have people living 
on Nollet Avenue, Grey Street, Church Drive.  Someone from Southey, 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, obviously was in Regina and signed the petition.  
As well we have someone living on McIntosh Street, Hodgins, once again 
someone from Ituna, Mr. Speaker, obviously into Regina for the day and had 



 

 

the opportunity to sign the petition. 
 
We have people living on Glasgow Street, Hanley Crescent, Rochdale.  Once 
again another person in from Tantalon, Saskatchewan, and they had an 
opportunity to sign the petition, 1st Avenue North, Courtney Street, Moore 
Crescent, Rochdale Boulevard, Mr. Speaker, McKinley Avenue, Empress Street, 
and Burgess Street, as well as 1st Avenue North.  All of these people, Mr. 
Speaker, are expressing their democratic right in opposition to the 
particular thing that I can't mention.  But they have signed this petition, 
Mr. Speaker, exercising their democratic right, and I'm pleased to enter 
this petition onto the public record. 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have another petition from the city of Regina.  This time 
one of these signatures, Mr. Speaker, comes from I think the member of 
Lakeview's constituency.  Atkinson Street -- I note that there's someone 
from Atkinson Street that signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, as well as 
Hanbidge Crescent, Coldwell Road, McSherry Crescent, Athol Street, Hanbidge 
Crescent once again.  It looks as though someone went through the apartment 
block, Mr. Speaker, and had different people in an apartment sign the 
petition.  And we also had obviously someone in from White City who had the 
opportunity to sign the petition, Mr. Speaker.  And I'm pleased to lay 
these signatures on the Table in order that these folks have the ability to 
express their democratic right.  Thank you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, once again I have a number of petitions from Regina.  These 
folks are expressing their democratic rights.  They've been able to sign 
the petition.  And, Mr. Speaker, they come from 12th Avenue, Krauss Street, 
Broad Street North, Angus Road, Trudelle Crescent, and Birchwood Road.  Mr. 
Speaker, I believe that some of these people live in the constituency of 
Lakeview once again, Mr. Speaker.  And I'm pleased to be able to present 
these signatures on behalf of the member of Lakeview, Mr. Speaker.  And I'm 
pleased to lay these on the Table.  Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Once again, Mr. Speaker, I have a number of signatories 
from the city of Regina.  All of these folks have been able to sign the 
petition and I want to read their addresses into the record, Mr. Speaker.  
They live on Melrose Place, Donald Street, Mikkelson Drive, Rochdale 
Boulevard, Dunsmore Drive, Blackwood Street I believe, Mr. Speaker.  I see 
someone motored in from Southey, Saskatchewan, and had the opportunity to 
sign the petition, Mr. Speaker.  As well, Mr. Speaker, we have some folks 
from Edgar Street, Dewdney Avenue, Farrel Bay, Bright Bay, and Dunsmore 
Drive, as well as Lawrence Street.  Mr. Speaker, I just want to put on the 
record that someone signed the petition from Dysart, Saskatchewan.  And I'm 
pleased to be able to present these signatories to the Legislative Assembly 
for the government's perusal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have some more signatures here.  They are coming from the 
city of Regina.  They, Mr. Speaker, come from Birchwood Road, Heffernan 
Drive, and Salemka, I think it is, Salemka Street, Mr. Speaker.  Once 



 

 

again, I want to present these signatures to the legislature.  These 
citizens are exercising their democratic right, Mr. Speaker, and I'm 
pleased to enter their signatures into the public record. 
 
Mr. Speaker, once again I have another petition here.  These folks seem to 
all be from the city of Regina, Mr. Speaker, with the exception of one. One 
person comes from Lebret, Saskatchewan, I believe.  But, Mr. Speaker, these 
people are exercising their democratic right to sign a petition in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
They all come from the city of Regina with the exception of one.  Their 
addresses are Graham Road, Whelan Drive, Fulton Drive, I believe it's Read 
Avenue, Walter Crescent, Sherman Road, Forsyth Crescent, Engel Drive, 
Devonshire, Hansen Drive, Bothwell Crescent, Lakewood Crescent, Tweedsmuir 
Bay, Rose Street, Samuels Crescent, Church Drive, Carter Crescent, 
Retallack, and Scarth Street, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I understand that most of these citizens are living up in the north end 
of Regina.  And we welcome these citizens and their democratic right to 
sign this petition.  And once again, Mr. Speaker, I am extremely pleased to 
enter these 20 signatures into the public record, and through their member 
of the legislature, express their democratic right to sign this petition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, once again we have a number of citizens from the city of 
Regina that have signed a petition.  These citizens, all 20 of them, come 
from the city of Regina.  They come from such areas as Wessel Bay, McCarthy 
Boulevard, Ewart Place, Bourne Street, Heffernan Drive, Woodsworth 
Crescent, Radisson Bay, Devonshire Drive, Cedar Meadow Drive, Hanley 
Crescent, Krauss Street, Dalgliesh Drive, Fyfe Street, Church Drive, 
Bastedo Crescent, Toothill Street, Champ Crescent, Ballantine Court, and 
Parsons Bay. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to enter their signatures into the public record 
as they have exercised their democratic right to sign petitions in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition here.  All of these citizens hail from 
the good city of Regina.  They have exercised their democratic right to 
sign a petition.  They come from Donahue Avenue and Beamish -- I believe it 
is -- Street, Mr. Speaker.  And once again, I am pleased to enter these 
signatures into the public record on behalf of all of those folks that 
signed the petition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition that I'd like to enter into the 
record.  Once again all of these folks come from the city of Regina.  Many 
of them have not signed their home address so I can't state exactly where 
they come from in terms of the city, but some have indicated that they come 
from the Sherwood Estates in the city of Regina as well as Argyle Park. 
 
And on their behalf, Mr. Speaker, -- I recognize some of the signatories -- 
I want to place this petition before the elected members of the Assembly 
for their perusal, Mr. Speaker. 
 



 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have another petition here that I'm pleased to enter into 
the public record.  All of these folks, with the exception of one, come 
from the city of Regina.  They come from such areas as Normanview West, 
Stanley Crescent out in McCarthy Park, McKinley Avenue in the Rosemont 
area, Levene Crescent, Grosvenor Street, which is out in Glencairn, Boyce 
Street, which is over in Walsh Acres, Springstein Avenue, Bell Street, 
Alexandra Street, Broad Street, Venture Road, Century Drive, Litzenberger 
Crescent, Rink Avenue, Retallack Street, McIntosh Street, Horace Street, 
some folks living out in Lakewood.  Mr. Speaker, I see that there's someone 
here from Govan, Saskatchewan, as well as Lang, Saskatchewan, and Fort 
Qu'Appelle.  In addition, Mr. Speaker, there are some people from the city 
-- Kartusch Place, Mahon Bay, and I think it's Pederson Crescent, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I'm pleased to enter their names into the public record as they 
continue their opposition to the item explained in this petition.  Thanks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have several more signatures that I want to enter into the 
public record.  These folks come from Pilot Butte, and Twin Lakes, Mr. 
Speaker, as well as the city of Regina.  And I see some of the folks from 
Regina live on Blakeney Drive, Blanchfield Street, Gibbings Bay, Battel 
Street, as well as R.R. no. 2, and Dewdney Avenue, Mr. Speaker.  And once 
again I am pleased to enter their names into the public record, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition here signed by a number of citizens 
from Vibank, and Regina.  Most of the people did not sign their addresses, 
Mr. Speaker, but one did and that citizen lives on Bryden Bay.  Mr. 
Speaker, these folks are exercising their democratic right to sign 
petitions in the province of Saskatchewan.  They are urging the government 
to do something as explained on the petition, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 
present these signatures to the Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker, for the 
government's perusal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a number of other signatures that I'd like to present 
to the legislature.  These citizens come from the city of Regina, all 20 of 
them, Mr. Speaker.  They haven't indicated exactly where they live, but 
from the signatures, Mr. Speaker, I'm of the view that many of these folks 
are elderly.  They wanted to express their democratic right.  And on their 
behalf, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to enter into the public record their 
signatures urging the government to do what's explained in the petition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition here from the city of Regina.  All the 
people who signed this petition did not indicate where they live in the 
city of Regina, but once again, Mr. Speaker, all of the signatures appear 
to be from elderly people.  They once again are exercising their democratic 
right to sign a petition, Mr. Speaker, and I'm pleased to enter their 
signatures into the public record. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition.  Once again this petition is from the 
city of Regina, and all of these signatories, Mr. Speaker, have indicated 
their address so I'm able to tell you where they live.  They live on 
Markwell Drive, Hanbidge Crescent, Cole Street, Kelsey Street, Whelan 



 

 

Drive, Markwell Drive, Sangster Boulevard, Cedar Meadow Drive, Dalgliesh 
Drive, Litzenberger Crescent, Thomas Bay, Kestral Drive.  Oh, Mr. Speaker, 
here's someone from Estevan, Saskatchewan.  They live on Hudson Road.  
Obviously they were visiting the city of Regina and had the opportunity to 
sign the petition. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, there are citizens living on Battel Street in Regina, 
Wellband Drive, Rink Avenue, Blanchfield, L'Arche Crescent, Angus 
Boulevard, Angus Road, I believe it is, Mr. Speaker, Petersmeyer Crescent, 
and Schneider Crescent.  And, Mr. Speaker, once again on behalf of all of 
these people that took the opportunity to sign this petition, which is 
their democratic right, I'm pleased to enter their signatures into the 
public record. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Speaker, I have another petition from the city of 
Regina.  All of these people, Mr. Speaker, did not sign their addresses so 
I can't tell you where they live, Mr. Speaker.  But I can assure you, Mr. 
Speaker, that all of these citizens come from the city of Regina.  And once 
again, Mr. Speaker, on their behalf I am pleased to enter this petition 
into the public record. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition, and many of the people that signed 
this petition come from the city of Prince Albert and surrounding areas.  
They live, Mr. Speaker, on Central Avenue West, 5th Street West, 10th 
Street East, Central Avenue again, Central Avenue West.  Mr. Speaker, 
obviously some folks had motored in from Shell Lake and had the opportunity 
to spend the day in P.A., and they signed the petition. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, we have some folks that live in rural route Prince 
Albert, and they signed the petition; some folks living on Dunn Drive, 25th 
Street West.  Oh, Mr. Speaker, a couple of people in from Canwood, 
Saskatchewan and they were able to sign the petition.  As well we have 
people living on 2nd Avenue West, 25th Street West, and 26th Street West, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Once again, Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to enter this petition into the 
record.  These folks have exercised their democratic right, and as an 
elected member of the legislature, I'm pleased to lay these signatures on 
the Table. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Speaker, I have another petition . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Being 5 o'clock, the House stands recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


