





























































Hansard: June 05, 1991


 

 

June 5/91 
 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I rise today pursuant 
to the rules and the procedures of the Legislative Assembly to present, as 
you see here in front of me, petitions signed by 40,000 Saskatchewan men 
and women who are opposed to the new, proposed 7 per cent provincial PST 
(provincial sales tax), bringing the total tabled to date to 120,000 names. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- These petitioners contained in this bundle which I'm going 
to table today, Mr. Speaker, come from every part of the province -- from 
farms, from villages, towns and cities.  And they're opposed to the 
government's latest tax increase because they say it is unfair, 
unnecessary, unsound and illegitimate. 
 
The petitions read in part as follows: 
 

 . . . That the provincial government does not have a mandate from the 
people of Saskatchewan to impose the major tax increase which would result 
from its proposed provincial GST . . . 

 
And it also reads: 
 

 . . . Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Honourable Assembly 
may be pleased to urge the Provincial Government to stop the provincial 
GST until the people of the province have an opportunity to pass judgement 
on it in a provincial election . . . 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Therefore, Mr. Speaker, it gives me some pride today to 
table these petitions signed by an additional 40,000 Saskatchewan people 
bringing the total number of petitions tabled, signatories, to this 
Legislative Assembly to date, to more than 120,000 people, the single 
largest petition ever tabled in the history of this Legislative Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, in tabling these petitions I urge the 
government to listen to the voice of the people and to stop this tax. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure today to 
introduce to you and through you to members of the legislature, His 
Excellency Pedro Alves Machado who is the Ambassador of Portugal, and with 
him Mr. Meguel Velozo, Consul of Portugal in Vancouver.  His Excellency is 
visiting Saskatchewan for the first time.  While he is here, he will be 
talking to the departments of Economic Diversification and Trade, 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
As you know Portugal joined the European Economic Community in 1986, and 
they are looking forward to a complete expansion in western Europe in terms 
of opening borders and free trade between the countries there.  We look 
forward to speaking to him about agriculture and about trade and the kinds 
of changes he's going to see take place in Europe in 1992.  I'd ask all 
members to please welcome His Excellency and the Consul of Portugal. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I have the pleasure 
this afternoon of introducing two groups of students to the Assembly.  
First of all from the Pilot Butte School, 21 grade 4 students.  They are 
accompanied by teacher, Mrs. Dick. 
 
And secondly, from the White City School, 33 grade 4 students, Mr. Speaker.  
They're accompanied by their teacher, Marjorie Gross, Mrs. Alford, and Mrs. 
Herman. 
 
I know that all hon. members will join me in welcoming our young guests.  
We hope that they have an enjoyable visit to the legislature, an enjoyable 
tour, they enjoy the proceedings, and I look very much forward to meeting 
with them after question period for refreshments and photos, Mr. Speaker.  
Please join with me in welcoming our young guests. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to join other members in welcoming 
students to the Assembly today.  And we have a group of students from E. D. 
Feehan High School in Saskatoon Westmount constituency.  They come here 
from the most beautiful city in the province, the largest city in the 
province, to assemble here and understand hopefully what we do in this 
Assembly. 
 
There are 58 grade 9 students from Feehan High School.  They are situated 
in the Speaker's gallery, Mr. Speaker, and I see that they are accompanied 
today by teachers, John Skorski, Stan Yuzik, and chaperons by the name of 
Cheryl Mighton, Debbie Jacobs, Mrs. Knowles, and Ray Baron. 
 
I know all members will want to join with me in welcoming these students 
from E. D. Feehan High School in the city of Saskatoon, in the constituency 
of Westmount.  I welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to join my colleague, the member from 



 

 

Saskatoon Westmount, in welcoming the students and teachers from E.D. 
Feehan High School. 
 
I had the privilege, Mr. Speaker, in teaching at E.D. Feehan from '82 to 
'86.  When the people of '86 retired me from politics, I was accepted and 
received very warmly by the teachers and students of E.D. Feehan.  And, Mr. 
Speaker, I want to also say that I will be there tomorrow night to join 
Stan Yuzik, who's a colleague of mine, and the other teachers who are 
retiring from the teaching profession.  I'll be there tomorrow night to 
celebrate with you. 
 
I also want to certainly welcome the students here.  E.D. Feehan certainly 
is one of the best high schools in the city of Saskatoon, if not in the 
province of Saskatchewan.  Welcome here today and I hope you have a good 
time.  Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's indeed a pleasure for 
me to welcome all of the students here today, but particularly the ones 
from E.D. Feehan.  Many of these students, Mr. Speaker, live in my 
constituency and I have visited their school on different occasions.  
There's no doubt, as the member opposite has said, a very good school, 
quality programs.  I understand that they may even have a position there 
for him again after the next election. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I do want to join my colleagues in welcoming the students 
and teachers, chaperons, that are here from E.D. Feehan. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gleim: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today it gives me great pleasure to 
introduce to you, and through you to the whole Assembly, four young girls 
from the town of Hazlet.  They are Girl Guides and they are here today 
receiving some awards.  And with them today . . .  They're in the west 
gallery, Mr. Speaker.  Their names today of the young girls are Mandy 
Olsgard, Christin Zinn, Renita Ellis, and Melissa Parker. 
 
With them today as leaders is Mrs. Kathy Olsgard, Mrs. Heather Ellis.  
Chaperons is Randy Ellis, Gloria Parker, Nola Zinn, and Lyla Shepardson. 
 
I would like all of you to help me welcome these people here to Regina 
today.  I will be with them later at 2:30 to take pictures and to give them 
their awards.  I would welcome them here to Regina and I wish everybody 
else help me along. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Opposition to the PST 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my question 



 

 

today is to the Premier.  Mr. Speaker, as you know, just a few moments ago 
we tabled an additional 40,000 names by way of petitioners opposed to the 
provincial PST, bringing the grand total to over 120,000.  And I think it's 
worth repeating again that this is the largest single petition as we know 
it, in research in any event, probably in the history of the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier is as follows:  Mr. 
Premier, will you listen to the people of the province of Saskatchewan?  
Will you pull this tax legislation and let the people judge this proposal 
in a provincial election campaign? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, as it relates to the harmonization of 
the sales tax base in Saskatchewan with the GST (goods and services tax), 
we have said on numerous occasions that we're doing it for two reasons. 
 
Number one is it makes life simpler for both the consumer and the business 
person.  You eliminate the confusion of what's in and what's out, two sets 
of tax collectors, two sets of auditors, all of those kinds of arguments, 
Mr. Speaker.  And secondly, because it will make our businesses more 
competitive and that ultimately means more jobs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now having said all of that . . . and we left the rate at 7 per cent to 
come up with the $125 million for the farm programs, which is so important 
to our entire economy.  But having said that, Mr. Speaker, we know that any 
time you're raising taxes, it's not popular.  And it's true that if you ask 
the average person across Saskatchewan would they want to pay more taxes, 
most often they will say no. 
 
But they also have told, as I would suggest, those members there, Mr. 
Speaker, that the government must deal with the debt and deficit and as 
well work to stabilize our rural economy and indeed our entire economy.  
These tax changes are part of our plan, Mr. Speaker.  We do have a plan, as 
difficult as the choices are, to stabilize the economy and balance the 
books and we're sticking with it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question and I am going to direct 
it again, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier because I think it's correct to 
observe that the Minister of Finance, who has essentially got this 
government in such a pickle over this tax, is obviously going to be 
committed to this tax.  But it's going to take a Premier decision to 
overrule them. 
 
And, Mr. Premier, as we see from the news today the people of the province 
of Saskatchewan obviously don't support your economic policies or the tax.  
And as we see from the news today, sir, you have no mandate, you have no 
mandate to introduce such a massive tax increase in the dying days of this 
your administration. 
 



 

 

Mr. Premier, my question to you is this:  why won't you listen to the 
concerns of the 120,000 people who have signed the petitions, the thousands 
more who will sign in the days ahead, to the opinion polls and to others, 
and to give the voters the opportunity to pass judgement first on your 
record in the next provincial election? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, this is not merely an initiative . . . 
the harmonization is not just something that we recognize as making sense.  
Some several months ago, as the hon. members will know, an expert advisory 
committee was put together, made up of people from organizations like the 
Canadian Federation of Independent Business, the Society of Management 
Accountants, the Consumers Association of Canada, Ipsco, Mr. Speaker, home 
builders, the Wheat Pool, the wheat growers, chamber of commerce, Mr. 
Speaker, Institute of Chartered Accountants -- and I could go on and on.  
Organizations that have in total some 3 to 400,000 members. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these independent-minded people recommended that we harmonize 
with the sales tax base of the federal government.  They said if it's going 
to be a reality, which it is, it makes no sense to have two different 
taxes, two sets of tax collectors.  And besides, Mr. Speaker, they 
recognized the merits of having our businesses be more competitive.  We're 
on a level playing-field, our businesses, for the first time with Alberta, 
an advantage to Manitoba.  Mr. Speaker, we recognize these are tough 
choices but unlike the opposition, who read the polls and said no we're . . 
. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question.  For the third time I'm 
going to direct it to the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, given the last two answers and given what we've seen the last 
couple of weeks, the people of this province are beginning to wonder -- in 
fact they're asking out loud -- what in the world does it take to convince 
this Premier and this government that they've made a mistake? 
 
A hundred and twenty thousand names on a petition ignored.  Pleas from 
business coalitions, from Saskatoon and elsewhere, ignored.  The 
opposition's questions ignored.  The headlines as we know in the news today 
right across all of Saskatchewan, what the public wants in Canada, ignored. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier is this: why in the world are you 
taking what can only be described as an arrogant view of your position that 
you are right, and every one else is wrong in Saskatchewan?  And if it's 
not ignorance, is this a matter of you simply deciding that your government 
is going to go down to defeat, and by golly, you're going to embark on a 
scorched earth policy, making it virtually impossible for the succeeding 
government to turn things around in the province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, it's really interesting, Mr. Speaker, that 
the Leader of the Opposition would say it would make it extremely difficult 
for a new administration, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We had a debate the other night in Regina with the chamber of commerce 
sponsors, Mr. Speaker.  And the Leader of the Opposition had to admit, Mr. 
Speaker, that it might take a 23 per cent increase in income tax if the NDP 
(New Democratic Party) was ever elected, Mr. Speaker.  And if it wasn't a 
23 per cent increase in income tax, Mr. Speaker, he said, Mr. Speaker . . . 
do you know what he said?  He would tax weekly newspapers and the radio 
stations, Mr. Speaker. They don't like to hear the straight goods -- the 
straight goods, Mr. Speaker.  Even those that did his research, his 
so-called research, Mr. Speaker, say the NDP is being intellectually 
dishonest with the Saskatchewan public.  That's what Dale Botting says, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And he goes on to say that it's somewhat disgusting the way they've treated 
this because he won't come clean with the public and say he'd have 
succession duties or death taxes or succession duties plus income tax at a 
23 per cent increase just to balance the books. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this administration has laid out a strategy to balance the 
budget, pay for GRIP (gross revenue insurance plan) and NISA (net income 
stabilization account), make sure we diversify the economy. 
 
And we just saw what happened in Ontario, Mr. Speaker, when the NDP didn't 
have a plan and whoops! the NDP got elected in Ontario and we saw a $10 
billion deficit which is 36 times the size of ours, Mr. Speaker.  And they 
still don't have a plan except pro-labour, kick out business.  Well, Mr. 
Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan know the difference.  They saw what 
happened in Ontario. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the Premier and 
I guess the good news of that answer was that the Premier finally had the 
courage to get up and answer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- The pathetic side of that answer is it's the same old 
tired-out old cliche pés for the last nine years that has brought this 
Premier and this government to the lowest level of support in the history 
of the province of Saskatchewan of any political party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Premier, my question to you is this.  Tomorrow the 
Supreme Court of Canada, we are advised, will be making a decision on the 
boundaries situation in the province of Saskatchewan.  Whichever way the 
court decides, this matter can be solved within the next week or two weeks 
at the outside after tomorrow's decision.  We'll have boundaries in place. 
 



 

 

Mr. Premier, my question to you is this.  In the light of this situation, 
will you give your commitment today to this legislature and to the people 
of the province of Saskatchewan that you'll pull this tax legislation for 
that two-week period; thereafter call an election and allow the voters and 
the taxpayers to decide on this policy?  Give us that commitment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member must be reflecting some of 
the editorials that are being written about him recently that's saying he's 
anxious because he thinks it might slip away from him, Mr. Speaker.  He's 
afraid that the tax might pass and we'll harmonize.  And, Mr. Speaker, if 
he's so confident, I don't know why it would worry him at all.  I mean, if 
he's so worried, well he can repeal it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
He's more interested in politics than he is doing the right thing, Mr. 
Speaker.  He knows harmonization is supported by the Wheat Pool; 
harmonization is supported by co-operatives; harmonization is supported by 
independent business; harmonization will be the single largest tax break 
for farmers and business and co-operatives in the history of Saskatchewan. 
 
And he knows, Mr. Speaker, that if this passes and people realize that it 
is a tax break, and for the first time our businesses can compete with 
Alberta and Americans, then, Mr. Speaker, as the editorials point out -- 
whoops, he may start to see it slipping. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, he knows anything that he saw today with respect 
to polls is not relevant in rural Saskatchewan.  And he also knows, Mr. 
Speaker, a 23 per cent increase in income tax is just something the NDP 
might do, Mr. Speaker, because we saw what happened in Ontario.  We're not 
going to let that happen, Mr. Speaker.  This is the right thing to do.  The 
people of Saskatchewan know that, Mr. Speaker.  That's why we've harmonized 
in the first place, and recommended by the people from the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Cost/Benefit Analysis of Decentralization 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I'm pleased to see the 
Premier stand, and I ask that he will also stand in defence of his 
government's actions on decentralization. 
 
Mr. Premier, earlier today we heard decentralization announcement number 
four.  Four announcements, Mr. Premier, but not a single one cost/benefit 
analysis -- none.  Big on words, but small on analysis. 
 
Now I ask you, Mr. Premier, will you show at least a little respect for the 
intelligence of Saskatchewan people. Why not release your studies and your 
cost/benefit analysis so that people of Saskatchewan can judge 
decentralization Tory 
_style on the facts?  What are you afraid of, Mr. Premier?  What are you 
afraid of? 



 

 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Isn't it interesting, Mr. Speaker, that the member for 
Moose Jaw North didn't ask those questions when the Water Corporation went 
to Moose Jaw.  Isn't that interesting, Mr. Speaker. Would he now say to the 
media, friends and other people that the Water Corporation should leave 
Moose Jaw?  Well, Mr. Speaker, he didn't say that. 
 
With respect to a new fertilizer operation just outside of Moose Jaw, Mr. 
Speaker, it's condemned by the NDP all over, but in Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker, 
they're very, very quiet if they're NDP.  They like to see diversification 
as long as we do it; they like to see decentralization as long as they can 
pick on it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that's the reason that the NDP have not been successful in 
Saskatchewan in the last two elections, because they're not straight with 
the people, Mr. Speaker.  They're not fair in Moose Jaw, they're not fair 
in Prince Albert or The Battlefords or other places.  They like to see the 
upgraders but out of town they condemn them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Fair Share, that is sharing jobs to the people of Saskatchewan 
all over this province is the right thing to do in Humboldt; it's the right 
thing to do in Gull Lake; it's the right thing to do in Wynyard, Mr. 
Speaker, and it's the right thing to do for Melville and Moose Jaw.  The 
hon. member knows it.  And do you know what, Mr. Speaker?  The NDP out in 
those ridings say, we'd do the same thing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Isn't it interesting that they stand in place in Regina and say one thing, 
and when they're out in the country they say the exact opposite, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Premier, I ask you when you are going to get straight 
with the people and when are you going to get off the rhetoric and get onto 
the facts here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- It's apparent today to people all across Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Premier, that you no longer enjoy the confidence of the people of this 
province.  And for years, Mr. Premier, you've put PC (Progressive 
Conservative) politics ahead of your responsibility as government for the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And what we see today now, Mr. Speaker, is yet more of this panic PC 
politics.  And I ask you: when are you going to show that you have the 
responsibility to govern?  When are you going to even try to show the 
people of the province that decentralization is anything more than a cheap 
PC political ploy?  When are you going to try and show that, Mr. Premier? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member, as his colleagues . . . 
as his colleague from Regina North West . . . or Regina North East, I'm 
sorry . . . in other days in here talks about politics as it relates to 
Fair Share Saskatchewan. 
 
I was this morning in the community of Gull Lake.  The people that came to 
a meeting in Gull Lake to hear about Fair Share Saskatchewan understood 
very clearly the stabilization that's needed in their community and in 
communities like theirs all across Saskatchewan.  Mr. Speaker, the 
cross-section of citizens of Gull Lake that were at that meeting, the 
cross-section of citizens from all ages, from whatever walk of life, were 
not, were not, and I make it very clear, were not representative of the 
Conservative Party of Saskatchewan. 
 
The cross-section of citizens of that community have a deeply held feeling 
for their community and for the needs of their community and rural 
Saskatchewan's instability as it now sits.  And they have a deep-seated 
need and a feeling for the need to stabilize their community in rural 
Saskatchewan.  And, Mr. Speaker, Fair Share Saskatchewan speaks directly to 
that need that they understand so well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Speaker, it seems to me, when I listen to the Premier and 
the Deputy Premier, there is a deep aversion to the facts in this Assembly 
from that side of the government. 
 
Let's talk about the facts, Mr. Premier.  This question to the Premier, Mr. 
Speaker: Mr. Premier, with today's announcements you have now promised to 
move 372 jobs to various locations across Saskatchewan.  Even using your 
own figures, even using your figures, Mr. Premier, you're already three and 
a half million dollars over your own budget for decentralization. 
 
And I ask you, Mr. Premier, what gives you the right to impose yet another 
Tory hoax on the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, the NDP had often talked about 
decentralization, and there's many quotes that I could give.  But I thought 
one of them, because the hon. member from Moose Jaw North talks about 
politics . . .  This is a quote from Allan Blakeney in the Western Report 
in July 1, 1986.  And Allan Blakeney used to lead that party . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. Order, order, order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I was just going to quote the 
former NDP leader, Allan Blakeney, because he was having a little bit of 
trouble with the decentralization.  And this was Western Report, July 1, 
1986, and he says, and I quote, Mr. Speaker.  This is for the member from 
Moose Jaw North because he likes to think that it's partisan.  He said: 
 



 

 

 The bald truth is that many New Democrats are somewhat uncomfortable with 
serious decentralization for fear that local people would not make the 
appropriate left-wing decision. 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, when we move, Mr. Speaker, to Humboldt, 
the local MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) from Humboldt says, the 
opposition wouldn't reverse the move.  The NDP go out into the country, Mr. 
Speaker, when we decentralize, and they say it's okay in Humboldt and it's 
okay in Gull Lake, and then they come back in here and they say, oh no, 
we'd never do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fact is they didn't have the courage to protect rural 
Saskatchewan or come up with a safety net or do the kinds of things with 
harmonization.  Well, Mr. Speaker, they can't have it both ways.  If you're 
going to diversify and protect rural communities, you've got to take the 
Water Corporation to Moose Jaw, you have to build fertilizer plants.  We do 
that because it's the right thing, Mr. Speaker.  We don't say one thing in 
the country and another thing in the city. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Mr. Speaker, thank you.  I have a question for the Premier 
as well.  Mr. Premier, we all know from the Manitoba experience that 
decentralization was a nice pre-election promise.  But after the election, 
decentralization simply cost too much to implement.  And we should 
remember, Mr. Premier, that Manitoba is in a better financial position than 
Saskatchewan. 
 
After nine years of your mismanagement, Saskatchewan has the highest per 
capita debt of all provinces in Canada. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier is this: if Manitoba could not 
afford to carry forward with their decentralization program, how can 
Saskatchewan possibly afford it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I think the Leader of the Opposition and 
his NDP colleagues would appreciate what I'm going to say with respect to 
the Manitoba and the Saskatchewan situation.  The former president of the 
University of Saskatchewan, Dr. Leo Kristjansen, is a strong supporter of 
agriculture.  And as far as I know he might have been maybe even a CCFer 
(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation), Mr. Speaker.  He supported 
agriculture.  He supported the rural.  He's retired back home in Manitoba.  
And, Mr. Speaker, when he was asked about decentralizing jobs from the 
capital to rural Saskatchewan, he says it's the right thing to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he said it should be sensitive to the rural people, Mr. 
Speaker, and he was quoted on CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) -- 
and I'll certainly give this to Hansard, Mr. Speaker -- and he says: 
 



 

 

 . . . (it is) a potentially positive move.  The basic advantage I see is 
that rural communities and farming in particular, is becoming more and 
more isolated from the decision-making process. 

 
He said -- and you can read this and I'll be glad to table it. We should 
decentralize government outside of the capitals to the people whether . . . 
(inaudible) . . . and really in Saskatchewan because we suffered 
agriculturally, more than Manitoba, more than Alberta, more than any other 
jurisdiction here. 
 
And I think the Leader of the Opposition would know that if Dr. Leo 
Kristjansen would say that we should decentralize and be fair when 81 per 
cent of the taxpayers in this province are outside of Regina, 19 per cent 
are here, we could at least make it a little closer to 50-50 with respect 
to job sharing.  And an academic, an agriculturalist, somebody with a 
social conscience like Leo Kristjansen said that's the right thing to do, 
Mr. Speaker, we're on the right track. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Premier.  You haven't 
answered the question, Mr. Premier, but I'll give you another one.  Perhaps 
you can take your choice of which one you want to answer. 
 
You have stated, Mr. Premier, that it is your government's plan to 
terminate 500 public civil servants next year.  My question is this:  how 
many of these jobs that you are claiming to be currently moving to rural 
Saskatchewan will be cut next year, should you form the government?  And 
how many families are you going to force to uproot and move to new 
communities, only to be told a few months down the road that there is no 
longer a job available for them? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- It's interesting . . . We have seen the cities of 
Saskatchewan grow.  It's interesting, Mr. Speaker.  We have seen cities in  
Saskatchewan, like Regina and Saskatoon, continue to grow.  And we have had 
Crop Insurance, Mr. Speaker, go to Melville.  We have had Water Corporation 
go to Moose Jaw.  We've had ACS (Agricultural Credit Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) go to Swift Current, and other agencies and branch go to 
Kindersley and Kamsack, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the city of Regina has a new upgrader, its expansion in Federal 
Pioneer.  Saskoil, since it's privatized, has a brand-new building and will 
continue to grow.  IBM and WESTBRIDGE are doing deals regarding expansions 
in the university, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let me point out, Mr. Speaker, if you really want to look at some serious 
problems, Mr. Speaker . . . I want to show this to the audience and to the 
public here today and I'll send one across to the opposition.  The Hudson's 
Bay Company of Canada is considering relocating to the United States 
because the NDP is generating real fear in the business community, Mr. 
Speaker. 



 

 

 
Now that's what you call a real problem, Mr. Speaker.  They're leaving 
Ontario in droves as a result of the NDP.  And we are having Fair Share to 
communities, Mr. Speaker.  The NDP don't have a government onside and they 
don't have the business community onside, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier is this. With the 
Supreme Court coming down tomorrow, Mr. Premier, with an announcement on 
the boundaries, and with conceivably no impediments to an early election, 
could you hold off your phoney announcements about this so-called 
decentralization? 
 
Will you give the people of Saskatchewan your assurances, Mr. Premier, that 
due to the chance of an immediate election, you will stop this senseless 
and cruel practice of leading on the residents of rural Saskatchewan with 
your empty job promises, and driving civil servants into despair with 
doubts about their future.  Will you give those assurances today, Mr. 
Premier? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- As I said in the debate, Mr. Speaker, as I said in the 
debate, when the NDP give me their position on Fair Share and 
decentralization clearly, when they give us an agriculture position 
clearly, when they tell us clearly how they'll balance the budget, when 
they'll tell us clearly how they'll diversify our economy, Mr. Speaker, 
when they say those things, Mr. Speaker, then the people will know what 
their choices are all about.  They continually hide in the weeds, Mr. 
Speaker; they're going to continue to hide.  How will the public know what 
their position is, Mr. Speaker?  We've laid it out.  Why don't they come 
clean and tell us what it is.  They've hid.  They're hiding.  They're 
afraid that they might slip in the polls, Mr. Speaker.  Why don't they 
stick their neck up a little bit and really tell the public how they really 
feel about Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Land Title to Silver Lake Farm 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I direct my question 
to the Minister of Agriculture.  Mr. Minister, as recently as two weeks ago 
there had been no transfer of the title of the land at the Silver Lake farm 
near Green Lake.  It remained Crown property, pending the outcome of a 
court challenge to a caveat by the Metis people of the area. Nor apparently 
was the Crown leasing or renting the land to anyone.  Mr. Minister, can you 
tell this House when that situation changed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, the situation at Silver Lake is a very 
complex one and it has . . . 



 

 

 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, the situation there is complex.  I want 
to point out that the Appeal Court moved that the matter be taken back to 
the Queen's Bench court to decide.  The Department of Justice is providing 
us with legal information regarding the role of the lake there . . . or the 
town there, and also the people involved in the former lease and we are 
dealing with the . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  The associate minister is having 
some trouble because we have at least six to ten members who want to answer 
the question -- a set of them.  Perhaps it was directed to the wrong 
individual but he's the Associate Minister of Agriculture and let him 
answer the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, the matter is being discussed with the 
Department of Justice to provide a reasonable response to both the 
individuals who have leased it for the last few years and to the village.  
And we'll be dealing with the real, fundamental issue of whether in  
 Dfact the opportunity can be given to the court to decide on who the 
lessee should be. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, with leave I ask that we go directly to 
Bill No. 61. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 61 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth that Bill No. 61 -- An Act to amend The Education and 
Health Tax Act (No.2) be now read a second time and the proposed amendment 
thereto moved by Mr. Van Mulligen. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Speaker, before I get into the context of the Bill that 
is before us, I think we had today in question period a prime example as to 
why we are debating Bill 61 before us today. 
 
The prime example, Mr. Speaker, that I speak about was the Premier's 
performance today in the House.  It clearly indicated that the Premier does 



 

 

not have a handle on the serious situation that exists in this province 
today.  Neither did any of his former . . . the Finance minister, when I 
referred to the member from Kindersley, the member now from 
Qu'Appelle-Lumsden, and the present member from Weyburn. 
 
Mr. Minister, in order to make absolutely certain that you have a handle on 
the finances of this province you've got to make sure that you understand 
the situation, and, Mr. Speaker, the consequences of policies that you put 
into effect.  Mr. Speaker, in order to intelligently discuss the Bill that 
is before the House today, and why it is here, one needs to go back a few 
years in the history of this province to 1982, and what happened at that 
time when the members opposite formed the government in this province. 
 
In 1982, this province was considered as one of the best fiscally managed 
provinces in all of Canada.  And that I don't think very many people will 
dispute.  Our financial situation, our debt load compared to our assets, 
Mr. Speaker, was the lowest in Canada.  In fact, Mr. Speaker, in our 
current account, we had no deficit. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, didn't happen by accident.  That didn't take place 
because people were in government at the time who didn't know where they 
wanted to take the province and who didn't understand the finances of this 
province.  We had, Mr. Speaker, I think one of the best premiers and the 
best statesmen and the best administrators that this country as ever seen 
in Allan Blakeney. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- I think very few people, very few people would argue with 
that statement -- very few people. 
 
We then came into 1982.  And let me, Mr. Speaker, just tell the present 
Minister of Finance, unless his memory fails him, that in 1982, they 
inherited a surplus of $139 million.  And, Mr. Speaker, from 1905 to 1982, 
the province had incurred a long-term debt in the Crowns of about $3 
billion.  That was the situation.  A net debt, in the long-term, net debt 
of $3 billion.  That's what the people opposite inherited. 
 
We had low unemployment.  We had the highest investment in outside 
investment on a per capita basis in almost anywhere in Canada.  The 
province had a very promising future. 
 
Along came an individual who's now the Premier, who coined the expression: 
there's so much more that we could be, indicating, Mr. Speaker, there's so 
much more that he could do for this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the legacy that he is going to leave for this province, 
the legacy that he is going to leave for our children and their children is 
the largest per capita debt anywhere in Canada -- anywhere in Canada, Mr. 
Speaker.  Instead of having a debt today of about 3,000 per man, woman, and 
child, we have a debt of over $13,000 per man, woman and child; $10,000 
increase in nine years and it took this province 75 years to accumulate a 
debt of 3,000 per man, woman, and child.  That, Mr. Speaker, is the legacy 



 

 

that this present Minister of Finance and his colleagues will leave to this 
province after the next election. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we are not certain that $13 billion is the accumulated 
debt.  I think once we examine the books and we open up the books, we will 
find that there are long-term commitments, long-term commitments, Mr. 
Speaker, that will cost this province billions of dollars -- billions of 
dollars that we will not be able to reverse.  Those, Mr. Speaker, will only 
come to the fore when the books of this province are opened. 
 
(1445) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I am not surprised at this, because I can full remember 
in 1986 before the election the then minister of Finance, the current 
member from Qu'Appelle-Lumsden, indicated that there would be a deficit of 
$389 million.  Immediately after the election, we found out that he had 
made a mistake of $800 million and we had a debt of $1.2 billion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, was this because of incompetence?  Some people say it was 
incompetence.  Others say it was lack of experience.  Others say they were 
simply not truthful before the election.  Still others say it's a 
combination of all of those things. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, it is incompetence.  I do believe that it was that 
they were simply dishonest.  And I think members opposite will tell you 
that yes, they knew that the deficit would be considerably higher in 1986 
than what they had predicted. 
 
Is it any wonder, Mr. Speaker, that the poll that was in the papers this 
morning, the Angus Reid poll, clearly indicates that the members opposite 
are not trusted by the people of Saskatchewan.  They do not believe that 
what they are saying is what they will do.  Is it any wonder that the 
Premier's confidence is down to 16 per cent in the province?  I don't think 
it's any wonder.  You could only prevaricate with the people so many times 
and they will no longer believe you after that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is it that in every year, every year that the 
Conservatives have been in power they've had a deficit, and almost every 
year since 1982 they have increased taxes, they have increased the taxes?  
Why is it?  And why is it then that this minister today has a Bill before 
the legislature which is saying to the people of Saskatchewan, even though 
you are the highest taxed, the highest taxed in this country, we want 
another $460 million from you people in order to run the government. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, and not to balance the budget -- still to have a deficit 
and increase that deficit.  That, Mr. Speaker, is totally irresponsible.  
That is totally irresponsible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I have indicated, in the nine years that those people have 
been in power, what have they done?  Why is it that we've got this deficit?  
I think we've got to ask those questions. 
 
Well of course some of it is because of their policies -- wrong-headed 



 

 

policies, there's no doubt about that.  Some of it is because of their 
waste and mismanagement, waste as far as GigaText is concerned.  You know, 
there are numerous others that we could refer to. 
 
Waste, I suppose, in the areas of policies in agriculture. Let me say for 
example, whereby . . . the production loan program is a good example.  
Everybody, Mr. Speaker, in 1986 would have agreed that $300 million would 
have solved the problem, would have solved the problem in agriculture in 
1986.  What did this government do?  This government implemented the 
production loan program that spent $1.2 billion and made people who earn a 
hundred thousand dollars, outside of their farming, eligible for production 
loan programs. 
 
And of course I'm referring to members opposite, cabinet ministers who were 
farmers also, who were eligible for the production loan program at 6 per 
cent when they were earning 80 to $100,000 in their position as cabinet 
ministers and in their position as Premier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those are the kinds of irresponsible policies, irresponsible 
policies that have put this province into debt to the tune of $5.2 billion 
in the current account.  Why, Mr. Speaker, why should the taxpayer out 
there who is maybe earning 15 or $20,000 or $30,000, why should he or she 
have to subsidize the Premier of this province because he is eligible for a 
production loan program?  Why should they, Mr. Speaker, have to subsidize a 
cabinet minister who makes between 80 and $90,000 a year?  Why should they 
have to subsidize those people because the policies put in by this 
government makes them eligible for loans which are subsidized? 
 
Mr. Speaker, those kinds of policies, and I'm only giving a few examples, 
are policies which have put this province into debt so that we now have the 
largest per capita debt in all of Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many others.  There are many others that I could use 
-- patronage for example.  Why do they think that it is fair to pay Chuck 
Childers of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, $740,000 a year?  Why?  
It doesn't make sense.  And yet, Mr. Speaker, in 1982 I can remember them 
criticizing the then chairman of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan who 
earned about 140,000 -- criticizing that he was making too much. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- And he was from Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- That's correct, he was from Saskatchewan and the present 
chairman of the board is from the United States.  He doesn't even pay taxes 
here because the contract that is written in such a way is that he will 
benefit from the taxation that is done in the United States.  Mr. Speaker, 
that's the kind of policy that people are referring to. 
 
I'll give you another one, Mr. Speaker.  Why is it that they feel that by 
order in council, when a contract was signed with the chairman of the 
Liquor Board Commission for $60,000 was to be his salary, why by order in 
council -- simply by the cabinet -- do they feel that it was necessary to 
double his salary to $120,000, when others could only get 3 per cent?  Why 
do they think, Mr. Speaker, that it was important for them to pay the 



 

 

chairman of the SaskPower somewhere in the neighbourhood of $200,000 a 
year? 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was lots of money.  There's lots of money for their 
friends -- large salaries, large income.  And, Mr. Speaker, all of those, 
all of those have assisted and have helped to create this huge deficit that 
we now have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other reason we are here today debating Bill 61 is because 
we've had poor and weak leadership in negotiations.  This Premier -- 
because he was in the back pocket of Mulroney, the Prime Minister -- this 
Premier had nothing to negotiate because he was always the yes man.  He was 
the yes man on the GST.  He flip-flopped on that.  He was the odd man out 
when all the other premiers opposed the federal GST.  Where did this 
Premier stand?  Well he sat right in the back pocket of Prime Minister 
Mulroney.  And he said, yes Brian, I'll support you.  Because you bailed me 
out in 1986 and saved my hide, I will now help you out. 
 
Every other province was thinking of taking the federal government to 
court. Where did our Premier stand?  In support of the GST.  And, Mr. 
Speaker, when it came to negotiations of GRIP and NISA, what great deal did 
he get for this province? 
 
Let's compare what we are paying in Saskatchewan as compared to Ontario and 
Quebec.  And, Mr. Speaker, the member from Shellbrook-Torch River says . . 
. well the member opposite says, well they got a bigger population.  So 
what.  On a per capita basis, on a per capita basis we here in Saskatchewan 
pay about $160 . . . we pay $160 per acre whereas Ontario pays about 30 and 
Quebec pays about 18.  Where is the fairness of that? 
 
I ask the member opposite, where was the Premier when he negotiated that 
deal?  Or, Mr. Speaker, was it because the Premier was so determined, so 
determined to have something in place before the next election that he 
settled for anything at any cost?  And what he has done, Mr. Speaker, he 
has saddled this province once again with huge costs which should have been 
borne by the federal government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is not a provincial matter.  This is a national and 
international concern.  And why are we asked here today . . . I ask the 
leader, the House Leader for the government if he truly and honestly 
believes that it is incumbent upon us, a million people in the province of 
Saskatchewan, to pay and bear the burden of the agriculture policy, the 
agriculture problems that exist in Canada, and not only in Canada but 
internationally.  Do you not agree that that should be a national 
responsibility and not a provincial responsibility? 
 
Why are they asking the province of Saskatchewan, with a million people, to 
bear the major burden of that particular program of GRIP and NISA?  And 
that, Mr. Speaker, says nothing against the program of GRIP and NISA, that 
they weren't needed.  I'm not arguing that.  What I'm arguing is that we 
had a very weak negotiator, very weak negotiator representing Saskatchewan, 
because he wanted an election and he wanted an election in April, but he 
got turned down because of the Boundaries Commission dispute. 



 

 

 
Mr. Speaker, what I'm saying is that we have weak leadership today and it's 
cost the province very dearly in the last nine years.  Very, very dearly.  
We have a Premier here who doesn't know how to negotiate.  He sold his soul 
to Brian Mulroney a long time ago, and because he owes the Prime Minister, 
because he owes the Prime Minister, Mr. Speaker, we now are faced, we now 
are faced with this problem of paying for GRIP and NISA.  And I'm not 
again, Mr. Speaker, saying that GRIP and NISA or programs like that weren't 
needed for the farmers.  They were.  But the responsibility, remind the 
Premier, rests with the federal government and not with the . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The Premier has a request. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- With leave, Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce some 
students from Estevan. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, in your gallery today are 22 students from 
the Hillside School in Estevan and they are accompanied by Marge Young, 
teacher, and Myrna McClary, and the bus driver is John Chess.  And I want 
the members of the legislature to welcome them here. 
 
I'm going to be having a visit with them and having some refreshments and 
showing them around the legislature, Mr. Speaker.   Please welcome these 
students from the constituency and city of Estevan. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 61 (continued) 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Speaker, may I join with the Premier in welcoming the 
students here this afternoon . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh I'm 
always nice to them.  Mr. Speaker, I have some very close relatives living 
in the constituency of Estevan who give me a regular report about what is 
happening in the city, and it looks very good for us, Mr. Premier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, getting back to the topic.  What I said, Mr. Speaker, before 
the Premier introduced the students was that because of the lack of 
leadership that the Premier has shown in his negotiations with the federal 
government, we now find ourselves in this predicament.  In the predicament 
that we have to again go to the people of Saskatchewan, ask them to bear 
the financial cost of a program that is caused or is here, Mr. Speaker, 
because of an international and a national problem.  That, Mr. Speaker, I 
feel is unfair and the people of Saskatchewan feel that it is unfair. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday we had a poll in Saskatchewan, the Angus Reid poll.  



 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, it clearly indicates the people of Saskatchewan are 
looking for strong leadership.  They're looking for people that are 
trustworthy, people that will, yes, make promises, but make responsible 
promises and will keep them -- and will keep those promises. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we only need to go back to 1982.  And what promises were made 
by the members opposite?  Well, Mr. Speaker, they said that they would do 
away with the sales tax.  The 5 per cent sales tax, they were going to do 
away with it.  What did they do?  They increased it to 7 per cent. 
 
(1500) 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, not only did they not do away with the sales tax, but 
increased it to 7 per cent.  Now they want to expand that sales tax to 
considerable other items.  For example, right now it's on restaurant meals 
and it's on children's clothing.  But by 1992, January 1, 1992, they say 
they're going to harmonize it with the federal GST and we know how many 
hundreds of thousands of jobs have already been lost by the implementation 
of the federal GST. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you follow the logic of the Minister of Finance, he says 
the 7 per cent expanded GST will create over 5,000 jobs.  Well if that is 
true, why doesn't he double the tax and double the number of jobs that are 
created?  Or even triple it and have a triple number of jobs.  Boy you 
know, pretty soon, if we have the taxes high enough, we could have 
everybody at work.  Everybody could be working. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it just doesn't make sense to say that you're going to 
increase taxes by $460 million and that is supposed to create jobs.  Where 
is the logic of those people opposite? 
 
But as I said to someone the other day . . . someone asked me the other day 
what's the logic of those people in government?  And I said to him, I said 
to him, don't think logically with those people, because if you do you're 
lost.  They never have; this Premier has never thought logically.  He's 
fought politically, what is politically expedient for him and his 
government now.  Not what is in the best interest of the people of 
Saskatchewan, but what's in the best interest of the Premier and his 
colleagues and the Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan.  That is 
how he thinks, Mr. Speaker. And that is why, Mr. Speaker, we are in the 
mess that we are in today -- $5.2 billion debt -- by that kind of thinking. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and I believe as the poll clearly indicated yesterday, that he 
will reap his just reward in the next election.  He will reap his just 
reward in the next election and deservedly that is exactly what he should 
get. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I was indicating the promises that were made, they said 
that they would cut the income tax by 10 per cent.  Oh, Mr. Speaker, you 
remember that well.  They said they would cut the income tax by 10 per 
cent.  What have we today?  The highest, the highest income tax in all of 
Canada.  And if they don't believe it, I'd ask them to have a look at their 
last income tax report and compare what your provincial tax was of the 



 

 

federal tax that you paid, and you will find that in most instances it was 
60 per cent or over, 60 per cent or over, unless you had a lot of 
exemptions.  Unless you had a lot of exemptions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why do I say that?  I say that because they had implemented a 
2 per cent flat tax, which is a most regressive tax anywhere that you can 
find. 
 
They've also implemented the surtax.  And I'm not really opposed to a 
surtax, but I am opposed to the flat tax, because it's a regressive tax.  
It means that the people who earn less are paying more on a percentage 
basis than those of high income.  Mr. Speaker, that is unfair. It is simply 
unfair. 
 
So did they cut the income tax by 10 per cent?  Of course not.  They've 
increased it substantially.  Increased it to the extent, Mr. Speaker, as 
I've said -- and the Minister of Finance well knows this -- that we pay the 
highest income tax in all of Canada; the highest income tax in all of 
Canada if you include the surtax and you include the 2 per cent flat tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they also said that they would eliminate the gas tax.  And 
we've seen that happen.  Well in 1982 he said he'd take off the 40 per cent 
gas tax and we should have twigged to that.  We should have twigged to that 
when the leader of the opposition at that time said it, the present 
Premier.  Because it wasn't a 40 per cent tax.  It was a 29 per cent tax.  
And the people of Saskatchewan should have said to themselves, if this man 
can't distinguish between 40 cents and 29 cents, what will he do when he 
gets into the real complex problems of government.  Well exactly, he 
doesn't understand it.  He doesn't understand it.  He throws money around.  
He throws figures around as though they don't mean anything. 
 
And I remember a few years ago asking him a question in the Assembly about 
the debt.  And I said, Mr. Premier, you're out $500 million.  His answer to 
me simply was, so what?  Five hundred million dollars and the Premier says, 
so what?  Mr. Speaker, that is why we are in the mess that we are in -- 
$5.2 billion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I remember well when he said there's so much more that we can 
be.  Well people took that as being so much better.  Well we are so much 
more all right.  So much more debt, so much fewer jobs, so much more 
unemployment, so much more people leaving this province -- 80,000 net in 
the last five years.  Oh at least, Mr. Speaker, he was right on that -- 
that we're so much more that we could be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the Premier was in New York a few years ago and said, 
Saskatchewan has so much going for it that you can mismanage it and still 
come out ahead, he didn't know how wrong he was.  You can mismanage.  You 
can mismanage a little, but not to the extent that this Premier has 
mismanaged.  This Premier has mismanaged the economy and the finances of 
this province to the extent, Mr. Speaker, that we don't have a surplus, but 
we have a $5.2 billion deficit.  And, Mr. Speaker, that is what the people 
of Saskatchewan have to bear. 
 



 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is the legacy that this Premier, this government, will 
leave after the next election, Mr. Speaker.  And it'll take the people of 
this province, not 10 years and maybe not 15 years, but it'll take them 20 
or 25 years to undo the harm that was caused by the incompetence of this 
Premier and his colleagues.  He will go down in history as probably a worse 
premier than Anderson was.  And it took 50 years. 
 
And the member says, not for long, not for a while.  That's right.  It'll 
be five months if he doesn't have the nerve to call an election sooner.  
Five years and he is gone; he'll be history.  And the history that they 
write about this individual and that government will not be very 
complimentary, I can assure that member. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me go from here to quotes that were made on the deficit by 
members opposite and why we are in the position today that we are in.  The 
members opposite make promises which they know they can't keep.  They make 
statements in their budget, statements which they know will never come to 
fruition.  And this is borne out not once but a number of times by Finance 
ministers of this province, of this government. 
 
Bob Andrew in 1982, when he was the minister of Finance, said this: this is 
a minimized and manageable deficit -- 1982 -- this is a minimized and 
manageable deficit.  What did he say in 1983?  We anticipate a manageable 
increase in our combined deficit.  Well what did he say in 1984?  We 
believe that all governments must work in concert to reduce budget 
deficits.  This was 1984.  Failure to accomplish this will force harsh 
financial penalties on our children. 
 
And he was so prophetic; he was so right.  And we only had, Mr. Speaker, at 
that time a deficit of about 500 million.  I wonder if he thought that he 
would ever have a deficit of 5 billion by this government.  He was very, 
very prophetic. 
 
In 1985 we hear Bob Andrew saying the following: the preliminary deficit 
for 1984-85 at 379.4 million was 112 million higher than estimated.  Well 
at least, Mr. Speaker, he paved the road for the next minister of Finance 
because that minister was only out 112 million. 
 
Well, Gary Lane . . . pardon me, the present member from 
Qu'Appelle-Lumsden, said this in 1986: this government -- and I want the 
members opposite to listen to this -- this government is confident that a 
balanced budget can be achieved within the next five years.  That means by 
1991 we should have a balanced budget.  Do we have it?  Of course we don't 
have it. 
 
Not only do we have a deficit, but now they're before the legislature 
asking for an increase in taxes of $460 million.  And are they going to 
balance that?  Even with that amount they're not going to balance the 
budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what did the present member from Qu'Appelle-Lumsden say in 
1988?  Well he said the following . . . oh, 1987, I missed one here, 
because I don't want to miss this one.  The deficit for 1986-87 is 



 

 

currently forecast to be $1.2 billion, about 800 million over the budget 
figure of 389. 
 
Before the election he said it would be 389.  Immediately after the 
election it was 1.2 billion.  What does he give as an excuse?  Well we 
overestimated the price of oil.  When in Public Accounts when I questioned 
the Finance department, clear indication, as members who are on that 
committee know, clear indication that they knew well in advance of October 
that that 389 million was way out -- way out.  That's exactly why in 
yesterday's poll the people said that they were untrustworthy.  The Premier 
and his colleagues are untrustworthy.  They are not honest with the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well what did that member say, the member from Qu'Appelle-Lumsden when he 
was the minister of Finance in '88? This government is committed to 
improving the financial management of the public sector and reducing the 
deficit.  Well at that time it was only 4.3 billion.  Today it's 5.2 
billion.  Well he was wrong again.  In 1989 what did the minister of 
Finance say at that time?  He says, through the careful balance of priority 
spending and sensible revenue measures, we will reduce the deficit. 
 
Well today, Mr. Speaker, in Bill 61 they are before us again.  They've 
already forecast a deficit.  Now they need another $460 million.  To 
balance a deficit?  Of course not.  We're still going to have hundreds of 
millions of dollars in deficit increase and they want $460 million.  Enough 
is enough. 
 
Well and then what did the present Minister of Finance say in 1990?  We all 
want a lower deficit.  We want a lower deficit because deficits add to the 
provincial debt -- well that's quite a statement -- which in turn leads to 
the higher interest cost.  What did he expect an increased deficit would 
do?  Reduce the debt?  Of course it will increase the debt.  Everybody 
knows that.  But, Mr. Speaker . . . and he indicates to us that the 
interest would be $493 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to also refer to a statement made by the present 
Minister of Finance in 1990 when he said the following. Continual deficits 
and the debt they produce do create problems.  The province cannot sustain 
deficits at the current levels on an indefinite basis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we have here is a government that is incompetent, a 
government that simply doesn't know where it is going, a government that 
does not deserve the confidence of the people in the next election.  And, 
Mr. Speaker, I am convinced, I am convinced as surely as I stand here that 
the people have had enough.  They've said, enough is enough and we are not 
going to stand for it any longer.  And they will tell them in no uncertain 
terms in the next election as to what they think of the nine years of 
incompetence, incompetency of those people who are sitting opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to . . . I haven't got the time, Mr. Speaker, to 
go into all the details, but I do want to also say that it's not just in 
income tax.  It's not just the increase in income tax that these people 
have increased the burden, the financial burden of the people of 



 

 

Saskatchewan.  I have here before me, Mr. Speaker, increases in provincial 
government licences, fees, and charges since 1982. 
 
(1515) 
 
And it would be scandalous, I think it is scandalous what they have done to 
this province.  Those of us who enjoyed the provincial parks before 1982, 
we well remember, Mr. Speaker, how the poor people, the low income people 
enjoyed the parks at $2 park fees.  I remember, Mr. Speaker, licensing my 
trailer which is a fold-down, a tent trailer, a fold-down trailer.  And in 
1982 -- and I want the members to check it out -- was $18 for a licence, 
$18 for a licence.  Now I haven't checked in the last two years because I 
haven't licensed it, but two years ago it was $72 -- $72, Mr. Speaker, for 
that licence.  In other words, a 400 per cent increase on the licence of a 
fold-down tent trailer -- 400 per cent increase. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me refer to a few others.  What have been the increases?  
Well, class 4 driver's licence, 122 per cent.  Resident white-tail deer 
licence, 100 per cent.  I'll just run through a few.  Wiring permit for 
school, 100 per cent.  Replacement driver's licence, 100 per cent.  Boiler 
and pressure vessel engineer's certificate, 471 per cent increase.  
Registration of business corporation annual return, 100 per cent increase.  
Business corporation certificate of incorporation, 150 per cent increase.  
Business corporation certification of documents, 300 per cent increase. 
 
Is it any wonder, Mr. Speaker, that small businesses are not supporting the 
members opposite? Is it any wonder, Mr. Speaker, that the small business . 
. . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Who told you? 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Who told me?  Angus Reid poll clearly indicated yesterday.  
I thank the member for asking me that question.  The Angus Reid poll 
clearly indicated that a huge majority of the small-business people are not 
supporting the Conservative Party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, special care home charges, 73 per cent increase; change of 
name application fee, 300 per cent increase; certificate of incorporation 
for non-profit corporations -- I want the members to know this is 
non-profit corporations -- 100 per cent increase; registration of business 
name, 150 per cent increase. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the next one, I found it rather interesting, marriage 
licences, 250 per cent increase.  What have the people opposite got against 
people getting married? -- 250 per cent increase.  I wouldn't be a bit 
surprised if I go a little further, we're going to find a huge increase for 
people who get married in churches.  You know, I just can't believe it. 
 
Incorporation fee, home building co-operative, 100 per cent increase; 
guides licence issued after June 30, 200 per cent increase.  Here's another 
one that the member opposite would be interested in.  Provision of a 
transcript, provision of a transcript to a university in Saskatchewan -- 
that's for students -- 100 per cent increase?  No, you're not close;  200 



 

 

per cent increase?  You're not close.  A lopping 400 per cent increase for 
students. 
 
I want the Minister of Education to know that, that he increased the 
provision for a transcript for university students by 400 per cent.  Not 
only that, Mr. Speaker, he had the audacity to stand in this House saying 
that tuition fees are not too high, that they're reasonable, when they had 
a 47 per cent increase at the U of S (University of Saskatchewan) -- 47 per 
cent increase.  Most of them, Mr. Speaker, most of them ranged from 23 per 
cent to 47 per cent.  Most of them.  That is true.  Most of them are from 
23 to 47 per cent increase.  I've got the figures from the university and 
I'll discuss those with you, Mr. Minister, in estimates in Education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here's another one.  Renewal of firemen's certificate, 400 per 
cent increase?  Oh, you're not close;  500? You're still way off.  Seven 
hundred per cent increase -- 700 per cent increase, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me say to the members opposite, I have before me here -- 
and it's no wonder -- I have before me here a provincial income tax 
comparison in 1990, a family income of 40,000.  And we find that 
Saskatchewan is by far, by far the highest income tax in all of Canada.  
The only other province that comes fairly close is Newfoundland.  
Newfoundland, it's 2,239; in Saskatchewan it's $2,426. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wanted this afternoon to also speak about tax reform, but I 
don't think I will have time.  I don't think time will permit me to do 
that.  But I remember full well the former minister of Finance, the present 
member from Qu'Appelle-Lumsden, how he supported the federal initiative in 
tax reform.  Time and time again, time and time again he supported the 
federal government tax reform.  And what did that reform do?  What did that 
tax reform do? 
 
It had huge savings, Mr. Speaker, huge savings for people making a hundred 
thousand and over, but very, very little savings for those people who made 
40,000 and less.  And it was this particular . . . it was the minister from 
Qu'Appelle-Lumsden, the member from Qu'Appelle-Lumsden who supported that 
with the other people on that side. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that tax reform and that particular member at that time, the 
minister of Finance at that time said, we're taking the first step of tax 
reform by initiating -- and the member knows full well -- we are going to 
put in a flat tax of .5 per cent.  You remember that.  What did he do then?  
Then he increased it to 1 per cent.  The following year it became 1.5 per 
cent.  But then he said, well we are not going to . . . then he put it to 2 
per cent but he said it won't stay on.  I ask the members opposite, what is 
the flat tax right now?  You all know it's 2 per cent, of course.  Another 
promise made and another promise broken. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is the problem that we have today in Saskatchewan as far 
as finances are concerned?  The problem, Mr. Speaker, is the accumulated 
debt, the accumulated debt of 5.2 billion, because it costs this province, 
it costs this province $500 million a year in interest charges alone, in 
interest charges alone. 



 

 

 
Mr. Speaker, I want to ask the members when they leave this Assembly, to 
turn to the Leader-Post of April 23, 1991.  And there they will find what 
damage they have done to this province and why, had their fiscal policies 
been responsible, had those fiscal policies been responsible, you would not 
have this Bill before this House today because there would be adequate 
funds available to pay for GRIP and NISA. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question in this editorial they ask is this:  did you know 
that by next March your debt will reach almost $5,200?  They're addressing 
this to each individual in Saskatchewan. 
 
The next question that's asked is what debt, you ask.  It's the one the 
government has piled up in your name over the last nine years -- this 
government, the PC government.  If we didn't have to pay the interest -- and 
I want members to note this -- if we didn't have to pay the interest on this 
debt, the debt that you people have created through your mismanagement and 
your  Dill-founded policies, if we didn't have to pay this debt, we could 
pay the 124.8 million for the gross revenue insurance plan, that's GRIP, and 
the net stabilization account, or NISA programs this fiscal year and still 
have more than $390 million left over to help out farmers in any other way 
we see fit. 
 
It's because of the wrong-headed policies that you people implemented in 
1982, because of the fiscal irresponsibility of you people and the Premier 
of this province, is that we are now paying the penalty for those 
ill-founded and ill 
_spearheaded policies that you put into effect in those years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are so many other things that one could talk about, about 
this government and their ill-founded policies.  You know, we didn't have . 
. . I want to refer to one other, Mr. Speaker, in this area.  And that's the 
Leader-Post on Monday, April 9, 1990.  It says:  One thing is certain, 
Hepworth said.  Taxpayers feel they're already paying their share. 
 
I want the members opposite to hear that.  This is what your present 
Minister of Finance said: 
 

 One thing is certain . . . (This is in 1990.)  One thing is certain, 
Hepworth said. Taxpayers feel they're already paying their share. 

 
I want to continue with that, and he says this: 
 

 "When it comes to taxes -- whether it is the business tax, personal income 
tax, the flat tax, the goods and services tax, lottery tax, property tax 
-- I think they're frightened.  I think they've had enough." 

 
Let me repeat that.  I want the member to know that.  This is your present 
Minister of Finance saying this. 
 

 "When it comes to taxes (I'm quoting him), when it comes to taxes -- 
whether it is the business tax, the personal income tax, the flat tax, the 
goods and services tax, lottery tax, property tax -- I think they're 



 

 

frightened.  I think they've had enough." 
 

And I would agree with that Minister.  They've had enough.  We should defeat 
this Bill and move on to other programs, Mr. Speaker, other Bills that you 
want to pass and if you so feel like it, which I'm sure you don't after the 
poll yesterday, let's dissolve this House and call an election so the people 
can then make a decision. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the boundaries will be there sooner than you think, sooner than 
you think.  The member opposite says, well what about boundaries?  Well I'll 
say to him that I hope he gives me the guarantee that when the federal 
Supreme Court comes down with the decision on Thursday that he will use his 
influence in cabinet to make absolutely certain that the Premier will not 
chicken out this time and will you call the election immediately, and let 
the people decide.  Let the people decide. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Speaker, I have another one here.  It says tax man takes 
$265 million bite. This was in 1987. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order, order. 
 
Mr. McLaren: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd ask for leave to introduce some guests, 
please. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. McLaren: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It is my pleasure today 
to introduce to you and through you to all members of the Assembly -- we 
have 42 grade 4 students from Simpson School in Yorkton and they are 
accompanied by their teachers, Marilyn Pearson and Sharon Brown; chaperons, 
Mrs. Brown, Mrs. Humphries, and Mrs. Phillips. 
 
Simpson School reminds me of the past, Mr. Speaker, where two of my children 
started their education in Simpson School.  So we have a soft spot in our 
heart for that school. 
 
We hope you enjoy your stay in the Assembly today, and that you have a good 
tour.  And we hope you have best of luck in your exams and a real happy 
summer holiday. 
 
So I'd ask all members to please welcome these students from Simpson School, 
and I'll be meeting with you very shortly. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 



 

 

Bill No. 61 (continued) 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, a Tory government, 
whether in Ottawa or in Regina, over the last number of years have proven 
that when it comes to taxation policies, they will always hit the 
small-income earner the most. 
 
And I want to read, Mr. Speaker, from a paper, The Globe and Mail of 1988, 
and quote the former prime minister of Canada, Mr. John Turner.  Mr. Turner 
said: figures from Statistics Canada and the Canadian Institute for Public 
Policy show that Canadians who earn 20,000 a year are paying $390 more in 
taxes than in 1984 when the Conservatives came into power, and those earning 
40,000 are paying 840 more.  But those earning -- I want the members 
opposite to listen -- those earning 120,000 more are paying $3,570 less. 
 
That is tax reform.  That is what they call tax reform.  Those who made 
20,000, Mr. Speaker, were paying $390 more; those who made 40,000 were 
paying $840 more, and you would expect that if they had fair taxation that 
the person who's making 120,000 would be paying more.  But that's not true. 
 
And it was the former minister of Finance of this province, the present 
member from Qu'Appelle-Lumsden, who supported that reform, and the $120,000 
paying $3,570 less, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1530) 
 
And in that category many of the cabinet ministers opposite -- I can 
understand them supporting that policy -- many of them will be making that 
kind of money.  And of course they'd be supporting, of course they'd be 
supporting that kind of policy because it's in their best interest, personal 
interest, Mr. Speaker, to support it. 
 
But I can tell the members opposite, that is not in the best interest of the 
ordinary citizen of this province and that is again why I say the Angus Reid 
poll yesterday puts you at 16 per cent.  You are not listening.  You are not 
listening to the ordinary citizen of this province.  And you deserve, you 
deserve exactly what you're going to get in the next election, and that is 
to seek employment somewhere else. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to . . . The Fraser Institute . . . I don't often quote 
the Fraser Institute, so I think I can do that.  The Fraser Institute in 
June of 1987 said the following, and I quote from the Leader-Post of 
Saturday, August 8, 1987: 
 

 A June 1987 Fraser Institute report shows Saskatchewan people are more 
heavily taxed than those in Newfoundland, Prince Edward Island, New 
Brunswick, and even NDP-run Manitoba. 

 
That was, Mr. Speaker, in 1987. 
 
Here's another, Western Producer, Thursday, November 11, 1987, "Saskatchewan 
heaps on more taxes": 
 



 

 

 The Saskatchewan government has increased its flat tax and has warned the 
public to expect a "significant" increase in sales tax. 

 
 Finance minister Gary Lane announced last week that the flat tax will 

increase from one percent of net income for 1986 to 1.5 percent in 1987.  
The increase is expected to bring in $55 million to $60 million. 

 
And we know of course, Mr. Speaker, that since that time they have increased 
the tax from 1.5 per cent to 2 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is lots of evidence to show that since 1982 this 
government and its counterpart in Ottawa, two Tory governments . . . This 
government inherited a surplus, no debt in the current account.  I recognize 
that the Tory government in Ottawa inherited a debt of $160 billion in 
Ottawa.  But if they were fiscally responsible, if they were fiscally 
responsible, Mr. Speaker, would they have allowed that debt to increase to 
the present $419 billion in Ottawa?  Four hundred and nineteen billion 
dollars. 
 
And I can remember well that the Tory government in Ottawa blaming the 
Liberals for this huge debt.  And again I don't have time, Mr. Speaker, to 
go through the editorials that have been written which clearly indicate you 
cannot blame the former governments for ever.  Sometimes you've got to 
accept your own responsibility for the policies that you have implemented 
and the irresponsible policies, fiscal policies that you have implemented 
which have caused this huge debt. 
 
I've said that the government in Ottawa, the government in Ottawa inherited 
a debt of $160 billion.  It's now 419 billion.  But what has this government 
done?  In 1982 they inherited a $139 million surplus and we now have a 
accumulated debt in the current account, of 5.2 billion. 
 
Not only, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are we the highest taxed before this Bill 
comes into effect, if it ever does, not only are we the highest taxed 
already, but we also have the highest debt per capita in all of Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that tells me something about the incompetence of those people 
opposite, and they don't deserve to govern any longer.  Any day that they 
continue to govern is an increased debt for the people of this province and 
it's time that a new administration takes over, implements some policies 
which come to grips with this debt and with this deficit that has been 
created by those people opposite, not only by their incompetence, by their 
mismanagement, by their waste, by their patronage appointments that they 
have made. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it is time that the Premier opposite put some 
credibility back into his statements and his policies.  We have before this 
legislature, Mr. Speaker, several Bills.  One, Mr. Speaker . . . well I 
don't need it anyway.  One, Mr. Speaker, is Bill 61, the one that we are 
debating right now, and that is the Bill to increase and expand the sales 
tax -- $460 million increase. 
 
The other Bill that I want to refer to -- and that's why, Mr. Speaker, I 



 

 

refer to the hypocrisy of this government, the hypocrisy of this government 
-- they have also before us a Bill, Bill 69, which refers to referendums and 
plebiscites.  And I believe, if I remember the details of that Bill 
correctly, it says that if 15 per cent of the adult population sign a 
petition, that they should have the right to ask for a plebiscite and then 
the government could also initiate referendums. 
 
We have today, Mr. Speaker, our Leader of the Opposition, the hon. member 
from Riversdale, tabled the remainder of the petitions that we have received 
so far -- and they're still coming in -- which clearly indicated that we 
have tabled 120,000 petitions.  People of this province have clearly 
indicated, no we do not agree with the Bill that is before this legislature.  
We do not want those increased taxes.  We think that you have sufficient 
revenue that you can take that out of present revenue if only you cut out 
some of the waste and mismanagement, if only you cut out some of the 
patronage, if only you changed some of those misguided policies that you 
have implemented over the years.  There's lots of money there to pay for 
GRIP and NISA. 
 
A hundred and twenty thousand people have asked you, have asked the 
government to listen, have asked the government to withdraw this Bill and 
have asked the opposition to do whatever it can to stop this Bill and force 
the government to call an election. 
 
But even before that, Mr. Speaker, if there was any  
 Dcredence at all in what this government says, in what this Premier says 
and does, if there was any credence at all, he would say to this 
legislature, I withdraw the Bill and I will hold a plebiscite.  But why 
waste the money on a plebiscite; I'm into my fifth year.  I've only got 
five months left into my term. I'll call an election and let the people 
decide.  If there was any honour at all, that's what he would do. That's 
what he would do.  He would say to the people, I have listened, I have 
heard, I will carry out your will. 
 
Why when there's only five months left in his term, in the dying days of 
his term, why does he want to force this down the throats of the people of 
Saskatchewan.  A hundred and twenty thousand people have signed petitions 
saying to him, stop.  And in the words of the present Minister of Finance, 
enough is enough.  We will refuse to pay any more taxes. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people of this province have shown that they will not 
support it.  They have shown by crossing the borders of Alberta, by 
crossing the borders in the United States and doing their shopping there.  
Mr. Speaker, they have shown by the car dealers who've come into this 
legislature.  They've shown by their restaurateurs who've signed these 
petitions and who have shown up in this legislature. Mr. Speaker, what more 
does this government need?  What more proof does there have to be to show 
these people opposite that they do not have the confidence of the people of 
Saskatchewan any longer. They have no mandate. 
 
If there was any legitimacy, if there was any honesty, any honour at all 
left in the members opposite, they would convince that Premier, since he is 
only at -- what is it? -- 16 per cent according to the Angus Reid poll, or 



 

 

19 per cent?  No, he's at 16 per cent; the party is at 19 . . . If he had 
any credence at all, if he had any credence at all, Mr. Speaker, he would 
dissolve this House as soon as the Supreme Court makes a decision on the 
boundaries and we would have an election and let the people decide. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have dwelt considerable amount on taxes, not only with this 
government but the government in Ottawa.  And the reason I did that, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, was because this Premier has been in the hip pocket of the 
Prime Minister of Canada ever since 1982.  And even more so, deeper in the 
hip pocket of the Prime Minister of Canada since 1986 when the Prime 
Minister bailed him out in an election that there's no doubt he would have 
lost. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, because he sits in the hip pocket of the Prime Minister 
he does not negotiate for the well-being and the best interest of the 
people of this province.  And again, Mr. Speaker, as I've indicated, that 
was clearly shown, clearly shown, by the poll that was done by Angus Reid 
yesterday . . . or the results that came out yesterday. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do want to read into the record a few other quotes which 
clearly indicate that the future of Canada, and that includes Saskatchewan 
. . . and because of the close alliance between the Premier of this 
province and the Prime Minister of Canada, I feel that the Premier of this 
province has to bear a lot of the responsibility of what is happening not 
only in Saskatchewan but also in Canada as such.  Because he could use his 
influence in changing the policies of the federal government so it would 
not continually off-load onto the provinces. 
 
We need a strong voice sitting in the Premier's chair, a strong voice that 
will stand up to Ottawa, a strong voice, as I say to the Minister of 
Education, that will stand up so that the federal government will not 
off-load in post-secondary education. 
 
And I ask the Minister of Education, when's the last time that he was in 
Ottawa negotiating for the province of Saskatchewan, for our two 
universities, so that you don't have to increase tuition fees because the 
federal government will not pay its fair share of post-secondary education? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Not only that, Mr. Speaker, I have yet to see this Minister 
of Education, I've yet to see this Minister of Education stand up for the 
interests of the students of this province.  He constantly apologizes for 
his cabinet ministers and for his government because of the lack of funds, 
operating funds that he provides.  And he provides for the two 
universities.  And, Mr. Speaker, is it any wonder when you have an 
apologetic Minister of Education that you have the lowest per capita 
operating finances in all of Canada -- the lowest, the lowest per capita 
operating in all of Canada because you have an apologetic Minister of 
Education.  That is why, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think he must even go into cabinet and say, oh no, that's lots.  I don't 
need any more than that, you know, otherwise I'd lose my position of being 



 

 

in last place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there's lots of evidence to show the policies of the 
provincial and federal government are doing irreparable harm to this 
country of Canada.  And I just want to quote one line from The Globe and 
Mail of April 6, 1989, an article written by W.A. Macdonald.  I'll only 
read one line.  And he said, "THE RAPIDLY GROWING national debt puts 
Canada's future in jeopardy." 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, if that statement is true, that the national growing 
debt puts Canada in jeopardy, then I think it's the logical step to say 
that the growing debt in the province of Saskatchewan puts the future of 
Saskatchewan in jeopardy also.  And that is the concern that the people of 
Saskatchewan have.  That is the concern that they have and that is why, Mr. 
Speaker, they have lost their faith in the people opposite, because over 
the nine years they have become irresponsible. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to also read from The Financial Post of February 27, 
1989.  And this is an article by Hyman Solomon.  "At last, Mulroney riding 
herd on deficit."  Well I wish he had been correct when he wrote this.  But 
what I want to read is the last few lines of this article that he wrote.  
He said that the resolve is there. 
 

 The resolve is there, (to reduce the debt that Canadians want the debt 
reduced) but the results are still to come.  What is certain is that the 
deficit/debt problem, politically, is no longer the legacy of former 
Liberal governments.  It belongs to the Tory government, lock, stock and 
rising misery index. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I use that quote because recently I heard the Premier and a 
few of his colleagues opposite trying to blame the $5.2 billion deficit on 
the former Allan Blakeney government.  Absolutely ludicrous.  Everybody 
admits that there was a $139 million surplus.  I mean it was signed by Bob 
Andrew who was then the minister of Finance, in July of 1982, signed that 
there was $139 million surplus.  And yet I heard the Premier the other day 
and a few of his colleagues saying that a large part of the blame for the 
$5.2 billion deficit rests with the Blakeney government. 
 
Well I suppose it rests with him.  If we had left $2 billion, the 
Progressive Conservative government now could have even wasted that too.  
And to that extent I suppose it's true.  But certainly it's a leap of 
logic, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to try and blame that on to a former government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to close my comments by simply saying this.  This Bill 
that is before us today -- Bill 61, to expand the health and education tax 
and sales tax -- which will give this government another $460 million, 
taxes which the people of this province can ill afford, a Bill, Mr. 
Speaker, that is not supported by very many people in this province, hardly 
anybody . . . Business people don't want it; farmers don't say that they 
need it, I mean the poll clearly states that.  We can't find very many 
people who want this Bill and say we need it.  Four hundred and sixty 



 

 

million dollars -- to take that out of the economy when you have a stagnant 
economy already further, Mr. Speaker, further puts the brakes to that 
economy. 
 
And instead of the government getting additional revenues, it will find 
that the people simply will not expend that money in this province.  They 
will expend it in the province of Alberta.  They will go to the United 
States and spend their hard-earned money there, but those revenues will not 
accrue to this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, because this government doesn't have a mandate to 
implement this huge tax grab in the last five months of their term, I think 
they should withdraw this Bill.  As the amendment says . . . and I'm sure 
the Government House Leader who is a reasonable man, will see the logic of 
that and he'll support this amendment.  He will say yes, we only have five 
months left.  If the people really want this Bill, if the people really 
want this Bill and they want these tax increases, then let's put it to a 
vote.  You've had 120,000 names, Mr. Minister.  You've had 120 names tabled 
in this legislature. 
 
Why don't you, together with a call for an election, have a plebiscite.  
Have a plebiscite on this Bill and if the people give you a mandate again, 
then yes, bring that Bill back to this legislature and it shall be passed.  
You don't have that mandate now.  Do the honourable thing.  Withdraw the 
Bill.  Take heedance of the poll yesterday.  Listen to the people and say 
yes, I'll do the honourable thing.  I will listen despite what my 
colleagues opposite say.  Despite what my colleagues say, I'll do the 
honourable thing.  I'll withdraw this Bill.  And I will recommend to my 
caucus that we do have a plebiscite. 
 
And let's go on with the other business of the House.  Let's go on with our 
estimates.  Let's go on with those other Bills and then when the Supreme 
Court makes its decision tomorrow, and if the boundaries then are 
legitimate, let the Premier call an election.  And let the people decide. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can't support this Bill.  I don't intend to support this 
Bill if it ever comes to a vote.  I will, however, if it comes to a vote, 
support the amendment, which, Mr. Speaker, would give the people of this 
province as they've clearly indicated through the petitions, their voice.  
They will decide and that will be the paramount issue in the election. 
 
Do they want $460 million additional revenues for this government to waste 
and mismanage or will they tell the people of this province look, $4.5 
billion of revenue should be sufficient in a province that only has a 
million people.  That should be sufficient to run a government.  Let's cut 
out some of the waste.  Let's cut out some of that advertising.  Let's get 
rid of some of those patronage appointments.  Let's get rid of some of 
those legislative secretaries.  Let's do a real housecleaning.  And if you 
did that I'm sure that you would find the money that you need for GRIP and 
NISA. 
 
And by the way, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I noticed yesterday when I went through 
Bill 61, the House Leader says, the Government House Leader says he needs 



 

 

this money for GRIP and NISA.  Not once in Bill 61, nowhere, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is GRIP and NISA even mentioned -- nowhere.  This $460 million 
will go into the general coffers, for what?  For more patronage 
appointments?  For more waste and mismanagement?  For more advertising for 
Dome Advertising?  We don't know what it's going to go for. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because this government has lost its mandate, because this 
people does not have the confidence of the people of Saskatchewan, and 
because I believe, Mr. Speaker, that money can be found in the $4.5 billion 
that we presently get as revenues in the government, I cannot, neither will 
I support this Bill if it ever comes to a vote.  But if it does, I will 
support the amendment.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It's very much my 
pleasure, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to enter into this debate on Bill No. 61.  
And in my view, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a very important piece of 
legislation for the health and wealth and economic well-being of this 
province that I've called home now for some 35 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill has been under debate in one form or another in this 
Legislative Assembly and outside this Legislative Assembly, I think it fair 
to say, since February 20 of this year.  It was on that day that our 
Minister of Finance, the member for Weyburn, saw fit to pre-announce to the 
people of Saskatchewan, with some very good justification, the 
implementation of this tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have heard from the opposition in a very narrow-minded, 
simplistic, distorted, one-sided point of view as to why simply, just don't 
pass the tax; don't bring in the Bill; don't tax us; with absolutely no 
alternative or no analysis of the realities of what this society is facing 
-- no depth of analysis of really where this province is at fiscally and 
socially, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I believe that members opposite have not done justice to really analysing 
the impacts of this legislation and analysing . . . or suggesting, pardon 
me, some alternatives.  And, Mr. Speaker, this afternoon I'd like to go 
through with you in a succinct sort of a way, some of the benefits for this 
legislation, some of the reasons, some of the justifications, some of the 
facts as to why this piece of legislation is absolutely essential. 
 
Firstly, Mr. Speaker, you will know that this province is committed to two 
farm programs.  Those are GRIP and NISA, standing for gross revenue 
insurance program and net income stabilization account.  These are two 
programs, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that people all across this province, and I 
say urban people, rural people, young people, old people, grandfathers, 
grandmothers, sons and daughters, and anybody who is knowledgeable about 
the fact that agriculture is our base have asked for. 
 
For so many years, Mr. Speaker, the people of this province have seen ad 
hoc programs, that is, perhaps they'll come this month, perhaps next month.  
And we placed a great responsibility onto our Premier to march down to 



 

 

Ottawa and shake some heads down there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and bring back 
money to this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I say to you today that our Premier and this party has 
done a very, very good job in light of the circumstances of going to 
Ottawa, bringing back home deficiency payments, drought payments, 
stabilization payments, and all sorts of moneys for agriculture. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, anybody could predict that that is not the way to 
handle the issue in the long haul.  What we must do is have something that 
provides stability, a greater degree of certainty, something that farmers 
could take to the bank.  This is what the people of Saskatchewan asked for 
and, Mr. Speaker, this is what the Conservative Party federally and 
provincially and across this country have provided to farmers -- a 
long-term stabilizing set of programs that takes a lot of the uncertainty 
out of the air in this province. 
 
Is that good for our farmers, Mr. Speaker?  Is that good for our 
non-farmers, our urban and our rural people?  Well I say yessirree, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker.  And 80 per cent of our farmers in Saskatchewan agreed, and 
they signed up -- 80 per cent, Mr. Speaker.  That's a large number of 
farmers who said yes to GRIP, yes to NISA. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- And I make the case, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that that's 
just not farm people.  Those are business people; those are working people.  
Common sense people in Saskatchewan said yes, bring us a program that has 
some stability. 
 
Did that program just grow on trees, Mr. Deputy Speaker?  Could we go some 
place else and find the money hidden in a vault somewhere?  No, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker.  We've got a job to do and that job was to raise the moneys 
requisite to pay for those farm programs.  Members opposite can say, oh 
well, we'd find it in cutting a few ads back in the local newspapers.  Oh, 
Mr. Speaker, we'd sort of cut back some of the wages around this place and 
we'd find it there.  Oh, Mr. Speaker, we'd buy some second-hand automobiles 
instead of some late model ones and we'd find the $125 million there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members opposite have not been reasonable, have not been 
responsible, and have not really come up with a plan to raise that money.  
Their plan was not a plan.  Their option was not an option.  Their 
alternative is not an alternative.  And oh, they can be coy and they can be 
smart, as politicians over the years have been, and think that they can 
skate around, be quiet, hide in the weeds, and not offer a plan to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are not the 1970s.  These are not the 1960s or the 
1980s.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, these are the 1990s.  These are complex, 
interesting, difficult, challenging times in many, many respects.  And I 
say to the members opposite, you may smirk and smile today and the polls 
may indicate for a day or two that you will again be successful in skirting 
around the issues and be hiding in the weeds and not bringing out policies 



 

 

and alternatives. But, Mr. Speaker, in the 1990s I will tell you that sort 
of scam, that sort of scam will not wash with the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
(1600) 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I believe that I've got a pretty good 
sense of what those people out there are going to do.  And, Mr. Speaker, 
I've been around a little bit in Saskatchewan and I've seen some slick 
artists.  I've seen some real wise guys, and I'll use the following 
analogy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And with all respect to salesmen -- I'm a salesman myself, and about 95 per 
cent of salesmen are good, honest, straightforward people -- but there's 
some people who are salesmen in this building who are going out and trying 
to sell the people of Saskatchewan a bill of goods.  And they're like a 
salesman that's coming along, and they're going to grandpa and grandma and 
they're going to say, well why don't you buy my product?  Sign the contract 
here, mom and pop, vote for me. 
 
But when mom and pop say, well why don't you show us the vacuum cleaner, 
why don't you show us the product, do you know what they say?  Oh well, 
we're still developing that.  There's no definite plan.  NDP -- no definite 
plan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Yes, Mr. Speaker, the question is,  
 Dthe question is, will the people of Saskatchewan when it comes right down 
to signing that contract, will they sign that contract and buy that vacuum 
cleaner sight unseen?  When they say, oh we're developing it; it's still in 
the factory; as it stands now we don't have the vacuum cleaner, we don't 
have the plan; we're not going to show you; we're not even going to give 
you the drawings of it, Mr. Speaker, and tell you what it's like, the 
question is:  will the people sign that contract?  I say no, Mr. Speaker, 
the people of Saskatchewan are far too wise, they are far too shrewd, they 
believe in this province far too much to ever just sign that old contract 
and say, you bet we'll buy this product. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP say they have changed.  The NDP say they have changed.  
They say, believe me, we have changed.  Well, Mr. Speaker, how have the NDP 
changed?  I say they've changed in a couple of respects, Mr. Speaker.  
They've gotten a little older, a little tireder, and they've been recycled, 
Mr. Speaker.  And maybe they got a little more radical.  That's the only 
way they've changed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, and these people, these people who would 
lead the people of Saskatchewan to believe that this tax is all bad have 
not given a full and thorough and comprehensive analysis of it to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 



 

 

 
The Department of Finance, under the able leadership of the Minister of 
Finance from the area of Weyburn, has developed a very thorough analysis of 
this plan.  Not a political analysis by NDP hacks in the back rooms, Mr. 
Speaker, but by some very professional, dedicated, competent individuals 
who have gone through all the work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, have the members opposite as they've been out and about 
Saskatchewan said, well folks, why don't you read this plan and tell me 
what you think?  They say, oh no, everything's all bad.  And what did they 
leave out, Mr. Speaker?  What did the NDP leave out?  Well what they did 
leave out was all the things that have to do with low income people.  Here 
they are, the members opposite, the so-called historic defenders of the 
small guy; the so-called defenders of people who can't earn their own 
living, Mr. Speaker; the so-called defenders of the people with less than 
average incomes. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I ask why did those NDP members not go to those low 
income families and say, you know, we don't agree with this tax but I sure 
want you to know that you will be getting some rebate cheques in the mail 
of up to $200 per child, $800 per family, to offset this. 
 
Where was their real compassion, Mr. Speaker?  Where was the NDP's real 
concern for those low income families?  I challenge members opposite to go 
to those low income families, let them know, Mr. Speaker, that there will 
be cheques coming.  As a matter of fact, they've already arrived. 
 
But the NDP chose very conveniently, very conveniently, to ignore that real 
true economic direct benefit to low income families.  And on behalf of low 
income families, Mr. Speaker, I say shame on the NDP.  Shame on the NDP for 
not talking to the low income families about some real benefits with this 
taxation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members opposite failed also to discuss the economic benefits 
with respect to business.  And sure, Mr. Speaker, the added cost is going 
to have some price sensitivity in some areas.  I understand that.  But, Mr. 
Speaker, there are also offsetting benefits. 
 
I speak, Mr. Speaker, to many, many businesses.  I use as the example . . . 
I should firstly say, Mr. Speaker, we have to deal with the reality that 
the GST is here.  NDP members can hide their heads in the sand, pretend it 
doesn't exist, but it's reality here.  For better or for worse, Mr. 
Speaker, whether we like it or whether we don't, the GST is here.  And then 
the question becomes how best to handle that, Mr. Speaker.  How do you 
manage in the 1990s with a complex tax as a reality for businesses, for 
consumers, called the GST? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the first thing that we said to business people and 
business people said to us in our consultations is, well boy oh boy, you 
better hitch the two together, harmonize them, because as a business 
person, Mr. Speaker, our business people are sick and tired of overlaps, 
duplications, two sets of forms, two phone calls to make, two sets of 
bureaucrats to deal with. 



 

 

 
Why not have a single tax, a single bureaucratic administrative system?  It 
just makes sense, Mr. Speaker.  Business people are sick and tired of 
filling out too many forms and administratively, I challenge the members 
opposite to bring back the business people that they had in the legislature 
here, tell them the truth, and see if those business people don't say yes, 
in that respect it does make sense; in that respect it does make sense. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I know that this GST is a complex, a 
complex tax.  It was difficult for our business people to catch on, and how 
did it work and there was questions and there was seminars, there was toll 
_free lines, information pamphlets.  And there's no question, it's a tough 
thing to deal with. 
 
As a business person, Mr. Speaker, I dealt with it myself.  I still haven't 
got it all figured out.  But I do know this.  I do know this, Mr. Speaker, 
that the way the GST works is that for a business person, you get a credit.  
That is, you may pay GST on something, but you get a credit for it and it 
is offset.  So in fact there is really no GST for business people.  What 
this tax is going to do in Saskatchewan is harmonize with that and there's 
going to be a benefit for business people.  In essence, Mr. Speaker, 
businesses will be tax free. 
 
I take a look at a business that I know very well, has a telephone bill, 
probably 35 to $40,000 a year, a small business.  Well by my calculations, 
if you're spending $40,000 a year on a telephone bill at 7 per cent, that's 
a $2,800 tax bill that automatically you get a refund or a rebate or a tax 
credit for.  That's $2,800 on the telephone bill. 
 
I know, Mr. Speaker, when a business person goes out to buy a brand-new 
pick-up truck, let's say it was a real fancy one at $30,000, okay; maybe it 
was a construction outfit, a one-ton truck sort of decked out to work in a 
construction crew, $30,000; 7 per cent of $30,000 -- $2,100 benefit to that 
construction company that they would not have paid before. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, those are real, live, concrete examples of what 
harmonization will do.  I'm not about to say that that's the same for every 
business or all businesses are going to benefit equally.  There will be 
some that won't get those large benefits.  There'll be some that this tax 
may in fact have some disadvantages for.  But, Mr. Speaker, we have to look 
at it in the big picture, in the big competitive picture, the big 
administrative picture, Mr. Speaker.  The NDP have chosen not to really 
tell the business people of Saskatchewan some of those benefits. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have heard of this tax once again since February 20 of this 
year.  That is about four months ago -- March, April, May -- yes, just 
about four months ago, Mr. Speaker, this tax was first announced.  This tax 
is presently being collected, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I also have to look at, well has this legislature, has this institution 
adequately dealt with this piece of legislation.  In some ways I say it has 



 

 

not.  In other ways, Mr. Speaker, I say this Assembly has had the 
opportunity to do so.  And, Mr. Speaker, members opposite, before the 
legislature was called, they were getting in front of the news cameras and 
writing in the papers and say, call that legislature; get that legislature 
in session so we can debate this tax Bill. 
 
And what happened, Mr. Speaker, when we got into the legislature?  Well 
members opposite all of a sudden clammed up and they says, oh no, we're not 
even going to debate this Bill; oh no, we don't want to talk about the 
Bill.  Why, Mr. Speaker, did they not want to talk about the Bill?  The 
fact is because they are the NDP -- no definite plan -- no alternative. 
 
And what did they choose as the option to debating the Bill?  Well, Mr. 
Speaker, the public of Saskatchewan know full well what the option by the 
NDP was -- not to provide constructive alternatives and decent analysis of 
it, but let's ring bells.  We can hide in the weeds a different way.  We 
can hide under the skirts of bells, Mr. Speaker.  Just get away and get all 
the bells ringing, and then we don't have to talk about what we're going to 
really do.  Well, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan will not be 
fooled by that. 
 
How else did they hide, Mr. Speaker?  Well let's take some of the rules of 
the Assembly.  And I don't know if they were broken or not -- that's not 
for me to decide -- but I do know that they were stretched to the absolute 
maximum, Mr. Speaker, bringing in petitions day after day, one name, one 
page at a time, when they could have been more efficiently done, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Let's hide behind petitions for probably 22 hours . . . 20 hours, pardon 
me, of petitions.  Let's hide behind those petitions and then we don't have 
to really analyse this Bill, we don't really have to talk about this Bill, 
we don't really have to come up with an alternative because we can hide 
behind petitions for 20 hours; we can hide behind bell-ringing for 22 
hours; we can shut this place down in the middle of the day and say, we 
just want to go home. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, "we just want to go home" is not good enough for the 
people of Saskatchewan.  The people of Saskatchewan are far too wise, far 
too shrewd, and love this province far too much to be sucked in by what the 
NDP have been doing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this House did come to an impasse about, oh, a week or 10 days 
ago when it became obvious to all that something was amiss here.  It wasn't 
getting debated; there were strange things happening here.  So, Mr. 
Speaker, the government chose to take a different course of action and say, 
well let's just go strictly to the Bill.  Let's debate the Bill. 
 
We have not heard satisfactory analysis in my view from the opposition as 
of yet.  But, Mr. Speaker, there's been plenty of opportunity -- 22 hours 
of bell-ringing, 20 hours of petition, quitting half way during the day, 
all these types of things, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I am challenging the opposition today.  I am challenging them to come 



 

 

clean with an alternative.  Come clean with an alternative.  Don't be like 
that salesman that just said, sign on the bottom line.  Bring out your 
product.  Show us.  Show us what you really do.  And, Mr. Speaker, I 
challenge them to do that. 
 
I challenge them to stand up in the next short while, Mr. Speaker, and 
really let the people of Saskatchewan know what they may do.  And, Mr. 
Speaker, some of the alternatives, some of the alternatives to me are very, 
very scary indeed.  Very scary alternatives, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One alternative may be . . . We don't have a monopoly on brain power.  
There's more than one way to skin a cat, but let's get an alternative.  And 
would that be to raise income tax?  Would that be fair to those out there 
who are doing the working and the paying, to say we're going to nip you a 
little more with income tax, 15 or 20 per cent?  No, sir.  No, sir.  That 
would not be fair. 
 
Would it be fair, Mr. Speaker, to say, well let's put a payroll tax on like 
they do in Manitoba?  Would that be fair, Mr. Speaker?  I don't think it 
would.  Would it be fair to resurrect inheritance taxes?  I don't think 
that would be fair.  I don't think that would be fair at all, Mr. Speaker.  
But those are real alternatives.  Payroll taxes, income taxes, death taxes. 
 
I don't know what else they may come up with.  Maybe a land tax.  Maybe 
there would be a tax if you owned so much land.  That would be sort of a 
socialist philosophy, I think.  If you owned so much land, well maybe just 
tack on some there.  Maybe so much per acre.  I don't know.  Or would the 
alternative, Mr. Speaker, be simply to let that old deficit rise like they 
did in Ontario?  And, Mr. Speaker, there's a really good example.  There's 
a really good example of a party coming to power with no definite plan. 
 
So let us examine just for a minute or two how socialists in  
 Dthe province of Ontario manage just on a day-to-day basis.  They said, 
well just elect us.  We don't have to give you a plan.  They get in there, 
Mr. Speaker.  It's utter chaos in Ontario.  Businesses are leaving.  
Businesses like The Bay.  Businesses like Zellers.  Businesses like a major 
tire manufacturer.  They're saying, only after six months of NDP, no 
definitive plan, they're saying, we're out of here. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I'll tell you the people of Ontario are pretty worried 
about that, and I don't blame them.  In fact I think it's almost to the 
point of being a national embarrassment, a national embarrassment, Mr. 
Speaker.  And you know what I'm hoping for, Mr. Speaker, and I say today on 
behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, I plead with those businesses, Mr. 
Speaker, if you're leaving Ontario, come to Saskatchewan.  We've got good 
values here, Mr. Speaker, good work ethic . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- And, Mr. Speaker, we are open for business here and 
this Conservative government expects that to stay for a long, long time. 



 

 

 
Mr. Speaker, I have challenged the opposition to debate this Bill, to come 
up with alternatives.  I say that there has been plenty of opportunity 
given.  And today, Mr. Speaker, after very thorough and careful 
consideration, very careful consideration, Mr. Speaker, I have come to the 
realization, come to the realization, Mr. Speaker, that this Bill will pass 
this legislature. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it's taken a long time.  The Bill was first introduced in 
this legislature on April 15.  What's today, Mr. Speaker?  We're talking 
about June 3 or 4 -- that's just about eight weeks.  Eight weeks this Bill 
has been under debate in this legislature in one form or another. 
 
Sometimes strange forms, strange forms of debate -- bell-ringings, 
petitions, quorum calls, motions, hiding under the guise of committee 
reports -- in one way or another this Bill has been debated, Mr. Speaker, 
for some time. 
 
At a given point in time, Mr. Speaker, I, as Government House Leader, on 
behalf of my colleagues from all over Saskatchewan, must come to a 
decision.  We've heard radical statements by members opposite that this 
Bill will never pass; this Bill will never be debated; we're not going to 
tell you our plan today; we have no plan as it stands now.  These are all 
quotations from the members opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have tried as best I can in running this Assembly -- and I 
have a big obligation and a responsibility to do that -- I've tried my very 
best to have reasoned debate, to challenge members opposite to come up with 
their views.  I've been successful only in part. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, today after giving careful consideration to the 
alternatives and the options before me as House Leader, I can only after 
analysing it, Mr. Speaker, reach one conclusion.  And that is, Mr. Speaker, 
that a challenge must be made to the opposition to stand up, give us your 
plan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I do that with some reluctance as to using the rules of 
this Assembly in what may be perceived by some as a heavy-handed and harsh 
way.  And, Mr. Speaker, I assure you that this is a last resort.  This is a 
strategy that has been developed only with little or no option, Mr. 
Speaker.  And, accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I am giving notice today of 
closure, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I give notice, pursuant to rule 31, that at the next 
sitting of the Assembly, immediately before the orders of the day is called 
for resuming debate on the motion, for second reading of Bill No. 61, an 
Act to amend The Education and Health Tax Act, and any amendments thereto, 
that I will move that the said debate be not further adjourned. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that's not choking debate.  There's been plenty of opportunity 
and there will be plenty of opportunity tomorrow.  And, Mr. Speaker, I'm 
challenging members opposite tomorrow in the time allotted to stand up and 
be counted.  And in a succinct way let's cut away all of the time wasting, 



 

 

Mr. Speaker.  Let's delve directly into the issue. 
 
Let's stand here as elected men and women with a conscience, and stand up 
and say really what the opposition may do, really what the alternative 
would be.  I challenge members opposite to cut away the political rhetoric, 
cut away the political rhetoric, and, Mr. Speaker, in 15 or 20 minutes 
every one of them is capable enough . . . and I'm not certain of that, but 
I think they are capable enough to stand up and give us a succinct view of 
what NDP plan might be. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it'll be an important day for the people of Saskatchewan.  
And I ask the people of Saskatchewan to pay specific notice to tomorrow's 
debate, where it will be an opportunity for members opposite to stand up 
and say, yes, we don't like this tax but here's an alternative.  Give us a 
choice, Mr. Speaker.  Be fair to the people of Saskatchewan.  And I 
challenge members opposite to do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As I say, I, with some reluctance, make this motion.  I feel strongly that 
it is a necessary course of action and an opportunity for members opposite 
to stand in their place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it's a pleasure for me to have had an opportunity to enter 
into this debate.  I want you to know that I am absolutely, in the 
circumstances, opposed to the amendment.  I have spoken in favour of the 
Bill, and I challenge members opposite to stand up in their place and do 
the same.  Give us your real views.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- I recognize the hon. member for Saskatoon Fairview.  Prior 
to the member from Fairview, I see that the member for Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster has an interjection. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  With leave I'd like to introduce 
some guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- I'd like to thank the members of the Legislative Assembly.  
Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all 
members of the Assembly, 10 young people from Sweet Grass School from 
Gallivan, Saskatchewan.  They're here to visit and tour the Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker, and I hope that what they see and hear will give them some forum 
of what democracy is all about. 
 
I'd also like to say, Mr. Speaker, that they're accompanied by their 
teacher Ada Gott and chaperon Alice Weenie.  I will be meeting with them, 
Mr. Speaker, for refreshments and pictures, and I'd like all members of the 
Assembly to please help me welcome these young people to this Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 



 

 

 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 
SECOND READINGS 

 
Bill No. 61 (continued) 

 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, thank you very much.  I look 
across the House, Mr. Speaker, at the House Leader, at the Government House 
Leader and I think that he finally must be satisfied.  I think he finally 
was able to do today what he's been telling the press and others he 
intended to do from about the time that this Bill was tabled. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we had barely begun debate on this Bill when the House Leader, 
standing in the corridor in this building, was telling the press how he 
wouldn't tolerate any extended debate on this Bill and that he was prepared 
to do what he had to do in order to limit the debate and to stop it. 
 
And indeed I want to just remind you, Mr. Speaker, and the House and the 
people of Saskatchewan that what the fight was about here was not Bill 61 
per se.  What the fight was about here was our right to debate Bill 61 and 
to lay on the record the basis on which we oppose Bill 61. 
 
I make that point, Mr. Speaker, because the House Leader in his 
presentation that he's just completed, talked about the fact that the rules 
of this House had been used to full advantage, that we had introduced all 
those petitions.  And in fact, Mr. Speaker, that whole process, as the 
House Leader well knows, was undertaken because of his attempt to introduce 
a time allocation motion that would have limited debate on this Bill. 
 
The point is simply that he's been trying to limit debate on this Bill ever 
since the Bill was introduced and finally today he's accomplished it.  Now 
we had to sit here for a few days and listen to a few of the members on 
this side of the House lay on the record their basis of opposition but he 
finally was able to stand up today and say: no more debate on this Bill.  
We don't want the people of Saskatchewan to continue to hear the problems 
with this tax and the devastation that it will bring to the economy of this 
province, and the job loss that it will bring to this province. 
 
He's decided.  He's decided, Mr. Speaker, as he did right at the beginning 
that debate on this Bill is not going to be allowed, that debate on this 
Bill is going to be curtailed.  So as I say, he has a look of satisfaction 
about him today because today he has finally accomplished what he wanted to 
accomplish and sought to accomplish from the very beginning. 
 
There is no need.  There is no need to limit our right to debate this Bill, 
Mr. Speaker.  There is no need to do that.  We're here.  We're here on our 
own nickel.  We're not being paid for our attendance at this House, Mr. 
Speaker.  We're not being paid our expenses.  We're here because we think 
this Bill is important.  We think that the opposition to this Bill is 
extremely important. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  There are a couple of members, and 



 

 

especially one, especially one who is extremely anxious to get into the 
debate.  If he'll be patient, he's going to have that opportunity from what 
I understand, from what I've just heard, in a fairly short period of time.  
I ask him to just be patient. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The point that I was making was 
that we've got lots of time.  We're here in June.  The crops are in the 
ground.  There's nothing urgent happening that requires this legislature to 
move . . . to finish up its work and for us to go on our summer holidays.  
We can continue to stay here and thoroughly canvass this Bill.  And it is 
our obligation to do that, Mr. Speaker.  I mean we're not here debating 
some trivial piece of legislation of interest only to a particular slice of 
the population.  We're here debating a Bill that has impact on everybody.  
And the level of opposition, Mr. Speaker, is staggering. 
 
As my leader said today on introducing the petitions to you, Mr. Speaker, 
120,000 people have paused in their daily activity to take a pen in hand 
and to sign the petition -- 120,000 people.  Now that's a lot of people, 
Mr. Speaker.  That's a lot of people in a province like this.  How many 
adult people would be resident in this province -- 600,000?  If it were 
600,000, then fully 20 per cent of the population signed that petition.  
Never before, never before have we seen that level of recorded opposition 
in the history of this province. 
 
We thought it was remarkable when the petitions against your plan, the 
government's plan to privatize SaskEnergy was before this House.  We 
thought it remarkable that 100,000 people, more or less, had signed that 
petition.  That was by far the largest number of people that had ever 
signed such a petition. 
 
But now in this case, in the course of just a few short weeks, 120,000 
people have signed the petition.  And as I speak here today, others are 
signing similar petitions.  The opposition goes on. 
 
And there's no need for the Government House Leader, acting on behalf of 
the government, to say that's enough debate.  The opposition of the people 
of this province to this plan to levy this massive tax ought to be given a 
full opportunity to allow the people's opposition to be fully expressed in 
this House. 
 
Somehow or another, somehow or another the depths, the length, and the 
breadth of the opposition of the people of Saskatchewan to this tax has to 
be brought home to the government, Mr. Speaker.  Somehow or another it has 
to penetrate their understanding that the people have just had enough; that 
the people think that this additional tax is beyond their means to pay.  
It's an unfair burden upon them and their pocket-books and their ability to 
manage their lives and we just simply can't go ahead with it. 
 
Now how can they reach this group opposite?  Well they've tried with their 
petitions.  We're trying to do it in expressing our opposition to the Bill.  
We've had the clearest kind of public exposition, public indication, of the 
people's attitude towards this government by the polls that were taken 
yesterday.  Now how much evidence does this government need to understand 



 

 

that it is a tragic mistake, quite a wrong thing to do, to proceed with 
this particular piece of legislation. 
 
We've tried everything we can think of over here.  We continue to try and 
we will try for as long as the law permits us to do so, as long as the 
rules of this House permit us to do so.  But somehow we haven't yet managed 
to pull it off and it was rather discouraging to hear the House Leader make 
the kind of heated remarks that he made today, indicating firmly that the 
government intends to go ahead with this Bill notwithstanding this 
unprecedented level of opposition. 
 
(1630) 
 
And it was further disheartening to find him standing in his place and 
finally realizing his plan to stop debate on this thing, and to ram it 
through this House regardless of what the people of this province think 
about it. 
 
Rather than invoking closure, Mr. Speaker, I say again one more time: what 
the government here ought to be doing is to take this plan of theirs, take 
this plan and lay it before the people of Saskatchewan in the time-honoured 
way and say to the people of Saskatchewan: what do you think about this 
plan?  What do you think about this plan to in effect double the federal 
GST?  To take the hated federal GST and to put beside it a precise twin -- 
the PST.  What do you think about that, people of Saskatchewan.  Well that 
as I say is the time-honoured way.  Democratic governments all over the 
world have traditionally and invariably taken major plans like that to the 
electorate. 
 
When the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, when the people of 
Saskatchewan voted in 1986 it did not understand that it was voting for a 7 
per cent value added tax that we've been referring to as the PST in this 
House.  It did not understand that.  The people of Saskatchewan understood, 
Mr. Speaker, that this was a government who was dedicated to lowering that 
tax.  And in fact that this was a political party that was dedicated to 
eliminating that tax.  That was their understanding of the situation. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in the fifth year of its mandate, in the face of all this 
public opposition, with the reality of a political support that is 
apparently practically collapsed, I submit that this government has no 
right to bring this piece of legislation before this House and to ram it 
through and to make it law. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Now I want to just deal with another matter that the 
Government House Leader raised, and that was a question of whether or not 
the business community understand this tax.  And the way he put it, Mr. 
Speaker, was that he indicated we had done something wrong in not 
explaining to the business people the full nature of this tax, and some of 
the supposed benefits of it.  And I want the House Leader to know, Mr. 
Speaker, that the business people of this province understand that tax 
very, very well indeed. 



 

 

 
We have met, we on this side of the House, have met with many of them.  
We've met with their associations, hundreds of business people have met 
with us in Regina and in Saskatoon and in other places across this 
province.  And they understand precisely how this tax is going to work.  
They understand precisely how the input tax credits are going to work.  
They understand precisely what are the reporting requirements under the GST 
and under the E&H (education and health) tax. 
 
None of this is news to them.  And they are opposed, Mr. Speaker.  They are 
opposed.  And like all these other groups, they have tried everything they 
can think of to bring home to this government the depth and the length and 
the breadth of their opposition, but apparently to no effect at all. 
 
One of the arguments, one of the really fundamental arguments against the 
value added tax deserves to be recalled, Mr. Speaker, and reviewed.  And I 
intend to speak to that in the time remaining to me this afternoon.  And 
then I intend to go back to a theme that I discussed yesterday in the rule 
16 debate concerning the effect that this will have on the economy and the 
loss of jobs that will follow from it. 
 
Dealing with the first aspect of it, there is no question at all that a tax 
on consumption paid by consumers such as the value added taxes that are in 
effect in Ottawa, and is the subject of this Bill, is a regressive tax. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, a regressive tax is one that just simply doesn't take 
into account the ability of the person paying the tax to pay.  We have been 
trying in this country for decades, Mr. Speaker, for generations, we have 
been trying to devise a tax system that will be fair and equitable and 
just.  That's been the purpose of our national governments and that has 
been the stated purpose of all of our provincial governments.  And the 
government opposite professes that fairness and equity is one of the 
principles that guide their decisions with respect to the kinds of taxes 
that we have to pay in Saskatchewan. 
 
My point is simply that this kind of a tax, the PST, is a consumption tax 
and is not progressive; it is regressive.  It does not take into account 
the ability of the people who  
 Dhave to pay the tax to actually pay it.  It does not . . . In that 
respect, Mr. Speaker, it is not equitable, it is not just, and it is not 
fair. And for those reasons it violates the government's own criteria, the 
government's own criteria for what a tax system should be shaped like. 
 
The point can be put this way.  Let's just take some concrete examples.  
Let us say that a person has to buy a jacket and goes to a clothing store 
in order to buy the jacket and finds, on buying the jacket, that he has to 
pay the GST of 7 per cent and now the PST of 7 per cent.  Now that's 14 per 
cent and that . . . 14 per cent of the price of the jacket.  And if the 
jacket is a $50 jacket, that means a $7 tax. 
 
Now the person has to pay that tax, Mr. Speaker, whether that person has an 
annual income of say $10,000 -- say a minimum wage earner with an income of 
$10,000 -- or whether that person is an executive in a large corporation 



 

 

and earns $200,000.  The amount of tax that has to be paid is exactly the 
same. 
 
Similarly, when that person goes to get a haircut, the GST and now the PST 
have to be paid on the haircut.  Six months ago they didn't have to do 
that, but now they're going to have to pay them both.  The tax on that 
haircut has to be paid by everyone regardless of whether they have any 
income or a low income or a very large income. 
 
Now I'm painting this with some degree of simplicity and detail because I 
want to be sure that it doesn't sail over the head of the members opposite.  
I want to be sure that they're able to understand it. 
 
Similarly, when you go to a bookstore and buy books, you've got to pay the 
the same GST and PST regardless of your ability to pay.  And the point -- 
and I'm now repeating myself, but I really want to be certain that the 
House grasps this -- the point is that everyone concedes these consumption 
taxes, these consumer taxes are not progressive; that they are regressive, 
that they are not fair and are not just and are not equitable because they 
do not take into account the principle of ability to pay.  And I repeat 
again that that has been a central principle to the designing of all of our 
tax regimes in Canada for generations -- for generations. 
 
And this sudden preoccupation in Canada by the Tory government in Ottawa 
and the Tory government in Regina, this preoccupation with a value added 
consumer tax is not fair and is not just and is not equitable and, Mr. 
Speaker, is not consistent with the basic principle upon which we've been 
designing our tax regimes in Canada at the federal level and in all the 
provinces for generations.  So it is out of step and wrong and it is not 
the direction in which we should be going. 
 
Now I want to refer, Mr. Speaker, to a very interesting presentation that 
was made to the standing committee of the House of Commons, the Standing 
Committee on Finance, with respect to the GST.  And I think it relevant, 
Mr. Speaker, because what we're talking about here is the twin of the GST, 
the same tax imposed again by a different level of government. 
 
This submission was made by the senior citizens' organizations of Ontario, 
the Ontario Coalition of Senior Citizens' Organizations, and was made to 
the House of Commons standing committee in September of 1989.  Now there 
are dozens of submissions like this, but I chose this one because it's the 
first one that I came across in my files.  And I just want to refer to 
that. 
 
Their first point, the first point of the senior organizations to the 
standing committee, Mr. Speaker, was that consumption taxes are regressive.  
That's the heading for this section.  And they make the point there, the 
point that I've just stated, that Canada's tax system has attempted to 
operate on the basis of ability to pay.  And they make the following 
statement: 
 

 This progressive system of tax collection pursues the goal of equity and a 
reasonable redistribution of the nation's wealth among all its citizens. 



 

 

 
And I continue to quote, Mr. Speaker, from page 2 of this submission: 
 

 Consumption taxes like the proposed Goods and Services Tax, while always a 
component of Canada's overall tax system, do not reflect an individual's 
ability to pay and are, therefore, regressive. 

 
And goes on to make the point that even the refundable tax credits don't 
cure the problem, the problem of the regressivity of the tax and the fact 
that it is not based upon ability to pay but continues to exist and is not 
dealt with and not disposed of by the tax credit system. 
 
They make a comparison in this brief between families earning 50,000 and 
families earning $10,000 annually.  They quote the National Council on 
Welfare in a study in 1987 as calculating the amounts spent by these 
families on food, clothing, and shelter. 
 
Now those items, Mr. Speaker, are to a large extent subject to the kind of 
taxes that we're talking about.  The family earning $50,000 a year spends 
an average of 33 per cent annually on those items.  The low income family 
spends an average of 57 per cent of its income on food, clothing, and 
shelter. 
 
And that illustrates very clearly the fact that the weight of this tax, the 
weight of this PST falls disproportionately, falls almost doubly on the 
family earning $10,000 a year as compared to the family earning $50,000 a 
year.  And the senior citizens' organizations in Ontario made this argument 
as a centre-piece of their opposition to the GST.  And I cite that to 
members opposite as support for the argument that I made that this tax is a 
wrong tax. 
 
They make the further point that I want to note parenthetically, Mr. 
Speaker, that the federal government has increased sales taxes, consumption 
taxes, by 67 per cent since they started to reform the tax system -- 67 per 
cent in the name of tax reform while the progressive income tax system has 
been increased by 46 per cent, and the corporate tax system, which is also 
progressive to an extent, has been increased by only 21 per cent. 
 
The federal government, in the opinion of the senior citizens' 
organization, is going exactly the wrong way in its focus upon the 
consumption tax which we call the GST.  This government is going in 
precisely the wrong way in seeking to raise its additional revenues through 
the mechanism of a consumption tax.  That's the point that I want to make. 
 
And with that I now want to turn to my second point which I had begun to 
discuss yesterday in the 10 minutes available to me in the rule 16 debate.  
And it is simply this -- that the impact of this tax on the economy will 
not be what the government says it will be.  The impact of this tax on the 
economy will be precisely the opposite.  It will force businesses out of 
existence.  It will force businesses into closure, into bankruptcy, and 
will result in the loss of employment and a decrease in the amount of 
economic activity. 
 



 

 

And as I started to say yesterday, Mr. Speaker, I don't understand why this 
point is not accepted by the government.  How else could it be?  How else 
could it work when a government reaches down as this government is doing 
with this PST and grabs $440 million, Mr. Speaker, out of the economy of 
the province.  Just reaches down and grabs it.  How can that help but 
depress the economy?  It means that $440 million that otherwise would be 
available to be spent on what people spend money on, various kinds of goods 
and services, it can't be used to buy those goods and services.  Rather, it 
has to go to the tax.  And that tax goes to the government. 
 
(1645) 
 
And as my colleague says, are they spending it wisely?  Indeed they're not.  
But it's just pulled right out of the economy and taken into government 
coffers, and it's not available to the economy, Mr. Speaker, to circulate 
in the way that money does in the economy, to buy goods and to buy 
services.  And the seller of those goods and services to have the money to 
in turn buy other goods and services and circulate the money in the 
communities and create economic activity. 
 
Now the government says, oh, but yes, we're going to be returning $260 
million of that $440 million in the form of input tax credits.  And I can 
appreciate that point.  I mean, that is to say I understand it.  But what 
does that mean?  That means that the relatively small number of large 
businesses in this province who have significant material that they have to 
buy, that they have to bring into their plant in order to produce the 
product that they sell, are going to be able to take advantage of that. 
 
I can understand that, and in many ways that's not a totally bad idea.  But 
my point is that it doesn't fall fairly on the economy.  It doesn't fall 
fairly on the economy.  It's all right for those people, but what about the 
restaurant owner in Saskatoon who has relatively few of those kinds of 
inputs, whose value added is mostly in the preparation of the food and in 
the serving of the food and in the providing of the surroundings and the 
atmosphere and the good staff and all those things, whose main expense is 
wages, wages and benefits of employees, and therefore who can't recover as 
much from the business inputs credits as the first kind of employer that I 
was talking about. 
 
What about that restaurant owner?  Let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, and the 
members opposite, that the restaurant owner in Saskatoon who is given the 
argument that he's got the advantage of all these business tax inputs, just 
laughs.  Just simply laughs.  Because as far as he's concerned, it is some 
kind of a joke.  It's not going to save his business at all.  It's not 
going to even help his business in any significant way. 
 
The impact of the tax so far as that restaurant owner is concerned is that 
people are not coming to his restaurant in the same numbers as previously.  
And the numbers are quite startling, Mr. Speaker, quite dramatic.  The drop 
in patronage in the restaurants in Saskatoon may be in the order of 30 per 
cent, may be in the order of 30 per cent over the past few months. 
 
Well this is causing devastation among those businesses in my city.  And I 



 

 

know the same situation exists in Regina.  And I'm certain that it exists 
in every city, town, and village in this province. 
 
Now I challenge the Minister of Finance and the House Leader, who are 
trying to challenge us in respect to explaining this tax, to go out and 
explain to the restaurant owners in all of the centres in this province as 
to why this tax is a good thing as far as they're concerned. 
 
Tell the restaurant owners that this is going to create employment.  Tell 
the restaurant owners that this is going to increase their economic 
activity and their business and be good for them and they'll be able to 
expand.  Poppycock!  It's not good for them at all.  It's a total disaster 
as far as they're concerned. 
 
Now I understand, Mr. Speaker, that the government opposite is in desperate 
shape so far as its finances are concerned.  The reasons why it's in that 
kind of shape are complex and interesting, but it can be boiled down to a 
few simple points.  And they were made by my colleague, my friend from 
Saskatoon South, earlier today.  You just can't spend what you haven't got.  
That's what it comes down to. 
 
And that's what it was in 1982-83, the first year in which the government 
opposite was in power.  They spent more than they got.  They spent more 
than they brought in. 
 
Well the first year they're just getting used to it; they don't know how it 
works yet.  They've got ringing in their ears the Premier's idea that you 
could mismanage the Saskatchewan economy and still run a surplus.  They got 
that ringing in their ears, so no cause for alarm. 
 
But lo and behold, in the second year there's a deficit and it's a little 
worse than it was in the first year.  And in the third year it's a little 
worse than it was in the second.  And on and on it goes.  And here we are 
today, facing a deficit on the operating side, of $5.2 billion. 
 
And as I said earlier in this House on another occasion, that's $500 
million a year in interest. And if you could have that back, Mr. Speaker, 
if my friends opposite could have that back, then they wouldn't be here 
asking for a huge tax grab like this.  They wouldn't have to be here asking 
to place this tax burden on the people.  They'd have enough money to do it 
just by the interest alone on the debt that they've racked up -- just by 
the interest alone. 
 
So I think it perfectly plain, and I think those opposite who are fair 
about this question would admit that it's a problem of their own making.  
And I say, Mr. Speaker, to members opposite, it must be a problem that you 
will have to resolve.  Don't turn to the Saskatchewan people and ask them 
to pay money that they haven't got, to pay money that they can't afford to 
pay in order to partially rescue you from a financial dilemma that you 
yourself created.  Don't ask them to do that because that's not fair and 
that's not just and that's not equitable. 
 
Look to yourselves, as my leader and others on this side of the House have 



 

 

said, clearly, surely $4.5 billion in expenditures is enough.  Surely in 
this province of 1 million people, with about 360,000 taxpayers, we can 
find a way to get along on $4.5 billion.  I mean if that's not enough in 
1991, then how much would be enough?  Surely we can reorder our priorities 
in this province.  Surely we can organize the business of government and 
public administration so that the government of this province can provide 
the services it provides and provide it within the total of $4.5 billion. 
 
It's not a question, it's not a question of saying, if we can't soak the 
people with the PST, how else can we soak the people?  That's not the 
question.  The people are already being soaked as thoroughly as they can 
stand to be soaked.  What we have to do is to be more fair with the people 
and to spend the people's money with a sense of responsibility and a level 
of competence that will result in being able to afford to support our 
farmers through a crisis, and being able to provide decent health care, 
being able to support the K to 12 education system, being able to provide 
universities and technical schools that will provide our children with the 
kind of skills that they need to make it in their careers as they train 
themselves for the work world.  Surely we can do all of that within a total 
budget of $4.5 billion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- And when I say, Mr. Speaker, that this government is 
soaking the people, that's the only way in which you can describe it.  You 
talk about a grab for $440 million in a consumption tax that pays no 
attention to the principles of fairness or equity or justice in the tax 
system but just reaches down and grabs for $440 million.  That's soaking 
the people.  That's soaking the people.  And it takes a lot of nerve for 
the government to stand up and say -- which is what they're doing -- well 
that's how we plan to soak the people; what's your plan for soaking the 
people?  Our answer is that we don't intend to soak the people.  The people 
are already being soaked enough.  The people are already being soaked 
enough. 
 
Now the Government House Leader asks us, what is our plan, what is our 
definite plan?  I'll tell, Mr. Speaker, what our definite plan is.  Our 
definite plan is to help the people of this province kick out the Tories.  
That's our definite plan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- That's our definite plan, and as best we can tell to this 
date, in every corner of this province, the people of Saskatchewan 
understand our plan and approve our plan and are supporting of us in our 
plan.  And that's the plan that we intend to follow, Mr. Speaker, and 
that's the plan that we intend to produce. 
 
It's not a question of us sitting down and writing up a new idea for 
soaking people and forcing them to pay taxes that they can't afford to pay.  
That's ridiculous.  That's ridiculous.  That looks in exactly the wrong 
direction. 
 



 

 

And it must be an embarrassment for this government to come before this 
House and to ask us to approve this kind of a tax. 
 
As I said, Mr. Speaker, they created this situation.  They allowed 
Saskatchewan to drift into the position where we've got this kind of a 
deficit.  They've done that in a financial regime that requires us to pay 
large interest on that $5.2 billion to the tune of at least $500 million in 
this fiscal year. 
 
Were it not for that, if this whole situation had been handled properly, if 
we had been living within our means in the last nine years, we wouldn't be 
here debating this Bill.  I wouldn't be standing here making this speech.  
We would be able to support agriculture.  We'd have money left over.  We'd 
be able to give the universities what they need in order to just provide a 
decent level of education for our own children -- for our own children, Mr. 
Speaker, who we want to prepare to take their places in a technological and 
difficult world where the emphasis is on education, where if you don't have 
education you're just not going to go anywhere. 
 
We have to be able to support these institutions.  I understand that.  But 
this government has created its own problem and it must be an embarrassment 
for it to come in here now and ask us to approve a plan to soak the people 
and require the people to pay money that the people just simply can't 
afford to pay, don't have the money to pay, don't have room within their 
budgets to pay. 
 
I'm proud to represent a constituency, Mr. Speaker, of working men and 
women in Saskatoon.  These people that I represent are, like all 
wage-earners everywhere, people that don't have a lot of excess income.  
Pretty much all of their pay cheque is taken up just in this business of 
living and in providing shelter for themselves and their children and for 
providing food and clothing for their children and a certain amount of 
entertainment.  But these are modest life-styles.  These are good, honest, 
hard-working people who don't have a lot of spare cash. 
 
When the federal government comes along, as it did in January, and says to 
the people who live in my constituency, you have to pay another 7 per cent 
on a whole variety of goods and services, on a wide, wide variety, that's 
tough medicine.  That 7 per cent doesn't come out of any discretionary 
income that these families have.  That 7 per cent comes out of money that 
they were spending on something else. 
 
Now that shock hit them in January and they tried to absorb it.  And I 
suspect they're still trying to absorb it.  But then the Minister of 
Finance comes along.  The Minister of Finance comes along in February and 
he lands another 7 per cent on them and hits them in an area that is close 
to them -- children's clothes, books.  Every time they take the kids to 
McDonald's, they've got to pony up another 7 per cent, another 14 per cent 
in total. 
 
Now that 14 per cent, Mr. Speaker, that 14 per cent does not come out of 
what I call discretionary income.  It's not like they had that 14 per cent 
and they were saving it and now they're not able to save it any more. 



 

 

 
The Speaker: -- It being 5 o'clock, the House stands adjourned until 
tomorrow at 2 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 
 


