





























































Hansard: May 21, 1991


 

 

May 21/91 
EVENING SITTING 

 
MOTIONS 

 
Resolution No. 11 -- Government Program of Restraint (continued) 

 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 
Speaker, just to refresh the memory of the House, earlier this afternoon we 
were debating a motion put forth by the member from -- where is it? -- 
Moosomin.  And the member was speaking through his motion to this 
government showing leadership by initiating an internal restraint program 
of some sort. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, members on this side of the House, and I would suggest 
the majority of the people of Saskatchewan, are not quite clear what this 
new restraint program that this government may have embarked upon, but I 
guess didn't, was all about, because you see, Mr. Speaker, the memories are 
very fresh in the minds of people of Saskatchewan -- the number of 
transgressions that this government has committed since 1982. 
 
And the fact is, sir, that this latest budget has not shown restraint on 
behalf of the government.  Nor has any budget prior to this budget shown 
any semblance of restraint, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I had indicated to the House that somewhere in the neighbourhood . . . in 
1982 the budget was . . . the revenue of the government was around $2.3 
billion.  That has grown in this last budget to a projected revenue of some 
$4.8 billion  
_- much more than double the amount there was in 1982. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before supper we had spoken about a number of issues in terms 
of this government's spending of public tax dollars.  We had talked about 
Chuck Childers, the president of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, 
and the fact that he hadn't been asked by this government to show 
restraint.  He sits with a $470,000-a-year, no-cut contract . . . or 
$740,000-a-year, no-cut contract. 
 
We talked about the government's record of travel and the fact that Jim 
Garner had spent some time during one winter, at taxpayers' expense, in 
Honolulu -- Jim Garner being the former Highways minister. 
 
We talked about trips to Chicago and Fairmont, Colorado and Palm Springs 
and Rio de Janeiro and Paris.  We talked about some of the trips, sir, that 
were taken by the Premier and his cabinet ministers to Reno, Nevada and 
Phoenix and Helsinki and Miami and Seoul, Korea and Denver and Moscow and 
Zu p√ºrich and Vienna and Berlin.  We talked about trips to Amsterdam, Palm 
Springs, Singapore, New Delhi, and Brasilia. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as well, we talked about former cabinet ministers and 
defeated MLAs (Members of the Legislative Assembly) who were on government 
payroll, and I'd like to go through some of those if I could, again just to 
refresh the memory of the House, sir. 



 

 

 
We talked about Bob Andrew, the trade emissary in Minneapolis at 
$100,000-a-year salary.  We talked about Eric Berntson, former deputy 
premier, now the campaign manager for the PC Party in this upcoming 
election, being appointed by their federal cousins, the Tories in Ottawa, 
at a salary of 71,000.  We talked about Larry Birkbeck with a $48,000 
contract.  He was a former MLA in this government.  Gordon Currie, chairman 
of the board of the youth drug centre in Yorkton.  Gordon Dirks, Louis 
Domotor, Sid Dutchak, Tim Embury.  We talked about Ralph Katzman, Myles 
Morin, Keith Parker, Paul Rousseau, Jack Sandberg, Paul Schoenhals, Bud 
Smith, and last but not least, Graham Taylor, who is the trade emissary in 
Hong Kong. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, let's talk about restraint, and for who.  Mr. Speaker, I 
want to talk about the people who work in restaurants in this province who 
are going to be affected by this government's decision to impose the 
provincial goods and services tax, and the waitresses in those restaurants 
who are asked to show restraint, because the people clearly are not tipping 
as they may have before the federal goods and services tax and now the 
provincial goods and services tax were imposed upon the people. 
 
And I guess I want to talk about clerks, maybe single mothers who are 
working in retail outlets throughout this province who are being laid off 
because retail sales have dropped, and I want to talk about the hardships 
that they are facing.  And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that through the 
provincial goods and services tax, this government has imposed restraint 
upon them, but not upon Bob Andrew and Eric Berntson and the list that I 
just mentioned.  And let me talk about, sir, where these people came from 
before they were put on public payroll. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Where?  Where did they come from? 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well some of them may have come from private industry 
or private enterprises.  They may have been; I don't know.  But you know 
the list that I read here, for the most part, were elected as PC 
(Progressive Conservative) MLAs.  Some of them ended up in cabinet, some of 
them quit of their own volition, and others were defeated.  But, sir, each 
and every one of these people that are not asked to share in this restraint 
and were put on big government salaries came through the ranks of the PC 
Party of Saskatchewan, sir.  And when we want to talk about restraint, Mr. 
Speaker, maybe we should be talking in terms of fairness and fairness for 
all people in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Member of the Legislative Assembly, a member of the PC 
Party who put forth this motion, this motion patting themselves on the back 
and commending the PC government for restraint, is the same MLA who takes a 
Legislative Secretary salary of some $8,000 a year, Mr. Speaker, to do 
absolutely nothing.  Travel, the use of vehicles when he's on whatever they 
deem to be government work, which nobody knows what that may be. 
 
But, sir, Mr. Speaker, it's not that he's the only member, because he has 
nine other of his colleagues who are taking the same salary -- a total, 
sir, of $80,000 a year.  And I say, Mr. Speaker, that they haven't been 



 

 

asking, this Premier hasn't asked his back-benchers who sit as legislative 
secretaries, he hasn't asked them to share in the restraint, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But you know who he's asked?  He's asked clerks in retail outlets who have 
had their hours cut back because of drops in retail sales.  Those are the 
kinds of people he's asked, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to say as well, Mr. Speaker, the hoteliers of this province have 
been asked to share in restraint.  Their retail sales have dropped, which 
means their bottom lines are dropping. 
 
And those in the southern part of the province are faced with customers 
running across the border.  And I can't say that it's not justified that 
they would go across the border to shop, Mr. Speaker, because down in the 
northern states they don't have the 7 per cent goods and services tax 
provincially imposed upon them, nor the 7 per cent federal tax, sir. 
 
What I'm saying is that these people are facing restraint because it's been 
imposed upon them by the Mulroney government and the Premier of this 
province and his cabinet.  And I say, Mr. Speaker, that that is an 
unacceptable situation. 
 
And the Leader of the Opposition announced today that we as a New 
Democratic Party will do our part to ensure that there are fair 
opportunities in this province and that people can afford to shop and to 
live here.  And we're going to, sir, if we're elected after the next 
election, get rid of the provincial goods and services tax if these people 
ever ram it through the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I haven't seen, and nor did the member 
from Moosomin speak to the $26,000 that Terry Leier, a friend of the PC 
Party, was given to take some schooling down in the United States, an 
eight-month course I understand, Mr. Speaker.  And I want to say . . . One 
of my colleagues asks me to repeat that.  That Terry Leier . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Who's this Terry Leier? 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- He's closely tied, sir, to the Progressive Conservative 
Party of Saskatchewan, was given $26,000 to take an eight-month course in 
the United States of America.  And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, he wasn't 
asked to share in restraint, but students in our own province, children who 
were born here and who want to take post-secondary education in our 
universities can't get in because the universities have had to impose 
quotas because of underfunding by the provincial government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- And I say, Mr. Speaker, shame on the member from 
Moosomin.  Shame on him for introducing this motion to the legislature, 
because I tell you it's the height of hypocrisy when you see a man who 
represents perhaps 10 or 12,000 people that would introduce this kind of a 



 

 

motion, given the government's record that he votes for in every occasion 
that he's been asked to. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about a man by the name of 
Waschuk who received a $150,000 loan, interest free, from a man by the name 
of Guy Montpetit.  And I tell you, Mr. Speaker, he wasn't asked to share in 
this restraint. 
 
And I want to explain to you why I mention this man's name, Mr. Speaker, 
because that money came directly from the taxpayers' pockets, the taxpayers 
of this province, because of an ill-conceived, ill-planned deal to bring 
French translation to this province -- technology that wasn't available and 
won't be for a considerable period of time, from what the experts tell us, 
Mr. Speaker.  The deal that this government blew five and a half million 
dollars on -- $5.5 million, Mr. Speaker -- of money that could have gone to 
ensure that our children can get an adequate, post-secondary education in 
this province, and an education that they can afford. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the priorities were wrong.  There was no restraint when 
it came to Guy Montpetit and GigaText.  The money funnelled into his pocket 
as fast as he could spend it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, let me tie Mr. Ken Waschuk's $150,000 loan to this PC 
government and to the lack of restraint.  Mr. Speaker, Guy Montpetit was 
the main actor in the GigaText scandal.  He was the man who was mostly 
responsible for spending some five and a half millions of government 
taxpayers' dollars.  And I tell you he was the man that Guy Montpetit said 
tied the connections between the PC government and his corporation and 
himself. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some would say that this $150,000 interest loan was a finder's 
fee, a fee to find the biggest suckers in western Canada over decades, Mr. 
Speaker, and it happened to be the Premier and this cabinet and the members 
of that party, the Government of Saskatchewan, and that cost the taxpayers 
five and a half million dollars. 
 
And I say Mr. Montpetit and Mr. Waschuk and the members of this cabinet who 
flew back and forth to Winnipeg and to Montreal, who drove around in 
Montreal in the back of big, black limousines -- some would say drinking 
champagne; I don't know that, sir.  But the fact is they did get taken for 
a ride, and it cost the taxpayers of this province some five and a half 
million dollars. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there was no restraint for Guy Montpetit and those that 
travelled in his circle.  But there is restraint, sir, for the students of 
this province. 
 
And I say to you and I say to the member for Moosomin, where was he?  When 
we asked the new member from Thunder Creek, when we asked him to stop the 
foolish waste and shut GigaText down that was costing us some $50,000 a 
month, where was he? 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was no restraint.  He sat in his place as he does now, 



 

 

quietly.  And when this government asked him to raise his hand in the air 
and support whatever it was they were asking for that day, he saluted.  And 
he said, ay, aye, sir, Mr. Premier, I support you.  And I tell you, Mr. 
Speaker, the people in that riding are waiting for him to come back and 
answer for that.  And that's going to happen soon because after five years, 
almost five years, the people of this province, whether this Premier wants 
it or not, are going to get a chance to voice their opinions, and they're 
going to pass judgement on that member and others. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, he talks about restraint.  And I see the 
member from Lloydminster sitting in his chair as well, and he was one of 
the ones that supported and voted.  And I say, Mr. Speaker, where was that 
member?  Where was that member when the people of this province were 
looking for restraint?  Insteading of hearing about it through a motion 
from the member from Moosomin; where were they? 
 
And what did they say about the $150,000 interest-free loan to Ken Waschuk?  
What did they say?  What did they say about the $26,000 that Terry Leier 
got to go to school down in the United States?  To go back to school -- a 
grown man -- when people in our own province can't gain entrance to our 
post-secondary facilities.  Where were they, Mr. Speaker?  I tell you they 
were silent; they never said a word.  We've watched for four consecutive 
years.  Since the election of 1986 every one of those members from the back 
benches . . . 
 
(1915) 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order, order.  Why is the hon. member 
on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: -- What's your point of order? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- The member opposite is making allegations that are 
unfounded and is misleading the House.  The member had this line of 
questioning in Crown Corporations last year.  All the answers were given to 
him.  The questions that the member opposite is raising about members on 
this side and alleging criminality have been dealt with.  The RCMP (Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police) investigated the question that the member raises, 
that the member raised in Crown Corporations, Mr. Speaker, and had all of 
those answers provided. 
 
The allegations that the member is making are very unparliamentary because 
he is alleging criminality of members of this government.  He has mentioned 
the Premier; he has mentioned ministers; and those things were all covered 
in that particular forum which is the forum that members should use to 
discuss these issues.  The member now raises it again, allegations that are 
unfounded and I feel are unparliamentary, Mr. Speaker.  And I think that 
that member should apologize to the legislature for implying criminality by 
members to this government, when he had that opportunity as a member to 



 

 

examine it in Crown Corporations and review the report of the RCMP, and yet 
he makes those allegations.  I find that unparliamentary, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I've been listening carefully to the 
member from Prince Albert talk about the many, many trips this government 
has taken.  And the list of trips is taken from public documents that the 
government has provided to the public, and the list is long.  Some would 
say that it's mismanagement and waste, and others would put it in stronger 
words. 
 
The member talked about GigaText and Guy Montpetit, and the fact that the 
Premier drove around in the limousine with Guy Montpetit in Montreal; 
that's no secret.  These are from court documents, Mr. Speaker.  Whether or 
not the public presume or assume criminality is something of the member's 
imagination.  Not once was criminality mentioned here.  The issue here is 
the waste of $5.5 million to Mr. Guy Montpetit with the Premier's full 
knowledge and involvement.  That's what it's about. 
 
And also the member talked about the use of Guy Montpetit's aircraft to fly 
other cabinet ministers around Canada.  That isn't a figment of our 
imagination.  These are court documents out of Montreal that our caucus 
took the time to go to the court proceedings, get the transcript from 
court, and translate them -- manually, I might add -- you from French to 
English.  We didn't have the access to this fancy equipment that the 
members opposite seem to have. 
 
The member's point of order is clearly out of order because there was not a 
mention of criminality, only corruption and scandal that this government is 
knee-deep in all the time in the last nine years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- I've listened to the hon. member from Thunder Creek's point 
of order and I have also listened to the member for Regina Elphinstone.  
Let me say that personal charges against hon. members are indeed 
unparliamentary and that is accepted practice.  I did not hear the hon. 
member make a personal charge -- personal charge.  However, I did hear . . 
. I believe I did hear him make a general statement, a general statement of 
corruption of activities of the government.  Normally, even though that is 
a language which we may not consider temperate, by and large is acceptable.  
However, I must say that I will be listening closely to the use of 
unparliamentary language, and I now ask that the debate continue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I thank you very much for your ruling and 
I do appreciate and understand your remarks.  And let me begin, sir, by 
saying that I do understand why the member from Thunder Creek is as 
sensitive as he is.  Because you see, sir, since 1986 when I was elected, I 
watched him first as a back-bencher support every move by this government. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Why? 
 



 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: -- And I know why and I think the members of this side 
know why.  Because he was working his way, sir, towards a cabinet position.  
Irrespective of whether a decision might have been in favour of what the 
people of this province would want or not, he voted with this Premier and 
with this cabinet, sir.  So I understand his sensitivity and I want to say, 
Mr. Speaker, that there is a lot that I would like to speak of tonight so 
I'm going to continue with my remarks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say that in terms of restraint, I didn't notice any 
restraint with respect to the public funds that were put into M.A.S. 
Medical in Saskatoon when an American entrepreneur made some commitments to 
open up a manufacturing . . . a medical manufacturing plant in Saskatoon 
and got some government money and nothing happened.  And I saw, sir, 
nothing in terms of restraint from SEDCO, the Saskatchewan Economic 
Development Corporation.  I saw, sir, no restraint at that time, and I 
felt, Mr. Speaker, that the people of this province will agree with me that 
they would want to have seen some restraint from this government, but it 
clearly never happened. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fact is that they've built the $5 billion deficit.  The 
fact is that they've raised the debt in the Crown corporation side by over 
$9 billion.  And the fact is, sir, that they didn't show restraint since 
1982, and they haven't shown restraint since their budget of this spring.  
And I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, the people of this province clearly 
understand the hypocrisy of a motion put forth by a member who was part of 
the government that allowed this massive debt to be built, that allowed the 
out-migration of our young people, that allowed the regulations to be ever 
increasing for people who want to get into post-secondary educational 
facilities. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the people of this province know that 
there's been no restraint.  Oh they talk about restraint prior to an 
election, but the fact is, Mr. Speaker, that this government doesn't 
practise internal restraint; they go to the people of this province for 
more taxes. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, when they announced in February the 
introduction of the provincial goods and services tax that are going to 
take $440 million directly out of the pockets of consumers in this 
province, we know who's been asked to practise restraint, Mr. Speaker; it's 
ordinary, average people in Saskatchewan but not this government.  That's 
what's been happening, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, every member on that side of the House, 
every member on that side of the House, including the Minister of Finance 
who can't keep his lips from flapping . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order, order, order.   Order.  Number one, we 
do not refer to members' presences.  Number two, even though one might not 
like a remark another member has made, I believe that the language used in 
this case should be more temperate than you did in this case.  And it isn't 



 

 

good for the House because what one gives, one can receive back, and then 
the House unravels and of course we don't want that. 
 
So the hon. member for Prince . . . Now the Minister of Finance, I believe, 
should not interrupt, should not interrupt, and then the House perhaps 
would proceed a little more smoothly. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you once again, Mr. Speaker.  I appreciate your 
intervention.  It was becoming more and more difficult to continue my 
remarks as the Minister of Finance spoke from his seat and I do appreciate 
that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say that of all of the members in this legislature, 
the last one that should be speaking should be the Minister of Finance who 
is responsible for imposing this provincial goods and services tax.  I 
would think with 85 per cent, roughly, of the people of this province 
opposed to this tax that he's trying to ram down their throats, that he 
would be the last one to be even seen in public, sir, because I think he 
should be ashamed of himself and he should be embarrassed with the way he 
has imposed this unfair tax upon the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I want to say to the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, that members 
on this side of the House, members of the New Democratic Party, are going 
to do everything that is possible legislatively to ensure that this Bill 
never passes this House because of its unfairness and because it does 
nothing to heighten the economy of our province.  It only dampens the 
economy and will drive us into a worse recession than we're already now in 
because of this government's mismanagement and because of the kinds of 
budgets that him and his predecessor have delivered, sir. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk and I want to get back to the motion with 
respect to restraint and the lack of restraint.  And I want to indicate to 
members of the House and members of the public that tonight I'll be 
introducing an amendment to this motion patting the government's back for 
whatever kind of restraint he feels may have happened. 
 
We're going to be, sir, amending this motion and it's going to be seconded 
by the member from The Battlefords.  And the reason is clear, sir.  The 
reason is because we are listening to the people of Saskatchewan and we 
understand that they do want a government with restraint.  But they also 
understand that it will never come from members on that side of the House.  
That's not their record.  That's not where they're headed.  And that's not 
what they're about to produce for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a list of a number of ventures that I would consider 
ill conceived and that show no restraint -- no economic restraint.  And I 
intend, during the course of my remarks this evening, to go through that 
list because I think it's fair for the people of Saskatchewan to have an 
overall understanding of how we've built this deficit, how we've built this 
debt in the Crown corporations of which SEDCO holds some hundred and fifty 
million dollars of debt.  I want them, sir, to better understand how this 
government has put us into the situation that it has put us into. 
 



 

 

We've seen, as I mentioned earlier, the GigaText scandal -- some five and a 
half million dollars of government money wasted -- without a word from any 
member on that side of the House.  And I say to you, sir, in all honesty 
and in all sincerity, I feel that's one of the reasons that members of that 
side of the House shouldn't be returned to this legislature. 
 
Each and every one of them, sir, has supported on every occasion, every 
move by this Premier, by this cabinet, by this government.  There is not 
one exception that I can think of where in this Chamber one of those 
members voted for restraint, for sound fiscal management, in the cases that 
I am about to cite. 
 
Because you see, sir, they have blindly followed the path of this Premier, 
the path of this cabinet, without any concern for what it's doing to the 
people of the province, without any concern for our young people who can't 
gain entrance to post-secondary educational facilities, for those who may 
have learning disabilities, to cite an example, in a school, in one of our 
public schools, who aren't getting the kinds of programs that they need and 
that they should have, sir, because of his government's choices and their 
priorities and their last lack of fiscal restraint. 
 
You see, sir, I think that the people of this province understand that 
these members have to be held accountable -- each and every one of them, 
from every corner of this province that they may represent.  Those who 
supported this Premier so blindly; those that supported the decision to put 
money into the Northern Lights game farm -- the former member from Indian 
Head-Wolseley's son involved -- some $200,000 of SEDCO financing; and that 
then supported him when he was up defending his intervention with the 
federal minister to get, as I recall, some $460,000 of western 
diversification fund money.  An operation, sir, that has now closed its 
doors and left many creditors in that community -- honest business people, 
honest men and women who've been trying to make a living retailing and 
supplying goods and services to their customers -- left them holding debts. 
 
(1930) 
 
You see, Mr. Speaker, when this government, and when their members, talk 
about restraint, it has no credibility because the record is not there.  
The record of accountability and the record of restraint just isn't there. 
 
The fact is, sir, that we've had about nine and a half years of waste, 
mismanagement.  They've turned a surplus budget of $139 million into a $5 
billion debt on the general revenue side.  They've turned Crown 
corporations that generated income for this province, that generated wealth 
to deliver education and health care and other issues, other items, they've 
turned that into over a $9 billion debt. 
 
And you see, sir, that's why I say, Mr. Speaker, that the government has no 
credibility when it stands before this House tooting its own horn and 
talking about fiscal restraint, because the facts just don't support that, 
sir. 
 
The facts are that the government has over doubled its revenue, still not 



 

 

been able to balance a budget one time, that there's a litany of failed 
businesses that have been financed by this government.  And there is, sir, 
a litany of scandal, and I don't know how else to describe the GigaText 
fiasco.  I don't know how else to describe the expenditure of that five and 
a half million dollars other than to say it is a scandal. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that the people of this province believe 
that;  they know that to be the truth.  And I say whether the member from 
Thunder Creek wants to believe that -- that in fact is the case -- or 
whether he doesn't, the people of this province don't support his position.  
The people of Saskatchewan don't support the position of the member for 
Moosomin. 
 
And they don't believe, sir, that this government has any intentions of 
fiscal restraint other than to talk about it prior to an election campaign 
that is rapidly coming.  Because if they don't call the election, the 
Lieutenant Governor is clearly going to have to call it and the people of 
Saskatchewan know that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, and I want to speak a little bit about one of 
the business deals that this government embarked upon in my home community.  
I want to talk about the sale of the PAPCO (Prince Albert Pulp Company) 
assets to Weyerhaeuser.  Mr. Speaker, members on that side of the House 
like to hold this up as a beacon of their economic diversification.  And I 
want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, we do welcome the jobs at the paper mill 
in Prince Albert.  We always have and we've never disagreed that 
diversifying that forest industry is a good idea, a positive idea. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, we have no quarrel with Weyerhaeuser.  We never did 
and we never will, to my knowledge.  I can't look into the future to see 
what kind of negotiations may be with that corporation, but I believe them 
to be good corporate citizens in our community.  But you know the fact is, 
Mr. Speaker, the problem is with the government.  The problem was with the 
deal and that's what we criticized. 
 
We said that we don't feel that you should be selling a quarter of a 
billion dollars of assets, because that's not fiscal restraint, and getting 
no payments.  Mr. Speaker, it's sad and I'm sad to say that a lot of people 
in Saskatchewan don't realize that Weyerhaeuser, under its obligations and 
under that contract, has not had to pay back and has not paid back 1 cent 
in the principal of the $250 million . . . of the $239 million -- not a 
cent. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, it's the height of hypocrisy when you have a record 
number of bankruptcies in the province of Saskatchewan -- 650 bankruptcies; 
small businesses, small family businesses many of them -- and there's not 
one single program to help them.  There's not one program of help from this 
government other than they get stuck with the provincial goods and services 
tax, Mr. Speaker.  There's $239 million of money and investment capital 
available to Weyerhaeuser but there's nothing for Saskatchewan business 
people. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that Weyerhaeuser has done well since 



 

 

they've taken over that corporation, and I knew they would do well, sir.  
If you plot the cycle of the pulp and paper industry, it would only make 
common sense to know that in 1986 there were going to be massive profits.  
And it wasn't isolated to just the Prince Albert operation.  That was an 
industry-wide cycle and it's plottable; you can do it on graphs; you can 
see it; you know it's going to happen. 
 
But this government didn't take that into account when they made that deal, 
sir.  Weyerhaeuser makes profits with what used to be our assets with no 
obligation to pay back a penny -- not 1 cent on the principal.  And at the 
same time we see over 600 Saskatchewan businesses going broke in this 
province. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, when people see that happen and they see 
small businesses closing down and they see this Premier instructing his 
Finance minister to go to the people of Saskatchewan for the provincial 
goods and services tax -- what will be, when totally harmonized, to our 
understanding, about $440 million a year -- people say this government has 
no credibility, Mr. Speaker. 
 
People say that when the member from Moosomin raises this motion before the 
legislature talking about government restraint, they have no credibility, 
Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, that's why from one corner of this province to 
the other, wherever you go, whether it be rural Saskatchewan or urban 
Saskatchewan, whether it be in the North or the South, the underlying 
question of the vast majority of the people of Saskatchewan is, for 
goodness' sakes, when is this man going to call an election, and when could 
we turn things right side up again in Saskatchewan as opposed to what we've 
had? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch -- Mr. Speaker, I've talked about Weyerhaeuser, and there 
are other business deals that this government was involved with that turned 
sour, that clearly didn't show economic restraint.  There's the closure of 
the High R Door factory in North Battleford, and we don't, frankly sir, 
know how much that's cost the people and the taxpayers of Saskatchewan 
because that particular deal is before the courts.  And like so many deals 
that this government has embarked upon, they refuse to answer questions 
because it's before the courts or the business is still . . . a shell 
corporation but still there, and so we can't answer questions about that.  
Like so many of the deals, High R Door serves just another example of where 
this government failed to exercise economic restraint and where they failed 
the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you move a little closer to Regina, you can talk about the 
Joytec operation.  Company invested hundreds of thousands of dollars . . . 
the government invested hundreds of thousands of dollars in that company, 
and they're gone, sir.  They're not operating in Saskatchewan; they're just 
not working here. They're not creating jobs here for our people.  
Saskatchewan people are left holding the bag.  And I say to you, Mr. 
Speaker, it's a sad commentary on a government, and members of that 
government, who don't understand really what they've done to the economy of 



 

 

this province by involving themselves in what turned out to be some very 
sour deals. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I see the list of money that this government has 
borrowed, and some of these bond dealers are from New York, and from Tokyo, 
and other places.  And, Mr. Speaker, these people have set themselves an 
interest rate  
_- a rate that's ever increasing because of the lack of confidence in this 
government -- they set an interest rate that they feel comfortable with, 
based on the risk and based on the abilities, they feel, of the government 
to manage the economy. 
 
And I tell you there's no restraint for those people, Mr. Speaker, because 
when this Premier and when this Finance minister sit in their offices and 
go before their boards to ask to borrow yet more money, they set the rate 
that they want.  But I tell you when you bring that back to Saskatchewan, 
the young people that are working maybe part-time in a gas station, who 
were asked now to pay this provincial goods and services tax, don't have 
the option of setting the interest rate, or their wages, or how much they 
pay for goods and services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fact is that this Premier and this government are setting 
those rates for them.  And I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, they're 
grossly unfair; they're grossly unfair.  And the small businesses in 
Saskatchewan, the family businesses who work long and hard hours, Mr. 
Speaker, in order to take home a salary -- and I want to remind you that 
those small-business owners are the last ones to receive a pay cheque out 
of those businesses -- they, sir, don't have the opportunities and they 
don't have the options, because they have to work with what's left of them. 
 
And this government . . . in February, this Finance minister stands before 
the people of this province without even bringing it to the legislature, 
stands outside of the legislature, hiding from this place, which is where 
legislation and budgets should be introduced, and he announces another 
budget -- a new budget -- that's going to take some $440 million a year out 
of the hands of Saskatchewan consumers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the economic spin-offs, and the ripple effect of that budget 
and of that move by this Finance minister, if left unchecked, sir, if left 
unchecked, is going to destroy and do a lot more to destroy the economy of 
this province than even the nine years, nine and one-half years of this 
government's previous record. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said before, you can go from one end of this province to 
the other.  Car dealers understand what it's doing to their business.  
Restaurateurs understand what it's doing to their business.  The hoteliers 
understand what it's doing to their business.  And I want to tell the 
member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster, if he doesn't understand what his 
colleagues in the hotel industry are saying, let me tell you that there are 
some people in this province who happen to understand what this PST 
(provincial sales tax) is doing to their business and what your economic 
disasters have done in the last nine and one-half years. 
 



 

 

Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, inflation: 1.4 per cent last month in 
Regina, and 1.3 in Saskatoon -- increases in both communities of almost one 
and a half per cent in a month.  And where are the economic gurus who 
dreamed up this scheme for the people of Saskatchewan?  Where is their 
plan?  I say to you, Mr. Speaker, there is no plan.  This plan was thrust 
upon them, I would suggest, by the bond dealers who, because of their 
mismanagement, this government's mismanagement, have forced them into 
finding more revenue.  Because I don't think even the bond dealers believe 
that these people have the ability to work within the $4.8 billion of 
revenue that they get each year. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, you have to lead by example, and this government 
hasn't done that with respect to internal restraint.  Mr. Speaker, why 
haven't they rationalized some of the expenditures -- the internal 
expenditures?  I tell you why they haven't, Mr. Speaker, because they're 
too busy with their little junkets, their flights from here to there; and 
we've gone through that list and we can go through more of them.  And 
they're too busy dealing patronage.  And I've gone through a list of former 
MLAs who've been defeated, and former cabinet ministers who've retired, all 
of whom are living very comfortably on government payroll -- hands in the 
pocket of Saskatchewan taxpayers.  These people are doing very well, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I think the bond dealers understand that this government is not willing 
to look internally in terms of saving the taxpayers of this province money.  
Mr. Speaker, I think the bond dealers, as well as the people of 
Saskatchewan, understand that when a government will sign an agreement with 
Chuck Childers, the president of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, 
for $740,000 a year on a no-cut contract -- which means you can't get rid 
of him -- and then sign it just on the eve of an election and tie the 
hands, perhaps, of other administrations, that they understand these people 
are not willing to look internally, and they're not willing to deal with 
the problems internally before they ask people outside to share. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what's been happening in this province is a total, total 
destruction of the confidence of the people in their own communities and in 
their own province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you see headlines as there was in the Leader-Post -- 
Devine's office tracking student job applications -- what hope does that 
give for any young student out there who may be non-political or whose 
families may be non-political, just wants to maybe go to school, get a 
summer job to help pay that tuition?  What happens with the confidence of 
those people, Mr. Speaker? 
 
(1945) 
 
I think all you have to do is walk around this province and ask the one 
question: what would you most like to see in this province?  And the 
response, as I've indicated before, is an election.  That's why it's 
happened, Mr. Speaker, because this government has gone wild with power, 



 

 

and the litany of patronage has become so long, and it's so entrenched in 
the minds and in the thoughts of this government that people no longer 
believe that there will be changes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when people look through Public Accounts . . . and I want to 
say that I think a lot of people are interested in how this government is 
spending money, that little bit that they will show us as to how they're 
spending it.  And when they see people who have been involved with this 
government to the level of the Premier's office, like David Tkachuk, who's 
involved in a corporation called D-Mail, what, sir, what could they think 
but that there's restraint for some but not for others? 
 
Mr. Speaker, look through Public Accounts and you see Strategic Direct 
Marketing, a total of $635,400 to improve the image of -- I presume -- the 
cabinet.  I mean we're not sure; it's never been articulated.  But what 
else could people think then there's restraint for some but not for others. 
 
The Corporate Strategy Group, I see here the Department of Education, 
275,000; Executive Council, 87,000.  And what's the function of this 
company, Mr. Speaker?  They do direct mail and they set up direct mail to 
target groups.  And most would say -- a lot would say -- Mr. Speaker, it's 
nothing but to promote the government's programs and their policies. 
 
I see here Decima -- polling, clearly -- I mean it looks to me as a polling 
company, $301,000.  Well, Mr. Speaker, is there restraint for that?  Is 
there restraint for Decima?  Not on your life, Mr. Speaker, but there is 
restraint for senior citizens who've got this new tax imposed upon them.  
There is restraint for school children when they go to buy their clothing.  
There's restraint for families.  There's restraint for businesses.  And, 
Mr. Speaker, the sad fact of the matter is, up until this point they don't 
have a choice, and they're looking for a chance, sir, to choose.  They're 
looking for a chance to choose whether or not they want this provincial 
goods and services tax, or whether they can choose a government that will 
impose internal restraint and will do some sound fiscal planning and some 
fiscal management and will start living within the means of the revenue 
that the people of this province give them through tax dollars, and will 
live within the means of the money that comes from the resource revenues in 
this province. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, they're looking for restraint.  You bet they are.  
But they're looking for a government that will deliver it, and they know 
it's not going to come from this Premier or his cabinet.  And I say, Mr. 
Speaker, when we're four and a half years, far past what is a normal 
mandate in Saskatchewan, for a government to have the audacity to thrust 
this massive tax grab on Saskatchewan people, I say shame on you.  Shame on 
this government, Mr. Speaker.  A government that has hundreds of thousands 
of dollars for travel and makes the choice to travel them and their staff 
around the province and around the world before looking after the needs of 
Saskatchewan people, it's no wonder people are cynical about his 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I mentioned earlier today about Norman Riddell, who resigned 
as the Premier's deputy minister.  He resigned to accept a job with Premier 



 

 

Bourassa, on his own, of his own volition, moved to Quebec, took a job with 
that Premier, and this government gives him $165,000 in severance. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that would fund an awful lot of families; that 
would buy an awful lot of groceries; it would pay an awful lot of rent; and 
it would buy an awful lot of clothing for those in this province who can't 
afford that. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, this government has made some choices.  They chose 
Cargill over the Saskatchewan business community.  And they chose to fund 
Weyerhaeuser over the Saskatchewan business community.  And they chose to 
fund Peter Pocklington, sir, over the hoteliers of this province who are 
looking for some help and are in rural Saskatchewan in some desperate 
straits.  And, Mr. Speaker, they didn't show restraint.  I look through the 
list here and I see the member for Melville, the Minister of Economic 
Diversification, a travel bill of $16,709.  Mr. Speaker, that in no way 
indicates to me restraint.  And I see the former deputy premier, Mr. 
Berntson, at $17,689.  Mr. Speaker, neither does that show restraint to the 
people of Saskatchewan.  And the member for Regina South, who is quite 
interested in this debate, I can tell, spent a total of $24,527. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that's why people are saying that they're feeling 
betrayed by this government.  It's why they're asking for an election: 
because the member for Regina South in one year racks up a travel bill of 
$24,527, which to my mind, Mr. Speaker, is outrageous.  And I think the 
people of this country and the people of this province feel it's 
outrageous.  I think he should be more interested in what's going on around 
him, Mr. Speaker, but I guess that's why we're in a problem. 
 
I listened today to the member from Shaunavon explain the cross-border 
shopping -- and I mean, Shaunavon, Mr. Speaker, very, very close to the 
American border . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Forty-five miles. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: --  Very much affected, some 45 miles one of my colleagues 
says, and very much affected those communities are by cross-border 
shopping.  And he stands in his place today; then he said well gee, I mean 
it always happens; it always did happen. 
 
Well I say to you, Mr. Speaker, I grew up in that part of the country, and 
I know well what cross-border shopping has been, and I know the history of 
cross-border shopping as does everyone down there.  And the biggest thing 
they did to enhance the economy of North Dakota and Montana was to impose 
the federal goods and services tax.  And now this government heaps the 
provincial goods and services tax on top of that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if there ever was a plan for economic development -- clearly, 
clearly it was the plan of this Premier and of his Finance minister -- but 
it wasn't for us in Saskatchewan; it was for the northern states.  That's 
who the plan for economic development was targeted to. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it's a shame when you've got a member of the 



 

 

legislature who stands up . . . who can stand up and support the moves of a 
government that caused the demise of the economies in ridings that he 
represents without saying a word, as I referred to earlier.  I say to you, 
Mr. Speaker, shame on that member and I say shame on the government that he 
represents and shame on the political party that allows those kinds of 
statements to be made in this legislature, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- And I said, Mr. Speaker, earlier today, that that 
portion of Hansard is going to be spread far and wide in that riding, and 
it is.  Because I think the business men and women in that riding and in 
that area have the right to know.  They have the right to know what he says 
when he comes to Regina.  And I tell you, Mr. Speaker, we're not going to 
let him get away with saying one thing in Shaunavon or in Aneroid or 
Kincaid, and coming into this legislature and taking another position. 
 
It's not going to happen, Mr. Speaker, because the people in this side of 
the legislature aren't going to allow it to happen, and we're going to 
expose members on that side of the House for exactly what they support when 
they're sitting in here in Regina, and we're going to maybe help explain to 
the people in their ridings why the economy has been destroyed the way it 
is -- simply because of the attitude of members in here who don't 
understand what's going on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, when a member of this legislature, 45 
miles from the American border, can support American business men and women 
over the business people in his own riding, is it any wonder why we've had 
the highest bankruptcy rate of any time -- the highest bankruptcy rate of 
any time in this province.  Last year 650 bankruptcies in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, and that member is a good indication of why it's happened to us in 
this province and I say shame on him. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- You know, Mr. Speaker, it's indicated that in one 
border crossing there are 800 cars going through in a day.  Can you imagine 
that, Mr. Speaker -- 800 cars going through one of our border crossings in 
Saskatchewan, people leaving this province to spend their hard-earned money 
to escape these unfair taxes imposed by Mulroney and by this Premier.  
Eight hundred cars a day through one border crossing -- can you imagine it, 
Mr. Speaker?  Can you imagine why businesses are closing their doors?  Is 
there any wonder why Saskatchewan business men and women are upset with 
this goods and services tax?  And is there any understanding of why a 
member of this legislature would stand in his place and say, well, I mean, 
it just happens? 
 
As my one colleague said one time, well wherever you go there you are.  And 
I mean if that's the attitude of members of this PC government with respect 
to cross-border shopping, is there any wonder, sir, people are asking for 
an election to turn things right side up again? 



 

 

 
Mr. Speaker, I say to you, this government has no intentions of changing.  
This government is so deeply entrenched in the mire and in the muck that 
there's no way to change the way things are happening in Saskatchewan here 
other than to change the Premier and the cabinet and the back-benchers and 
put someone in there who really cares. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I have listened quite closely, quite 
closely I've listened to the comments of the Minister of Finance since 
we've been back in the legislature and he's somehow got some convoluted 
idea, some mixed up, jangled up idea that the imposition of this $440 
million tax on Saskatchewan business people is going to create 5,000 new 
jobs. 
 
Well now, Mr. Speaker, when I first heard this I thought, well he's an 
educated man and I mean there has to be some reasoning.  There has to be 
some kind of an economic study, an impact study on the different sectors of 
our economy.  And I mean somebody has sat down with the Finance minister 
and said, yes, you can create 5,000 new jobs, just keep taxing those guys.  
You give them another $440 million worth of taxes and that's going to 
equate to 5,000 jobs.  I promise you.  I know it's going to. 
 
But you know, Mr. Speaker, day after day we ask for this Finance minister 
to table this study.  But you know what? -- he didn't have it.  He didn't 
have it day after day after day.  He had nothing to show the people of this 
province until today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- What did he show today? 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well, let me give you the chronology of today.  What 
happens today is the Leader of the Opposition, the member from Riversdale, 
has a press conference in Saskatoon, and he makes a commitment to the 
people of Saskatchewan that we're going to reform government.  We're going 
to practise restraint.  We're going to look at the internal expenditures of 
government and we think there are ways, there are different ways, and are 
there other choices that can be made.  And we think that the provincial 
goods and services tax is unfair and it's going to be a negative on the 
economy of this province.  And as a matter of fact, we've done a study on 
the economic impact of the provincial goods and services tax, and it's been 
looked at by a number of prominent people in this province and in this 
country.  And by golly, they agree that this . . . first of all the goods 
and services tax is no good and that it's got to go. 
 
And so we're making this commitment to you; we're going to table our study.  
And the other thing we're going to do is, if we're elected, we're going to 
get rid of the provincial goods and services tax provincially if these 
people can ram it through the legislature. 
 
And I want to say, it wasn't long after, Mr. Speaker, that the Finance 
Minister was scurrying for a rehash of the federal analysis of the federal 
goods and services tax.  And lo and behold!  He pounds together a little 



 

 

book and he presents it to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
(2000) 
 
Mr. Speaker, that impact study that he tabled just recently could have been 
put before the people of Saskatchewan.  It could have been put before the 
people of Saskatchewan when he made the announcement that he was going to 
oppose it, so that we could have passed judgement on whether or not it was 
fair and whether or not it was right to do. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have that study with me here.  And I want to refer to 
the two studies tonight, first of all the one that was put forth by the 
Minister of Finance, and the document that was put forth by the Leader of 
the Opposition. 
 
Well first of all, let me take you to back page . . . and the member from 
Cut Knife-Lloydminster is laughing.  I want to take you to the very back 
page. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  I'm going to once more . . . order.  I'm going to 
ask the hon. member not to refer to the presence of members. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- I appreciate your ruling, Mr. Speaker.  So let me 
address, sir, this to you.  On the back page of the Finance Minister's 
study, he's got a list of groups that have been . . . consultation on 
harmonization, he's got it, provincial consultation. 
 
And there's a whole list here, but I tell you, Mr. Speaker, there were two 
that stood out in my mind.  The first one was the restaurateurs' 
association.  And I tell you, Mr. Speaker, if they were consulting with the 
people who own restaurants and make their money out of the food business in 
this province, they didn't hear what they had to say. 
 
And I tell you, Mr. Speaker, there was one, to me, that was even a little 
bit more glaring.  It was the Canadian Federation of Independent Business.  
Now, Mr. Speaker, pretty clearly this Finance Minister and the Premier and 
the cabinet and, I would assume, a number of the back-benchers got huddled 
around and they went out and they said, well we're going to have a little 
meeting with these groups and then we're going to go ahead and impose this 
provincial goods and services tax anyway; it doesn't matter. 
 
And I tell you why I would say that . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  Why is the hon. member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- I was wondering if the member would entertain a question, 
sir. 
 
The Speaker: -- Would the hon. member entertain a question? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- No. 
 
The Speaker: -- The hon. member refuses. 



 

 

 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, if I thought the question would have any 
semblance of common sense, I might, but I don't. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to refer back to the document presented by the Minister 
of Finance.  And he talks about the list of provincial consultation on 
harmonization and the different groups. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, here I see the Canadian Federation of Independent 
Business, which brings me to the document presented today by the Leader of 
the Opposition.  And in it there are some people who are well-known 
throughout Saskatchewan, western Canada, and indeed throughout Canada, the 
list of people who had reviewed the research done by the caucus, with our 
caucus, with respect to this PST.  They've reviewed it and they've endorsed 
it as a fair and reasonable assessment. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I don't know all of these people.  But 
by the one that I do know, Mr. Speaker, I believe this to be a fair and 
honest assessment of what they've read, of the document presented by the 
Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Because you see, Mr. Speaker, there's Professor Neil Brooks, professor of 
law, Osgoode law school, York University.  And I don't know him.  There's a 
Dr. Alex Kelly, professor of economics, University of Regina.  And I can't 
say that I've met him but I know that Mr. Kelly is very well respected 
throughout the province; Doug Elliot, editor and publisher of Sask Trends 
Monitor.  And the members on the opposite side laugh and that's fine. 
 
But there's one gentleman on here, sir, whose judgement I do trust and who 
I do know, and that's Dale Botting of the Canadian Federation of 
Independent Business, the same operation who this government says they've 
consulted with. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, if that's what consultation Tory-style is all about, I 
say to you, we don't need any more of it.  And I say, Mr. Speaker, that's 
why people will no longer believe, if they ever did, that this government's 
rationalization of internal spending is nothing but a joke.  And for 
members on that side of the House to stand up and applaud themselves for 
embarking on that particular role is a . . . it's a laugh, it's a joke. 
 
On one hand they misrepresent.  They say they consulted, and sure they 
consulted but they didn't tell the whole story . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order, order.  The member from Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster and the member for Regina Lakeview are carrying on 
simultaneous debate.  The member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake has the 
privilege of having the floor.  Allow him to continue. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, the 
point that I was trying to make is the Finance minister indicates he's 
consulted widely.  And I don't know how many of these other groups that he 
may have consulted with, but by golly you know, when I see an analysis of 
the negative impact and one of the groups who has been consulted has been 



 

 

clearly ignored, that tells me something, Mr. Speaker.  It tells me 
something. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, that this is one of the reasons we're going to be 
presenting the motion to change this motion because it doesn't really 
represent what's been happening in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  If anything 
it's a misrepresentation, and the people of Saskatchewan, I say, Mr. 
Speaker, deserve more than that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had touched on out-migration earlier this evening, and I 
talked about cross-border shopping, and I want to spend a little more time 
talking about cross-border shopping and the effects on communities like 
Estevan, like Shaunavon, Coronach, and Rockglen.  I want to talk about 
what's happening in those communities, Mr. Speaker.  At a time when their 
Premier is spending $53,000 a year flying around the world, around the 
province, their people, their customers are getting in their cars, driving 
across the border to avoid an unfair tax that's imposed upon them because 
of these kinds of wild expenditures. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the Premier's own riding, in Estevan, I've talked with a 
number of business men and women who have said, we can't exist.  We can go 
another couple of months maybe, but I tell you the shopping down in the 
United States is killing us and we can't survive.  We're going to close our 
doors.  The Co-op farm service centre in the Premier's own community, one 
of the communities in his riding in Estevan, closes down; 17 jobs 
disappear. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the Premier spends $53,434 in a year flying around 
Saskatchewan and around the country and there are businesses closing.  And 
he imposes a tax -- a tax that's chasing consumers out of this province -- 
to cover the costs of his flying around the province, around the country, 
and around the world. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, if this government was serious about 
internal restraint, the first thing that the Premier should do is live up 
to the commitment that he made to the people of Saskatchewan that his 
cabinet and his caucus are not going to be flying all over the place and 
are going to be spending less money on travel.  Mr. Speaker, that's one of 
the first things that has to happen. 
 
Can you imagine, Mr. Speaker, $501,845 spent in one year by members of this 
caucus -- cabinet, none the less -- flying back and forth.  And I 
understand that there's some of those flights they will have to make.  But 
I say to you, Mr. Speaker -- and I refer again to the former minister of 
Highways, Jim Garner -- when you see a trip to Honolulu in the middle of 
the winter to go over to Hawaii to learn how to build roads, you know that 
there's something wrong.  Because I'll tell you, there's a different 
industry in Hawaii building roads, to my mind, than building roads here in 
Saskatchewan.  It would lead some to believe that it was nothing but a 
winter holiday. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, that if that's the restraint that this government 
is exhibiting, how can the member from Moosomin stand in his place and 



 

 

applaud the actions of the government? 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we've talked about just about every aspect of how this 
government has turned things upside down in this province, and I think I've 
made a strong argument to suggest that in fact there has been no internal 
restraint.  And I think, Mr. Speaker, by my conversations with people 
throughout this province, it's very, very clear that this government, and 
that people know and feel that this government, has no intentions to 
constrain their spending internally. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I shared a little story and I want to repeat that 
story because I really found it interesting.  Before supper a friend of 
mine, a gentleman, a senior citizen that I've know for many, many years and 
who knows Saskatchewan very well . . . He's worked, spent all his working 
life here in Saskatchewan and he's retired now, and a well-deserved 
retirement he's having. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, he phoned me with a little story.  He says, 
you know, he said, I got up this morning and he says, I was just thinking 
how things have changed in Saskatchewan and how things have really been 
turned around.  He said, it used to be that years back when people would 
rush to the bootlegger, they were paying twice the price for whatever they 
were buying.  And he said, you know this government has turned things 
around so dramatically that now people are going to a bootlegger to save 
money, because it's all cross-border American whisky. 
 
And you know, I thought, I guess you're right because really that's what's 
happening.  And it's not only those that are selling American whisky 
illegally and cigarettes that are brought in from the States illegally.  
This government, sir, is forcing people out of their home communities, 
forcing them to buy groceries, and forcing them to buy clothes.  And I say, 
Mr. Speaker, when a government has to force its own people out of its own 
jurisdiction, out of its own province to buy elsewhere, something's got to 
be wrong. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, the first thing that's wrong, the first thing is 
this government's priorities.  Their choices that they've made with respect 
to expenditures, that's been one of the first problems.  But it's created, 
sir, a second problem and that second problem is that they've had to go to 
the well too often and still not be able to balance a budget.  An increase 
in revenue from 2.3 billion to 4.8 billion in nine and a half years -- Mr. 
Speaker, it's a shame. 
 
I would defy you to find one family in this province who has over doubled 
their income.  You may find some; I would say not very many.  For the most 
part they've gone down.  I believe that perhaps Chuck Childers's family has 
doubled their income.  I think that to be the truth, but I say, Mr. 
Speaker, that opportunity and that option hasn't been open to Saskatchewan 
families for the most part.  They've had to live on less and less 
disposable income because of the attitude of this government towards 
working men and women. 
 
I look, sir, at the constraint that they've imposed upon the construction 



 

 

industry.  People that were working at well-paying jobs prior to 1982 -- 
prior to this government allowing spin-off companies -- people were working 
at jobs maybe making 15, $16 an hour, some maybe more.  Some of those 
people who can find work in Saskatchewan are working for 8 and $9.  And I 
tell you they've felt restraint.  They understand restraint, Tory-style.  
And when they see people like Chuck Childers, with a $740,000-a-year salary 
and a five-year, no-cut contract, is it any wonder why they're angry at 
this government and when they don't believe them when they talk about 
restraint, internal restraint? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I talked about the construction industry because the riding 
that I represent was home to an awful lot of construction workers: 
electricians, plumbers, bricklayers, and other different jobs.  And I tell 
you what's happened to them, Mr. Speaker. A lot of those people are working 
outside of this province. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Where? 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Alberta and . . . The member says, where?  Listen, Mr. 
Member, let me tell you, in the community of Duck Lake there are 12 
bricklayers, journeymen bricklayers, and I want to tell you that there 
hasn't been one of them that's been working steady since your government 
took over.  And I say to you, Mr. Member, you have nothing to say. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- What you should be, is embarrassed.  What you should 
be, sir, is embarrassed.  And I say to you, sir, those that have left this 
province to seek employment and a reasonable standard of living in other 
areas have left because of the . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order, order, order.  I ask hon. members to . 
. . Without repeating the words, I simply ask hon. members to refer to each 
other with respect, number one.  Secondly, I remind them again not to 
interfere with the member on his feet. 
 
(2015) 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I talked about restraint and about 
priorities, and restraint for some, and choices.  And I want to tell you, 
Mr. Speaker, when I see that the chairman of the Saskatchewan Liquor Board 
receives an increase of tens of thousands of dollars, and it isn't even 
legislatively correct -- they have no legislative power to increase that 
salary -- I say to you, Mr. Speaker, the auditor says it, and members on 
this side of the House say, that they had no right to give that kind of an 
increase.  It tells you where restraint is.  I tell you, the chairman of 
that commission, there was no restraint for him.  The government coffers 
and the pocket of the taxpayers was wide open for that gentleman. 
 
But the people, the working men and women in my riding who've had their 
wages decreased and who've been relegated to the unemployment rolls, they 
know where restraint has been.  And I tell you, they feel restraint when 
they've had to sell their homes and when they've had to sell cars, and then 



 

 

finally when they've had to leave the province, they understand restraint.  
And I tell you, Mr. Speaker, I could take you through a list of businesses 
in Prince Albert that have found restraint and have felt the impact of 
restraint.  MacDonalds Consolidated closing very shortly in Prince Albert, 
31 jobs gone -- those people know restraint; Western Grocers closed, dozens 
of jobs gone -- they know restraint; Grosser & Glass, a well-established 
wholesaler, long time in our community -- they know restraint and their 
employees know restraint.  And I tell you, the sport shops that closed down 
on Central Avenue in Prince Albert, three young men trying to start a new 
business, and because of the way this government has destroyed the economy, 
have had to close their doors -- they understand restraint. 
 
And I tell you, Mr. Speaker, when they see the list of travelling that this 
cabinet and this Premier does, and when they see the double standard and 
what's in it for them, they understand where there is restraint and where 
there's a lack of restraint.  And I say, Mr. Speaker, that the people of 
Saskatchewan are more than willing, and in fact are anxious, to go to the 
polls and display their feelings with respect to motions that come before 
this legislature by members on that side of the House.  They're more than 
willing to pass judgement on those comments. 
 
And when they see their MLAs from the southern part of the province stand 
up and so callously shrug off hundreds of thousands of dollars, millions of 
dollars of Canadian and Saskatchewan consumer dollars moving across the 
border to the United States, and when they see members defending that, they 
understand what they need to do and they understand what they want to do.  
And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, it's going to be not long before they have 
the opportunity to explain exactly how they feel, and that's when an 
election happens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, cross-border shopping, the loss of Saskatchewan businesses, 
the out-migration of in two years 42,000 of our young men and women who 
were looking for the opportunity to be employed and to create employment in 
this province . . . And the out-migration of 42,000 people, roughly 
three-quarters, I understand, which are under 35 years old, is an economic 
disaster in itself, sir. 
 
And had this government looked internally and repriorized their 
expenditures, I would suggest that there may have been money for economic 
development programs, and there may have been money for the Saskatchewan 
business community.  And I say, Mr. Speaker, if this government had 
practised restraint and if they had looked internally, there may have been 
help for the hotel industry where you've got hotel after hotel after hotel 
going bankrupt.  There may have been help. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, people understand double standards.  They 
understand them clearly and they understand flip-flops.  And they 
understand the Farm Credit Corporation writing down loans for some and not 
for others.  They understand when that opportunity is available to one of 
the members of the Executive Council who garners a salary of in excess of 
$110,000 a year.  They understand double standards.  I want to tell you, 
Mr. Speaker, they understand, when there's a write-down for one and not for 
another, that there's a double set of standards.  And that's why they 



 

 

understand there's restraint for some and not for others. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, the people of this province understand clearly why 
there's a need for a change of this government.  And I want to say, Mr. 
Speaker, that I'm pleased to have been part of this term these last four 
years.  It's been very much a learning experience for me, and I want to say 
partly the learning has come from the people who I represent in the riding 
of Prince Albert-Duck Lake, because they've helped me to understand what a 
hardship a callous and unfair government can impose upon its constituents. 
 
They've helped me to understand what it's like for a single parent who is 
asked to practise restraint by an uncaring and callous government and to 
try and eke out a living on two or three minimum wage jobs . . . and when 
they see because of the goods and services tax, their tips dry up.  They've 
helped me to understand why it's so important, Mr. Speaker, that we return 
again to a fair and a caring government. 
 
And I want to say as well, Mr. Speaker, members of that side of the House 
have helped me to understand why it's so important that we never ever allow 
a Tory government in this province ever again because of what they've done 
in the last nine and a half years.  And, Mr. Speaker, members of that side 
have helped me to understand just where right-wing thinking governments 
come from, when the priorities of Cargill Grain come before the business 
men and women of this province, and when the aspirations of Cargill Grain 
come before the working families and the home owners in Saskatchewan.  
They've helped me to understand why it is that we can never again in this 
province have a Tory government.  And I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, when 
this government can make a decision to put some $3 million a job at risk at 
the Saferco plant of Cargill Grain, and business men and women who have 
operated in this province, who've approached SEDCO for some financial 
assistance and found out there's nothing there, Mr. Speaker, they've helped 
me to understand why the people of Saskatchewan are so serious about 
getting rid of this Premier, his cabinet, and his back-benchers. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, that I'm thankful for that lesson.  And it's a 
lesson that I'll never forget.  It's a lesson, sir, that I'll carry with me 
for a long, long time.  Mr. Speaker, when I see this uncaring and callous 
government impose what has to be the most massive and unfair tax grab 
without even bringing it before the legislature; Mr. Speaker, when you see 
a government that will on the one hand do that action, and then in the next 
day stand before the legislature and talk about internal restraint without 
having balanced one single budget, sir, in 10 years, Mr. Speaker, I say to 
you that there is need for change. 
 
It's well past time for a change and I believe the people of Saskatchewan 
will work and work hard to ensure that that change in actual fact does 
happen.  Mr. Speaker, we're only days, weeks -- well for sure no more than 
months -- away from another election.  And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that 
the people of Saskatchewan will indeed select for change and I believe that 
to be in the form of a New Democrat government because, Mr. Speaker, we've 
got a commitment to reinstating a fair government, open government, and an 
honest government. 
 



 

 

I say to you, Mr. Speaker, there's going to be an end to the flights of Jim 
Garner to Honolulu.  There's going to be an end to the trips to Athens, and 
Winnipeg, and Calgary, 
 Dand London and Edmonton and Brasilia and Fredericton and Washington and 
Phoenix and Quebec, and you can read on the list because, Mr. Speaker, this 
next election is going to introduce a government that is willing to live 
within its means -- a government with a commitment to balanced budgets, a 
government to commitment for fairness for people, a government that will 
commit itself to programs for Saskatchewan people and not for multinational 
corporations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, therefore I wish to move an amendment to the motion put forth 
by the member for Moosomin, and the amendment would be: 
 

 That all the words after "Assembly" be deleted and the following 
substituted therefor: 

 
 condemns the Government of Saskatchewan for failing to initiate an 

effective internal restraint program during the past nine years, and for 
its unprecedented waste and mismanagement of taxpayers' dollars. 

 
And this, sir, is seconded by the member from The Battlefords. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I want to 
participate into the debate on this motion today during private members' 
day.  I certainly support the amendment put forward by the member from 
Prince Albert-Duck Lake.  And I found it somewhat hypocritical for the 
member from Moosomin to bring forward a motion to this legislature calling 
on the government to be commended for its internal restraint program 
through the difficult economic times. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do believe that the Minister of Finance should subscribe to 
a little publication called Building Budgeting Skills.  I mean there's more 
fiction than fact in what the government is putting forward over the past 
four years. 
 
They certainly have not been in a mood of restraint when they looked at 
such programs as the funding of Austrak Machinery Corp. Canada.  On June 1, 
Mr. Speaker, or June 31, pardon me, the Minister of Finance, on behalf of 
the minister in charge of SEDCO, announced that Austrak would be locating a 
tractor plant in Weyburn and this $2.4 million project was to initially 
employ 20 people with expected growth to 100 jobs within five years.  Of 
the total cost of the venture, Mr. Speaker, SEDCO provided the company with 
a loan of $700,000, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now as I said, this company was announced on June 31 of 1989.  Austrak 
ceased operations on August 29 of 1990, Mr. Speaker.  A little over a year 
and after putting in $700,000 into this company, it folds up shop in 
Saskatchewan and leaves the province. 
 
What about GigaText translation systems inc., Mr. Speaker?  Do they show 



 

 

restraint with GigaText?  In May of 1988, GigaText began operations in 
Regina with an initial investment of some $4 million from SEDCO.  And in 
March of 1989, after it had become clear that the company was in financial 
trouble, SEDCO took over control of the operations of the company and 
provided it with another infusion of capital of some $1.25 million, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And then after that happened, GigaText ceased operations on November 16 of 
1989.  On March 16 of the following year, the government announced that 
SEDCO had invested a total of some $5.5 million into a venture that could 
be expected to have a total recovery of maybe a million dollars, they said, 
from the sale of the company's assets, plus a federal tax credit that the 
firm held for some $950,000. 
 
(2030) 
 
Mr. Speaker, it's not really fair game for this government to mislead the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan into thinking that this government 
has practised restraint at any step of the way throughout their mandate 
over the past four and a half years.  And in fact what people in 
Saskatchewan are saying, Mr. Speaker, is that this government's mandate has 
run out.  The Minister of Finance should pack his books into a bag, hand 
them over to the Premier, and ask the Premier to call an election so the 
people in the province of Saskatchewan can decide about the cruel and 
unusual punishment that this government has inflicted on the people in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what about the restraint they showed with Pro-Star Mills Ltd.?  
On March 2, 1983, SEDCO provided Pro-Star Mills with equity financing of 
$490,000, with this financing aimed at assisting the company in developing 
new markets.  The company Pro-Star, Mr. Speaker, ceased operations in 
January of 1985.  Is that restraint that this government has shown, after 
putting in $490,000 to a company that closes up their doors?  No it's not 
restraint, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The only people who have been punished by this government have been the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan whose tax dollars have had to pay 
the bills because of the cruel and unusual treatment that this government 
has inflicted upon them: the lack of budgeting skills, the lack of 
integrity, the lack of planning, the lack of financial accountability.  Mr. 
Speaker, I say again, the people in Saskatchewan are saying, enough is 
enough; tell the Minister of Finance to pack his flawed, cooked books into 
a big bag, hand them over to the Premier of this province, and tell the 
Premier to call a general election so the people in Saskatchewan, the 
voting public, can decide where restraint should be put, Mr. Speaker.  
That's what should happen. 
 
How about, Mr. Speaker, Nardei Fabricators of Saskatchewan Ltd?  On October 
14, 1986, just six days remaining before the general election campaign of 
October 20, the Premier of the province officially opened Nardei 
Fabricators' new $600,000 pipe fabricating plant in Regina.  Three days 
following the October 20 election, the plant permanently closed.  Mr. 
Speaker, an announcement on October 14, a closure on the October 20 -- six 



 

 

days have transpired.  And the people of Saskatchewan were duped into 
another false promise by the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan and a 
government just trying desperately to win a provincial election in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it worked in 1986, but it will not work in 1991 because 
this government has gone far beyond their mandate and far beyond the 
integrity and the confidence that people in Saskatchewan should normally 
show on a government.  This government has lost complete confidence with 
the people in the province of Saskatchewan, and the Minister of Finance and 
the previous minister of Finance that would almost bankrupt the province of 
Saskatchewan should be ashamed to show their face in this province, Mr. 
Speaker -- ashamed to show their face in this province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what about Canapharm Inc. medical textile division?  That 
was a plant proposed for Swift Current, Mr. Speaker.  On October 15, 1986 
-- five days prior to an election -- the Premier of the province announced 
the construction of a new $12.5 million bandage plant in Swift Current, 
Saskatchewan.  It was reported at the time that the plant would create 100 
jobs.  To date, this plant has not yet been built, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There's no integrity left in this government, Mr. Speaker, and no 
confidence that the people of Saskatchewan can place in a government that's 
so flawed and lacking in integrity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what about High R Doors Manufacturing Ltd. in my own 
constituency of The Battlefords?  On April 14, 1987, it was announced that 
High R Doors would be establishing a plant in the city of North Battleford, 
creating 175 jobs, Mr. Speaker.  SEDCO invested $2 million into this 
venture. 
 
On August 8, 1989, the company ceased operations.  In the following year 
the plant was sold to which is now a reputable firm who's doing a good 
business.  But the government took another bath on that one, pumping in $2 
million, Mr. Speaker, 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, I am wondering if the hon. member would 
entertain a question, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Would the member take a question? 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- I only entertain serious interventions, Mr. Speaker, while 
I am giving a debate in the legislature. 
 
Well thank you, Mr. Speaker.  High R Doors in North Battleford never came 
close to employing 175 people in North Battleford.  In fact, High R Doors 
is lucky if they ever employed 20 people in the city of North Battleford 
and surrounding district, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It's an atrocity what this government does to waste and just blatantly 
misuse the taxpayers' dollars in the province of Saskatchewan.  They have 



 

 

no shame in what they do, and the people in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, will 
have no shame in what they do when this government finally screws up the 
courage to call an election and place their record before the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What about Joytec limited? Was that financial restraint, Mr. Speaker?  
Joytec, a Saskatoon company which attempted to develop a golf simulator, 
raised $4 million under the province's venture capital corporation program.  
Investors received some $1.125 million in provincial government tax 
credits.  Moreover, the company received $76,000 in assistance from the 
Department of Science and Technology.  Is that practising restraint in the 
province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker?  No it's not. 
 
Joytec took Saskatchewan taxpayers' dollars, left the province of 
Saskatchewan, moved to British Columbia, associated themselves with a 
company called Technigen.  Technigen and Lyco -- a marketing agent for 
Technigen -- ended up having charges laid against them in the province of 
Saskatchewan under the Securities Commission, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Part of those charges carried on over into the province of British 
Columbia, Mr. Speaker, where either Lyco and Technigen, or possibly both of 
them, are up on charges before the Securities Commission, because they said 
that they had this company with Corporacion Relacio of Geneva to sell 
millions of dollars worth of golf simulators, Mr. Speaker.  But when we 
tried to find the company Corporacion Relacio in Geneva, it didn't exist, 
Mr. Speaker.  Where did we finally track down the company, Mr. Speaker?  In 
Panama.  And did the company have an office and an executive over in 
Panama?  No they didn't have an office or executive officers in Panama, Mr. 
Speaker; they had a post office box in Panama.  That's what Corporacion 
Relacio had in this great marketing scheme through the company Joytec and 
Technigen and Lyco, Mr. Speaker.  That's what happened. 
 
Is that restraint when they waste taxpayers' dollars like that, Mr. 
Speaker?  I would think that that's not restraint, Mr. Speaker.  That's not 
restraint at all. It's a disgrace and it's deceiving to the people in the 
province of Saskatchewan who put so much faith into this government in 1982 
and rapidly, rapidly lost that faith.  And today we have a government that 
has no confidence from the people in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, none whatsoever. 
 
I think we also want to look at the restraint practised with Supercart 
International, Mr. Speaker.  On April 15, 1986, Supercart International 
opened a Regina plant to produce plastic shopping carts.  It was estimated 
that the plant would create 150 jobs.  Federal government contributed 
$366,000 to the venture and the provincial government an additional 
$250,000, as well as a program to hire 47 people on welfare. 
 
Well less than a year later, on December 16, 1986, Supercart laid off all 
but 5 of its 35 employees -- long shot from what they said they'd hire.  
And on January 29 of the following year the company ceased operations.  Is 
that restraint shown by this government, Mr. Speaker?  No that's not 
restraint shown by this government, Mr. Speaker.  It's waste and 
mismanagement.  This company . . . I said company, just a slip there, Mr. 



 

 

Speaker.  No company in the world would act like this government has acted 
over the course of their mandate, Mr. Speaker, none whatsoever. 
 
What about M.A.S. Medical Ltd., Mr. Speaker?  On June 25, 1990, the 
provincial government announced that SEDCO and the Department of Economic 
Diversification were assisting M.A.S. Medical in relocating to Saskatoon 
with $703,000 in loans and grants.  On October 5, less than six months 
later, M.A.S Medical ceased operations and is currently under investigation 
by the RCMP, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Was that a restraint program, providing them with $705,000 after the same 
principals, Mr. Speaker, had gone from the Maritime provinces where they 
had ripped off one of the Maritime governments out there?  You would have 
thought surely that this government would have practised restraint in 
checking out a company that they would give $705,000 to, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we look at the cabinet in this government.  This cabinet is so 
huge and bloated that it can't even function.  People in Saskatchewan say 
the biggest lie now is not, the cheque's in the mail, any more.  They say 
it's when a cabinet minister appears to speak to them and says, I'm from 
the government; I'm here to help you.  That's the biggest lie in the 
province of Saskatchewan now. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  I'd ask the member to refrain from using 
unparliamentary language. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Yes, Mr. Speaker, I'd definitely do that; there's no 
question about it. 
 
It's just not our words, Mr. Speaker, that talk about this government's 
lack of restraint and their lack of integrity.  What about statements by 
the Provincial Auditor?  With the appointment of more private sector 
auditors, the auditor now sees about 50 per cent of the expenditures from 
the public purse.  That's what the auditor says about your expenditures.  
Is that practising restraint or is that hiding the expenditures of 
taxpayers' dollars, Mr. Speaker?  I say it's hiding the expenditure of 
taxpayers' dollars and doesn't have diddly-squat to do with practising 
restraint, Mr. Speaker, none whatsoever. 
 
What else does the Provincial Auditor say?  I have been interfered with in 
the execution of my duties.  That's the Provincial Auditor, an officer of 
the Legislative Assembly -- not an individual who works for the government, 
not an individual that works for the opposition, not an individual who 
works for you, sir.  The auditor is an officer of this Assembly.  He is the 
watch-dog over the public purse.  And he says, I have been interfered with 
in the execution of my duties.  Is that practising restraint?  No, that's 
tampering with due process.  The people of Saskatchewan are saying, enough 
is enough.  What does this government have to hide, Mr. Speaker?  What are 
they hiding from the people of Saskatchewan when they interfere with the 
duties, the execution of the duties of the Provincial Auditor? 
 
The public accounts are not timely, and they do not provide correct and 
complete information to the Assembly.  That's another statement by the 



 

 

Provincial Auditor.  And what happens when the Provincial Auditor questions 
the practices of this government?  They don't say, well gosh, we made a 
mistake; we'd better correct that because the Provincial Auditor says we're 
doing something wrong -- an officer of this great, or at least once great 
institution in our land; the place where democracy should prevail; the 
place where laws are made and changed and made again and deleted if they're 
obsolete; a place where democracy is protected. 
 
(2045) 
 
But what does the auditor say?  The public accounts are not timely, and 
they do not provide correct and complete information to the Assembly.  Is 
that practising restraint, Mr. Speaker, as the member from Moosomin puts 
out in his motion here this afternoon that we're still debating here this 
evening?  No. I'd say it's a government that has something to hide, Mr. 
Speaker.  The people in Saskatchewan are saying, enough is enough.  Open 
the books in the province of Saskatchewan.  Don't use your rhetorical 
comments about restraint when you hide the real facts from the Provincial 
Auditor, an officer of this Assembly. 
 
People in Saskatchewan are saying, enough is enough -- shame on you, the 
government of the province of Saskatchewan.  Shame on you Tories for what 
you have done to the Saskatchewan community. 
 
But then again you must understand their attitude, Mr. Speaker.  The 
attitude of the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan is reflected back 
in 1982.  What did the Premier say then?  He said, deficits are just a 
deferred tax that must be paid by future generations; 1982 the Premier of 
the province of Saskatchewan said that, Mr. Speaker.  And what does he do?  
He allows his ministers of Finance to run up a deficit over 10 consecutive 
budgets, Mr. Speaker, where as at the end of the 1990 fiscal year we're 
looking at debts on the Consolidated Fund -- that's the operating account 
of government -- of about four and a half billion dollars. 
 
Up until 1982, Mr. Speaker, when this government came to office, there had 
only been two deficit budgets since the 1940s, and both of those were very, 
very small.  But what happens in less than a decade?  We have over $4 
billion in accumulated deficit budgets, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What are people in Saskatchewan saying?  They're saying, enough is enough.  
They're saying, why are you doing this?  Why are you doing this to us?  Do 
you make your friends in the resource sector pay?  No, they don't make 
their friends in the resource sector pay.  Do you make your corporate elite 
giants like the Weyerhaeusers and the Cargills pay?  No, they don't make 
them pay, Mr. Speaker.  They make the ordinary men and women of the 
province of Saskatchewan pay, Mr. Speaker.  They make the small businesses 
pay, Mr. Speaker.  They make the farmers pay, Mr. Speaker, for their 
incompetence and mismanagement and lack of planning and lack of restraint, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
No way could anyone in Saskatchewan, let alone  
 Dmembers on this side of the House, support the motion by the member from 
Moosomin put forward this afternoon in this Assembly, commending the 



 

 

government on practising restraint.  Mr. Speaker, what a joke, what a cruel 
joke on the people of the province of Saskatchewan.  Those people are 
saying, enough is enough; we won't tolerate it any more. And we can't do 
much about it right now but we want you to voice our concern in the 
provincial legislature.  And when the time comes that they muster up their 
courage to call an election we'll tell them clearly what we think at that 
point in time, Mr. Speaker.  We'll tell them enough is enough; no way we 
want a Tory government in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Let's look at some of the other examples of restraint, Mr. Speaker -- 
$17,423 in expenses run up by the Premier's office at the Regina Hotel 
Saskatchewan in one year.  What's wrong with this great building we have 
here, Mr. Speaker?  Is there a problem with this building?  The Speaker 
could meet assemblies in here.  He could meet them in the government's 
caucus room.  He could meet them in his own office.  We'd even lend him our 
caucus room if it saved them $17,423 a year of the taxpayers' dollars, the 
hard-earned dollars that men and women in the province of Saskatchewan have 
to pay to this government. 
 
The government wants it shovelled in the front door of the legislature and 
just siphoned out the back door, Mr. Speaker.  Hardly even stops to get any 
appreciation for the kind of volumes of money that this government has 
dealt with.  Sixty-four thousand, two hundred and fifty-three dollars paid 
to the British merchant bank, N.M. Rothschild & Sons for two months of 
privatization -- excuse me, privatization consultation.  Is that restraint? 
 
People in Saskatchewan told this government what they thought about 
privatization, Mr. Speaker.  People in the province said what they thought 
about privatization, and that was, we don't need two-bill Hill.  We don't 
need another billing for our electricity, and another billing for our gas 
charges.  We were happy with SaskPower, and people won't forget two-bill 
Hill come election time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Most people in Saskatchewan would like to earn $64,253 for the two months 
that they told the Government of Saskatchewan what they thought about 
privatization.  Privatization is another cool hoax played by a government 
that doesn't represent them, Mr. Speaker, played out almost to its fullest 
line, until the people in Saskatchewan spoke out, and through the 
opposition in the Legislative Assembly stopped them in their tracks on the 
sale of SaskEnergy, Mr. Speaker.  Stopped them in their tracks.  Is that 
restraint, when they paid $64,253 to the merchant bank, N.M. Rothschild & 
Sons, for two months of privatization consultation?  No that's not, Mr. 
Speaker.  That's not restraint. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan offered that advice for nothing.  The government 
didn't take that advice but charged them thousands of dollars more in tax 
dollars to the business people, and to the farmers, and to the working men 
and women in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
People in Saskatchewan are saying, whoa.  Enough is enough.  We're not 
going to take this any more.  Why are you doing this?  That's what people 
in Saskatchewan are asking.  They're asking, why don't you call an 
election?  Mr. Speaker, that's what they're asking people like the member 



 

 

from Kelvington-Wadena and the member from Redberry.  This government is 
telling the people of Saskatchewan they're not ready.  People can't afford 
for them not to be ready much longer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- What about the people? 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- What about the people in the province of Saskatchewan?  
Instead of their own largess at the public trough -- like the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena, and the member from Redberry, the member from Shaunavon 
-- why don't they call an election to see how long they leave you there? 
 
Let the people of the province decide.  Let them decide that, not your own 
smug disrespect.  And then to stand up in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, and 
for them to talk about restraint is one of the most hypocritical comments 
that any member on the government side could put forward, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just as a side note, it should be noted that part of this 
restraint that the government is bragging about is now costing taxpayers in 
the province of Saskatchewan about $550 million a year in interest on a 
debt -- a debt that wasn't there in 1982 when they took office, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Is that restraint?  No, I think it not be restraint, Mr. Speaker.  I think 
it is waste and mismanagement in the worst degree that Saskatchewan people 
have ever seen, Mr. Speaker. That's what it is. 
 
And again I go back to it being part of an attitude by the government 
opposite.  In 1983, the Premier of this once great province said, and I 
quote: Saskatchewan has so much going for it, you can afford to mismanage 
it and still break even.  Well he was right on the action, Mr. Speaker.  
They did mismanagement in the province of Saskatchewan but they didn't 
break even, Mr. Speaker.  That's why taxpayers today in Saskatchewan have 
to pay over $550 million a year of interest on a debt that did not exist in 
1982 when they took office, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are so many items, so many items that appal the people 
in the province of Saskatchewan.  Mr. Speaker, one of the things that I 
often hear from my constituents is that even when we get a pay raise any 
more, we earn less.  What's the point of still working to build this once 
great province?  I'm losing hope in the future, they say to me.  Why are 
they losing hope in the future?  Because they're on the verge of a tax 
revolt, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The people in the province of Saskatchewan, unless they are given a remedy 
through the electoral process or through this Legislative Assembly, they 
will wage something in Saskatchewan that will make proposition 13 from the 
province of California look pale by comparison, Mr. Speaker.  They are 
tired of seeing waste and mismanagement, no plan, no restraint, blatant 
disregard for the public, and at the same time their taxation burden going 
up. 
 
Let's look at the provincial income tax comparisons, Mr. Speaker, for 1990 
on a family, not an individual, but a family income of $40,000.  That 



 

 

family living in the province of Alberta, Mr. Speaker, would pay $1,664 in 
provincial income tax.  That family living in Manitoba, to the east of us, 
would pay $1,958 in income tax, Mr. Speaker.  But what would that same 
family in 1990 -- they've just sent in their income tax -- what would they 
pay in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker?  Not 1,664.  Not 1,958.  
They would pay $2,426 in income tax, Mr. Speaker.  The highest income tax 
anywhere in the great country of Canada, Mr. Speaker -- the highest rate of 
income tax.  No wonder people in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, are saying, 
enough is enough, ease us from this burden, forget about the provincial 
goods and services tax.  Call a provincial election and let the people of 
the province decide.  Stop the waste and mismanagement, stop the 
incompetence, stop the lack of planning, stop this government gone astray, 
because they're surely hurting us deeper than we've ever been hurting 
before, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, no wonder people are saying, whenever I get a pay 
increase it doesn't matter, my take home pay is less.  It's because 
Saskatchewan is the heaviest taxed province in all of Canada.  Why?  
Because this government has not practised one ounce of restraint.  Since 
the day they came to office they have practised waste and mismanagement, 
Mr. Speaker, nothing about restraints. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what about some of the other increases on people in the 
province of Saskatchewan, that they don't see coming off of their income 
tax and their small business at the end of the year, or their farm income 
tax due about the end of the year, or their source deductions. 
 
What about the resident white tailed deer licences, up 100 per cent; class 
4 driver's licences, up 122 per cent; road tests for driver's licences, up 
67 per cent; electrical inspection fee per hour, up 60 per cent; wiring 
permits, single family dwelling, up 89 per cent; wiring permit for a suite, 
up 90 per cent; wiring permit for a school -- and they talk about helping 
education -- wiring permit for a school has gone up 100 per cent, Mr. 
Speaker.  Journeyman electrician's licence, up 100 per cent; replacement 
driver's licence, up 100 per cent; boiler and pressure vessel engineering 
certificate, up a whopping 471 per cent, Mr. Speaker.  Registration for 
business corporation and annual return, up 100 per cent; business 
corporation certificate of incorporation, up 150 per cent; business 
corporations certification of documents, up 300 per cent; certificate to 
amend the articles of a non-profit corporation, up 100 per cent; special 
care home charges, up 73 per cent; change of name application fee, up 300 
per cent; certificate of incorporation for non-profit corporation, up 100 
per cent; registration of business name, up 150 per cent; better not get 
married more than once, marriage licences up 250 per cent; incorporation 
fee, home building co-operatives, up 100 per cent; outfitter's licence 
issued after June 30, up 200 per cent; guide's licence issued after June 
30, up 200 per cent; provision of a transcription to a university in 
Saskatchewan, up 400 per cent; duplicate teacher's certificate, up 150 per 
cent; correspondence school fee, per subject, up 67 per cent; renewal of 
fireman's certificate, up -- I thought it was a misprint at first but I 
checked it, Mr. Speaker -- up 700 per cent. 
 
Is that restraint, hon. gentlemen opposite?  Is that restraint?  What 



 

 

hypocrites you are to put forward a motion that says you should be 
commended for your restraint.  You should be condemned for your waste and 
mismanagement and the cruel hopes that you have played on the people . . . 
 
(2100) 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  What is the hon. member's point of order? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- While belligerence may not be unparliamentary, I 
believe calling a government hypocrites is unparliamentary language, and 
therefore you should rule that the member restrain himself. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  As I listened to the hon. member, I don't believe 
he levelled a personal charge against an individual member.  He did that on 
the government as a whole.  And I do agree that this language is 
intemperate, and while I will not rule it unparliamentary, I will certainly 
ask hon. members to be aware of the language they use in response to other 
members.  Intemperate language leads to further problems in the House.  And 
I think hon. members, it is their responsibility to keep that in mind when 
they speak. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well these are certainly 
intolerant times.  And the people of Saskatchewan expressed that 
intolerance, Mr. Speaker.  And I know that the government doesn't like some 
of the language used against them.  If they don't like the language in this 
legislature they should go out in the streets of the province of 
Saskatchewan and hear some of the language used against the government of 
the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  That's where they should go. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- How about increases to total provincial taxes?  The 
Saskatchewan average family, between 1981 and 1990, provincial income tax 
went up by some $320; utilities, some $936; sales tax, $285; gas tax, $132; 
prescription drug costs, $181; property taxes, $576; loss of the property 
improvement grant, $230, for total increases of $2,660, Mr. Speaker.  
That's an increase in taxes on the people of the province of Saskatchewan 
imposed by this government.  And this has no reflection of the provincial 
goods and services tax that this government wants to bring into place, Mr. 
Speaker, which will be a further burden of hundreds of dollars a year on 
Saskatchewan families.  It's unfair, it's unequitable, and it's undeserved 
by the people in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  Let's stop the 
waste and mismanagement. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of comments I think we should look at 
in the past, that we should go through some of the comments made by a 
former minister of Finance, Mr. Speaker.  I quote: we believe that all 
governments must work in concert to reduce budget deficits.  Failure to 
accomplish this will force harsh financial penalties on our children.  It 
is inevitable that mounting deficits will result in unwanted reductions in 
government services and tax increases. 
 
Now who do you thing would say something like that?  Finance minister, Bob 



 

 

Andrew, in 1984.  And up until 1984 they'd had a deficit budget in 1983 of 
$227 million and then another one of $331 million, for an accumulated 
deficit at that time of $558 million in the first two budgets of this 
government, Mr. Speaker.  No wonder when a minister of Finance in that year 
stands up and says that, and it's continued every since, people in 
Saskatchewan do say the "H" word on this government.  In fact if it's not 
unparliamentary, Mr. Speaker, they call this government hypocritical when 
they make statements like that, and they call them hypocritical when they 
bring in motions like they brought in here this afternoon, Mr. Speaker.  
There's no place in the democratic system for what this government is doing 
to the people in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Well and then we look at another statement by the same 
minister of Finance a year later in 1985 and I quote: the preliminary 
deficit for 1984-85, at 379.4 million, was 112.2 million higher than 
estimated.  Finance minister Bob Andrew, 1985.  That's the end of that 
quote, Mr. Speaker.  Now how is that, that they could misproject a budget 
like that?  Well let's move on.  Here's another quote, Mr. Speaker: the 
deficit for 1986-87 is currently forecast to be 1.2 billion. 
 
It's not million, Mr. Speaker. That's the "b" in front of it -- 1.2 
billion, about 800 million over the budget figure of $389 million.  Now who 
would we say that quote would be attributed to, Mr. Speaker?  I'll bet 
every member on the government side of the House knows who made that 
statement.  I know every member on this side of the House knows who made 
that statement.  It was Finance minister . . . Well I don't know if I can 
say it in the House.  It was Finance minister Gary Lane in 1987, the member 
from Qu'Appelle-Lumsden.  They only missed their projection by $800 
million.  Is that restraint? 
 
Which member on the government side of the House could stand in his place 
this evening and describe that as restraint?  Did their revenues go down, 
Mr. Speaker?  No, their revenues have not gone down.  As the member from 
Prince Albert-Duck Lake pointed out in his presentation here this evening, 
the government's revenue has increased since 1982 by 69 per cent, Mr. 
Speaker.  Inflation hasn't come anywhere close to that.  So they're raising 
more revenue than they did in 1982 by 69 per cent and they over-shoot a 
budget by $800 million -- way over 200 per cent, almost 300 per cent 
greater than what they forecast the deficit to be. 
 
Do you think, Mr. Speaker, that this government was practising restraint?  
Were they practising restraint on behalf of the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan or were they gouging them for their tax dollars?  People in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, think they were being gouged for their tax 
dollars.  That's why they're saying enough is enough, Mr. Speaker.  Enough 
is enough. 
 
The people in Saskatchewan are saying, why are you doing this to us?  The 
government doesn't have an answer for it.  They manipulate reality.  Thank 
goodness that they don't write history.  Future generations would be 
deceived by the kind of restraint this government is talking about.  You 



 

 

know why, Mr. Speaker?  Because it's not restraint, it is incompetence.  It 
is mismanagement.  It is deception.  It is deceitful.  It is not the decent 
thing to do to the people of the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  
It's a betrayal of faith, and that's why this government has lost 
confidence in the people of the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Enough is enough.  They want this government to come to their senses, Mr. 
Speaker.  Either call an election or get on with the business of governing 
the province in a planned and in a sound and in a fiscally responsible 
manner, not by the waste and mismanagement that you have inflicted on the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan.  That's what they're saying, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let's go to another quote by the minister of Finance, the 
member from Qu'Appelle-Lumsden back in 1989.  I quote: through the careful 
balance of priority spending and sensible revenue measures, we will reduce 
the deficit. 
 
What a joke, Mr. Speaker.  They have not got one concrete plan that they 
can put forward that shows deficit reduction as a priority.  After 10 
consecutive years of deficit budgets, running up an accumulated debt for 
the Consolidated Fund of about $5 billion or thereabouts -- we'll see what 
it is when the auditor gets a chance to look at the books -- after 10 
deficit budgets, Mr. Speaker, and such a huge debt, this government then 
says they'll balance the budget in three years. 
 
Some members laugh, Mr. Speaker, but the people in Saskatchewan don't 
laugh.  The people in Saskatchewan are ashamed, ashamed to admit that this 
government has driven them into a state of almost bankrupt, almost 
unrecoverable because of the mismanagement and the financial waste, the 
incompetence and the lack of planning of this government, Mr. Speaker.  
What a cruel joke to play on the people of the province of Saskatchewan, to 
say that they'll balance the budget in three years.  Could it be an 
election promise, Mr. Speaker?  Could it be an election promise?  They 
certainly can't run on their record.  They certainly can't run on their 
planning.  They certainly can't run on the programs they've delivered. 
 
So what do they do?  They try and fool the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan by saying, oh we'll balance the budget; in three years we'll 
balance the budget.  They would break every taxpayer in the province, Mr. 
Speaker, is the way they would balance the budget in three years, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let's look closer to home, more recent years.  The Minister of 
Finance, the member from Weyburn, in 1990 said, and I quote:  we want a 
lower deficit because deficits add to the provincial debt which in turn 
leads to  
 Dhigher interest costs.  What a profound economic statement.  What a 
profound economic statement by the member from Weyburn. 
 
Anyone could figure that out, Mr. Speaker.  We don't need the Minister of 
Finance to tell us that.  We need the Minister of Finance in the province 
of Saskatchewan to tell us he's going to stop the waste and mismanagement 



 

 

and be a responsible custodian for the taxpayers' dollars and the resources 
of the province of Saskatchewan.  That's what we need a Minister of Finance 
to say in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What else did the current Minister of Finance say, Mr. Speaker?  He says 
and I quote:  continual deficits and the debt they produce create problems.  
The province cannot sustain deficits at the current levels on an indefinite 
basis.  Did it take them 10 years to figure that out?  There isn't a 
business, there isn't an individual, there isn't a law firm, there isn't an 
accounting firm, in fact there isn't anyone except the Government of 
Saskatchewan that would think you could run perpetual deficit finances and 
have it be healthy toward the economy of the province.  Anyone else would 
be bankrupt, Mr. Speaker, but thank goodness the only thing that's bankrupt 
right now is the government of the province of Saskatchewan and those Tory 
back-benchers that sit across here.  They're bankrupt of ideas. 
 
They're old and they're tired, Mr. Speaker.  It's time to put them out to 
pasture, Mr. Speaker.  They're not fit to run in the race of life any more.  
Put them out to pasture, let them graze awhile, soak in the sunshine.  And 
we're sorry we took away their severance pay if it affected them to that 
degree, but they'll all be dealt with fair enough, I'm sure, by their 
friends.   So out to pasture with you.  Or conversely, if you think you had 
the confidence of the people of the province, call a provincial election. 
 
(2115) 
 
See if they'll put you out to pasture or see if they'll restore you to 
government.  See if they'll make you a loan.  See if they'll let you run a 
project or a business in their communities.  By the time this Tory 
government is done with the people in the province of Saskatchewan, I 
predict they won't want you to run anything -- private sector, public 
sector, co-operative, or otherwise. 
 
But I could be wrong.  People in Saskatchewan are saying though, enough is 
enough.  And by that I interpret that people want an election held because 
enough is enough in the province of Saskatchewan.  Members ask me about the 
chamber of commerce. I ask members out there about the trailer court in 
Hudson Bay.  I ask members whether they are like the member from Yorkton 
about the court house, in Yorkton.  Yes, not much integrity in your 
positions.  I don't think we want to get into a situation of personalities.  
Let's run on the record of your government. 
 
I think that the waste and mismanagement runs so deep in that government 
over there that if the books were opened up and the true story was told, 
the people of Saskatchewan would want you punished beyond defeat at the 
electoral polls, because of what you've done for your own largess and what 
you've done to the people in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think we should review a record of cumulative provincial 
deficits. Mr. Speaker, 1983 deficit, $227 million; 1984 deficit, $331 
million; 1985 deficit, $379 million -- and I'm rounding these off, Mr. 
Speaker.  I'm rounding them off to the lowest number; the highest number 
would be even worse -- 1986 deficit, $578 million; 1987 deficit, $1.232 



 

 

billion, Mr. Speaker; 1988, $542 million deficit; 1989, $324 million 
deficit; 1990, $379 million deficit.  And the 1991 estimate is $365 million 
deficit. 
 
What a shame.  What a cruel hoax they've inflicted on the people of the 
province.  And what have they done during the same time?  Since 1982 
they've increased their expenditures by 90 per cent.  Talk about big 
government, big bad government.  That's what people feel of the government 
in the province of Saskatchewan right now -- big bad government.  Ninety 
per cent your expenditures have increased since 1982. 
 
And how much have your revenues increased?  How much have your revenues 
increased?  Your revenues have increased by 69 per cent since 1982.  That's 
what your government has done.  Waste and mismanagement.  And where have 
they got their funding from, their increased funding?  The vast majority of 
that, Mr. Speaker, is from individual, ordinary men and women working for 
wages in the province of Saskatchewan.  The next place they got it from are 
those small entrepreneurs who slave and work and sometimes can't even draw 
an hourly wage because of the state of the economy.  That's where they drew 
it from. 
 
But they don't draw it from their friends in the corporate sector.  
Corporate income tax from '81 to '91 rose by 54 per cent.  And I'm sure 
some of the corporations aren't even very happy with that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But let's look at personal income tax through that same period of time -- 
75 per cent increase, 75 per cent increase.  It used to be, back in the 
1950s, Mr. Speaker, that governments in this country got about half of 
their revenue, their taxation revenue, from corporations and half from 
personal taxation.  Now it's way out of balance with that.  We find that 
the vast majority comes from personal income tax and about 14 per cent . . 
. 12 to 14 per cent nation-wide comes from corporations now, Mr. Speaker.  
That's where the inequity lies.  That's what people in the province of 
Saskatchewan are upset about. 
 
What about the royalty structure, Mr. Speaker, in this country?  How about 
the royalty structure in Saskatchewan where resources used to pay a fair 
share?  Resources no longer pay a fair share in the province of 
Saskatchewan.  I base this not on statistics, because I don't have them 
here with me this evening. I base this on a quote from the Saskatchewan 
Trends Monitor, Mr. Speaker, dated April 1990.  I quote: 
 

 Even with the declining prices, had the royalty and taxation levels 
remained at their earlier levels, the current provincial debt of $4 
billion would simply not exist. 

 
Mr. Speaker, enough is enough.  People in Saskatchewan are saying: why are 
you doing this?  Why are you doing this to the people in the province of 
Saskatchewan?  What more do you want?  What more do you want from the 
people in the province of Saskatchewan?  They've already worked their 
fingers to the bone, and now you're trying to force through a provincial 
goods and services tax. 
 



 

 

Well what's going to be taxed?  Children's clothing and shoes, adults 
clothing and shoes, restaurant meals, soft drinks, snack food, tooth paste, 
diapers, cough syrup, books, magazines, newspaper subscriptions, natural 
gas, electricity for residential use, haircuts, car repairs, postage 
stamps.  And you know, Mr. Speaker, those are some of the things that came 
in on April 1 of this year. 
 
The government announced it back in February, a press release, and they 
still don't have the legislative authority to impose the tax.  How arrogant 
can this government be, that they would impose a tax by press release on 
people in the province of Saskatchewan without the legislative authority to 
impose the tax.  A legislative authority, Mr. Speaker, I'll do my best to 
prevent them from getting, because they don't deserve it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There's enough money come in the front door of this Legislative Building 
and we want to stop it going out the back door before the auditor gets a 
chance to look at it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- But it doesn't stop at the increases that came in by press 
release on April 1, Mr. Speaker.  By January 1 of 1992, if we allow the 
government to proceed with Bill 61, they will be taxing everything that the 
federal goods and services taxes right now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When you're born you'll be taxed.  And even your funeral service when you 
die you'll be taxed.  This government even wants to tax you after you drop 
dead, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Enough is enough, people in the province of Saskatchewan are saying.  
People in Saskatchewan are saying, for goodness sakes, Tory government, 
take your hand out of our pocket.  We can't afford to pay any more.  And 
the government continues to want to increase their revenue.  They believe 
in growth of revenue within the coffers of the provincial government. 
 
But there's a false premise there, Mr. Speaker.  Any government that can't 
live at this day, at this point in time, with projected revenues of some 
$4.5 billion coming into the provincial coffers this year, should turn over 
the reins to someone else. 
 
Some of them would say, where is the NDP (New Democratic Party) going to 
get this revenue from if you don't bring in the tax?  I say, Mr. Speaker, 
you don't need any more revenue if you responsibly administer the province 
of Saskatchewan with due regard for the taxpayers' dollars and the public 
purse. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you don't need more revenue coming into the province of 
Saskatchewan.  You need better management, and you need a government with 
some integrity that will stand for the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan and not for their own friends and their own deals and the 
things they want to hide from the Provincial Auditor. 
 
These aren't our words, Mr. Speaker.  These are the words of the auditor of 



 

 

the province of Saskatchewan.  And they are in increasing numbers the words 
of the people of the province of Saskatchewan who want their say.  They 
want their day in court.  Their day in court happens to be, Mr. Speaker, at 
the point in time when this government calls a general election.  When is 
that going to happen?  Surely it will happen before November 12, Mr. 
Speaker, because that is the date at which the Queen's representative would 
have to step in and dissolve the government because they no longer have a 
constitutional mandate to govern. 
 
And April 12 is coming very, very close, Mr. Speaker.  April 12 is rapidly 
approaching.  And this government doesn't even have rules before the 
legislature to approve which provincial boundaries they're going to run on.  
There has never ever been a government in the history of the province of 
Saskatchewan that has been so blatantly, unscrupulously disregarding their 
role as a government.  No boundaries, Mr. Speaker, on which this government 
can call an election.  One set of boundaries is held up in the Supreme 
Court under appeal.  The other set of boundaries is under study soon by the 
people of the Province of Saskatchewan.  But here we are in May 1991, the 
fifth month of the year, and in less than five . . . pardon me, in less 
than six months, Mr. Speaker, this government has no choice but to call an 
election or the Queen's representative will have to intervene. 
 
And what are they doing?  They're still fooling around after all the 
consultation they say they did, still fooling around trying to impose the 
biggest tax increase in the history of the province of Saskatchewan on the 
people of the province, of this great province, Mr. Speaker.  After all the 
opinion that they've had that this tax is wrong, they don't need it, it's 
harmful to the economy.  And if you want this tax increase so bad, you put 
it on the line to the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
This is the government, Mr. Speaker, that advocated referendums to the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan.  But they won't even let them vote 
on the most basic democratic right, and that's to elect their 
representative, Mr. Speaker, let alone to vote whether they want the tax or 
not.  What a hypocritical stand by the Minister of Finance and others on 
his side of the House.  They won't even let them vote in a general 
election, let alone to vote on a tax increase. 
 
And what about the by-elections, Mr. Speaker.  There have been vacant seats 
in the province of Saskatchewan for somewhere between the period of 
16-or-so months that those constituencies have been without representation.  
Why?  Because government thinks they can't win the election. 
 
They talk about democratic reform.  They talk about democratic reform.  
That's another hypocritical statement by that government.  If there was any 
kind of democracy, representation . . . no taxation without representation.  
It goes back to the Magna Carta for Heaven's sakes. 
 
How can this government impose a tax upon those four constituencies, one of 
which has been without a member in this Assembly for 16 months?  And 
they're imposing a tax that has no legislative authority.  That is 
anti-democratic, not democratic. 
 



 

 

No representative in Souris-Cannington.  The member from there, Eric 
Berntson, left here after saying he was opposed to the federal goods and 
services tax, resigns from this House, goes to the Senate and helps 
Mulroney, the cousin to this government, force through a goods and services 
tax through the Senate.  Now he's back running the campaign for the 
Conservative government.  Campaign by press release would it be?  I think 
they're scared to call the election, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The constituency of Turtleford.  That member at least left with some 
integrity left intact.  I think he had too much integrity and that's why 
the Premier overlooked him for promotion so many times.  That member had 
more integrity than any six cabinet ministers you could put together over 
there.  He's now working elsewhere, Mr. Speaker.  On his own hook he went 
out and got a job.  That's more than you can say about the rest of their 
members who have departed. 
 
(2130) 
 
What about the constituency of Indian Head-Wolseley.  Should they have 
taxation without representation?  Their member went off to Hong Kong to be 
a trade commissioner, got all his benefits from this place and is still 
drawing more benefits, Mr. Speaker, from the public purse.  Can you 
honestly say it's fair to have taxation without representation on those 
people from Indian Head-Wolseley?  No, it's not.  I'm sure most members 
opposite don't know what the Magna Carta is, let alone to quote anything 
about taxation without representation. 
 
And then what about the constituency of Kindersley, Mr. Speaker?  They have 
no representative in this Legislative Assembly either.  Four constituencies 
in the province of Saskatchewan, no representation.  Why don't these 
government geniuses over there put the test of their mandate and their tax 
Bill and all the great things that they say they've done -- put them to the 
test in those by-elections. 
 
If you're too afraid to call a general election, call those four 
by-elections.  You should be confident.  You should be confident that those 
four constituencies would be yours.  Souris-Cannington was yours.  Indian 
Head-Wolseley was yours.  Turtleford was yours.  Kindersley was yours.  Why 
don't you call the election in those?  Wouldn't that be a great idea?  Then 
you could call it a test for the general election.  You could also call it 
the referendum for your tax increases. 
 
And do you think that the people in those ridings would treat you well 
enough to say, yes, take more tax from us because we want you to help the 
province of Saskatchewan recover?  I don't think they would -- but you 
should put it to the test -- because I don't think the people in those four 
constituencies want taxation without representation.  And I don't think 
they would agree with the member from Moosomin who said that this 
government should be commended on their restraint.  What a cruel joke on 
the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
There are not many people . . . well the member from Morse says I'm 
repeating myself.  I'm repeating myself so that people in the province of 



 

 

Saskatchewan remember very clearly the cruel and unusual punishment this 
government's inflicted upon them.  And I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, there 
are other examples that I think that we should look at. 
 
I want to look at some of the analysis of the provincial goods and services 
tax, Mr. Speaker.  Before I do that though, I want you to know that we are 
aware that repeatedly this government was asked for their economic impact 
analysis from the harmonization of the provincial sales tax, making it the 
provincial goods and services tax.  And not once have they laid that 
document on the table for public scrutiny, not once. 
 
Therefore we can only conclude that they have either not done an economic 
impact analysis or the results of it are so bad they don't want the public 
to know.  In that case it would be just like hiding the expenditures from 
the Provincial Auditor. 
 
People in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, are saying, enough is enough.  They're 
saying, why are you doing this to us?  Why is the Conservative government 
in Saskatchewan doing this to our province?  They can't understand it, and 
yet the government hides behind what they call their mandate.  You have no 
mandate to provide government any longer in the province of Saskatchewan.  
You have no mandate to call an election. 
 
If you want to go till the bitter end, dissolve the legislature and go back 
home and listen to your constituents.  See what your constituents say to 
you.  It's obvious you haven't been talking to the people of the province 
of Saskatchewan or you'd react differently in this legislature.  It's very 
obvious that they're not talking to their constituents.  So if you're not 
going to call an election, dissolve the legislature and go back home 
because we're not going to allow you to pass the provincial goods and 
services tax through this legislature.  Because people have told us enough 
is enough; don't let them take any more money out of our pockets to waste 
and squander through their mismanagement as a government in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
That's what people in Saskatchewan are saying.  That's what we've heard 
many, many times.  I don't know whether or not the government isn't paying 
Decima enough for their polling any more or what, but I'm sure that their 
polling must show the same thing as what people in Saskatchewan are saying 
to us. 
 
And it's not very friendly, what the people in Saskatchewan are saying 
about this Conservative government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think any of the back-benchers over there, any one else associated 
with this government should give themselves as much distance as possible.  
Don't tie yourself, you back-benchers, to this government.  Don't let them 
use you as the anchor on the Titanic.  Don't let them do that to you.  Some 
of you I'm sure have worked far too hard to be used as a deck chair or an 
anchor on the Titanic.  That ship has had many paint jobs, but it's still 
the rusty old bucket that it was a few years ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today in Saskatoon the Leader of the Opposition released an 



 

 

economic impact of the provincial goods and services tax on Saskatchewan.  
This paper was prepared by our own research staff, but there have been 
outside experts who have endorsed it as a fair and reasonable assessment of 
the impact of the provincial goods and services tax on the Saskatchewan 
economy.  These people are Professor Neil Brooks -- Professor Brooks is a 
professor of tax law at Osgoode Hall Law School, York University.  It has 
been endorsed by Dr. Alex Kelly, professor of economics at the University 
of Regina.  It has been endorsed by Doug Elliott, editor and publisher of 
the Sask Trends Monitor.  It has also been endorsed by Dale Botting, 
vice-president, western Canada, the Canadian Federation of Independent 
Business, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, by way of introduction, the leader of the New Democratic Party 
today talked about . . . on January 1, 1991, the Mulroney government 
imposed its 7 per cent goods and services tax throughout the Canadian 
economy.  While it was too early to ascertain the full economic impact of 
the new comprehensive federal sales tax, preliminary indications from the 
first quarter indicate that the goods and services tax's dampening effect 
on consumer spending, retail trade, and employment, have aggravated the 
recession. 
 
Six weeks after the imposition of the Mulroney government's federal goods 
and services tax, the provincial government announced its plans to impose a 
7 per cent provincial goods and services tax in Saskatchewan.  The 
government's plan entails harmonizing the new provincial goods and services 
tax with the federal goods and services tax by: (1) extending the existing 
7 per cent provincial sales tax to all goods and services covered by the 
federal goods and services tax; (2) establishing a business input tax 
credit as with the federal goods and services tax; (3) establishing a 
family tax credit for low income families with children; and (4) 
implementing the provincial goods and services tax in two stages, extending 
the 7 per cent provincial sales tax to a wide range of goods previously 
untaxed -- and they extended that on April 1 of 1991 -- and extending it to 
services and establishing the business input tax credits on January 1, 
1992. 
 
And at that time, Mr. Speaker, this -- what we know today as the E&H 
(education and health) tax or some call it the provincial sales tax -- will 
be a full-fledged goods and services tax.  Virtually everything you do that 
has got a service performed or goods purchased, will have a 7 per cent tax 
imposed upon it. 
 
The provincial government announced its intention to impose the new 
provincial goods and services tax in Saskatchewan in a press release.  Can 
you imagine that? -- in a press release on February 20 of 1991, in the 
absence of a budget or draft legislation, thus giving consumers and 
businesses only 40 days to prepare for the second major new 7 per cent 
consumption tax in three months, Mr. Speaker. 
 
To date the government has not yet tabled any legislation with respect to 
the second phase of its provincial goods and services tax to be implemented 
on January 1, 1992.  And while the government has asserted that this new 7 
per cent provincial goods and services tax will create 5,000 new jobs in 



 

 

Saskatchewan and will raise an additional $181 million per year, it has not 
released any credible economic or fiscal analysis of the impact of this new 
tax on Saskatchewan people, Saskatchewan business, or the Saskatchewan 
economy. 
 
Although there are, of course, many similarities between the Mulroney 
government's national goods and services tax and the new provincial goods 
and services tax proposed by the Government of Saskatchewan, there are 
significant differences as well. 
 
First there is the question of timing and consultation.  The Mulroney 
government initially proposed a 9 per cent goods and services tax in its 
detailed discussion paper released in the summer of 1989, then reduced the 
proposed rate to 7 per cent and published a second detailed technical 
paper, and had a parliamentary committee conduct extensive public hearings 
across the country long before the proposed implementation date. 
 
In Saskatchewan the public was given only five weeks warning, and the 
government has published no credible studies or analysis, and held no 
public or legislative hearings on its proposals before it began to impose 
the tax. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, the tax was imposed two weeks before the enabling 
legislation was introduced for the first phase and three weeks before the 
provincial budget was introduced.  That has raised questions about the 
legal and constitutional validity of the tax, quite apart from the issues 
of equity or fiscal and economic impact. 
 
The Speaker: -- I have been listening to the hon. member with great 
interest.  And I would now like to ask him to relate his remarks to the 
motion which are dealing with an internal restraint program initiated by 
the government.  Would you please relate your remarks to that motion. 
 
(2145) 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for your ruling.  I 
will want to relate what I'm saying now to the government's motion and to 
our amendment.  Our amendment, sir, says: 
 

 condemns the Government of Saskatchewan for failing to initiate an 
effective internal restraint program during the past nine years, and for 
its unprecedented waste and mismanagement of taxpayers' dollars. 

 
What I'm talking about here, Mr. Speaker, are taxpayers' dollars.  I've 
laid out the case earlier this evening of the waste and mismanagement and 
the terrible fiscal state of affairs that this Tory government has drawn 
Saskatchewan into. 
 
I am now talking about the other end of that, Mr. Speaker.  I'm talking 
about the desire of the Tory government in Saskatchewan to increase even 
more tax burden on people, that they don't care about restraint, and that 
they want these tax dollars to do some vague thing they talk about with no 
assurance of that. 



 

 

 
And when there's expenditure there's raising of revenue, Mr. Speaker, and I 
want to tie those two together here this evening, so people in Saskatchewan 
can understand both ends of what happens when you have waste and 
mismanagement on the extravagant scale that this government has elevated it 
to in the province of Saskatchewan, especially over the past four and a 
half years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, whereas the Mulroney government was replacing one tax, the 
manufacturers sales tax, with a new one, the Government of Saskatchewan is 
effectively adding a new tax and replacing nothing.  It is therefore not 
surprising that the new 7 per cent goods and services tax is being widely 
and correctly perceived as a major tax increase.  Almost certainly the 
largest single tax increase in the history of Saskatchewan. 
 
There are some crucial questions that must be looked at in this respect, 
Mr. Speaker, about the waste and mismanagement.  Government says they've 
done restraint; we say they haven't restrained one bit.  I think it is the 
purpose of our party to examine the economic impact of any proposed new tax 
on Saskatchewan people and unfortunately this must be undertaken in the 
absence of any professional studies or analysis from the provincial 
government -- the government that has refused to release any that they may 
have. 
 
The critical questions to be considered, Mr. Speaker, are firstly:  Will 
this new tax be a positive or a negative effect on the Saskatchewan economy 
and particularly on job creation?  Secondly:  Is this new tax equitable? 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it's hard to answer those two questions conclusively, but 
I think that the people in Saskatchewan will try.  They'll try at election 
time to answer those questions. 
 
Because is this new tax equitable?  No, it is not equitable, Mr. Speaker, 
because the burden of the tax falls on the ordinary men and women of this 
province who already have an unfair tax burden placed upon them because of 
this government's waste and mismanagement, Mr. Speaker.  And will this tax 
have a positive or a negative effect on the Saskatchewan economy, and 
particularly on job creation?  It will have a negative effect I submit to 
you, Mr. Speaker.  It will have the negative effect of people being laid 
off because the businesses no longer have the cash flow in many sectors of 
our economy to sustain the staffing component they once had, those in the 
food service industry in particular, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Although the provincial government has not been forthcoming with analysis, 
evidence, or rationale for it's claim that its new provincial goods and 
services tax will create 5,000 jobs over the long term, that claim appears 
to be based on two arguments. 
 
First, the government may be claiming that the removal of the provincial 
sales tax from business inputs will lead to some businesses relocating to 
Saskatchewan from other provinces.  Second, the government may be claiming 
that the removal of the provincial sales tax from business inputs will lead 
to increased investment and job creation in the capital-intensive 



 

 

manufacturing and resource industries.  In order to assess the likely 
overall economic impact of the new provincial goods and services tax, it is 
therefore useful to examine each sector in turn.  And I'd like to do that 
here this evening, Mr. Speaker, if time permits and I'm not sure that it 
will. 
 
In agriculture, the Saskatchewan economy accounts . . . or agriculture 
sector accounts for some 10 per cent of the gross domestic product and 18 
per cent of total employment.  A wide range of agricultural inputs are 
already exempt under provincial sales tax.  This sector is dominated by the 
production of wheat and other grains and oilseeds for export to world 
markets, and is heavily influenced by world prices, by the exchange rate, 
and by interest rates.  The new provincial goods and services tax regime is 
not likely to have a discernable positive or a negative effect on 
employment levels in agriculture.  That's what I say to you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The other primary industries sector of Saskatchewan's economy include gas, 
oil, mining, forestry, fishing and trapping, and they account for some 6 
per cent of the gross domestic product and 12,000 jobs with 3 per cent of 
total employment. 
 
The manufacturing sector accounts for 7 per cent of the gross domestic 
product and 26,000 jobs or 6 per cent of total employment.  The claim that 
the new provincial goods and services tax regime will create more jobs 
rests on the assumption that there will be an increased job creation in 
these two sectors which together account for 38,000 jobs or 9 per cent of 
total employment. 
 
The provincial sales tax on business purchases of goods and services is far 
less important than other costs of production and location factors in these 
capital-intensive industries.  When making location decisions firms must 
take into account a wide range of considerations, including proximities of 
markets, the availability of a skilled work force and the relative costs of 
land, labour, and capital. 
 
Firms in the resource sector of course, are particularly affected by the 
nature and physical location of the natural resources.  The potash mines 
are located in Saskatchewan because that's where the potash is, not because 
of the presence or absence of any provincial sales tax, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In addition, firms in the manufacturing and resource sectors are primarily 
sensitive to interest rates and to the exchange rate, two major factors 
which are far more important than the provincial sales tax is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of the province's largest manufacturings, Ipsco, reported that in 1989 
its export sales were curtailed because of the high exchange rate.  Nothing 
to do with the tax, Mr. Speaker.  And I quote:  by the fourth quarter Ipsco 
had cut back substantially on exports of flat roll products to the U.S. and 
offshore because exchange rates rendered many potential sales unprofitable.  
End of quote.  And that came from the Ipsco Annual Report in 1989. 
 
In the same year the province's largest potash producer, the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan, reported that changes in the exchange rate 



 

 

between 1989 and 1988 had cost the company $13 million.  And I would . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  I wonder if the hon. member can relate that to the 
motion.  You receive a certain latitude and I'd ask him to relate that to 
the motion. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I simply relate 
that to you and through you to the House, that this tax that the government 
wants to fill in the voids of their waste and mismanagement, they're making 
some false assumptions on that tax and what it can do.  And by them making 
those inaccurate assumptions on that tax, they are deceiving the people of 
the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, into believing -- they're 
manipulating their opinion -- into believing that something can be attained 
at this tax that cannot be attained from their waste and mismanagement, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And certainly we have to talk about both ends.  We have to talk about the 
waste and mismanagement.  They talk about their restraint; we talk about 
waste and mismanagement.  Taxation is always tied into there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that quote that I just made about the exchange rates . . . 
I'll just start the quote again.  I quote: 
 

 Comparing the average exchange rates of 1989 to 1988, the effect was a 
drop in net income of approximately $13 million. 

 
That's the PCS (Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan Inc.) annual report in 
1989, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, since the new 7 per cent provincial goods and services 
tax will entirely fall on the backs of individuals and families, it will 
tend to increase the cost of living and put upward . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  Order.  I don't want to interrupt 
you but it seems that there are a good number of members who wish to enter 
the debate. I would ask them to wait their turn. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Well any form of stimulation effects of the new provincial 
goods and services tax regime in these sectors will be significantly offset 
by making workers relatively more expensive and capital equipment 
relatively less expensive, thereby providing incentive for firms to replace 
workers with machinery, Mr. Speaker.  Finally of course there is no . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  The hon. member is not on the topic.  
I ask him to come back on the topic; simply not on the topic.  And I'm not 
satisfied with the relationship you've drawn, and I ask you to get back on 
the topic. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Well, I guess I'd talk about straight restraint again then, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  I'm asking you to draw your remarks to the topic. 
 



 

 

Mr. Anguish: -- I, as always, Mr. Speaker, respect your ruling.  But if I'm 
only given two minutes between each time, it's kind of hard in a long, 
important debate to keep . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Now you've been given a short time . 
. . Please sit down.  You've been given a short time because you're not on 
the topic, sir.  And I keep having to ask you to draw your attention . . . 
to relate your remarks to the topic, and if you are unable to relate your 
remarks to the topic, I will interrupt you again and if necessary, ask you 
to assume your place.  I draw that to your attention clearly, and simply 
keep your remarks on the topic. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for your ruling.  I 
certainly will honour that. 
 
Restraint by this government.  Let's talk about patronage.  Does that tie 
in to restraint?  Do restraint and patronage go hand in hand? 
 
How about Bob Andrew, trade emissary at the Saskatchewan Trade Office in 
Minneapolis -- salary, $97,000 a year; Eric Berntson, appointment to the 
Senate -- salary, $71,000 a year; Larry Birkbeck received $48,028 for a 
contract to his company, Venus Consulting -- Venus Consulting, Larry 
Birkbeck, former MLA for the Tories -- $48,028.  Now he received a 10-year 
appointment to the Saskatchewan Municipal Board at a salary of $57,820 a 
year. 
 
Restraint, Mr. Speaker?  Who pays that restraint?  The people of the 
province of Saskatchewan pay that restraint, Mr. Speaker.  But that's not 
restraint.  That's waste and mismanagement and a blatant misuse of 
taxpayers' dollars in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- How about some of these other defeated Tories in the 
province?  Gordon Currie, Gordon Dirks, Louis Domotor, Sid Dutchak, Tim 
Embury, Ralph Katzman, Myles Morin, Keith Parker, Paul Rousseau, Jack 
Sandberg, Paul Schoenhals, Bud Smith.  Graham Taylor, trade emissary at 
Saskatchewan Hong Kong Trade Office, salary approximately $97,000 a year.  
Is that restraint? Ladies and gentlemen of the opposition, is that 
restraint? I think not, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What about the former deputy minister of the Department of Environment, Mr. 
Speaker?  You look in the most recently released Public Accounts.  Do you 
know what the deputy minister of Environment got paid in the fiscal year 
ending March 31, 1990?  Two hundred and forty-six thousand dollars in the 
fiscal year ending March 31, 1990.  Is that restraint, Mr. Speaker?  I 
think that's not restraint, ladies and gentlemen of the opposition.  That's 
not restraint.  What a hypocritical statement by this government.  They 
don't understand the meaning of the word restraint.  They should use the 
Webster's dictionary, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

Mr. Anguish: -- I don't know how many members in the House would remember 
the CJV Carpet song, Mr. Speaker, but it listed off a number of communities 
and then said: I've been everywhere, man.  Well, where's all the money 
gone?  Where's this government travelled to?  I understand all governments 
have to travel but in times of restraint how about Minneapolis; Dublin; New 
York; Ottawa; Hong Kong; Rapid City; Vancouver; Atlantic City; Helsinki; 
Reno; Toronto; Athens; Winnipeg; London; Calgary; Cairns, Australia; 
Edmonton; Brasilia, Brazil; Montreal; Fredericton; Washington, D.C.; 
Phoenix; Quebec City; Miami; Port of Spain; New Orleans; Zu p√ºrich; White 
Horse.  I've been everywhere, man.  San Francisco; St. John; New Delhi; 
Kansas City; Jackson, Mississippi; Beijing; Grand Falls; Chicoutimi; Palm 
Springs; Geneva; Victoria; Cleveland; Thailand; Columbus, Ohio; Manila; 
Colorado; California; China; California; Hawaii; Newfoundland; Germany; 
P.E.I.; Ireland; Nova Scotia; Germany; Quebec; Banff; Digby, Nova Scotia; 
Waterloo, Ontario; Los Angeles, California; Winter Haven, Florida; East 
Germany; Corner Brook; Spain; Digby, Nova Scotia; Moncton; Chicago; 
Antigonish; Hecla Island; Fairmont; Colorado Springs; Rio de Janeiro, 
Brazil; Seattle, Washington; St. Andrew; New Brunswick; Paris, France; 
Prince Rupert; Bulgaria; Brussels . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Being 10 o'clock, the House stands adjourned until tomorrow 
at 2 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10 p.m. 
 


