





























































Hansard: April 25, 1991


 

 

April 25/91 
 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is truly an honour for me 
to have the opportunity to introduce four very special guests seated in 
your gallery -- four Canadian heroes. Captain Claire Plamondon, Corporal 
Greg Ebert, Corporal Don Nicholson, and Private Virginia Hobday have just 
recently returned to Canada and to their home base at CFB (Canadian Forces 
Base) Moose Jaw from their service in the Persian Gulf. 
 
Captain Plamondon, a nurse; Corporal Ebert, a medical assistant; and 
Private Hobday, a supply technician, all served in a Canadian field 
hospital in Jubayl where wounded soldiers from both the allied and the 
Iraqi sides were treated. 
 
Corporal Nicholson is a mobile support equipment operator and undertook 
general transport duties in support of operations at the Canada Dry One 
base in Qatar. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity on behalf of the 
government and the people of Saskatchewan to welcome them not only to the 
House today, but also to welcome them home. 
 
I would also like to express our province's pride, admiration, and 
gratitude to these four men and women and indeed to all the Canadian troops 
who served our country so courageously and so magnificently in the recent 
Gulf conflict. 
 
If I may say, Mr. Speaker, what these young men and women did cannot be 
overstated.  To travel half-way around the world to a place that a few 
months ago most Canadians knew almost nothing about, to participate in a 
major world conflict under extremely harsh and difficult conditions, and to 
perform every job that was asked of them with such a high degree of skill 
and confidence, this takes a special kind of person.  It takes a tremendous 
degree of courage and determination and self-discipline, and we in Canada 
are indeed very fortunate to have people of this calibre serving in our 
country's forces. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'd also like to acknowledge the sacrifices made by the 
families of these four individuals, and of all the Canadian forces, 
families who had to live with uncertainty and fear and indeed, loneliness 
for their loved ones stationed in the Gulf.  Canadians are extremely 
fortunate to have such a highly dedicated and professional armed forces. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would just like to say to these young men and 
women: welcome to the Legislative Assembly today.  Welcome home and 
congratulations for a job very well done.  Thank you, we're very proud of 



 

 

you and God bless. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  On behalf of the official 
opposition, I too would like to extend a welcome to the four members of our 
armed forces who are here today, and express our appreciation for the role 
that they play in the peacekeeping efforts for which Canada has developed a 
long-standing reputation. 
 
As the Premier has mentioned, too often the role that the families play and 
the sacrifices that the families make are forgotten, and we should not 
forget that.  And I think that that is important to acknowledge.  So that 
the families of these people who are in the gallery as our guests today, we 
want to also express our appreciation and acknowledge the difficult times 
which they have experienced during this period of time. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, also that I know that it is well-known that 
Canada has had a long reputation as playing an important peacemaking and 
peacekeeping role in the world.  That reputation we have, Mr. Speaker, is 
to a large extent because of the type of people we have serving in our 
armed forces in this country. 
 
For that I want to, on behalf of the opposition, express our appreciation 
to the guests who are with us today, welcome them back home, and wish them 
well in all of their future careers. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure to introduce to 
you, sir, and through you to all members of the House, a group of 60 grade 
5 and 6 students from St. Margaret School in Moose Jaw. 
 
Mr. Speaker, St. Margaret School is located in the constituency of Moose 
Jaw South, but because it serves as the French immersion school for the 
Catholic system for the whole city of Moose Jaw, these students come from 
all parts of the city. 
 
With them today, Mr. Speaker, their teachers Lyne Dube pé, Vic Lavalle pée, 
and Richard Turcotte and their bus driver Linda. 
 
I sincerely hope that the students from St. Margaret today enjoy their 
visit in the legislature, enjoy question period, and I look forward to the 
opportunity to meet with you right after question period along with the 
member from Moose Jaw North.  I would ask all members to welcome these 
students. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too had wanted to add my 
congratulations to that of the Premier and the member opposite and 
congratulations to our members in the Canadian Armed Forces.  I've had the 
opportunity and the pleasure to represent CFB Moose Jaw for the last six 



 

 

years as MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly). 
 
And having attended many graduations and functions at Canadian Forces Base 
Moose Jaw, I can assure the members of the legislature and people around 
Saskatchewan that the quality of the training, the dedication of the people 
stationed there is without parallel, and I know that the record that our 
forces exhibited in the Gulf, where they were forced into all sorts of 
roles in their duties as members of the United Nations forces, that they 
acquitted themselves just absolutely wonderfully, and Canada is very proud 
of them. 
 
And I just look forward to attending my next function at CFB Moose Jaw and 
talking to people that actually had the opportunity to take part in that 
action.  So I too would ask members to congratulate the members of CFB 
Moose Jaw. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- Mr. Speaker, I wanted to take this opportunity to 
introduce to you and everyone assembled here today, the members of the 
House and everyone else, Arlene Harris, who is seated in the west gallery, 
Mr. Speaker, with her family.  I will have more to say about her when I do 
ministerial statement following question period, but I wanted to use this 
opportunity to introduce to everyone here Arlene Harris who is the 
recipient of the Saskatchewan Consumer Award of Excellence and I'll have 
more to say about her and her family during the ministerial statement.  
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, the member from 
Thunder Creek and myself share in common being home, our constituencies, to 
members of CFB Moose Jaw.  While the base is located in Thunder Creek, many 
of the personnel from CFB Moose Jaw live in the constituency of Moose Jaw 
South and in the constituency of Moose Jaw North.  And I want to share with 
other members, to say simply to you folks, as I'm sure is felt by your 
families, I know is felt by every member of this House, we simply say:  
thank God for your safe return. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'd like to join with 
my colleague, the member from Moose Jaw South, in expressing welcome to the 
contingent from St. Margaret School here.  As the member from Moose Jaw 
South indicated, St. Margaret is a French immersion K to 8 school for the 
separate school system for all of Moose Jaw.  And many of the students who 
are here attending today are constituents in Moose Jaw North. 
 
I would also like to add to that, Mr. Speaker, it is a rare and indeed 
special occasion that very rarely happens that as members of the 
Legislative Assembly we have one of our own children attend . . . visit to 
the Assembly as a contingent of a school group.  And my daughter, Meredith, 
is with the group here today.  And I simply like to recognize her presence 



 

 

and ask all members to join in welcoming again the group from St. Margaret.  
I look forward to joining with the member from Moose Jaw South in the visit 
following. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'd like to 
introduce to you and to all members of the Assembly today 13 students who 
are attending today's proceedings of the legislature.  They are living at 
Dale's House in the constituency of Regina Rosemont.  They're accompanied 
by their teacher, Pam Metz, and their chaperons, Costa Yannikostas and Jim 
Tarnowski, and I'd ask all members to welcome these students here today to 
the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Funding for Home Care 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to the Minister of 
Health.  Mr. Minister, the new policy of your department in regards to 
hospital care would seem to be to take patients out of the hospital early 
and leave it up to home care to take up the slack. 
 
However, there has not been a sufficient corresponding increase in 
home-care funding in order to compensate for the extra work-load that they 
are going to have to take on.  A $1.8 million increase to home care is not 
sufficient to compensate for a $40 million shortfall with respect to 
institutions and care homes.  This is going to result in inadequate 
follow-up services, Mr. Minister. 
 
Why are you penalizing, Mr. Minister, the sick and the elderly people 
because of your government's economic mismanagement? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, we made it very clear in the budget that . 
. . and the early announcement as I have said earlier in the House other 
days, that the three and a half per cent increase to hospitals would be 
difficult for those hospitals to make their plans and to develop their 
budgets for the current year.  They've been developing those plans since 
February, have them now complete, and for the most part have them delivered 
to the public and to their staff. 
 
We also made it clear that there is a shift going on, and the hon. member 
makes reference to that shift in terms of . . . to more of a 
community-based service, home care being one of those community-based 
services.  There's a 6 per cent increase in this budget for home care in 
recognition of that changing trend and in recognition of the pressures that 
are on home care. 
 
And I'll be very quick to say, Mr. Speaker, that I don't for a moment 



 

 

suggest that there should be a comparison dollar for dollar, as the hon. 
member tends to do, a shortfall in the hospitals as a dollar-for-dollar 
comparison to home care, that it would not be a valid comparison. 
 
But I would say, Mr. Speaker, as well, that yes, home care will be under 
pressure.  They know that.  We've had good discussions with the home care 
association of the province.  They have said, as they have said in press, 
they believe they can cope although there may be some difficulty. 
 
 DSome Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Minister, you've just admitted by your comment that 
you're penalizing sick and elderly people who are being discharged from 
hospitals because home care is not going to be able to deal with the 
work-load.  You've just admitted that, Mr. Minister. 
 
But what you didn't reveal in your budget is that you will be increasing 
fees for home-care services by an estimated 15 per cent.  You won't fund 
hospitals to a required level, so people have to return to their homes to 
recover, and then you charge them more for the privilege to do so.  Mr. 
Minister, once again, why are you penalizing the sick and elderly in this 
province twice? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, the member tends to -- you know it's not 
the first -- tends to overdramatize the issue and the various issues 
surrounding health care.  And I think that's clear for all to see and it 
has been for a long time, for months, maybe even years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the hon. member says, you won't fund hospitals to the required 
level.  I believe those were her exact words.  You won't fund hospitals to 
the required level.  The question that that conjures up, Mr. Speaker, is 
what is the required level?  What's the required level in the plan of the 
NDP (New Democratic Party)?  What's the required level in the plan of the 
NDP? 
 
Their plan is to criticize, to put the blinders on, to not recognize in any 
way the fiscal and the economic reality of this province, this million 
people, these taxpayers in this province with a very excellent, very large, 
very complex, and very expensive health-care system that is under some 
pressure but is running well and will continue to serve our public very, 
very well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Minister, you're sending people home early from the 
hospital and you're not providing adequately for follow-up services.  And I 
say that the sick and the elderly are paying for your incompetence and 
mismanagement as a result of your huge deficit. 
 
Now the only way the home-care people found out about your 15 per cent 
increase, estimated 15 per cent increase in fees, was by reading it in the 



 

 

newspaper, Mr. Minister.  Now what sort of consultation process is that, 
Mr. Minister?  Is this how your government consults in the budgetary 
process by using the media to announce decisions that you've made? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, my earlier answer is the substance of her 
question, but I reject, I absolutely reject to this House that the 
home-care association found out about the increase in fees by reading it in 
a newspaper.  It is simply, Mr. Speaker, very clearly it is simply not the 
case.  The home-care association were briefed by me personally before it 
was ever in the newspaper.  So, Mr. Speaker, that's absolutely the case and 
the hon. member once again comes forward with information that is far from 
accurate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Funding for Education 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of Education 
and it concerns the government's lack of support for education as outlined 
in this week's budget.  The Saskatchewan School Trustees Association issued 
a press release on Monday which reads in part: 
 

 Education underfunding affects people.  For Saskatchewan citizens this 
budget means higher local taxes; for teachers and other school division 
staff it means lost jobs; for Saskatchewan communities it means the 
closure of schools; and for children, this budget means the quality of 
education is threatened. 

 
Mr. Minister, I would like you to explain to the public why your government 
has chosen as an education policy, through underfunding, tax increases for 
people, lost jobs for people, school closures for people, and a threat 
toward quality of education for our Saskatchewan young people.  Why have 
you chosen that route, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, not too long ago I made the 
comment in this House that the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association 
were indicating that the Saskatchewan education system is one of the best 
in the world.  And I think we can all be very proud of that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
At the same time I would suggest that that will continue because education 
remains a priority of this government.  The fact of the matter is, that 
there has been a decline in enrolment in several areas of the province, 
particularly rural Saskatchewan.  And there has been the need for some 
boards . . . and I would point out, Mr. Speaker, it's school boards that 
have the authority to make decisions whether or not schools are down-sized 
or whether in fact schools are being closed. 
 
And I would point out as well, Mr. Speaker, that because of the 
co-operation that exists between school boards in this province, that we 



 

 

see the concern about the quality of education and how the rural decline 
can be countered.  And I point out to an article in the paper that I have 
here, Mr. Speaker, with regard to Lemberg and Neudorf.  Two school systems 
that have been operating as consolidated school systems for many, many 
years, who now have an agreement between them where they are going to have 
the K to 6 children housed in one particular centre and the 7 to 12 housed 
in another centre. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that's the type of decision that school boards in rural 
Saskatchewan are making today to ensure that the children have a quality 
education, and I really commend them for that. 
 
I would also point out, Mr. Speaker, that the member opposite . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- New question to the minister.  Mr. Minister, the SSTA 
(Saskatchewan School Trustees Association) release states: 
 

 . . . because of the way operating grants are distributed, many boards 
will actually receive a decrease in provincial funds.  Rural school 
divisions, because of declining enrolments, are hardest hit by this 
budget. 

 
The April edition of The School Trustee, the publication of the SSTA states 
that the grants going to rural school boards this year increase by only .8 
of 1 per cent, Mr. Minister. 
 
Now how on earth can you say to the public of this province that education 
is a priority of your government when we see massive school closures in 
rural Saskatchewan, massive teacher lay-offs in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Minister, and a budget increase of .8 of 1 per cent.  How on earth is that 
a major priority on the part of the Government of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well it's interesting what the member opposite 
says, Mr. Speaker, because the fact of the matter is -- and she quite often 
does not care to deal with facts; she develops her own figures -- the fact 
of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, that of all of the school divisions in the 
province of Saskatchewan this year, 62 of them get a larger grant this year 
than they did last; 47 get less. 
 
The biggest reason, Mr. Speaker, why boards are getting less money this 
year is because of a decline in enrolment, a decline in enrolment. 
 
I would also point out, when this member talks about the cut-back in 
positions of teachers, that during the last 10 years, Mr. Speaker, the 
school enrolment in this province has declined by 6,000 students, and at 
the same time, Mr. Speaker, the number of teachers being employed has gone 
up by 626. 
 
Now is it any wonder that boards where they are faced today with tighter 



 

 

times, that they have to cut some positions to be a little bit more 
efficient?  And I commend them for doing that.  But, Mr. Speaker, it is the 
boards that have the authority to cut back on schools, school closures.  
They are managing efficiently and, Mr. Speaker, we are spending over $900 
million on education in this province.  And, Mr. Speaker, that's 
commitment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Supplementary to this Minister of Education: I cannot 
believe it, Mr. Minister, that you commend the closure of rural schools and 
you commend job lay-off in rural Saskatchewan.  I can't believe that a 
Minister of Education which is supposed to defend education in this 
province is in fact supporting rural school closures and massive teacher 
lay-off. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, The School Trustee indicates on its front page that 
somebody's child is everybody's future.  Given this government's 
underfunding and mismanagement is robbing the province of Saskatchewan of 
its future, Mr. Minister, we can no longer have trite excuses from the 
members opposite. 
 
How do you explain to the children of this province, that their education 
and their future is not a priority of the PC (Progressive Conservative) 
Government of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, the opposition didn't have a 
plan when they were in power and they still don't have one today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Now let me just talk a little bit about that.  Let 
me just talk a little bit about that.  When she talks about massive 
closures of schools, I would point out to the member opposite, Mr. Speaker, 
that there were more schools closed in the 1970s under that administration 
than there have been under this administration. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Let me also point out that the spending on K to 12 
education in this province has gone up 72 per cent since 1982 -- 72 per 
cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And one final comment.  This government has spent over $640 million on 
school construction in the last nine years.  Where were they in all of the 
good years with all of the schools that needed repair and new schools that 
needed to be built during their time in administration. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Family Income Plan 



 

 

 
Mr. Prebble: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of Social 
Services.  Mr. Minister, in your budget last week you cut the amount of 
money for payments under the Family Income Plan by $6 million.  You cut 
that budget by 45 per cent.  Family Income Plan benefits go to the working 
poor, Mr. Minister, to low-income families who have children and who, 
because of very low salaries, require an income supplement to ensure that 
their children are properly housed, clothed, and fed. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, because of your policy Saskatchewan already has the 
highest rate of child poverty in Canada.  One out of four children in this 
province are living in poverty.  In light of this fact, Mr. Minister, can 
you explain to us today why you have removed $6 million from a plan 
specifically designed to help low-income children in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, once again the opposition is proving that 
they know not whereof they speak.  And when they don't understand something 
properly, I guess it is incumbent upon me to clarify the matter for the 
hon. member. 
 
Essentially what has happened in the . . . First of all, let me assure 
everyone out there right now that is in need of financial assistance, there 
have been no cuts anywhere in the budget to anyone who is dependent upon 
social assistance or the Family Income Plan.  There have been no cuts. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- Now, Mr. Speaker, it is true that I have taken it upon 
myself to be as responsible a minister as possible in letting the people of 
Saskatchewan know exactly what is being spent in the Department of Social 
Services.  And one of the things that I have insisted upon in this budget 
is to tell the people the way it is so that they can understand. 
 
In previous blue books records you will find that there is a higher number 
attributed to the Family Income Plan, but that amount was never used.  It 
was never applied for.  The utilization rate was not there.  What this 
budget is doing now is facing that reality and putting the figures so that 
people can understand this is what was spent last year in anticipation of 
that.  This is what is going to be spent this year.  There is no cut to 
anyone who is receiving the Family Income Plan.  They are receiving the 
same amount, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Supplementary, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order, order. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Supplementary, Mr. 
Speaker, to the minister.  Mr. Minister, the reductions in spending to 
fight child poverty have nothing to do with a lack of need for help.  



 

 

You've got more than 3,000 children a month using the Regina Food Bank; 
more than 3,000 children a month using the Saskatoon Food Bank.  The 
reductions in the use of your program, Mr. Minister, are because you have 
dramatically changed the rules for eligibility of the Family Income Plan, 
making it impossible for most people to be eligible, and because you never 
advertise the program any more. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question is: won't you acknowledge that you are in fact 
destroying the Family Income Plan in the province?  That's what you've done 
and that's what this budget puts the finishing touches to. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, once more the hon. member speaks out of 
both sides of his mouth, and I suggest to you that he can't have it both 
ways.  Right now he was accusing this government of not advertising.  He 
was accusing us of not advertising the program; and on the same hand they 
are accusing us of doing too much advertising.  Now which way do you want 
it?  Do you want us to advertise or do you want us not to advertise? 
 
And I repeat, Mr. Speaker, as far as the needy people of this province is 
concerned, we will be there; our support is there; it will continue to be 
there.  And, Mr. Speaker, my concern as Minister of Social Services is to 
see to it that the citizens of this province have that support system 
there.  But my greater concern is to get them off that relief, to get them 
off of the dependency upon government, as members opposite would like to 
see, and put them back as self-supporting, productive members of society.  
That is our concern. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Minister of Social 
Services.  Mr. Minister, we're talking about an income supplement for 
working people in this province and their families, not people on . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Now, Mr. Minister, while you're cutting the Family Income 
Plan, you are . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order, order, order. 
 
I'm sure that hon. members are having difficulty hearing the member, and 
let us give hon. members that opportunity. 
 
Order, order. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  A new question to the 
minister, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, while you're cutting the Family 
Income Plan, you are increasing your rental payments to the Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation by $4 million, in this case a 45 per cent 
increase.  So, Mr. Minister, we have a 45 per cent cut in income 
supplements to working families with children, low-income, working 



 

 

families, and we have a 45 per cent increase in payments for office rental 
and furnishings in your department. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, why don't you cancel the 45 per cent increase in office 
administration, supplies, and furnishings in your department and put that 
money in to the Family Income Plan to assist low-income children in this 
province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, once again the first billion dollar man 
of the Saskatchewan legislature speaks.  I guess what I would ask the hon. 
member, the extra money that you're asking us to spend now, is that still 
part of the first billion, or are you starting to work on your second . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order, order! 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, there are no cuts in this budget.  I am 
very, very proud of how my department and my department officials have been 
able to advise me on the method of supporting the needy families in this 
province, admittedly, Mr. Speaker, with not as much money as last year.  My 
department took a .75 per cent cut.  And yet we are delivering services.  
We have increased funding to all front line services, to foster homes, to 
all of those people out there that are dependent upon this government.  We 
have increased funding or maintained it.  We have not, Mr. Speaker, 
resulted in cuts to the needy in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Child Hunger Programs 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you very much Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my question 
today is to the minister responsible for the . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order, order, order.  Our friend the Minister 
of Justice seems to certainly want to get into the debate today.  But you 
haven't been asked a question and I ask you to refrain from answering them. 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Again I say my question is 
to the minister responsible for families.  Mr. Minister, last year your 
budget department had about $740,000 in its budget in programs to feed 
hungry children.  Now that wasn't very much, Mr. Minister, but at least it 
was something. 
 
This year, however, that amount of money is indeed conspicuous by its 
absence from this budget.  Yet at the same time, Mr. Minister, you 
personally are prepared to defend your government's policy of paying Chuck 
Childers almost three-quarters of a million dollars a year in salaries and 
benefits. 
 
Mr. Minister, when the 22,000 Saskatchewan children using food banks ask 
you to feed them, when they come to you and say that they are hungry, are 
you prepared today to stand on your feet in this House and say to them what 
you said earlier on this week?  Are you prepared to say to hungry children, 
so what? 



 

 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- Mr. Speaker, we're used to extreme statements from the 
member from Rosemont.  This is the same man that equated George Bush with 
Saddam Hussein, so we're used to the most outrageous statements from the 
man. 
 
I'm pleased to report, Mr. Speaker, that the $740,000 that was introduced 
last year for the feeding programs around the province . . . which I must 
say was extremely well received, and we did it in partnership with 
communities and school boards and teachers and professionals throughout the 
system.  They thought it was well received and well done, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That was last year announced as a three-year program, Mr. Speaker, so he 
should be aware of that.  We announced that last year.  It's a three-year 
program.  It goes this year, next year as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Cuts to Public Service Commission 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you again.  A new question to the same minister.  Mr. 
Speaker, it is indeed very interesting, Mr. Minister, when you find that 
you can feed Chuck Childers three-quarters of a million dollar year over 
one year, but in fact you have to feed hungry kids three quarters of a 
million dollars over two years. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, I want to talk to you about another little episode in 
your departmental activities.  This week we've seen you carry out an 
extensive advertising campaign around National Consumer Week and Volunteer 
Week, spending tens of thousands of dollars of advertising around the 
province.  In fact, on Tuesday of this week these ads began to appear 
throughout Saskatchewan, on Tuesday of this week. 
 
Yet, Mr. Minister, my question to you is this: on the same day that these 
ads began to appear around the province of Saskatchewan, you fired three 
people from your department.  Now, Mr. Minister, when those people come to 
you and ask you -- what about my job?  What about my family? -- what kind 
of response are you going to give them, Mr. Minister?  Are you going to 
tell them, so what, as well?  Is that going to be your response? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- Mr. Speaker, there's two answers here.  First of all, 
on his first question, his first comment, I agree.  I agree that the amount 
of money that Chuck Childers gets is a lot of money.  But it's not the 
government's responsibility to decide how much he gets paid.  It's been 
privatized.  It's the potash . . . it's their decision who gets the money. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- Mr. Speaker, on the other issue of . . . Mr. Speaker, 



 

 

several months ago, we entered into negotiations with the . . . (inaudible) 
. . . without their support -- Sask Sport, Saskatchewan cultural 
organizations and the recreation organizations in the province -- and 
talked to them about the possibility of taking over the lottery money so 
let them make the decisions as to who would get the money and what programs 
should be around. 
 
Over the last 20, 25 years, Mr. Speaker, the volunteer group in this 
province has matured to such a state it may very well be the best organized 
and, I think, the best in the country. I think I can say it is the best in 
the country.  They are ready to do that now, Mr. Speaker.  They wanted that 
responsibility.  We gave them that responsibility.  When we transferred . . 
. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Saskatchewan Consumer Award of Excellence Recipient 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure to introduce the 1991 
recipient of the Saskatchewan Consumer Award of Excellence to this 
Assembly. Seated in the west gallery, Mr. Speaker, with her family, is 
Arlene Harris of Regina who I ask to rise and be acknowledged. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- Mr. Speaker, Mrs. Harris will receive the 1991 Consumer 
Award of Excellence for her outstanding work in helping consumers, 
especially disadvantaged consumers, make the best use of their own 
resources.  Her skills as a home economist and educator have helped many 
Saskatchewan families and individuals to solve their own problems.  Hon. 
members will appreciate that the presentation of the Consumer Award of 
Excellence to Arlene Harris is a highlight of National Consumer Week in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
This marks the second time, only the second time, Mr. Speaker, National 
Consumer Week has been observed.  In proclaiming this special week I have 
emphasized how important the theme for the week is to Saskatchewan.  The 
theme, Mr. Speaker is: "Team Up for a Stronger Marketplace" -- consumers, 
business, government. 
 
National Consumer Week is an opportunity to build partnerships between 
consumers, business, and government.  Arlene Harris worked vividly . . . 
her work vividly demonstrates that we make the best use of our resources 
and strengthen our families in the market-place by working together.  
Working together is a Saskatchewan way. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I urge hon. members, consumers and business people to join 
with the Family Foundation in building these strengths together during this 
National Consumer Week in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in about 20 minutes, at 3 o'clock today in room 218, we'll be 



 

 

making the presentation to Mrs. Harris, and her family will be there of 
course.  And I invite all members of the House to join us in room 218 as 
they may come in and have a cup of tea and have an opportunity to talk and 
meet Mrs. Harris and her family.  I would ask all members to recognize Mrs. 
Harris. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As the opposition critic for 
Consumer and Commercial Affairs I want to immediately take the opportunity, 
as I hope to again later during the presentation, to congratulate Mrs. 
Harris on her reception of the prestigious award.  Her contribution to 
consumer interests in our province as the minister has identified, is 
well-known and worthy of the presentation, Mr. Speaker.  And I join with 
the minister and I'm sure all members of the House in offering our 
congratulations to Mrs. Harris.  This is National Consumer Week, Mr. 
Speaker, but frankly, Mr. Speaker, I wish that this minister and this 
government provided something for the consumer of Saskatchewan other than 
the kind of rhetoric that we've heard today and before today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the minister and his cabinet who presided over the 
destruction of the Department of Consumer and Commercial Affairs in the 
province.  We have no department for consumer affairs in Saskatchewan.  We 
had one.  And, Mr. Speaker, we had a good department with good people 
working in that department, doing good work.  The day that this minister 
puts ads in the papers for National Consumer Week, what does he do?  This 
same minister fires those good people - 
_ fires the people that were serving the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if I may say, if there is one thing this government could 
do for consumers in Saskatchewan, it is as early as possible call an 
election and let's get rid of this PST (provincial sales tax), this 
provincial goods and services tax.  That's the best thing they could do for 
the consumer in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 72 -- An Act to amend The Northern Municipalities Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill to amend The 
Northern Municipalities Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next 
sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 



 

 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth that the Assembly resolve itself into the Committee of 
Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Petersen: -- Well thank you, Mr. Speaker.  When I left off my 
remarks yesterday at 5 o'clock, I had been talking about some of the 
accusations that came from across the floor from members opposite about the 
deficit that this province has and the claim that it has all come about 
since 1982. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the NDP like to make that false claim that the province 
had a surplus of funds when they left office.  In fact, after years of 
record commodity prices, favourable weather conditions, the province was in 
debt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 1982 the province was in debt after some of the best years 
that we've had.  The NDP shamelessly squandered the money that they had, 
the opportunities that they had, and left us penniless to face the ravages 
of drought, world subsidy wars, all those things that have hit us in the 
last six and seven years. 
 
Now the debt that was hidden in the Crowns, Mr. Speaker, in 1982 totalled 
over $3 billion, in 1982.  In 1991 dollars, that would have been $5 
billion, Mr. Speaker, $5 billion in debt.  Mr. Speaker, on top of that, 
when we took office in 1982, we also found that there was a $1.5 billion 
debt in the teachers' pension fund, unfunded liabilities; a $3.5 billion 
deficit in the government employees' pension fund; 900 million had been 
taken from the Heritage Fund and was given to Crown corporations.  The 
deficit of over 200 million in the Heritage Fund.  There was no surplus; 
there was no surplus. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to quote now, if I may, from Hansard, from Public 
Accounts December 1, 1982.  And at that time the person questioning was the 
former member for Rosthern, Mr. Ralph Katzman.  When he came to this office 
in 1982 after the Tory victory, he put his talents to work in trying to 
find out exactly where the province was as far as its fiscal stand was.  
Those who know Mr. Katzman know that he has an eye and a nose for money, 
and he is very, very aware of responsibility and fiscal responsibility 
especially. 
 
(1445) 
 
When the former member came across these hidden deficits, Mr. Speaker, the 
member for Regina Centre was the chairman of the Public Accounts Committee.  
And I want to quote from the Hansard of that day with regards to the 
unfunded liabilities.  I quote the hon. member from December 1, 1982, 
Public Accounts proceedings: 
 

 This is a lesson on how not to set up a pension plan.  This is an apt 
lesson on how not to set up a pension plan.  The difficulties with pension 



 

 

plans are that we politicians tend to live for the moment.  Our time 
horizons are normally next month, sometimes next year but never beyond the 
next election." 

 
And that was the hon. member for Regina Centre saying that, an NDP member 
admitting that they had made an error.  It's no wonder they don't have a 
plan to offer to Saskatchewan. 
 
Their time horizon is not towards the future, not long-term planning, but 
at the very most next month, next week, maybe next election.  And they 
still cling to their outmoded and failed ideas.  A moratorium.  The Leader 
of the Opposition said they're going to put a moratorium on farm 
foreclosures.  And then he said, it isn't going to do any good but we're 
going to do it anyhow.  I mean those are the kind of the ideas they have. 
 
But to get back to my comments I started with, I want to quote further for 
the member from Regina Centre: 
 

 The problem with these things is that it's a very long-run problem.  You 
can do something today which is not terribly responsible, and you are not 
going to pick up the tab for many years to come.  That's why the idea of 
having pensions negotiated between employees and the government of the 
day, is not a wise one because the problems come back to haunt you so far 
in the future and we politicians aren't always cognizant of what's going 
to happen in the next decade.  We have this terrible fear that it may be 
our worst enemies who have to face the problem in 10 years time.  
Therefore why worry about it? 

 
Well why worry about it, Mr. Speaker?  Why worry about it?  This is coming 
from the hon. member who was the minister of Finance and who now complains 
about waste and mismanagement.  And he says that they just went ahead and 
set this up, took the money in, spent it foolishly, and they thought they'd 
never have to worry about it because probably their worst enemies would be 
in office. 
 
Well I guess judging from the comments, he was right.  The NDP's worst 
enemies are in office -- the Tories.  And it's our government who has to 
face these unfunded liabilities, these hidden deficits, and deal with them 
today. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I would like to quote one final item from those 
proceedings that day, and I quote the member for Regina Centre: 
 

 These are really startling figures.  And I remember Mr. Lutz (who was then 
the provincial auditor) raising this at the orientation seminar.  This 
unfunded liability is somewhere in the same neighbourhood . . . (of the 
total provincial debt.) Three point something billion comes to mind.  
Unfunded liabilities in these pension plans stand near equal to the debt 
of the province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that comes from the member for Regina Centre who was the 
chairman of Public Accounts, a member of the NDP front bench when they were 
in government, a member of the opposition now, who says there's waste and 



 

 

mismanagement in government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what hypocrisy.  What more can I say?  We are now paying for 
the evils of yesterday, and we're asked to pay for it at a time when we 
have no money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those are extremely, extremely sad things that we have to talk 
about.  But when you talk about mismanagement . . . the NDP opposition 
likes to talk about failed projects that the Government of Saskatchewan 
between 1982 and 1991 has been involved in.  And I suppose, as I said 
yesterday, there's a possibility that all governments will become embroiled 
in some problems -- pot calling the kettle black. 
 
Well let's just tally up some of the things, because they're very fond of 
tallying up the deficit that we have and saying it's because of waste and 
mismanagement.  Mr. Speaker, I've just outlined waste and mismanagement at 
its utmost, taking the pension money from public servants, from teachers, 
taking that money.  And instead of investing it in a proper account as this 
government has done, they spent it on buying potash mines, potash mines -- 
didn't create any new jobs, Mr. Speaker.  They spent the money to further 
their ideological dreams. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, it's very sad; it's very, very sad to see this 
happening.  And then members opposite stand up and sanctimoniously say that 
they are the protectors, and they are only ones that can manage and can 
handle this tough time we're in.  They're the only ones who ever had a 
balanced budget.  Well, Mr. Speaker, if we robbed teachers, if we robbed 
government employees as they did, we might be able to balance our budget 
too at this time without any tax increases. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, that is not what we're about.  Honesty, integrity, truth, 
responsibility -- we put in our plans for the next three years.  We lay out 
a tax regime in our budget, Mr. Speaker, so that the countryside can see 
what we're about.  We put it forward so that people may judge us before the 
fact, not after the fact. 
 
Members opposite went into elections promising the moon.  They went into 
elections saying, oh yes there's no problem; we won't have a deficit.  In 
1982 in their last budget I think they overestimated oil revenues by 180 
per cent, potash revenues by 170 per cent.  If we were fiscally 
irresponsible, Mr. Speaker, we could write in any number we wanted to as 
well. 
 
In our budget, I believe oil prices are calculated around $20.85 -- 
realistic, Mr. Speaker.  Other governments may not be quite so realistic.  
Alberta I note, is in at about $23.  They're quite optimistic.  We didn't 
pencil in $30 a barrel in order to come up with the numbers that the 
Minister of Finance put together.  We put it in at realistic numbers, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now sometimes the truth hurts but you have to face it and that means you 
have some tough choices to make.  And that's what this whole budget is 
about, Mr. Speaker -- choices, choices -- the choice between honest and up 



 

 

front with the electorate or hiding in the bushes telling them, the world 
is fine, don't worry about it.  We'll look after you; don't worry about it.  
Don't worry about it, we'll look after you, government will take care of 
you.  Big Brother will look after everything. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that is the thinking of the '60s and of the '70s.  
That's dead.  It's as dead as the wethead and polyester suits.  And the 
Leader of the Opposition should take note of that, Mr. Speaker.  There is 
no going back to those old times as much as members opposite would like to.  
They'd like to rest secure in the knowledge that the Regina Manifesto is a 
new idea. 
 
They took heart in the fact that an NDP government was elected in Ontario.  
Well, Mr. Speaker, it's possible that in Ontario the deficit that that 
government, the NDP government in Ontario, could run up, will be greater.  
The deficit will be greater than the entire budget for Saskatchewan in one 
year under an NDP administration. 
 
And today we saw members asking the Minister of Social Services about our 
funding for those in need and saying that there had been cut-backs.  Well, 
Mr. Speaker, there have been no cut-backs.  The minister answered the 
question truthfully and forthrightly.  What he said was, we put in the same 
amount of money that was utilized last year.  You may have 10 million in 
the budget but you only utilized 7.  Fair enough.  People only apply for 
seven, that's the number you should be using, reflecting truly, truly the 
situation. 
 
In Ontario under an NDP government, headlines are reading now that the 
welfare workers, not the recipients, but the welfare workers are saying 
that it's run amok, that it's absolutely ludicrous.  And we see a 
government duly elected, duly elected, putting forward the largest deficit 
in the history of that province -- a deficit, a deficit bigger than the 
whole entire Saskatchewan budget.  And that's the NDP idea of management?  
That's the NDP idea of management? 
 
And when you look at the promises, at the promises of the Government of 
Ontario who were then in opposition, NDP opposition at the time, they 
promised the moon.  They promised the moon.  Because in their wildest dream 
they never thought they'd be government.  They never thought they'd have to 
live up to those promises. 
 
But they've kept some of them.  They've kept some of them, Mr. Speaker.  
They have, absolutely.  We have a Morgentaler-type abortuary on every 
corner.  No problem at all, Mr. Speaker.  No problem there.  They keep 
those promises. 
 
But I go back to the fiscal responsibility, the billions of dollars.  We're 
talking billions -- perhaps six billions of dollars in a deficit, in a 
deficit.  And some of the numbers I quoted to you from Public Accounts of 
the NDP of the'70s in Saskatchewan, well I guess I shouldn't be so hard on 
them.  Compared to the NDP of the '90s, those guys were pikers. 
 
You know it's amazing, Mr. Speaker, just amazing how members opposite can 



 

 

sit there and sanctimoniously look us in the eye and tell this government 
that we have wasted money -- that we have wasted money. 
 
We have spent money on programs that were needed.  We have doubled the 
funding for health care, increased the funding for education at a time when 
student enrolment went down in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  
We've done those things.  We've been there with home owner protection.  
We've been there with student summer job employment programs.  We've been 
there for agriculture when it was needed, Mr. Speaker.  We've done all 
those things.  We've done those things. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members opposite say waste and mismanagement.  They say, oh 
yes, waste and mismanagement.  Well I guess I could run through a list of 
waste and mismanagement that they went into when they were government, but 
I'll save that for another day.  I'll just leave that for my friends across 
the floor to think about.  We can go into waste and mismanagement any time 
they want. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that this budget that the Minister of Finance on this 
side of the House has brought down seems like a fairly hard budget.  And it 
is.  It's honest.  It's truthful.  It's straightforward.  It tells the 
people of Saskatchewan the way it really is.  And that is what people are 
looking for today. 
 
In the Department of Highways and Transportation, Mr. Speaker, yes we've 
had a reduction in our capital budget.  But, Mr. Speaker, what that means 
is that we may not have as much new construction as some would like; 
perhaps not as much new construction as members on this side of the floor 
would like.  But we have to hold our fiscal house in order.  We have to get 
our fiscal house in order.  We have to maintain a hold on that deficit 
which has grown during the time that we were government, responding to the 
needs of people, not to the needs of some ideology that was thought up by 
somebody who really didn't have a handle on the real world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the Department of Highways and Transportation, we have 
provided services.  We have maintained the highway system.  We are going to 
have the same highway system tomorrow as we had yesterday.  And, Mr. 
Speaker, it's going to be in good condition.  The maintenance budget has 
remained the same.  It has not been trimmed back..  We aren't going to 
build new highways. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, yesterday the members opposite asked me questions about 
that.  And again I saw in some of the news reports, members opposite quoted 
as saying that a 7 per cent reduction in the Department of Highways capital 
budget would somehow translate into 3,000 lost jobs in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
(1500) 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I have a hard time, a hard time following that because I 
don't know if people understand that with a 200-and-some million dollar 
budget in the Department of Highways, the department proper, that we have 
about 1,600 employees.  Now we've had a 7 per cent reduction in the capital 
budget.  I can't see how that translates into 3,000 lost jobs.  I can see 



 

 

how it could create perhaps some situations where construction companies 
are going to be very, very close on their tendering, and are going to have 
some very, very sharp pencils, and that's fair enough. 
 
But members opposite didn't tell you the whole story.  They didn't tell you 
that in this last year we've seen a 30 per cent reduction in the price of 
asphalt.  Last fall we were looking at asphalt prices 30 per cent higher 
than they are now because of world oil prices, because of the Gulf crisis.  
Now, Mr. Speaker, 30 per cent increase in asphalt, even if we would have 
had an increase in the department budget would still have meant less work.  
So, Mr. Speaker, asphalt prices down 30 per cent means that there will be 
work, there will be lots of work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday I tabled the 1991-92 construction project array.  
And if members opposite had time to go through it, they would have time to 
add up the numbers of kilometres of highway that's going to be built, the 
number of kilometres of highway that are going to be resurfaced, the number 
of bridges that are going to be repaired, and that doesn't include the 
safety projects that we go into, the upgrades that we go into, and a number 
of other items that we work on.  We're looking at about 278 kilometres of 
highway to be graded, construction projects to be graded -- 278 kilometres.  
Well that's a fair, good distance.  We're looking at 569 to be surfaced, 
Mr. Speaker, resurfaced and surfaced.  That's a fair, good, sizeable amount 
of work too I think, Mr. Speaker.  And we're looking at perhaps 15 bridge 
projects. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that's a lot of work.  That's a lot of projects.  So for them 
to say that it's going to translate into 3,000 lost jobs in the province of 
Saskatchewan is patently ridiculous.  The member opposite quoted from an 
article in a newspaper yesterday when he was asking me questions about 
that.  The critic for Highways was asking me questions about the Department 
of Highways budget -- as is his right to do -- and I responded as well as I 
could to the questions and provided the information that the member asked 
for. 
 
The only thing that bothered me about his quoting from the article was he 
didn't quote all of the article, Mr. Speaker.  He didn't go into all of it.  
He quoted the construction association as saying there was going to be lost 
jobs and that we needed more money to be spent on our highways and all the 
rest of it.  But he didn't follow through with all of the article wherein 
the construction association recommends a dedicated fuel tax as a method to 
come up with the extra dollars.  They acknowledge that we are in difficult 
economic times.  They applaud our restraint procedures that we've had to go 
through in the Department of Highways because these are very, very astute 
business people.  They applaud those measures and they say, look it would 
be nice if we had some more; we could use some more; we should have some 
more; the highway system could deteriorate in the future.  All those things 
may be true.  And they say, but we have a solution.  We would like to see a 
cent a litre, perhaps 1 cent a litre, perhaps 2 cents a litre applied as a 
dedicated fuel tax. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I would ask the member opposite if that is something that 
he would endorse -- a dedicated fuel tax.  He was willing enough to quote 



 

 

from the article and to accept their comments about job loss and to accept 
their perhaps condemnation of the Highways budget.  He was willing to do 
that for political reasons.  Well perhaps that's a bit unkind.  He's not 
planning to run for office again, so maybe it wasn't for political reasons. 
 
But just to help his memory just a bit, the rest of the article did talk 
about a dedicated fuel tax to be put towards highways.  And I ask the 
member, you know, is that his stand?  Is that what he supports, a dedicated 
fuel tax?  One cent a litre means $18 million; 2 cents a litre, $36 
million.  Well that would certainly build a lot of miles of highway.  Does 
the member opposite support that stand? 
 
I just wish that members opposite could make up their mind where they are 
at.  They're against raising taxes, they're against raising taxes.  They're 
against cutting, they're against trimming, they're against fiscal 
management.  They say, well we could do all these things because yes, well 
because we're the NDP and we know how to do it.  That's their stand. 
 
And we heard a member today, the billion dollar man, talk about all the 
different things that could be done in Department of Social Services if 
only the NDP were there.  And the Minister of Social Services in his speech 
yesterday, went through the litany of those things and ran up the bill.  
And I believe we have got a billion dollar man in this Assembly, because 
that's what it's going to take to fulfil those promises. 
 
And the members opposite don't want taxation.  Oh, I forgot, they do.  
That's right, pardon me.  They want to tax the big, bad oil companies.  At 
least some of the members want to tax the big, bad oil companies.  The 
leader says the big, bad oil companies are okay and he wouldn't tax them, 
but other members say they would.  But then again maybe they won't.  But 
then again they could.  You're not too sure. 
 
And what else are they going to tax?  Oh they're going to tax the rich; 
they're going to tax the rich, the rich. Oh,  
 Dokay.  Well that's an interesting concept, Mr. Speaker.  I don't know how 
many people in Saskatchewan qualify for the terminology, the rich.  But 
it's something that's easy to roll off your tongue.  It fits into the 
rhetoric very easily.  It's not something that makes a lot of sense, but 
it's easy to say. 
 
And members opposite have had a habit of doing that over the years -- 
always.  If it was rhetoric that could build the world, they'd have built 
four of them.  And we saw the Leader of the Opposition in his reply to the 
budget speech the other night, indulge in rhetoric, and only rhetoric, Mr. 
Speaker.  No plan, no vision, strictly rhetoric.  The biggest part of his 
plan was they were going to put a moratorium on farm foreclosures.  And he 
acknowledged that wouldn't work.  Long on rhetoric, short on action, no 
plan.  NDP -- no darned plan.  That's what it is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now it's tough in Saskatchewan.  We have gone through some cycles in the 
province.  We always do, Mr. Speaker.  When you're tied to a resource base, 
that's what happens.  But you've got to have the intestinal fortitude to 
stand up and tell the public of Saskatchewan where the province is at.  You 



 

 

have to say: this is the cards we've been dealt; this is the way the 
numbers crunch out; these are the choices we have to make. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you lay those choices out honestly for the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan, if you tell them truthfully that this is what we 
have spent in health care, that these are the requirements and we've had an 
increase; and if you tell them truthfully that education, yes, it's one of 
the things that we're committed to and we need that, and we've had an 
increase in there; and if you look at agriculture and say it's the backbone 
of the province -- 40 per cent of the jobs in Saskatchewan are tied to 
agriculture . . . and we have to support that industry, take it through 
these tough times, help the industry against the international subsidy 
wars, against countries that have multi, multibillion dollar economies. 
 
Little old Saskatchewan, Canada, one of the smallest populations in the 
world, accounts for over 20 per cent of world grain trade -- 20 per cent.  
And we're up against countries that have got millions and millions and 
millions of people who put their dollars into the treasury in the form of a 
value added tax in Europe to help fight the subsidy war.  So they support 
their farmers in Europe.  Value added tax, the VAT tax, very similar to a 
GST (goods and services tax) or a PST (provincial sales tax) -- a value 
added tax. 
 
Consumers pay it, Mr. Speaker.  Consumers pay it all over Europe.  And 
Europe has managed to take itself from a position after the war, of being a 
country that could . . . or being an area that could not feed itself, to 
becoming an area that has gone into the export business.  And they've done 
it with those types of taxes.  The value added tax is a fair tax because 
everybody pays it, everybody pays it. 
 
And in Saskatchewan it's even fairer because it's discretionary, Mr. 
Speaker.  We tax restaurant meals, but we don't tax food.  I stopped in a 
bakery in Wadena this morning, talked to my friend, Mr. Suik, and I said, 
well how's business going since the PST came in?  Well he said, you know, 
it's not bad; he said people come in and instead of buying one or two 
doughnuts or three, they'll buy a half dozen.  It may have even helped 
business, I'm not sure, he said; but no, there's no real complaints about 
it. Because we don't tax basic groceries, Mr. Speaker.  We tax 
discretionary items like restaurant meals. 
 
In the budget, Mr. Speaker, we also take into account that many people in 
Saskatchewan may be of lower income, and even with the family income plans 
and all the other support things that are in the Department of Social 
Services, it may be an unfair imposition to tax children's clothing, 
children's necessities, diapers, those sorts of things, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so the minister in his budget put forward a $200 per child tax credit.  
On a family of four -- mom, dad, and two kids -- that's $400, $400.  Well, 
Mr. Speaker, at 7 per cent, $400 should cover off $6,000 worth of 
purchases.  And I don't know any baby in Saskatchewan that can go through 
$6,000 worth of diapers.  It's pretty tough, it's pretty tough. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, that this budget has been fair, has been open, has 



 

 

been honest, and has been compassionate, because it does provide the offset 
and the relief that is needed for people of lower income so that their 
children don't suffer, so that their children don't suffer. 
 
There's nothing wrong with that, Mr. Speaker.  I agree with that type of 
thing.  I'm a compassionate person.  The members opposite laugh.  I guess 
you'll have to ask my neighbours, ask my friends.  I'll take my chances on 
having a bolt of lightning strike me but, Mr. Speaker, we are compassionate 
people on this side of the House.  Members opposite are going to disagree 
of course; they disagree with everything that we say, but we back our words 
up with actions.  We don't just have empty rhetoric. 
 
We don't impose death taxes on widows and orphans.  Members opposite did 
that, and they claim to be compassionate.  They claim to be compassionate.  
Now, I can't believe, Mr. Speaker, that that is the case.  Succession 
duties, death taxes are compassionate?  Mr. Speaker, I really can't believe 
that members opposite are going to go back to those kinds of ideas, but I 
hear that they are.  I hear that's part of their platform.  They're talking 
about it out on the street.  Maybe they do have a plan after all -- maybe 
they do. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I probably could go on for several hours today.  And I 
know members opposite have been listening attentively because they have 
been rather quiet today, and I thank them for that.  It's a rare 
opportunity to have that happen in this House.  And so, Mr. Speaker, I will 
only end by saying that I support this budget 100 per cent.  Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's once again an honour to take 
part in this debate on the budget.  This is the fifth occasion since being 
elected in 1986 that I've had the privilege to represent the people of 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
And while I sat listening to the Minister of Finance on Monday night, I 
couldn't help but recall that I had heard much of what he had to say on the 
evening of February 20, 1991 when I was listening to the news.  And that 
was the occasion that he told the public that there were going to be small 
increases for the Department of Health, small increases for the Department 
of Education, and that the government was going to introduce a provincial 
goods and services tax to pay for the province's share of GRIP (gross 
revenue insurance plan) and NISA (net income stabilization account). 
 
And the minister on that evening basically said, the evening of February 
20, that people living in urban communities in Saskatchewan were going to 
have to pay their fair share.  And I thought, this can't be, this is 
outrageous.  This government has finally gone too far in terms of trying to 
drive the wedge between urban and rural people. 
 
(1515) 
 
That decision on February 20, 1991 to introduce a provincial goods and 
services tax and link it to urban Saskatchewan was a most cynical move, a 



 

 

cynical move on the part of the government to get themselves re-elected in 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And it's interesting, Mr. Speaker, while the Berlin Wall has come down 
between the two Germanys, this government continues to try and put up walls 
between rural and urban citizens living in Saskatchewan.  The government 
wants to drive the wedge even further between urban citizens and rural 
citizens so that they can be successful electorally. 
 
Well I want to tell the members opposite that this is simply not possible.  
The people of this province know that in order to make progress in the 
province of Saskatchewan, to come to terms with our very real problems, 
urban and rural citizens are going to have to work co-operatively.  They're 
going to have to work together regardless of where they live in order to 
better the lot of all of us. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this province faces some very serious challenges.  We 
have a provincial government debt that is well in excess of $5 billion.  We 
have an agricultural industry which is on the verge of collapse.  We have 
young people who see no future in Saskatchewan and are leaving Saskatchewan 
in record numbers.  We are seeing lay-offs in the private and public 
sector.  We're seeing that housing starts in our province are down.  
Bankruptcies, both personal and business and farm, are evident everywhere.  
We're seeing rural school closures, and on it goes. 
 
What the citizens of our province wanted in this budget was some hope.  
They wanted some hope.  They wanted the government to boost their spirits.  
And this budget offered no hope and it did little to boost the spirits of 
Saskatchewan citizens.  Instead, Mr. Speaker, what this budget offered was 
tax increases, more job lay-offs, more program cuts, and of course more 
debt. 
 
And I want to review for a minute the government's record on taxes.  I 
recall as the candidate running in the 1982 election campaign, the 
Conservative Party promised to cover . . . or to cut personal taxes by 10 
per cent.  They promised to eliminate the gas tax and they promised to 
reduce the sales tax.  In fact they promised to eliminate the sales tax. 
 
But what have they done?  Did they lower personal income taxes by one 
dollar?  No.  In fact they introduced the flat tax which is now in excess 
of 2 per cent of net income.  Did they promise or did they eliminate the 
sales tax?  Not only did they increase it from 5 to 7 per cent, but they 
have announced that they intend to extend this tax to every good and 
service in the province of Saskatchewan that's now covered by the federal 
goods and services tax. 
 
And did they eliminate the gas tax?  Well first they did, and then they 
didn't, and then they did.  Now my question to the members opposite is, who 
are the flip-floppers in the province of Saskatchewan?  This government 
flip-flops on taxes. 
 
And then of course there was the tax on used cars, and then there wasn't, 
and now it looks as though there will be.  Another flip-flop on the part of 



 

 

the members opposite.  And then of course who could forget the tax on 
lottery tickets.  First they put it on and then they took it off, and now 
they're putting it back on, and another flip-flop on the part of members 
opposite. 
 
And then they threatened a tax on food but instead gave us the provincial 
goods and services tax, the biggest tax increase in the history of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The irony in all of this is -- the PC government's record on taxation -- is 
that they're planning to get $167 million more from the sales tax this 
year, but they will get 48 million less from oil royalties according to the 
budget book that was presented on Monday evening. 
 
This government's record on taxation has been one of unfairness.  They've 
not had a taxation policy based on the ability to pay.  No, Mr. Speaker, 
this government has given tax breaks to the multinationals and the big 
corporate business friends of the members opposite, and at the same time 
they've increased individual taxes onto the individual taxpayer by 
horrendous amounts. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to turn now to the issue of the deficit.  This 
latest budget introduced by the Conservatives is the 10th straight deficit 
budget.  The province's cumulative government debt is now $5 billion, and 
that's just what we know of.  What we have said, Mr. Speaker, is that we 
want to open the books to find out where this province is really at in 
terms of government debt. 
 
Now just the annual interest charges alone are $500 million per annum.  Mr. 
Speaker, that means that every man, woman, and child, based on 1 million 
citizens, pays $500 per year just to service the debt.  Next to the budget 
for the Department of Health and Education, this interest on the debt is 
the third largest expenditure in the budget.  And what is so saddening is 
that the debt didn't need to get this high.  The government had the choice 
to be fiscally responsible or they had the choice to be wasters and 
mismanagers and they chose the latter.  They chose Joytec and GigaText; 
they chose Supercart and  Cargill.  They chose government advertising and 
Weyerhaeuser.  They chose waste and mismanagement over people.  But it is 
the people not their big corporate business friends who are now being asked 
to pay for their irresponsible government. 
 
What we need in this province, Mr. Speaker, is a government that will be 
fair when it comes to coming to terms with the debt.  What the people want 
is a government that will have a revenue policy based on fairness. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to speak about the government's record on 
education.  On Monday evening the Minister of Finance, who has been the 
minister of Education said, and I quote: 
 

 . . . education makes the difference in the ability of individuals and 
communities to compete in our rapidly changing and increasingly complex 
world.  It enhances our quality of life by opening doors to better job 
opportunities and increases our understanding of the world around us. 



 

 

 
 However, (Mr. Speaker) as is the case in health, those involved in the 

delivery of education services must seek greater efficiencies. 
 

According to the Minister of Finance.  Well that's it.  That's the Minister 
of Finance's comments on education.  On the one hand the government 
indicates education makes a difference in our ability to compete and then 
they tell us we must seek greater efficiencies while they continue their 
policy of underfunding in the area of education. 
 
Last year the Department of Education and schools in this province received 
a 3 per cent increase.  The school system in response laid off teachers, 
increased class size, closed schools, and trimmed programs, and increased 
property taxes.  And school boards told the province and told the Minister 
of Education and told the government that a 3 per cent increase simply 
wasn't enough. 
 
This year the government has increased grants to school boards by $13 
million or 3.5 per cent, and cut the educational development fund by half.  
Well, members opposite, 3.5 per cent increase won't keep pace with 
inflation let alone all of the increases that have come about because of 
the federal goods and services tax, the provincial goods and services tax, 
a 24 per cent increase in unemployment insurance premiums, core curriculum 
implementation, and collective agreements with the teaching staff in this 
province and the support staff. 
 
In response to the government's budget in education, school boards, 
particularly those in rural Saskatchewan, whom have been hardest hit by the 
cut-backs in education, have cut teachers, they've cut support positions, 
they are closing schools, they've cut programs, and they are increasing 
local property taxes. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, rural school boards only received a .8 per cent 
increase and consequently school boards are laying off teachers and support 
staff in rural Saskatchewan, closing schools in rural Saskatchewan, and 
increasing property taxes in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Government underfunding in education has meant lost jobs in rural 
communities, school closures, and tax increases.  So much for repopulating 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
This government talks about decentralization of government services out of 
Regina and into rural communities.  At the same time close to 400 citizens 
living in rural communities may lose their jobs because of this 
government's underfunding in education. 
 
I want to speak for a moment on the government's decision to close the 
school for the deaf.  We have long held the view that in order for 
special-needs students to have the very best education available to them, 
that they must have a variety of options, a variety of education options 
available.  Closure of the school for the deaf, Mr. Speaker, will mean that 
deaf students in this province will not have access to a school similar to 
the school for the deaf. 



 

 

 
What it means is that that particular educational option is no longer 
available, and while there are many people in Saskatchewan that support 
mainstreaming of special-needs children and mainstreaming is most 
appropriate for special-needs children, there are some special-needs 
students who are not able to fit into the mainstream of our education 
system and they require a different option.  And I find it regrettable that 
the Government of Saskatchewan decided to close the school for the deaf, 
lay off people who have worked there, many of them for up to 20, 25, 30 
years, and then send those kids elsewhere.  That's regrettable. 
 
The staff at the school for the deaf are committed professionals.  Many of 
those people have been there for 20 . . . in excess of 20 years.  Those 
people view the children at the school for the deaf as their family and 
they're very, very worried about the future of those young people.  And 
unfortunately the Government of Saskatchewan did not involve the staff in 
the planning for those kids -- did not listen to the staff about some other 
options.  And the deaf community in this province is taking the government 
to court to try and get this government to stop the school closure because 
they're worried about the future of those young people. 
 
The kids are committed to each other.  Many of those kids have only known 
that school as their only home.  Many of those kids have only lived at the 
school for the deaf during the vast part of their lives and go back to 
their own communities during the summer holidays.  That is their home.  
That is their home.  And I find it regrettable that the government didn't 
look at other options. 
 
It is recognized that the building may no longer be appropriate.  It may be 
too big.  But there are some other buildings, some other spaces in the city 
of Saskatoon that could have been used for a much smaller program, and the 
government didn't look at those options. 
 
The other regrettable thing, Mr. Speaker, is that the government did not 
look at involving the deaf community in finding new ways to deliver 
education.  They did not examine the educational program that was at the 
school to find out whether it was appropriate.  And I feel that the 
government really should have followed the Ontario government's model of 
examining deaf education by looking at deaf education in mainstream schools 
and deaf education in the school for the deaf in order to best determine 
what would be an appropriate model or models of education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to review for another moment the K to 12 education 
funding.  If you look at the operating grants and the educational 
development fund combined, education, K to 12 education only received a 
1.51 per cent increase.  And consequently that's why you're seeing job 
lay-offs, that's why you're seeing school closures, and that's why you're 
seeing property tax increases. 
 
The government's record on education has not been good.  And if you look at 
the government's record, spending record on education, you will note that 
the spending by school boards on education has increased throughout the 
1980s, but in constant dollars per students, spending increased an average 



 

 

rate of 4.1 per cent from 1980 to 1985 and 3 per cent from 1985 to 1988. 
 
We are presently, Mr. Speaker, in the process, I am presently in the 
process of trying to determine what this budget means in terms of constant 
dollars.  But if you look at the government's record, up until 1985 their 
spending on education kept pace with inflation.  But since 1986, since this 
government was re-elected in 1986, the spending per student has in fact 
decreased based on 1981 dollars. 
 
(1530) 
 
And I'll give you an example.  In 1981-1982, total grants to school boards 
amounted to $269,092,164.  If you base that on a per capita or per student 
grant, that amounted to $1,349.19.  Now if you take the increased funding 
for each of the other years up until 1990-91, grants per student in 1981 
dollars are in fact $1,398.91.  And if you put this year's spending, '91-92 
spending on education into the mix, we are below where we were at in 1981. 
 
And so real spending on education has decreased under this Conservative 
government.  And that's why we have rural school closures.  That's why we 
have teacher lay-offs and that's why we have tax increases. 
 
Now if you look at the Langlois-Scharfe report on school governance you 
will find that in fact Saskatchewan, if you look at Saskatchewan in 
comparison to other jurisdictions across the country, we rank second in 
terms of property taxes.  In Prince Edward Island the gross property tax 
per capita is $114.73.  In Saskatchewan we spend on average $802.56.  The 
only province that spends more per capita on property taxes is the 
government or is the people of Ontario. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, five years ago we were ranked fifth.  We were fifth in 
the country when it came to property taxes.  But under the Government of 
Saskatchewan we have seen a steady down-loading of responsibility for 
educational funding onto local jurisdictions.  And as a result of that, we 
have moved from fifth rank in Canada to number two rank.  And we think, Mr. 
Speaker, it's time the Government of Saskatchewan started adequately 
funding the K to 12 system in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I noted that the Minister of Education in question period 
today talked about all of the capital projects that have been undertaken by 
the Government of Saskatchewan during your years in office.  And I just 
want to remind the Minister of Education that there are many, many new 
schools that have been built under the Conservative government that are on 
the verge of closing. 
 
And one example is St. Gregor right outside of Humboldt.  St. Gregor School 
is basically a brand-new school, and the Humboldt School Board is on the 
verge of closing that school. 
 
We have another school in the P.A. (Prince Albert) Rural School Division 
called Paddockwood.  And the people in Paddockwood, because of declining 
enrolments, are concerned that their school too shall close.  And on and on 
it goes. 



 

 

 
I have written the Minister of Education to tell me what schools have been 
built in this province under your government, and I have asked the Minister 
of Education to tell me what schools are now scheduled for closure.  I made 
that request some months ago, and the Minister of Education has not 
bothered to respond. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what we have in Saskatchewan is a situation where in 1980 
about 56.7 per cent of funding for education came from the province of 
Saskatchewan.  In 1991-92 less than 48 per cent of the funding comes from 
the province of Saskatchewan.  We are seeing increasing pressure on local 
property taxpayers to pay for education. 
 
And I acknowledge, Mr. Speaker, that rural depopulation has contributed to 
the problems that rural Saskatchewan is facing in terms of grants from the 
province, because grants are based on per capita students.  I acknowledge 
that.  However when people decide to leave a community or communities, 30 
people don't leave the same school.  They will leave different areas in a 
rural community.  School boards are still obligated by statute to provide 
an education for those students. 
 
And it seems to me that we have known for some time, we have known for some 
time that the trend in rural Saskatchewan has been one of student loss -- 
student population loss.  And if we look at the numbers of school 
enrolment, particularly in rural Saskatchewan, we have gone from 94,179 
students in 1980-81 to 1990-91, 84,101.  We've lost 10,000 students in 
rural Saskatchewan alone.  That's not including the towns and villages.  
That's just rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Well it seems to me there should have been some planning done on the part 
of the government to ensure that schools in rural communities have access 
to funding.  And as we've seen in this budget, there has been a .8 of 1 per 
cent increase in funding to education and it's simply unacceptable. 
 
It seems to me what the Government of Saskatchewan must do is to start 
providing some leadership in the area of education and figure out how it is 
that we are going to provide an education to students living in rural 
Saskatchewan, because school boards are finding it increasingly difficult 
because of government underfunding in education. 
 
Now I just wanted to talk for a moment on the student aid fund that was cut 
by 12.7 per cent.  We will all have heard by now that the University of 
Regina and the University of Saskatchewan are planning on increasing 
tuition fees by some 17 per cent.  In some colleges it will be much higher 
than that, particularly in the professional colleges.  At the same time the 
Government of Saskatchewan has just cut the student aid fund by some 12.7 
per cent.  Millions of dollars have been cut from the budget when it comes 
to student aid. 
 
Now how on earth do we expect our students, who are finding it very 
difficult to get into these colleges anyway because of enrolment quotas 
which have been brought in by the universities because of government 
underfunding, but how do we expect these students to continue to pay 



 

 

tuition fee increases, continue to pay increases in the cost of living, and 
at the same time cut back the funds that are available to them through 
student aid. 
 
Now we have to remember, we have to remember that a loan is a loan is a 
loan.  Students will pay it back.  What we're finding, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
is that students in this province are taking out larger and larger student 
loans and some students are leaving owing the Government of Saskatchewan 
$45,000 in student loans.  Well in my day, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that's what 
it cost to buy a house.  We have students that are leaving owing as much 
money as it would cost to buy a house, and that's because the cost of 
education is becoming more and more expensive. 
 
And it seems to me that if we don't want to limit the access of the 
university to only those students that come from privileged or money 
backgrounds, then we must have increases in student loans available to 
students, and we must bring back bursaries, because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
the bursary system has been done in under the leadership of the members 
opposite. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk for a minute on health care.  I find it 
ironic that in the city of Saskatoon, the city that I represent, we have 
had a new addition to University Hospital, we've had a new addition to St. 
Paul's Hospital, and we are in the process of building the new City 
Hospital. 
 
Now the Government of Saskatchewan decided to bring in a fellow by the name 
of Atkinson who wrote the Atkinson report on hospitals in Saskatoon.  What 
the Government of Saskatchewan did was set up the Saskatoon hospital 
authority. And the role of the authority was to try and co-ordinate 
services in our various hospitals so that the hospitals would not be 
duplicating service.  And that committee or that authority is in the 
process of trying to sort out what medical services will go into what 
hospitals. 
 
But before they had the opportunity to go through that process, the 
Government of Saskatchewan brought down its edict on February 20 that 
hospital funding was going to be limited this year, that hospital funding 
was not going to meet the rate of inflation. 
 
And how have the hospitals responded?  They have closed beds, they have 
laid off staff, and they have closed operating rooms.  That's how the 
hospitals in my city have responded.  This government did not give the 
hospital authority, whom it set up, the opportunity to go through the 
process of trying to sort out who was going to go where. 
 
And in fact at St. Paul's Hospital we had an extension, I believe, of 54 
beds.  Last fall they closed 41 beds.  That gave us 13 additional beds.  
And now because of this government's underfunding they have closed more 
than 13 beds.  And so really we have spent millions of dollars in a 
hospital expansion at St. Paul's Hospital that is not in essence open 
because this government has closed more beds than it built. 
 



 

 

Now it seems to me that if you're going to spend hundreds of millions of 
dollars in edifices to yourself, then you've got to put the money in place 
to pay for the operating costs of those facilities. 
 
But this government hasn't done that.  We have a lovely new building at St. 
Paul's, we have a lovely new facility at University Hospital, we have a 
brand-new building in the form of City Hospital, but we don't have the 
money available to run them. 
 
And so my question is, what sort of planning is going on on the part of the 
provincial government?  We have new schools in this province that are being 
closed and we have new hospitals in this province that in essence are being 
closed.  We've spent hundreds of millions of dollars which contributes to 
the long-term debt of this province, and these facilities are in essence 
not available to the people that they're supposed to serve because the 
Government of Saskatchewan has chosen not to put the operating funds in 
place. 
 
And I think it's time that we returned to the people of this province some 
form of fiscal responsibility on the part of government.  We can no longer 
expend huge sums of funding onto capital expenditures and then not have the 
necessary operating funds to run those facilities. 
 
Another case in point is the agricultural building on the University of 
Saskatchewan campus.  Now while the Government of Saskatchewan likes to 
comment upon the new agricultural building -- and it is a beautiful 
building and it is a facility that is obviously needed and has been wanted 
for some time -- the question becomes, will this facility open?  The 
president of the University of Saskatchewan has asked that the government 
pay for the increase in operating costs, and the Premier has indicated that 
that has to come out of the university's budget. 
 
Now the question is, what did the Premier promise?  The Premier promised 
the university that those increases in operating funds would be available, 
and they haven't been made available to the University of Saskatchewan.  So 
the question becomes, will the building open?  And it's interesting.  As I 
understand it, the College of Agriculture  
 Dis the only college on campus where you can still have a 65 per cent 
average and get into the college.  They have not had to bring in enrolment 
quotas, and I suspect that's because of the farm crisis that's presently 
facing rural Saskatchewan. 
 
But certainly all the other colleges, you have to have high averages in 
order to get into university.  For instance, the College of Education, in 
order to go into the elementary school program, you require a 78 per cent 
average, and I believe the secondary school program you require an 82 per 
cent average. 
 
Well there's a whole lot of kids that are being left out of the university 
and their access to that college, who in years past would have had the 
average to get into that program but are being denied the opportunity to 
become teachers because of this government's underfunding in education.  
And I in fact, Mr. Speaker, find that incredible. 



 

 

 
Now I know that some of my other colleagues want to get into the debate on 
the budget, so I want to tell the members opposite that what the people of 
this province want is hope.  They wanted a budget that would give them 
hope.  This budget offered no hope to the people. 
 
It offered tax increases.  It offered job lay-offs.  It offered program 
cuts.  It offered devastation, and this is not the time to put devastation 
onto people in this province.  People want some hope.  They want some 
vision.  They want some new leadership.  And I really think the people were 
hoping that we would have an election this spring and not a budget.  I will 
not be supporting this budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- I will not be supporting this budget because this budget 
fails to offer the people of this province hope, and that's really what 
they want. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(1545) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I'm a little disappointed 
in the remarks of the hon. member who just took her seat.  She obviously 
hasn't read the budget document, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when she talked about 
hope and vision, because that's precisely what this budget document did do, 
was lay out a plan for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I know that that fact that a plan was laid out causes some discomfort 
in the members opposite because the spelling of the word "plan" may be 
causing them some problems.  We know that one of the issues rapidly 
developing in this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the fact that the New 
Democratic Party opposite doesn't have a plan for the future of this 
province, doesn't have an idea as to the direction this province should 
take.  Mr. Speaker, they keep saying, well wait until the election, we'll 
have a plan; wait until the election, we'll have a plan.  Well the public 
are also making it abundantly clear, Mr. Speaker, that they don't like that 
type of cynicism, that an opposition party's afraid to put out any 
suggestions that it may have because, oh, somebody may take them. 
 
I will give you the assurance, the hon. members opposite, from some of the 
comments I've heard and from some of the proposals put forward by members 
opposite, I can give them the assurance on behalf of the government that we 
won't take one of them.  We won't steal one of the suggestions.  We won't, 
Mr. Speaker, we won't touch one of them with a 10-foot pole. 
 
When I look at suggestions like a government Crown corporation to do all 
the building, as the member from Regina Rosemont suggests, I can tell you 
that it would never be a policy or plan of the Progressive Conservative 
Party of Saskatchewan . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, what I said, 
you don't have a plan and that is not inconsistent. 
 



 

 

I said that there are some goofy suggestions and I said there's some goofy 
ideas and there's some goofy proposals floating around out there, but I 
said you don't have a plan because, Mr. Speaker, you couldn't find anybody 
in this province with the thinking that could put the collection of idiot 
ideas that are coming about over there together into a comprehensive plan.  
And that's one of the difficulties that members opposite have. 
 
One of the other disappointing points, Mr. Speaker, of the members 
opposite, to date not one of them has talked about the economic 
difficulties in the province of Saskatchewan and the interdependence of 
rural and urban Saskatchewan -- not one of them, Mr. Speaker.  And the 
reason is because all the politics, of course, is the government is driving 
a wedge between rural and urban.  I think I can document a case, Mr. 
Speaker, that the wedge very much is part of the policies of the members 
opposite who -- and I think the case is demonstrably obvious -- have 
written off rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And let's take a look.  Let's take a look.  Mr. Speaker, I talked about the 
interdependence.  And the hon. members don't even follow, Mr. Speaker, and 
I note the Sherwood Co-op.  And this was an important notice in yesterday's 
Leader-Post, and it deals with the Sherwood Co-op here in Regina, and it 
talks about a notice to the members of the Sherwood Co-op.  And it goes on, 
and they talk about the difficulties that the Sherwood Co-op has had in 
Regina, the difficulties faced in the early '80s. 
 

 There's little doubt that our future success (and this is the Sherwood 
Co-op) will be aligned to two fundamental factors.  In the first instance, 
as an economy possessing a strong agricultural base, our success will be 
influenced by a healthy farm economy. 

 
And then of course they talk about the need for their members to purchase 
goods and services from them. 
 
So here we have, I believe, the largest co-operative in the province of 
Saskatchewan outside of the Wheat Pool, retail co-operatives, making it 
clear in the largest city in this province, or the capital city of this 
province, that they depend for their future on a strong agricultural 
economy.  Exactly what the Premier and this government have been saying, 
Mr. Speaker, for a long time, that urban Saskatchewan depends vitally on 
rural Saskatchewan.  Saskatchewan goes as rural Saskatchewan goes and as 
agriculture goes. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, to deal with that and the agricultural difficulties, 
through the leadership of the Premier, our government, Mr. Speaker, led the 
way in developing long-term agricultural stability programs, the GRIP 
program and the NISA program. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we stabilized and built a new infrastructure in rural 
Saskatchewan, when I talked about individual line service and rural natural 
gas and new nursing homes and new hospitals outside the major centres.  
And, Mr. Speaker, we try and involve rural Saskatchewan and Saskatchewan 
people in the future of their own communities with community development 
bonds, a new debt instrument, Mr. Speaker, a new instrument to create 



 

 

stability, opportunity, and hope in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I look at the number of small businesses that we put outside this 
province, and I think of the criticism of members opposite, criticism that 
Gainers goes into North Battleford, that Phillips multinational goes into 
Moose Jaw, and I could go on and on and on of the industries that are going 
out to rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as part of that plan for stabilizing Saskatchewan, I look 
at the commitment of this government to the processing of Saskatchewan's 
natural resources right here in Saskatchewan.  We now process our oil here 
in Saskatchewan into fuels.  We now process our forests into pulp and fine 
paper. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are all part of that strategy and vision of this 
government to bring stability to this province, to give them the 
opportunity to grow and development, recognizing that it will be a 
partnership, Mr. Speaker, of the people of this province, the businesses of 
this province and the government of this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- And I have to contrast, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with the 
stated policies of the members opposite and their track record.  And let me 
run through because some of the hon. members have obviously forgotten. 
 
Was it, Mr. Speaker, a Conservative government or a New Democratic 
government that put a moratorium on nursing homes in this province?  It was 
an NDP government that put a moratorium on nursing homes, nursing homes 
which helped stabilize many communities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Was it a Conservative government or a New Democratic Party which said, no 
more hospitals.  No, it was the leader of the New Democratic Party that 
said, no more hospital institutions should be built.  Will that help rural 
Saskatchewan?  Not in the least. 
 
Is it, Mr. Speaker, a Conservative government that is opposed to 
decentralization?  Not in the least.  It's the New Democratic Party that's 
opposed to decentralization to try and help restore and stabilize and give 
hope and opportunity for rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Is it, Mr. Speaker, a Conservative government that said to the people out 
there, no you can't participate, you can't have community development 
bonds.  No, it was a New Democratic Party, for nearly 20 years in office, 
refused to give the people in rural Saskatchewan or anywhere in 
Saskatchewan the opportunity to invest in their own province.  Mr. Speaker, 
it is this government that brought in community development bonds to give 
hope and opportunity for much of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, was it the Conservatives that said no small industries?  No, 
it was the New Democratic Party.  Let me give you the example, Mr. Speaker, 
of how the New Democratic Party thought with its central planning, 
government knew best approach to economic development.  And it epitomizes 



 

 

all the wrong-headed thinking that you could possibly find, and I'm 
referring to a company called Nabu. 
 
Now Nabu was an investment by the New Democratic government of the day into 
telecommunications, Mr. Speaker.  This was supposed to be their foray into 
high tech.  High tech for the New Democratic Party up to that point had 
been ox carts, Mr. Speaker.  But no, they were taking a quantum leap in 
intellectual assessment of economic development, and they came up with a 
company called Nabu. 
 
Thirteen million dollars in today's dollars that they lost in this 
fly-by-night operation, Mr. Speaker. But you know what was doubly wrong 
about that investment, which was appallingly wrong and tells you how 
wrong-headed they were, Nabu wasn't even a Saskatchewan company.  It was a 
company down in Ottawa, Mr. Speaker.  It was in Ottawa, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now what happened is a whole bunch of these central thinkers on their 
weekly excursion down to Ottawa probably read something.  It only had four 
letters.  Maybe we should invest in it -- we can spell it.  Let's buy 
shares in this.  And now we've got these moneys from the Heritage Fund and 
so let's go and get some of that, and we'll be high technicians here.  
We'll be at the forefront. 
 
So here they are, Mr. Speaker. They don't help the small industry in 
Saskatchewan get started; they bought some.  But where do they go for their 
high-tech investment?  They go outside the province, put some jobs 
temporarily in Ottawa, end up losing their shirt, costing the people of 
Saskatchewan $13 million. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have to take a look at their track record.  And we 
have to take a look at their track record and there are some very, very 
interesting facts.  There was not one paper mill built by a New Democratic 
government in the province, in the history of this province.  There was not 
one pulp mill built by a New Democratic government or a CCF (Co-operative 
Commonwealth Federation) government in the history of this province. 
 
Interestingly enough, there was not one new potash mine built by the New 
Democratic party or the CCF Party.  Now they did, Mr. Speaker, again in the 
central planning wisdom, decide to expand the potash mine at Lanigan which 
was one of the great boondoggles of all time. 
 
They did not build, the New Democratic party did not build one upgrader; in 
all the years CCF-NDP, they never built one, never were prepared to process 
the oil that was in Saskatchewan, never had a commitment to recognizing 
that there is some benefit to the people of Saskatchewan in processing the 
resources here.  The logic is always escaped me as to why that would not 
have been a natural thought of any political party of any stripe in this 
province.  Never, in all the years CCF-NDP, never built one fertilizer 
plant, Mr. Speaker, not one. 
 
So having said all of that, Mr. Speaker, I have indicated that they're 
opposed to nursing home development with a moratorium.  They have said 
publicly, no more hospital institutions.  They have fought 



 

 

decentralization.  They are opposed to the community development bonds.  
Their small industry development was based on sending some money down to 
Ottawa in a fly-by-night operation, $13 million.  They were totally against 
processing the natural resources here in the province.  They never 
developed the natural gas industry in this province, refused to consider 
rural natural gas helping the infrastructure, refused to build individual 
line service, and now they say they are opposed to GRIP and NISA, the farm 
stabilization. 
 
And they try and say -- and they're critical -- that there's no plan for 
hope.  Where was the plan for hope from the New Democratic Party?  It was 
never there.  It was not there when they were in opposition from '82 until 
'86.  It is not there today, Mr. Speaker.  And the track record shows it 
won't be there tomorrow; it won't be there at election time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- And when they lose, it won't be there the day after, and 
it won't be there five years down the road or ten years down the road, Mr. 
Speaker, because the track record and the evidence is overwhelming that the 
NDP never had a plan to develop and stabilize Saskatchewan and never will 
have one, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1600) 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member that preceded me in the 
debate said that she is concerned about the credibility.  For the first 
time, Mr. Speaker, we are going to get a list in this Assembly of the 
number of flip-flops in position of the New Democratic Party in the last 
couple of years, Mr. Speaker.  I think it's worthy of note, I think it's 
worthy to be read into the record, and I certainly believe that it's worthy 
for the people of this Saskatchewan to be aware of some of their positions. 
 
I might indicate . . . because I saw some confusion over there when I went 
through the list, Mr. Speaker, of what the NDP had done.  Some members of 
the New Democratic opposition said, gee I didn't know we said building no 
more hospitals; boy, I didn't realize that we'd said that.  Where did that 
come from? 
 
Well that came from a hospital products and technology conference, 
August-September of 1985 and the quote is, "building more hospitals is not 
the answer". 
 
And that came from the now Leader of the New Democratic Party, the Leader 
of the Opposition opposite, Mr. Speaker.  If you want to know where it is, 
it's public record, public record, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The first issue I'd like to talk about is the NDP talk about deficit 
reduction.  And if the public gets confused as to their plan, I think they 
will understand why, because they have a many-headed monster before them in 
terms of what their position will ultimately be.  They're going to need the 



 

 

election campaign.  I can see what happened, they say they got a plan at 
election.  I can see what'll happen.  They'll drop a couple of suggestions 
down, they'll catch 90 per cent of their candidates by surprise, half of 
the 90 per cent will be disagreeing publicly with what is said. And they're 
going to spend all through the campaign saying, oh you didn't give us a 
chance, you're not giving us a chance, you're not giving us a chance. I can 
see it all now, Mr. Speaker, exactly what happened in the last federal 
election.  Exactly what happened in the last federal election. 
 
Well first of all, the Leader of the Opposition said he's going to 
eliminate the deficit in 15 years.  And then a couple of days later . . . 
I'm sorry, February of 1991 he's going to do it in 15 years.  March 8, 
1990, said he was going to eliminate the $12 billion deficit in 15 years.  
Then he goes up to the SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) 
convention and he said he'd do a $4 billion deficit over 15 years.  Then he 
goes to the chamber of commerce, said that he'll eliminate the deficit in 
15 to 20 years.  And then he goes in Saskatoon to the Star-Phoenix and 
said: I don't think I said that ever. 
 
Well the funny part was, Mr. Speaker, and what is a bit tragic about the 
New Democratic various positions on deficit, is that they will go to some 
meetings, Mr. Speaker, and they'll say the deficit's the problem and that 
they're going to try and eliminate it over 15, 20, 25, 30, 35 . . . I mean, 
let's put off the election for a couple of months and get it up to 50 
years.  Give you more time to put out some figures. 
 
As recently as this session, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition went before the cameras and said, as it applies to SaskEnergy, 
they should increase their debt, increase their debt to pay for pipeline 
expansion.  On the one hand he says he's going to reduce it; and then he 
comes in here and says, oh no, increase the deficit -- increase the deficit 
by $250 million to pay for pipeline expansion. 
 
No wonder, Mr. Speaker, the NDP don't want to talk about what they would 
do.  I could go on -- and the quotes are just about a campaign in 
themselves -- about their position on the deficit.  And the number of years 
talked about are also very inconsistent. 
 
Now let me talk about another inconsistency.  Well when the GRIP program 
came out and the NISA program came out, I've got a quote from the Fort 
Qu'Appelle Times and the Waterfront Press from the New Democratic Party  
 Dcandidate in Qu'Appelle-Lumsden, saying how much the NDP . . . and she 
says we welcome GRIP and NISA.  We welcome GRIP and NISA.  At least it does 
get away from the ad hoc pay-outs which come later than hoped for.  So 
that's what they said.  That's what they said publicly.  And I'm sure we've 
got candidates, New Democratic Party candidates all over the place, that 
said exactly the same thing. 
 
What happens in the session?  What happens in the session?  The Leader of 
the Opposition comes up and says we're going to scrap the GRIP and NISA and 
we're going to renegotiate GRIP and NISA.  He's going to scrap it, throw it 
out.  On the one hand they say they wanted it and welcome it, and a month 
later they say they're going to scrap it and renegotiate it. 



 

 

 
Talk about flip-flops, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  That is two.  The first one is 
their inconsistencies, fundamental inconsistencies on the deficit, and now 
their fundamental inconsistent position on the farm safety net programs. 
 
So then, Mr. Speaker, they called for a moratorium on farm debt.  And 
that's what they said.  They've gone around and said we've got to have a 
moratorium on farm debt.  The credit unions would be protected, which is an 
interesting comment in itself, because they hold much of the debt out 
there.  So if you're only going to put it on the banks, I think you should 
say so.  Or if you're going to put it, and you're going to give the money 
back, you should say that because one's another expenditure that we're 
going to have to add to the list.  But a very inconsistent position. 
 
Then what happens during the budget debate.  The Leader of the Opposition 
then gets up and says, our idea of a moratorium won't work anyway.  And 
those are not my words.  Those are not my words, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  So on 
the one hand they call for a moratorium, then they say it won't work 
anyway.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is the third fundamental inconsistency 
and flip-flop that I've named today. 
 
So then, Mr. Speaker, we have the call from the member from Prince Albert, 
who stood up and called in the city of Prince Albert and across this 
province for a revival of the land bank.  He wants the land bank brought 
back.  And he said that on March 19, 1990.  And the farmers heard it across 
the province.  Bring back the land bank, says the NDP member from Prince 
Albert.  But what in 1990 did the Leader of the Opposition say?  At a 
meeting of farm women in Fillmore he said the land bank was a failure and 
wouldn't be repeated.  Who do you believe from the New Democratic Party?  
They've got two positions on the land bank -- for it and against it.  
There's not many other positions they can take, Mr. Speaker.  They've got 
it covered.  So now that's four contradictions and flip-flops, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So then we've heard for a number of years a very heavy dedicated political 
attack on the Weyerhaeuser pulp mill.  They were against it, and the paper 
mill they were against it -- they said so in this House -- we shouldn't 
have built it.  They attacked the Weyerhaeuser family personally in this 
House.  And now what happens, Mr. Speaker.   Now what happens after 
attacking it and saying they didn't want it.  One of the NDP members of 
Prince Albert says, well it's not an issue in Prince Albert any more.  I 
guess it's okay.  I guess we'll keep it.  We won't tear it down.  So that's 
now five, Mr. Speaker.  That is five flip-flops -- the deficit, the farm 
safety net programs, the moratoriums, land bank, Weyerhaeuser. 
 
And let's go to Saferco, let's go to Saferco.  They've attacked Saferco, 
the fertilizer plant, day after day after day in this Assembly and in most 
parts of the province.  They're opposed to processing natural gas here to 
make fertilizer.  Saskatchewan has more farm land than any other 
jurisdiction in Canada.  We should have been the first jurisdiction, first 
province to have a fertilizer plant, not the last.  It's being built, Mr. 
Speaker, over the objections of the New Democratic Party who have said they 
are opposed to it, opposed to dealing with Cargill. 
 



 

 

But oh no, very recently they go and talk . . . November of 1990, one of 
the members from Moose Jaw -- fortunately he's here and knows of what I 
speak.  I'm not getting a lot of concern; kind of likes the deal now as a 
matter of fact.  So now at least some of them are in favour of the Saferco 
deal, Mr. Speaker.  At the same time others are going out attacking it, 
saying they would scrap it.  So now that is number six.  That is six 
flip-flops. 
 
Let's go to number seven.  We can talk about . . . Oh I've got a long list, 
Harry; don't give up on me yet, please.  Harry, I have such a long list; it 
took me so long to prepare these lists of flip-flops, I've got to give 
them.  I've got to give them on the record.  I know the public are 
interested. 
 
And we look at Gainers.  Now, Mr. Speaker, members on this side of the 
House have sat through some pretty vicious debates, very strong debates, 
about how bad Gainers is in the city of North Battleford.  And now, 
contrary to what Hansard says, the member from The Battlefords now says on 
November 1, 1990, NDP member says, I've never been critical of Gainers, he 
said -- never been critical of Gainers, he said.  Fought it in the last 
election; opposed it in this House; goes to Prince Albert and said, well 
Gainers is all right.  That's another.  That's number seven, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let's talk about the GST and the E&H (education and health) 
tax harmonization.  And let me quote, let me quote.  We had the statement 
in this House by the Finance critic, the hand-picked Finance critic of the 
New Democratic Party, personally chosen, hand-picked Finance critic -- 
recently yanked Finance critic in the budget debate -- but hand-picked 
spokesman on financial matters for the New Democratic Party.  They chose 
the most knowledgeable person over there to deal with Finance, and the one 
who understood financial matters.  And that's what the leader said. 
 
Well let me quote the Leader of the New Democratic Party in an NDP news 
release on October 3, 1990, and it goes on: the fairest and most sensible 
way to proceed would be to harmonize the two sales taxes.  That's what the 
New Democratic Party leader says, the Leader of the Opposition said on 
October 3, 1990.  In this House the hand-picked Finance critic says, if 
there's got to be two taxes, they should be harmonized.  That's what they 
said. 
 
And that's what they had said consistently for nearly two years, Mr. 
Speaker.  Today they stand up and say, oh no, we may have said that we were 
in favour of harmonization, but somewhere we changed our mind.  We're not 
sure.  It depended who we talked to last, and today now we're going to try 
and convince the people of Saskatchewan that we've changed our mind.  We're 
opposed to harmonization because we're going to fight this to the death, 
they said. 
 
They're going to delay the House, stall the House, whatever they're going 
to do.  It's the mother of all battles, I think they've called it on 
harmonization.  When in fact, Mr. Speaker, on public record on numerous 
occasions, the New Democratic Party had said they favour harmonization of 



 

 

the provincial sales tax and the federal goods and services tax, Mr. 
Speaker.  That's number 8. 
 
I talked about the deficit.  I talked about the deficit and the New 
Democratic Party's position of . . . now it says increase the deficit of 
SaskEnergy.  And I'll quote what the Leader of the Opposition said. 
 
More debt would be one way . . . Sees no problem with the Crown corporation 
going into further debt to finance pipeline expansion. 
 
(1615) 
 
Then, Mr. Speaker, how do some of their key supporters, the trade union 
movement, get any sense, Mr. Speaker, of what the New Democratic policies 
are, because out in rural Saskatchewan the Leader of the New Democratic 
Party says labour's going to have to pay for that debt and that deficit.  
And that's what the farmers were told publicly.  Publicly, they were told.  
But oh no, at the federation of labour convention, the Leader of the 
Opposition changes his mind and says:  oh no, not labour, not you guys.  
Labour doesn't have to pay for it.  I was wrong in Harris.  I've changed my 
mind.  I've changed my mind, says the Leader of Opposition. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, and I'm going to quote because the hon. member from Moose 
Jaw didn't hear it: we've got to sacrifice and that means business and that 
means labour, and that's what he said about paying the deficit.  Then the 
headline -- I won't use it -- labour makes NDP leader back down.  Another 
flip-flop, Mr. Speaker, that is number 10. 
 
And then we go to the question of trade offices.  Do the NDP favour trade 
offices or don't they favour trade offices?  The NDP candidate in Indian 
Head-Wolseley said he would shut down the trade offices; that's the NDP 
policy.  Now the Leader of the Opposition, the Leader of the New Democratic 
Party says now he's not so sure; he'd have to take a look at them.  Changed 
his mind; flip-flopped on the policy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we talked . . . the NDP have said, oh there would be no more 
political appointments because the Tories use political appointments; the 
NDP won't have political appointments.  But I urge all hon. members to take 
a look at the Leader-Post of March 1 where the leader says, won't rule out 
appointments, that he won't rule out appointing former NDP MLAs to 
government agencies, boards, and commissions if his party forms the next 
government. 
 
That's what the policy is of March 1, which is completely contradictory to 
the long-standing policy of what's been stated in this House and around the 
province from time to time.  That's number 12, Mr. Deputy Speaker -- 12 
changes, inconsistencies in policies. 
 
Well let me take another one because it is of significant interest to a 
major industry in this province.  It's the oil and gas industry.  Well the 
headline in the Leader-Post, Wednesday, October 17 is, "NDP hopes to make 
energy policy attractive."  He says the NDP hand-picked Energy critic would 
support a price-sensitive royalty structure with special encouragement for 



 

 

projects using techniques for enhanced oil recovery.  "There are ways in 
which (and I'm quoting) . . . There are ways in which we (the NDP) can use 
royalty holidays."  That's what they said, speaking to the oil and gas 
industry. 
 
But oh no.  Oh no, Mr. Speaker.  On March 12 the deputy leader of the NDP 
says that oil revenues are now going to be up and they're going to pay for 
the farm safety net programs.  They're going to look at the resource sector 
for taxation to pay for the schools.  They're going to look at them to pay 
for the agricultural support programs. 
 
The member who preceded me in debate said the oil companies had a nice time 
under the Conservative government.  We would look to the oil companies and 
change the oil royalty structure.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is 13 
flip-flops, changes in position, inconsistent positions by the New 
Democratic Party. 
 
Now what is interesting about all of these, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that 
these are not minor policy items.  Many of these policy items that I've 
talked about are fundamental to the economic growth, fundamental to the 
governance of this province.  They're basic policies that political parties 
must have stands on, must have positions.  And I've tabled 13 different 
ones of fundamental basic policies that the NDP has taken at least two 
positions on each one. 
 
And that's why the people of this province believe and say -- and New 
Democrats from one end of this province also say -- that they have no 
policy and they have no plans, Mr. Speaker.  I believe that I have proved 
beyond any doubt, Mr. Speaker, what the people are saying is right, and 
that is that the New Democratic Party have no policy, no plans, no vision, 
no sense of direction for the future of this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- There are a lot of things they're not telling the hon. 
member from Humboldt.  They've kept his head in the sand for quite a while, 
Mr. Speaker.  They're obviously keeping it there because he is not 
listening and getting what he's being told.  Do your own, I suggest.  Don't 
take what they're telling you from the top, fellows, because not only are 
you missing . . . 
 
You know, the other interesting thing, Mr. Speaker, and I can say this and 
I know this is the last budget debate I'll participate in.  But in my years 
in politics in this province, one thing that the NDP always prided 
themselves on were policy development.  The one thing that you could always 
count on, and I remember some leaders in that party over time said, it's 
the biggest problem we've got.  Everybody in the New Democratic Party wants 
a policy.  They all want to speak to policy.  The annual conventions were 
vigorous debates on policy.  It used to be the rule in Saskatchewan that if 
you got two democrats together, they'd have a fight over policy, Mr. 
Speaker.  And they used to pride themselves on the political debate 
internally in the policy development process. 
 



 

 

What's happened over the last five years?  What's happened over the last 
five years to the New Democratic Party in its policy development?  
Obviously, Mr. Speaker, they have lost that will to generate policies.  
They've lost, Mr. Speaker, I suggest for whatever reason, they have lost 
the ability to develop policies. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, maybe the NDP are a reflection of the uncertainty that's 
out in the world today of an increasingly complex society, of people having 
difficulties assessing policy, having difficulties seeing and accepting 
answers to some complicated problems, hoping for simplistic answers, 
knowing that they're not there.  Maybe the NDP reflects the uncertainty in 
the people. 
 
That is all the more reason, Mr. Speaker, for political parties of any 
stripe to stand up and say to the people: here is where we're going; here's 
what we believe in; here are our policies; here is where we want to take 
you if we're given the opportunity and responsibility of governing.  That 
is what an honest political party, a true political party should do in 
these times, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- And all we are seeing from the New Democratic Party is 
confusion, disarray, uncertainty, inconsistency, Mr. Speaker.  They don't 
have a policy because they can't make up their mind. 
 
We may get a bit though, Mr. Speaker, a better sense.  I think we are.  
People of Ontario are certainly getting a better idea of the "what if" NDP 
government.  You know next week the eyes, I suspect, of a lot of people 
interested in politics in Saskatchewan are on the Ontario government.  Now 
never in the history of this province, in this country, has a government 
elected with a majority fallen so quickly from favour as the New Democratic 
government in Ontario.  People in Ontario are putting their heads down and 
saying, Lord, let this pass from me.  Let the next four years go so quickly 
so we can get rid of the New Democratic government of Ontario.  They are 
fed up with them after six or seven months of an NDP government in Ontario. 
 
Not only are they fed up with them, Mr. Speaker, the ultimate shame of the 
people of Ontario, they are embarrassed by the government that they have in 
Ontario.  As one political observer says in Ontario: it's a cabinet and a 
government made by Planters.  It's a can of mixed nuts down there, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- It's a can of mixed nuts.  I mean the first thing the new 
Premier of Ontario does is bring in an early retirement program.  Two 
cabinet ministers have retired already, another one's under investigation, 
and one MLA has been kicked out already. 
 
Now wait, Mr. Speaker.  That's only their first six months.  They've just 
begun to roll.  They've just begun to roll, Mr. Speaker. 
 



 

 

I predict, Mr. Speaker, and I believe the NDP inherited a deficit of $500 
million in Ontario when they took office.  I'll predict that the next 
deficit of the Ontario government is going to be bigger than the total 
budget of the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  They will have missed 
it by several thousand times, Mr. Speaker.  That's what'll happen.  And 
that's what people know will happen with NDP governments in other 
jurisdictions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, more people are leaving Ontario than left Saskatchewan in the 
Depression.  The tragedy, Mr. Speaker, the tragedy is that the people 
leaving Ontario are not coming into the rest of the country; they're going 
to the United States.  And that's a national tragedy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I always get a kick when we talk about population loss in the 
province and some of the statistics that are thrown around.  But the 
interesting thing about the population today and the population when the 
next election is called, in spite of five years of very difficult 
agriculture, in spite of recession, Mr. Speaker, in spite of grasshoppers 
and drought, there are still 20,000 more people in this province today than 
when this government took office in 1982, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- And I'll tell you, they wouldn't have been here under an 
NDP government because you wouldn't have had the resource processing, the 
small business, the community development bonds, the farm safety net 
programs.  And I could go on and on and on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But what's one of the other things?  The Government of Ontario.  You know, 
a lot of Canadians, and I think certainly on this side of the House, we 
take some pride when we take the oath of allegiance.  We've never seen that 
as something politically wrong.  We think that that's pride that we swear 
allegiance to the Queen and to the country.  And I think most Canadians 
feel that way, that they take some pride in being able to take that oath of 
allegiance. 
 
What's one of the first things that the NDP do in Ontario?  You don't have 
to take the oath of allegiance to be appointed in the province of Ontario 
any more because the NDP took away the requirement of swearing the oath of 
allegiance, Mr. Speaker.  Talk about support for institutions of this 
country.  The Government of Ontario is destroying the fundamental 
institutions of this country.  And, Mr. Speaker, I would predict that that 
is a belief held by many New Democrats who serve, who want to be government 
in various jurisdictions in this province, in this country. 
 
 DMr. Speaker, now in Ontario, they've raised the welfare and thrown the 
money around that the statistics show and the writers are saying that in 
the province of Ontario you have to be earning $45,000 a year.  If you're 
earning less than that in the province of Ontario, you're better off on 
welfare. 
 
Is that the type of government that the people of this country want 
spreading beyond the borders of Ontario?  Well I say no.  I believe the 



 

 

people of this province are going to say no.  I believe that these beliefs 
that welfare should be better than work is not a belief of the people of 
Saskatchewan.  I believe that. 
 
(1630) 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I happen to believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the people 
of this province believe that the oath of allegiance means something, and 
something important.  And scrapping the oath of allegiance is not an idea 
or a proposal we want here in Saskatchewan.  And I believe most of us in 
this party, all of us in this party, and I believe most fair-minded people 
will fight to keep that oath of allegiance as a very basic principle in 
this province and this country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP talk about taxes.  And I would sure like, Mr. Speaker, 
to put some of the NDP positions on taxes again before the people and 
certainly before this Assembly. 
 
The NDP . . . I've talked about harmonization and how they favour one tax.  
That's their stated policy; they're now trying to change it.  But they also 
. . . Mr. Speaker, let me talk about death taxes, inheritance taxes, 
succession duties.  And do you know what, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . no, no, the hon. member says, oh, she doesn't favour 
it.  I've gone through a list of nearly 15, where members of your party are 
taking totally different positions. 
 
Let me tell you what one of the federal New Democratic Party members from 
the province of Saskatchewan says, Simon de Jong, NDP MP (Member of 
Parliament) for Regina-Qu'Appelle, in a householder distributed last 
spring, says: we should bring back the taxing of estates, inheritance, or 
by an annual tax on net wealth.  That's what the federal NDP said in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Don't tell me they don't favour succession duties.  Do you want to know why 
they won't say what their plan or policy is?  Because they're afraid to, 
Mr. Speaker.  They either, Mr. Speaker, have to admit they don't have one, 
or face that they have their hidden agenda, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And let me go with what the NDP in Ontario say.  A succession duty, Mr. 
Speaker, and they want to bring it back and they want to put it on small 
businesses and farms, Mr. Speaker.  So the inheritance tax is part of the 
NDP belief, philosophy, and proposals. 
 
And let me talk about payroll taxes.  That's a tax.  I mean the more people 
you hire, the more tax you're going to pay.  I mean there's something 
illogical about a payroll tax.  I would think that anybody that believes in 
economic development would accept that there is a fundamental error in the 
rationale for a payroll tax.  When you're trying to create jobs and get 
people to create more jobs and businesses to hire more people, you want to 
encourage that.  I mean, that just makes sense to me and I think it makes 
sense to most people in this province. 



 

 

 
Well what did the NDP do in the Government of Manitoba?  They brought in a 
payroll tax.  The more people you hire the higher your tax would pay, 
eventually you hire fewer people, put them out of work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me go through the NDP tax positions.  They've taken two 
positions on harmonization, talked about succession duties, and their 
position here in Saskatchewan and in Ontario, and the NDP payroll tax in 
the province of Manitoba.  Well, Mr. Speaker, we've said that we'd put back 
the gas tax, and it's very interesting, Mr. Speaker.  The NDP said it 
should have been there all the time.  They criticized us for taking it off 
in the first place -- very, Mr. Speaker, very inconsistent positions.  I 
also find it interesting, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP don't want to talk 
about things like succession duties and inheritance taxes and payroll 
taxes. 
 
Well let me tell you what is the topic of conversation across this 
province.  What is the topic of conversation across this province is how 
the New Democratic Party can ask to be government when it has no policy 
plans or it has a hidden agenda which goes contrary to the interests of the 
people of this province . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- And it's contrary, I suggest, to the very fibre of the 
people of this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, that what I've seen over the last while and 
fortunately -- it took a while but the polls are now giving me some 
comfort, Mr. Speaker . . . that the the NDP have no plan, no policies.  In 
today's complex society, Mr. Speaker, it is no longer good enough for 
governments to be or parties to be inconsistent, contradictory, and 
illogical, as the NDP are, Mr. Speaker.  The people demand, are asking, and 
are asking for more, Mr. Speaker.  I say it's not good enough for the NDP 
to have that position.  It's not good enough in this highly complex society 
with increasing change and rapid change.  Mr. Speaker, it's no longer good 
enough for any political party to waffle about its programs and try and 
hide behind positions and hide positions from the people. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it's epitomized, it is epitomized . . . and I say it's no 
longer good enough, Mr. Speaker, for leaders of any political party to 
refuse to debate on issues like agriculture, as happened.  The Leader of 
the New Democratic Party wouldn't participate in the Wheat Pool debate on 
agriculture, wouldn't participate in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix forum on 
the rural way of life. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of this province are demanding more.  They're 
demanding it from this government.  They're demanding it from the New 
Democratic Party.  They're demanding it from the Liberal party.  And, Mr. 
Speaker, the only party that has stood up before the people of this 
province and said we have a plan, a direction, we have a vision for this 
province that will mean hope for the people of this province, opportunity 
for the people of this province, jobs for the people of this province, 



 

 

stability for the farmers is the Progressive Conservative Party of 
Saskatchewan.  And I'm proud to support this budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well, Mr. Speaker, if things are 
as good for the Conservative Party as the previous speaker said they are, 
then I just can't quite figure out why we're late in the fifth year of 
their mandate and they haven't called an election yet.  And his last two or 
three comments were . . . he said, well we have plan, we have a program.  
But you know what? He spoke for almost an hour and didn't say one thing.  
He talked character assassination; he talked about Ontario and Manitoba.  
He gave a political speech that sounded just like he was in opposition, 
where the people are going to put them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Right where the people are going to put them, because the 
people aren't treating them like government.  The people are treating them 
like opposition and they're acting like opposition.  They're not leading, 
they're floundering. 
 
He failed to talk about his programs, but he gave a tremendous personal 
attack on the Leader of the Opposition, and that's the strategy of course.  
Of course the strategy is to attack the Leader of the Opposition personally 
because the Leader of the Opposition is so far out ahead that they're 
striking him from behind.  That's what he's doing. 
 
And I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, I couldn't help but notice how the Minister 
of Justice looked so relaxed and calm and getting into his speech with a 
smile on his face.  Why?  Because he don't care any more.  He's gone.  He 
jumped ship and he's swimming to shore, but he's leaving the rest of his 
comrades to sink.  Or maybe not, maybe they'll all quit; who knows.  If 
they don't quit, they'll be quit by the people. 
 
But I'll tell you, he can jump ship, feel relaxed, get his reprieve from 
the death sentence set by the people of his province, but he will never 
hide because, I'll tell you, the legacy of that member, Minister of 
Justice, and his colleagues and the Premier of this province, will not be 
struck from the record of this province in its entire history because it 
has created chaos.  It has created hardships.  It's created a situation in 
Saskatchewan where people are literally walking away because they can't 
stand this government any more. 
 
That legacy will not be struck from the record and that legacy will be in 
very bold print in the history of this province.  And that is the reason 
that the last time there was a Tory government they weren't here for 40 or 
50 years, and after this Tory government they're not going to be back for 
40 or 50 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk today about several topics.  First I want to 
start with some of the things in my own constituency that are being 
effected.  I notice again in this budget, this government has cut back the 



 

 

funding to PAMI -- the Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute. 
 
I can remember back in 1988, Mr. Speaker, when this government, this 
Premier, the Minister of Agriculture, tried to do away with PAMI.  And if 
it wasn't for a bold and brave fight put up by the people of Humboldt and 
the opposition and all of the other people who are interested in seeing an 
institute in rural Saskatchewan providing jobs, that Premier, that Minister 
of Agriculture and his party would have taken away PAMI out of Humboldt, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But there's been a great revelation, Mr. Speaker.  There's been a great 
revelation even though again the budget is cut, another chipping away at 
the Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute, creating more instability. 
 
The revelation is that all of a sudden this government says, well we're 
going to put people in rural Saskatchewan.  They're going to put people in 
rural Saskatchewan with their big fair share offering.  That's the fair 
share offering.  They put in an office in Watrous, Saskatchewan.  Mind you, 
the lease in that office is only for six months so I'm not sure what the 
terms of reference is for the people who are working there. 
 
This government is playing politics, playing politics with the lives of 
people -- the heartless government that Saskatchewan has.  Because on one 
hand they're trying to take things out of rural Saskatchewan and on the 
other hand they're saying we're going to have this fair share idea because 
we think it's a good political ploy and we're going to tell people there's 
going to be 100 to 200 towns that are going to get government offices and 
create employment. 
 
But what did they do a year ago in Humboldt, Saskatchewan?  They privatized 
the SaskPower maintenance crew.  Five families, Mr. Speaker.  And all of a 
sudden now, oh no, we're going to put offices in rural Saskatchewan.  Well 
that's hypocritical.  That's totally hypocritical.  And as a matter of 
record, there have been over a thousand jobs lost in rural Saskatchewan -- 
over a thousand government jobs lost in rural Saskatchewan.  And now 
they're saying they're going to put them back. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that is why nobody in this province believes this 
government.  That is why the Minister of Justice makes an opposition 
speech.  He doesn't talk about the long-term plan.  It's all short-term 
political patchwork to try to salvage a government that is floundering and 
sinking and drowning in the sea of contempt that people have for them. 
 
Another thing, Mr. Speaker.  I can remember not too many months ago there 
was a great big sign in front of the Humboldt hospital.  There was going to 
be a big renovation project.  And mysteriously the sign, half of it was 
knocked down not too many months later.  And now the hospital board in 
Humboldt are having great difficulties negotiating with the government. 
 
If they're so concerned about putting families and workers in rural 
Saskatchewan, what's the hold-up?  Not only would it provide the 
health-care services that are necessary to keep . . . the changes that are 
necessary to keep the hospital operating, it provides the health-care 



 

 

services.  It provides jobs for many people in the area.  And they think 
people are going to believe that fair share is anything but a political 
plot to try to re-elect themselves?  Of course they won't. 
 
And then there's the Watrous hospital.  Well I'll tell you the little story 
about the Watrous hospital.  They moved the machinery on to build the new 
Watrous hospital a couple of days before the last election.  Well it didn't 
work then, and it won't work again because every year they've cut back on 
the hospitals.  They've cut back staff and services.  And they're saying 
they want to build rural Saskatchewan.  They say one thing and they do the 
opposite. 
 
(1645) 
 
And then when the Premier comes into Regina and talks to the people in 
Regina, he says well we're not going to do this very fast.  It'll be about 
the same pace as we've done it over the years.  Well that was about one a 
year.  But he runs out to rural Saskatchewan and says we're going to have 
100 to 200 departments in towns out here.  Who would believe it, Mr. 
Speaker?  Who would believe it? 
 
So there are many, many things that the government is trying to do, but 
every one of them is to try to save their political hide because the people 
in Saskatchewan have been touched.  And this is what this government 
doesn't understand.  The longer they postpone the election, the more 
people's lives are being affected in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And every time a life is affected in rural Saskatchewan, they look at the 
government and ask why are you doing this to me?  Why are you doing this to 
my neighbours, and why are you doing this to my community?  That's the 
question.  And as time goes on, more and more people are being affected. 
 
But here is the big plan.  Just think of it.  We have farm families with 
record numbers being forced off the land, although the Premier says 
everything's fine.  He's done everything he could.  He's given out whole 
bunch of money; everything's great.  Farm families being forced off the 
land, moved into the cities, towns and cities, eventually many of them may 
even move out of the province.  But he's forcing farm families off the land 
into the cities, where they don't want to be.  And now he's telling the 
people in the cities through his so-called fair share, we're going to take 
you, put you out in the country where you don't want to be -- all the while 
affecting, directly affecting the lives of working people.  And this is the 
legacy and this is the downfall of this government.  They have no 
compassion for people.  They have no idea how to treat people in any other 
manner than to get themselves re-elected. 
 
But it doesn't work, Mr. Speaker.  It won't work because the people of 
Saskatchewan understand the heartlessness of this government.  They 
understand the hurt of moving off farms.  Neighbours understand when one 
family leaves, it's one less family for the community.  And they rally 
around the neighbours, and we've seen several farm gate defences, several 
attempts to keep neighbours on the land.  But does this government do 
anything about that?  Absolutely not. 



 

 

 
Oh, but the Premier, he keeps his own land deals going, I'll tell you, Mr. 
Speaker.  The Premier, he seems to manage to get some . . . in times when 
many, many people are losing the land, the Premier seems to be acquiring 
it.  Now isn't that funny? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- At fire-sale prices. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Acquiring it at fire-sale prices, as my colleague says.  
Absolutely. 
 
I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, there's a story behind this.  Farm Credit 
Corporation has a fund to fund all transactions that put a parcel of land 
in a deficit situation to the Credit Corporation.  So if there's a 
transaction and land is devalued, then the Farm Credit Corporation fund 
picks it up.  The transaction where a farmer can't make his . . . if he's 
renting the land and he can't make full rental payments, the Farm Credit 
Corporation fund makes up the difference. 
 
So anybody who is involved in a land flip or a write-down can access this 
fund.  That is not a widely known fact, Mr. Speaker, because very few 
farmers know about this.  I've talked to farmers who found out about it, 
that there was a fund available, after they'd gone through the process.  
Did the Premier know about this?  That's my question.  Obviously a Premier 
or Minister of Agriculture, he would know about this.  There are advocate 
groups running around telling people about this fund now and trying to 
explain that they have options. 
 
I ask you this question, Mr. Speaker, and the people of this province and 
the government opposite, why did the Premier of Saskatchewan, the Minister 
of Agriculture, not take it upon himself to familiarize the people of 
Saskatchewan in financial difficulties, losing the land, with a program 
that was available when he accessed it, when he got the benefit of it? 
 
I say that that is not very honest.  I say that when Farm Credit 
Corporation holds nearly 70 per cent of the land in Saskatchewan held by 
institutions, nearly 700,000 acres held by Farm Credit Corporation, this 
Premier, this Minister of Agriculture has a duty, has a responsibility to 
ensure that the farm families of Saskatchewan know what our programs are 
provincially and federally.  He failed to do that for the people of 
Saskatchewan.  Mind you he spent millions of dollars on advertising his own 
government and his own department, millions of dollars telling how great 
things were, but he didn't tell people how to access a program. 
 
And that is not right.  And I'll tell you that is why the people of 
Saskatchewan don't trust him. 
 
But anyway, Mr. Speaker, the minister managed to figure out a way how to 
acquire land at a time when a lot of people are losing their land.  Isn't 
that odd.  He can lobby for himself, but he doesn't lobby for the people, 
the other farmers of Saskatchewan. 
 
And let's take it one step further.  Let's take it one step further.  Look 



 

 

at the budget prepared and presented to this House.  Is there one inkling 
or one suggestion of a debt restructuring program?  Not one hint of a debt 
restructuring program that the farmers have been crying out for, for years 
and years. 
 
And everybody knows that you have to balance your income with your debt in 
order to survive.  This government's taken an approach where debt doesn't 
matter.  It's only income that they're worried about.  It won't work.  It 
won't work for most people but it seems to be working for the Premier, 
seems to be working for the Premier.  Debt restructuring seemed to fall in 
his lap quite conveniently. 
 
But what about the other people who are losing their land, Mr. Speaker.  
What about the other people whose families are being forced off, who are 
going through tremendous emotional crisis?  The Minister of Agriculture, I 
say, has no heart.  And if he did he would not be continuing this type of 
action.  He would let everyone know what all the programs are and not just 
take advantage of it himself. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to turn now for a minute to the GRIP program.  This is 
a program brought forward by the government -- Canada, Canadian government 
and the Saskatchewan government.  The GRIP program that was supposed to be, 
as promised, a long-term income safety net program.  Well I'll tell you we 
have not seen it because it's failed as a long-term program.  There will be 
in the short-term, no doubt, two or three years there'll be some pay-outs, 
substantial premiums and some pay-outs. 
 
But they say the program has to be actuarially sound.  If you start 
figuring out, Mr. Speaker, how many dollars over the first two or three 
years that will be spent, and then think that the program has to be 
actuarially sound, I'll tell you it will be a good many years of farmers 
paying high premiums and no return if they say this program is going to be 
actuarially sound.  And they know that.  That's why, again, it is a 
short-term program. 
 
We have seen a series of meetings around Saskatchewan this spring, 
tremendous amount of expense.  Here again a government that is spending 
millions of dollars on promoting itself, and that's what these meetings 
were for.  They were getting very good turn-outs to the meetings.  The 
government interpreted it as being supportive.  Well I suppose they would 
like to think it was being supportive, people were being supportive, but 
I'll tell you, they weren't very supportive when they left the meetings, 
especially those people who went to three or four or five, up to seven or 
eight meetings, those people that I've talked to, who followed them around.  
Information from one meeting to the next -- and the associate minister sits 
over there and smiles -- information from one meeting to the next was 
changing. 
 
And at those meetings, one of the main points that this government brings 
out is that the GRIP safety net program was developed by 19 producer groups 
in conjunction with the government because they wanted . . . try to let 
people think that it was the producer groups who developed this program.  
Well we have seen many disclaimers by producer groups, because there's been 



 

 

80 to 100 changes since last October when the producer groups no longer had 
input into the program, Mr. Speaker.  And farmers came away confused.  They 
wondered why the information was being changed from day to day, from 
meeting to meeting. 
 
The question I ask, Mr. Speaker, is: if this government was serious about 
bringing forward a program, a program that would really help farmers, they 
could have done it long ago.  But you see, they spend taxpayers' dollars 
with how many meetings -- I just forget the total number -- but many, many 
meetings around the province, and did it accomplish anything?  They thought 
they were going to accomplish a spontaneous mood in the country; this was 
going to be their saviour, their re-election plan. 
 
But it failed on them.  It failed because they got caught in their own trap 
of deception trying to fool people, giving us information that was maybe 
accurate one day but inaccurate the next day.  And so people don't trust 
the program.  People say, well no.  I've talked to hundreds of farmers who 
say, you know, first couple of years, sure I'm going to get some money.  
But if I can afford it, I won't go in the program.  So then the government 
got the message.  People weren't accepting the program as readily as they 
thought they might. 
 
So what do they do?  Instead of trying to clear up the program, laying it 
out in point form exactly what the rules were, no, they didn't do that, Mr. 
Speaker.  They say, well we're going to get these guys.  We're going to 
force them into the program. 
 
So then comes along the third line of defence announcement, third line 
defence that was supposed to be . . . Now just let me read here.  This is 
from the document -- and I'll be using this quite often -- Report to the 
Minister of Agriculture: Grain, and Oilseeds Safety Net Committee.  And I 
quote, "The third line of defence represents a systematic approach to 
events which are beyond the scope of the first and second line programs". 
 
That's the definition.  It's pretty clear.  The committees made it very 
clear the first line was the farmer's income off his grain.  The second 
line of defence was a long-term safety net program and the third line was 
independent of line one and two -- special occasions when the income was so 
low that there needed to be a boost.  And this is what farmers needed this 
spring, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Not only did they need it this spring, it was the Associate Minister of 
Agriculture, the Premier, the Minister of Agriculture and all his 
colleagues running around the province saying, we need cash; we're going to 
go down and get cash. 
 
Then the announcement comes.  Farmers were expecting some money to bridge 
the gap to the fall when the GRIP program would begin.  What did they get?  
They got let down totally.  And if these members and ministers of this 
government would have enough courage to go out to rural Saskatchewan and 
listen to what the farmers are saying, they would know just how badly that 
was accepted.  And the farmers weren't being greedy.  All they wanted was 
to be able to put a crop in.  What about those people, Mr. Speaker, who are 



 

 

going to be forced off the farm? 
 
Now just a minute.  This is a government that was saying they've got a 
safety net program that is going to help farmers.  I say for two or three 
years, yes but long term, no for many reasons. 
 
But let's just say that this program were to work.  What about the farmer 
who is going to be forced off the land this spring?  What about the farmers 
whom I've heard about who have fuel bills from last year to pay and won't 
be able to get fuel this year possibly?  What about the people who are 
going to be forced off?  This government is denying them the right to 
access a program that they say is going to keep them farming. 
 
Had they brought forward a third line of defence, a payment like they said 
they were going to, those people would be able to stay on the farm, for a 
few years anyway.  But they refused to do that, Mr. Speaker.  They refused 
to do that because the whole program is designed to try to re-elect 
governments, and this is the plot that's starting to develop. 
 
I don't know if you heard, Mr. Speaker, on the CBC (Canadian Broadcasting 
Corporation) radio the other day.  I was driving in my car and I heard the 
Minister of Agriculture say this.  He said, well you never know, with Mr. 
Mazankowski as Finance minister, with Mr. Clark as high portfolio, with Mr. 
McKnight as Agriculture minister, well you never, he says, maybe we'll have 
enough influence to get some more money for farmers.  You never know. 
 
So when do you think -- is it possible, Mr. Speaker? -- when do you think 
this possible payment might be?  Is it now in the spring when farmers are 
desperately crying out for a few dollars to put their crop in?  No.  If 
there is a payment, and I suspect there might be because that's the modus 
operandi of this government, it'll be right in the midst of an election. 
 
The Speaker: -- It being 5 o'clock, the House stands recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


