





























































Hansard: April 11, 1991


 

 

April 11/91 
 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Introduction of Pages 
 
The Speaker: -- Before we begin today's business, I wish to take the 
opportunity to introduce to the hon. members the pages who will be serving 
you during this session: Miss Nathalie Bellerose, Denise Kinney, Gary 
Merasty, Adnan Qayyum, and Laura Robinson.  Please welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: -- According to order, I have reviewed the following petition that 
was presented at the last sitting of this House under rule 11(7), and it is 
hereby read and received: 
 

 Of certain residents of the province of Saskatchewan praying that the 
Legislative Assembly may be pleased to urge the provincial government to 
reverse its decision to relocate the Saskatchewan Liquor Board from its 
present location in the Market Mall to a new location on 8th Street, 
Saskatoon. 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 

Special Committee on Rules and Procedures 
 
The Speaker: -- I wish to take the opportunity to read to the hon. members 
the first report of the Special Committee on Rules and Procedures.  I also 
wish to bring to your attention that I'm going to read the report, which is 
several pages long, not only for the benefit of members but for the benefit 
of the viewing audience, since the proceedings today will be of an unusual 
nature.  Therefore if you will indulge me, I wish to read their report to 
you. 
 
As chairman of the Special Committee on Rules and Procedures, I hereby 
present the first report of the committee, which is as follows: 
 
On December 19, 1986 your committee received an order of reference which in 
part gave instructions to examine such matters as it deems advisable with 
respect to the rules, procedures, and practices of the Legislative 
Assembly.  The committee was also instructed to include in its report, 
drafts of proposed rules to give effect, if adopted by the Assembly, to any 



 

 

change or changes that may be proposed by the committee. 
 
Among the matters considered by the committee has been the process for 
election of Speaker.  Saskatchewan, like many jurisdictions in Canada, has 
a long practice of the Premier nominating the Speaker from the ranks of the 
government side of the Assembly by means of a substantive motion.  Unlike 
most other jurisdictions however, Saskatchewan does not have a tradition of 
consultation with the opposition prior to the Premier making his 
designation. 
 
The process of members voting for or against the motion constituted what 
has been traditionally called the election of Speaker.  It is worth noting 
however, that the process does not stem from the Assembly's standing orders 
but from a practice inherited from the Canadian House of Commons, which in 
turn took its practice from Great Britain. 
 
In fact the practice was handed down to the Assembly of the Northwest 
Territories through the statutory stipulation that "The Legislative 
Assembly on its first assembling after a general election shall proceed 
with all practicable speed to elect one of its elected members to be 
Speaker."  The provision for an elected Speaker was subsequently carried 
over from The North-West Territories Act to The Saskatchewan Act of 1905 
and then incorporated into successive Legislative Assembly Acts so that it 
survives today intact, exactly as drafted over 100 years ago. 
 
While the Speaker is technically the choice of the House, it is evident 
that in current practice the position is awarded at the discretion of the 
Premier.  This being true, it might be asked why the word "elect" remains 
at all in The Legislative Assembly Act, and not simply replaced with the 
term "appointed". 
 
In historical terms the reason Speakers have continued to be elected is to 
symbolize one of parliament's earliest assertions of independence. 
 
In the 17th century parliament's struggle with the sovereign for 
independence came to a climax, and it was during this period when the 
Speaker ceased to be merely the king's minion.  To demonstrate its 
independence, parliament refused to accept the king's nominee for Speaker 
and established the right to choose one of its own.  Today the election of 
Speaker continues to be such a fundamental declaration of parliament's 
independence that it is repeated at the beginning of each legislature and 
is contained in statute.  This is the reason why the election of Speaker is 
so important, but it doesn't address the process of election which has come 
into question. 
 
It is noteworthy that the model of Saskatchewan's practice for the election 
of Speaker, the Canadian House of Commons, has in recent times found cause 
to break with its own tradition.  In 1984 a Special Committee on the Reform 
of the House of Commons proposed that the Speaker should cease to be 
nominated by the prime minister and that he or she should be elected by all 
members by secret ballot. 
 
The House of Commons committee report pointed out that the Speaker is a 



 

 

servant of the whole House, not a servant of the government nor of the 
opposition.  The Speaker is not only the House's presiding officer but its 
head of administration and representative in all matters, with the effect 
that the Speaker is actually the embodiment of the House's prestige and 
authority. 
 
The committee concluded that to perform this role the Speaker must enjoy 
the full trust and confidence of the House.  Therefore it was recommended 
that the Office of Speaker would be better served if the House exercised 
more direct control over the nomination of candidates for the speakership.  
Accordingly in 1986 rules and procedures were adopted and the House of 
Commons elected a Speaker by secret ballot for the first time. 
 
The House of Commons in Ottawa is not the only jurisdiction to elect its 
Speaker by secret ballot.  Since 1937 Australia House of Representatives 
standing orders have provided procedure for the election of Speaker by 
secret ballot.  More recently the Northwest Territories has elected its 
Speaker by secret ballot, and in 1989 Ontario also adopted rules for the 
election of Speaker by secret ballot, which were first used in October of 
1990.  Presently Newfoundland is considering rules for a similar process. 
 
The committee recognizes that in the past Saskatchewan Speakers have worked 
very hard and successfully to uphold the important tradition of 
impartiality and dedication to the Legislative Assembly.  None the less it 
must be also recognized that under present practice the impression of the 
Speaker's independence is sometimes tarnished by a government's influence 
in the selection process.  In difficult situations, particularly during 
times when political stakes are high, it is vitally important that the 
Speaker have the trust and support of all members.  When the manner in 
which the Speaker came to occupy the Chair comes into question, this of 
course makes the job of Speaker doubly difficult and does nothing for 
members' respect for the position. 
 
It is your committee's view that, as rare as such situations may be, the 
Office of Speaker would be enhanced and better respected if members had a 
more direct role in the actual selection of their Speaker.  It is your 
committee's view that it is time the independence of the Office of the 
Speaker is enhanced so that the occupant of the Chair is better able to 
fulfil his or her important duties. 
 
Therefore your committee recommends that the method of selection be changed 
to provide for a Speaker elected by all members by secret ballot.  The main 
features of this new process include: all members except ministers and 
leaders of recognized political parties are eligible for election; an 
eligible member can become a candidate by filing a written declaration with 
the Clerk; the vote would be conducted by secret ballot; a candidate must 
receive a majority of votes cast to be elected; the Clerk of the 
Legislative Assembly will preside for the election. 
 
These principles are incorporated in the rules your committee recommends 
for adoption as attached in the appendix to this report. 
 
It is now my duty and pleasure to table the report of the committee. 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It's very much my 
pleasure this afternoon to speak to the tabling of this report, and at the 
conclusion of my brief remarks I will be moving a motion that this report 
be concurred in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am part of the Rules Committee, the Special Committee on 
Rules and Procedures.  I've served in that capacity for some time.  And I, 
together with members on the government side of the House and members from 
the opposition party, have been pleased to review the general rules and 
proceedings of this Assembly.  We are pleased to bring forth this day a 
report from this committee that in essence puts a historic change into the 
way we conduct business in this legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, traditionally your role, the role of Speaker, has been an 
appointed role.  I believe that it has served the people of Saskatchewan 
for a good many years.  I think it's served the people well.  But I also 
say, Mr. Speaker, that these are changing times, and things and ways that 
we have conducted business in the past do not necessarily present the best 
method of conducting business in the present and in the future. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think this is just a prime example of a reform per se 
that this legislature, on behalf of the people in Saskatchewan, should 
undertake. 
 
Mr. Speaker, your role is a role that at times can be difficult.  You are 
an officer not necessarily of the government, not of the opposition, but an 
officer of this legislature.  You have conducted that role I say extremely 
well.  I believe Speakers before you have likewise done admirable jobs. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the time has come now when I think the public of 
Saskatchewan, the public of this country, and other jurisdictions, are 
saying let us change the way we do things; let us have democratic reforms.  
You simply have to open up a newspaper, watch the television, turn a radio 
on, and you will see, Mr. Speaker, that people all over the world are 
asking for reform of institutions. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, that this movement today is symbolic of a changing 
mood amongst the populace in Saskatchewan.  You may ask, Mr. Speaker, or 
others may ask, well is this reform limited to election of a Speaker?  I 
say no, Mr. Speaker, that we should reform a number of things. 
 
In our Rules Committee, if you take note of the issues we have discussed, 
you will find a large number of reform category issues that I believe 
should also be changed.  I speak of length of speeches in this legislature; 
I speak of ringing of division bells in this legislature; I speak of 
procedures for calling of quorum, procedures for presenting petitions -- 
simply, the operations of this House. 
 
If I was going to make a prediction, Mr. Speaker, I would predict that in 
the not distant future, you will see rules, procedures, and courses of 
actions dramatically changed in this House. 
 



 

 

Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I think what we have just witnessed, the 
concurrence of the opposition that rules and procedures in this House will 
change, is heartening to see.  It is not always that we get agreement from 
government and opposition.  And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, in all 
sincerity, that I applaud members of the opposition for having the courage 
to adopt this rule change, for having the courage to commit in this 
session, yet to make further changes to the rules and proceedings. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I say from the government perspective that you will see 
not only this change of electing a Speaker, but in short order, with 
concurrence of the opposition, changes in other respects that I have 
mentioned before -- ringing of bells, length of question period, petitions, 
hours of operation.  You will see many of those changes, Mr. Speaker, and 
it's my pleasure to be part and parcel of this historic day when we change 
from an appointed Speaker to an elected Speaker. 
 
I would at this time, Mr. Speaker, like to move, seconded by my colleague 
from the constituency of Moosomin: 
 

 That the first report of the Special Committee on Rules and Procedures be 
now concurred in. 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, as chairperson for the Rules Committee, 
I'd like to take a few moments to speak of our concurrence with the report.  
When it comes to electing the Speaker in the Saskatchewan legislature, we 
think it's an important move. 
 
But I want to say as well, Mr. Speaker, that no one should be fooled by 
what's happening here today in terms of the election of the Speaker.  I 
know that all members of the Assembly will agree that here in Saskatchewan 
the move to elect the Speaker, I say again, is an important move in terms 
of opening up and making the House more democratic, I guess, as a principle 
that is well worth moving towards.  And the previous speaker spoke of a 
changing world, and I believe in fact that this is recognition of how the 
world here in Saskatchewan is changing. 
 
But I think it's important to recognize as well that there are many areas 
where that change is long overdue.  It's interesting that on day 68 or 69 
of the last session of this government would be the time, the opportune 
time to make even this small but important change. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say that accountability, open government, is 
important.  And I want to let the people of Saskatchewan know and the 
members of this Assembly know, that in the Rules Committee that has been 
meeting for the past two years on a not-so-regular basis, but a number of 
times since 1989, that a number of changes have been proposed by the New 
Democratic caucus in the Rules Committee.  I guess I would say I would be 
sorry if I didn't mention the fact that a number of changes that have been 
proposed by the opposition have been turned down by government members, 



 

 

that would have gone a long way to opening up the process. 
 
I want to say that several of these positions that were proposed even as 
late as last week were not accepted by government members.  First of all, 
we proposed a lengthening in daily oral question period; secondly, 
requiring the government to respond in a timely way to questions that 
members put to government members.  We all know the long delays that are 
taken both in written questions, in answering them, and also in oral 
questions that are taken notice of. 
 
The third main point is enhancing the important role of private members.  
We offered up a solution whereby members of both the opposition and 
government on a daily basis would be allowed a period where they could 
bring directly to the House statements on behalf of their constituents.  
That too was turned down by government members. 
 
The fourth main point that we thought was important, Mr. Speaker -- and I'm 
sure that you would understand and respect this position -- is also the 
election of the Deputy Speaker.  In this Assembly, as in all assemblies, we 
know that Mr. Speaker is a very busy person and therefore often has to be 
away from the Assembly.  I don't know what the percentage of time would be, 
Mr. Speaker, but probably 30 or 40 per cent of the time the Deputy Speaker 
is in the Chair. 
 
We will now be in the interesting position, as a result of the government 
turning down our proposal to elect the Deputy Speaker, of having an elected 
Speaker for 60 per cent of the time and an unelected or appointed Speaker, 
appointed by the Premier, 40 per cent of the time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I say again, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately, that the 
government members on the Rules Committee refused to adopt these proposals.  
However we remain hopeful, as the minister has indicated in his speech, 
that the government will move quickly to accept these changes. 
 
And I think it's important to know that if the rules are not accepted now, 
another proposal, I guess, that would work would be if the rules were 
agreed to now to be implemented immediately after the next election.  I 
think there's something to be said about changing rules that will apply 
when the new government takes over, whatever political stripe that would 
be. 
 
I think it's not appropriate that this government would, on the final days, 
as if in deathbed repentance, move to pretend that after nine years they 
suddenly believe in open and democratic government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to say that for Saskatchewan 
people we all know that in our free and democratic society that government 
members must themselves respect the law.  People therefore become deeply 
concerned by a government which attempts arbitrarily, above the law, for 



 

 

example to privatize SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) and then are 
refused because they are not following the laws of the land. 
 
And if we're talking about open government, we not only have to change 
rules that make this place work better, but also governments must follow 
the laws that they set out.  People are generally concerned when reforms 
should make government more democratic and accountable.  Saskatchewan 
people are fully prepared to accept the obligation and responsibility of 
democracy, but at the same time they demand the corresponding right of 
democracy. 
 
That also means of course, the right of elected representation in this 
Assembly.  People are concerned when constituents become vacant because 
MLAs (Members of the Legislative Assembly) resign, and then remain vacant 
for more than 15 months. 
 
Now I say that it is important that we elect a Speaker.  But I say to you, 
when you have 40,000 voters in this province unrepresented for up to 15 or 
16 months, the cynicism of the public rises because they know the 
government needs no rule changes in order to elect members to those four 
vacant seats. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people also want a 
fundamental institution, governments to be more open.  They are concerned 
that major tax increases and hundreds of million dollars in spending are 
carried out behind the closed doors of cabinet, not because we can't call a 
session in earlier, but it's the political intent of the government to 
avoid the scrutiny on their spending and tax increases before the public.  
We don't need rule changes to bring the House back in to approve the 
spending.  All we need is the commitment and will of the government.  I say 
people want open government and a government that will open up the books to 
the public. 
 
Above all, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people want the government to be more 
accountable.  They want it to be more accountable for the tax increases 
they impose on Saskatchewan families.  They want it to be more accountable 
for how it spends those tax dollars.  They see the media reports about the 
provincial deficit of more that four and a half billion dollars and they 
demand answers to the question, where did all the money go? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- That is why Saskatchewan people want democratic reform 
that would strengthen the Provincial Auditor, require public release of 
SaskEnergy annual reports, and provide for a longer, more efficient 
question period. 
 
Those are just a few examples, Mr. Speaker, of specific proposals that have 
emerged from our work on democratic reform that was released by our critic, 
who has done a great deal of work over the past four years, and I want to 
congratulate him for that. 



 

 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Finally, Mr. Speaker, it should be emphasized that 
such reforms would help improve management in government and help 
government to avoid or prevent costly mistakes, and I won't list them out 
here.  Such democratic reforms would help government to become more 
effective and more efficient.  In short, such democratic reforms would not 
cost money, Mr. Speaker, in fact they would save a great deal of money for 
Saskatchewan taxpayers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, it is important that any 
proposed changes to the Rules and Procedures of the legislature be 
developed in a spirit of these basic principles: democracy, openness, and 
accountability.  We now have before us one such proposal.  It has been 
unanimously endorsed by both parties in the House and I invite all members 
to join in adopting it. 
 
I am hopeful that in the days ahead significant rule changes and democratic 
reforms will be developed, mutually agreed by both parties, and adopted by 
this Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, this is truly an 
historic moment for Saskatchewan.  And I'm very proud and pleased and 
honoured to be a part of the moment in the discussion taking place this 
morning regarding the election of a Speaker -- indeed honoured to second 
the motion presented by my colleague, the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the motion presented this morning, as my colleague has 
indicated, is just part of an overall reform that this House, I believe, 
that since being elected first in 1986, must and should see in the near 
future.  And as was indicated by the member opposite, Mr. Speaker, there 
certainly are, there is room for a number of changes, changes that I 
believe could be brought into effect in this House that would make it more 
effective and a more efficient place for government and how it operates.  
And certainly a number of the initiatives that have been put forward by 
both sides are no way lost, in the fact that the Rules Committee isn't 
sitting exactly today, but, Mr. Speaker, will be addressed in the near 
future.  In fact, I would suggest that now is the time that we look at 
those rules. 
 
As we sat the first time back in 1986 or 1987, Mr. Speaker, when you look 
at it, it's easy to become very partisan, and for one party to take the 
credit or suggest that the rules should be changed just for our benefit.  
The fact that we would look at rule changes and bring them into effect at 
the closing of the session or towards the end of a particular government 
and allow the next election to take place with all parties involved, 
knowing that the rules are going to change, is, I believe, the most 
effective and the most appropriate time for rule changes to be made and to 



 

 

be brought into effect. 
 
However, as the public is asking more accountability from government, they 
not only talk about accountability from the elected government, but the 
elected government is made up of government and opposition.  So I believe, 
Mr. Speaker, it means all members of this Assembly.  We are all accountable 
to the public, both whether we're in government or in the opposition. 
 
For the first time in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, I want to address the 
fact of electing a Speaker.  The Speaker of this Assembly will be 
democratically elected by the members of this House.  Now there are many 
people in the province of Saskatchewan, many people indeed probably across 
Canada that are not really familiar with the workings of this Assembly.  
The election of a Speaker may not seem to be a very important event or of 
very great importance.  But to all members of this House, we, of course, 
realize that it is an important part of our reform policy. 
 
Traditionally, the Speaker's role in the House has always been separate 
from partisanship, and I believe that this policy has held true in practice 
as well as in theory throughout history, no matter which party has been in 
power or which party has been the power of the government of the day.  But 
by reforming the rules to allow election of the Speaker, we are 
guaranteeing that there will be no bias in the future either.  And more 
than that, we are placing the support and trust of the entire Assembly 
behind the Speaker, whoever may occupy the Chair. 
 
So for these and other reasons I believe election of the Speaker is 
meaningful and an important reform, and one that all present here today and 
all Saskatchewan people will support. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people will support this move, just as they have 
supported the many other reforms this government has undertaken since 1982.  
Reforms such as opening the Public Accounts meetings to the public and the 
media, for example -- a situation which, Mr. Speaker, prior to 1982 was not 
available to the public.  Not until this government was elected were the 
public allowed or able to go and observe the goings on in Public Accounts 
meetings.  It took this government to implement this simple, yet important 
reform. 
 
And throughout our mandate we have continued to make changes that make 
government more accessible, open, fair, and effective for the people of 
this province.  Election of the Speaker is just one more part of that 
commitment to reform, and should be seen as a part of the reform package 
that will be presented this session. 
 
Another component will be the freedom of information and protection of 
privacy Act.  This Act, together with legislation to allow plebiscites and 
referendums on important issues, will give the people of this province more 
access to and control over the government than any before. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as far as access to government is concerned, this 
government has done more in that area than any other government in our 
history.  Election of the Speaker gives the people greater indirect control 



 

 

and secures an important parliamentary position. 
 
And for more direct access, Fair Share Saskatchewan will move government 
out of the ivory towers in Regina and out to the communities and people the 
government serves.  And, Mr Speaker, certainly in a number of my 
communities where government services are brought into the city, they're 
certainly looking forward to government services being available even 
closer to home again. 
 
We have already done this with Crop Insurance, Agricultural Credit, 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan, Sask Water, and New Careers.  And the people out 
there welcomed these reforms.  Electing officers of the Assembly, 
introducing freedom of information, letting the people have referendums, 
strengthening the role of the Provincial Auditor, and bringing government 
to the people are things that many people across the province, and indeed 
not just the province of Saskatchewan but Canada and the world, are looking 
for.  More and better reforms all down the line. 
 
And I again remind the members opposite that this government is the one 
introducing many of these reforms.  The fact is that these reforms are what 
the people want.  And they are asking for them yesterday, but more 
importantly today, not tomorrow; and not after the election, but now.  And 
certainly desperately casting about for any possible criticism that can be 
found is nothing more than political posturing -- posturing that is 
wasteful, counter-productive, and has no relation whatever to the problems 
that members here were elected to deal with. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the reforms we are presenting, like election of the 
Speaker, do address the issues that are important to Saskatchewan people.  
Electing the Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I believe makes good . . . and it's good 
common sense. 
 
The Speaker of any governing body in the democracy must represent the 
entire elected Assembly, no matter which party is in power.  He or she must 
be seen as impartial, concerned only with administering the rules and the 
regulations of this Assembly.  As I said before, I have every reason to 
believe that this has always been the case in this House. 
 
Certainly while I have been here, the member from Last Mountain-Touchwood 
has executed his duties in an exemplary fashion.  You have done in fact 
such a fine job, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: -- . . . that I fully expect to see that you would allow your 
name to stand for election of being the first elected Speaker of this 
Assembly.  But by changing the rules so that all members elect the Speaker, 
the office's impartiality will be preserved for all time in Saskatchewan.  
That can only benefit not only this legislature but everyone in the 
province of Saskatchewan.  No matter how you look at it, this reform 
undertaken at this time is a good move for we in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 



 

 

Mr. Speaker, I fully support the change.  I will be voting in favour of the 
motion and encourage all members of the House to do the same.  Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swan: -- Mr. Speaker, it's indeed my privilege this afternoon to speak 
to this motion.  At the outset I would like to say to you and to all of the 
members of this Assembly that it is indeed an honour and a privilege to 
speak in this historic debate dealing with a rule change that will for the 
first time elect a Speaker for this House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I speak in this debate because I feel that the position of 
Speaker often is not recognized as much by the people around the province 
as it should be.  This is indeed a very important position in the operation 
of the Government of Saskatchewan and the operation of this legislature.  I 
want to assure you, Mr. Speaker, that it's very important that this 
legislature take time today to move in this direction and to make this rule 
change. 
 
I know, Mr. Speaker, that you have been in this Chair now for a number of 
years, since 1986, and you have done a commendable job of being Speaker of 
our legislature.  But I believe that it will only be strengthened by the 
fact that we elect the Speaker and that that position then will have more 
authority and more respect in the years to come.  It's just one of the 
changes that our government is moving to make -- and it has made a number 
of reforms over the term of being government -- but I believe this is one 
of the very important ones. 
 
When we first came to power in 1982, we moved at that time to open the 
Public Accounts Committee to be a public committee.  Now, Mr. Speaker, that 
may not seem a big change to some, but I sat in that committee for a number 
of years prior to 1982 and indeed I chaired the committee, and the 
government of the day would not allow that committee to be open to the 
public.  The news media was not allowed to come into the committee.  And it 
was indeed a move in the right direction to open that committee so that the 
public could see how the expenditures of government were being accounted 
for by the government and to the public.  That's indeed very important, and 
one that I think will be appreciated by the news media and appreciated by 
the public.  So it was opened and has continued to be open to this day. 
 
During the same period of time, we've put television in this Chamber, Mr. 
Speaker.  It had been talked of prior to 1982 but had never happened.  And 
so in 1982 the House here came into the position of having television to 
televise all of our operation of the legislature.  A very important move, 
Mr. Speaker, and it was a leading edge for legislatures across our nation 
and indeed across the world. 
 
Many people have visited Saskatchewan to observe the type of television 
operation we have, and in many cases have gone back to their own countries 
and have followed the example that we have used.  One that I would indicate 
to you who did exactly that was Australia.  They were building for the 
future of their country a brand new facility, a new legislature.  And 
they've built it; they've incorporated into it almost identical television 



 

 

equipment to what we have here, and that House has operated with that since 
that time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you announced the rule change today to the Assembly, I was 
very pleased to hear of the change and to have the opportunity to speak to 
it.  I want to inform you how much I appreciate the work that you, as the 
member for Last Mountain-Touchwood, have done through the years that you 
have been Speaker.  And I believe that your constituents can be justifiably 
proud of the way that you have handled the job and how you have indeed 
operated this House in a very democratic fashion. 
 
Having had the honour to serve as Speaker of this Assembly for a period of 
years, I appreciate perhaps more than most people the job that you have to 
do and the difficult position that you are many times placed in.  And I 
believe, Mr. Speaker, that you have carried that job well and your 
constituency should be justifiably proud. 
 
As we come to the election of Speaker, I am trusting that you are going to 
put your name forward as a candidate.  And I'm sure, Mr. Speaker, that this 
House will reaffirm the position that you have done a good job and will do 
a good job for us again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm indeed pleased today that the parties on both sides of 
this House have indicated their support for this rule change.  And as we 
move forward now to elect our Speaker, I look forward to this method being 
continued now and on into the future.  It will only be for the betterment 
and for the democratic process of our government and the Government of 
Saskatchewan in the years to come. 
 
Thank you for the opportunity of sharing in this debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I would also like to at this time move a 
very routine motion that will in effect have this new procedure, that this 
House has unanimously adopted, printed in our rule book.  And I would like 
to move, seconded by my colleague from the constituency of Moosomin: 
 

 That this Assembly approves and adopts the amendments to the Rules and 
Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan as they appear in 
the appendix of the first report of the Special Committee on Rules and 
Procedures of the Legislative Assembly; 

 
 and that the Rules and Procedures as amended shall come into effect this 

day; 
 
 and that the Clerk and the Speaker be instructed and authorized to 

supervise the printing of the first report of the committee and the 
reprinting of the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly as 
amended and that they shall have such numbers of copies printed as deemed 
to be necessary for the service of the Legislative Assembly of the 



 

 

province of Saskatchewan. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

RESIGNATION OF THE SPEAKER 
 
The Speaker: -- Before proceeding to the next order of business, I ask the 
indulgence of the House to make a personal statement. 
 
Today the Legislative Assembly has taken an important first step in 
reforming the procedures of this House.  A new process is now in place for 
the election of Speaker by secret ballot.  Both sides of the House have 
declared their support for these new rules and for the principles reflected 
in them.  It is highly desirable that all members of the Assembly freely 
participate in choosing the member who is to serve as their Speaker. 
 
To enable the Assembly to use this new process for the first time, it is my 
intention to resign from the Office of Speaker effective at the adjournment 
of the sitting day. 
 
Accordingly the election of Speaker by secret ballot will take place when 
the House convenes tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
I also wish to announce that it is my intention to allow my name to stand 
as a candidate in the election of Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on Monday, next 
move: 
 

 Whereas strongly noting the commitment of the Government of Canada to 
provide a third line of defence as part of the complete farm safety net 
package recently negotiated by the Premier of the province, and whereas 
recognizing the urgency for farm families that the nature, extent and 
timing of this third line of defence be known, and whereas pursuant to the 
commitments made by the federal ministers, both in Saskatchewan media and 
in the House of Commons, that this Assembly now therefore calls upon the 
Government of Canada to honour these commitments by announcing the details 
of the third line of defence and urges that the government include 
sufficient funding to provide Saskatchewan farmers with the assistance 
desperately needed for their income stability. 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, speaking of 
the need for greater democracy --and that is important -- I give notice 
that on Friday next I shall move first reading of a Bill to amend the 
Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Acts in order to require that 
by-elections be held within six months of a vacancy.  Thank you very much. 
 



 

 

Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(1445) 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure today to introduce to 
you, and through you to the members of the Assembly, His Excellency the 
Ambassador of Sweden, Ernst Andres, who is sitting in the Speaker's 
gallery, and Mr. Ernst Keller, the Consul General of Switzerland in 
Toronto.  This is His Excellency's first official visit to the province of 
Saskatchewan.  While in Saskatchewan, he will meet with the Lieutenant 
Governor, the Speaker, and with the Departments of Agriculture, Trade and 
Economic Diversification. 
 
I might add, Mr. Speaker, that His Excellency and I had a very good meeting 
yesterday with respect to GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) 
negotiations, the various kinds of things we can look forward to in terms 
of the role that two countries like ours are involved with, with respect to 
food prices, agriculture prices, and more farm stability both in Western 
Europe as well as in North America. 
 
So I would ask all members to please welcome His Excellency and the Consul 
General of Switzerland to the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it is my 
pleasure to rise and to introduce in your gallery, sir, delegations from 
the constituencies of Kindersley, Indian Head-Wolseley, Turtleford, and 
Souris-Cannington, Mr. Speaker.  These constituencies as you know have been 
vacant from 16 to 9 months, and I think their presence here today is a 
reminder of that to us.  I'm pleased to have them here and I invite all 
members to welcome our many guests, and I invite our guests to stand and be 
welcomed by the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order, order. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I recognize 
in the east gallery two elected executive members and two staff members 
associated with the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour, which members of the 
House will recognize represents some 70,000 organized working men and women 
from every community across the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask the members of the Assembly to recognize the 
president of the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour, Barb Byers; the 
treasurer, Dave Maki; and staff persons, Don Anderson and Ted Boyle.  If 
they'd please rise and be recognized by the members of the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 



 

 

 
Introduction of the Provincial GST 

 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, on February 
20 of this year, this unpopular government opposite here, announced by 
press release what probably is Saskatchewan's largest single tax increase, 
the provincial GST (goods and services tax).  They did so, Mr. Speaker, not 
in a budget; they did so not in the legislature, but they did it by press 
release. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier is this: is it not correct that you 
deliberately chose to do it this way, namely to avoid the legislature, to 
avoid the public and the press because you know full well this tax is 
wrong, unfair, and unnecessary, especially if you'd cut your own government 
waste in order to get the funds? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, I will acknowledge that the pre-budget 
announcement in February was somewhat larger than has been the practice of 
pre-budget announcements in prior years.  The reasons for making the 
announcements that we did in February were twofold. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, we wanted to give business people across 
Saskatchewan the necessary lead time to do whatever technical changes they 
might have to their computers and cash registers to be ready for the tax 
change on April 1. 
 
And secondly, as it relates to the announcement of grants to major third 
parties -- that being schools, universities, hospitals, rural 
municipalities, urban municipalities -- for some time when this cabinet and 
caucus has met with school boards, hospital boards, nursing home boards 
across Saskatchewan -- we hold meetings outside the capital -- they have 
constantly, since I've been a member at least, been asking for that kind of 
early notification.  A number of other provinces do that.  We too, Mr. 
Speaker, recognize the validity of their arguments.  It allows them to do 
better planning.  And given that this year there are modest increases, I 
think that made sense, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question, and I direct it to the 
Premier, the person in charge of this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance, in his attempt to explain what was 
done, says that this information had to go out early so that the business 
people and others would know about it.  I say, Mr. Speaker, that there's a 
better way and a proper way to do it, especially on this day when the 
members opposite are heralding democratic reform, and that is to have 
called the legislature to have announced this tax increase. 
 



 

 

Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Instead, Mr. Speaker, we've had government budget by press 
release; in effect we have tax increase by stealth.  My question to the 
Premier is therefore the following: what legal authority do you have to do 
it this way, by press release; what legal or moral right do you have to act 
in such a high-handed and arrogant manner outside the legislature?  Table 
your legal opinion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, the process relative to the legislation 
for these tax changes will be the same as it has always been.  Whether the 
announcements are made inside the House, Mr. Speaker, or outside the 
legislature, the practice always has been, and I suspect will continue to 
be, that a Minister of Finance announces a tax change.  Very often it's 
effective midnight that day, and then a month or two, or two weeks or four 
weeks down the road, the legislation comes forward, is debated, and passed.  
That's been the procedure in the past; that will be the procedure again 
this time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  Order, order. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I have a new question 
to the Premier, and I really do implore the Premier to take responsibility 
of this government and to answer the question. 
 
His Minister of Finance says that it's very common for tax changes . . . 
tax increases to be announced outside the legislature.  He full well knows, 
the Premier does, that tax increases and tax changes are announced on 
budget day and are subsequently ratified by legislation, but that it is 
very uncommon and very unprecedented to have tax increases announced this 
way by this government in this high handed and arrogant fashion.  The 
Premier knows that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- I ask the Premier to table his legal authority for doing 
this which he has done, namely imposing such a high, unfair tax which is 
going to affect all the farmers, the small-business people, and the 
labourers.  Please tell us, Premier, how you do it.  Why do you do it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, in so far as precedent for tax 
changes being announced outside the legislature, I would maybe remind the 
hon. member, who I think at the time was House Leader and Deputy Premier, 
in 1976, Mr. Speaker, what happened and what tax change was announced then 
outside the House.  And I only use this by way of example to answer the 



 

 

hon. member's question because there are a number of examples I could draw 
on. 
 
To set the stage, Mr. Speaker, on or about December 8 in 1976, about six 
days after the legislature shut down that year, guess what the Minister of 
Finance of the day did six days after.  He announced a five-point increase 
in income tax effective January 1.  The House was not sitting.  Whoops, I 
forgot.  Now they had been sitting all fall.  They had been sitting all 
fall under the guidance of that member as House Leader and Deputy Premier, 
then all of a sudden six days after the House shuts down they say, whoops, 
I forgot to tell you about a tax change effective January 1.  What 
hypocrisy, Mr. Speaker.  What hypocrisy. 
 
 DSome Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  I'd like the hon. members to refrain 
from interrupting, and especially the Minister of Justice, I would like to 
ask him to refrain from interrupting. 
 
Order, order. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I note again that 
it's the Premier who refuses to answer these questions, and I suspect for 
good reason.  Because at least the Premier knows that he does not have the 
courage to make the kind of misleading statements that the Minister of 
Finance has just finished doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Yes, I have it right here too.  Mr. Speaker, in 1976 the 
tax arrangements which were announced were the result of a 
federal-provincial negotiated, yes, EPF (established programs financing) 
arrangement, and they resulted in a zero tax increase, and not an increase 
like these people opposite have done.  Zero.  Zero increase. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, unlike the largest tax increase in the history 
of the province of Saskatchewan by the Premier opposite.  I ask the 
Premier, Mr. Speaker, this question specifically.  I ask the Premier, today 
we have representatives from four constituencies; they have no MLAs and 
representation; they have no voice; what about taxation without 
representation?  What gives you the right in your fifth and last year of 
government to impose this outrageously high and unfair tax on the farmers 
and the working people of Saskatchewan?  What gives you the authority? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, unfortunately the hon. member's 
recollection of history isn't as good as maybe it should be.  The reality 
is the federal tax change, Mr. Speaker, didn't come into effect until April 
1, and this tax change was made effective for January 1, Mr. Speaker, and 
that it was necessary to increase taxes -- to quote them. 



 

 

 
The essential argument here, Mr. Speaker, is I don't think there is an 
argument between either party about the necessity to harmonize the tax 
base, Mr. Speaker.  No question.  I mean that's been well stated by both 
sides of the House, Mr. Speaker, inside and outside the legislature.  
There's no question that raising taxes are not popular and some sectors are 
particularly hard hit. 
 
But the reality is, Mr. Speaker, if we're going to make it simpler for the 
business person and the consumer, and if we're going to back up the rural 
economy for the good of the entire Saskatchewan economy, these kinds of 
changes are necessary, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question and I'll try one more 
time, I suspect in vain, to the Premier, who is frankly ducking out of his 
responsibilities here, and I'm very sorry about that.  It seems that the 
Premier is leaving it entirely to the Minister of Finance, but I'll try one 
more time as a new question to the Premier, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has no game plan, they have no credibility, no 
mandate to tax, tax, tax.  Mr. Premier, you could have found the money if 
you needed to by means other than huge and unfair taxes, but you chose not 
to do it.  If you can't or you won't do it, why not shelve this tax until 
the voters elect a government than can do it the right way? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member talks about 
credibility and talks about shelving the tax, but the reality is, in this 
legislature and outside this legislature they have called consistently for 
the harmonization of the taxes; that there should be one tax base.  It's in 
Hansard here on more than one occasion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There is no division in terms of if the GST is reality, which it is, that 
we should have one tax.  That's been said time and time again by members 
opposite, Mr. Speaker.  That's what we're doing.  Legitimate enough to have 
a debate about the rate and why we left it at 7 per cent. And the reason we 
left it at 7 per cent is we believe in backing up the farmer, the farm 
economy, and if you do so, you'll be backing up the entire Saskatchewan 
economy.  And that's why we're doing it, Mr. Speaker, and we stand behind 
it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Penalties for Non-Collection of Provincial GST 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Just as an aside to the Minister of Finance -- you 
certainly have the farmers in this province backed up all right, backed up 
a long ways. 
 
My question is to the Premier, if he has the courage to answer it.  If not, 



 

 

I assume he will pawn it off.  Mr. Premier, it is obvious to any 
fair-minded observer that this province is on the verge of a tax revolt.  
The public of Saskatchewan are seething with anger at the level of the 
taxes which your government's imposed. 
 
Mr. Premier, the high-handed and arrogant manner in which you flout public 
opinion on the question of taxes is galling enough, but it is unacceptable 
to be imposing penalties for the non-collection of taxes under a law which 
has not been passed.  That is just intolerable, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Premier, my question to you is: is it really the intention of your 
government to haul small businesses into court, to harass them because they 
haven't collected a tax under a law which does not exist?  Is that really 
your intention? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(1500) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, I can only repeat that the process for 
enacting the legislation will be the same as it has always been.  The Bill 
comes forward a week or two or four or six after the announcement has been 
made.  It's debated and it's passed and it's made retroactive.  We've said 
that clearly.  That'll be the case here again in this instance, Mr. 
Speaker.  And that's as the practice has always been and that will be the 
practice again, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- New question, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, I want to read 
for your benefit -- because you seem to need to be reminded -- I want to 
read a passage for your benefit.  And it reads: 
 

 A person charged with an offence has the right . . . not to be found 
guilty . . . of any act or omission unless, at the time of the act or 
omission, it constituted an offence under Canadian or international law. 

 
Mr. Premier, that is section 11 of the Charter of Rights.  Mr. Minister, it 
is true that your government has behaved in office like a rogue elephant.  
You have flouted the Canadian law and Saskatchewan law whenever it suited 
your purposes.  But surely, Mr. Premier, this is different.  Surely when 
you are trampling on the rights of citizens under the Charter of Rights, 
surely that's different. 
 
Mr. Premier, I ask you again, is it really your intention to haul small 
businesses into court, harass them for not collecting the penalty under a 
law which you apparently didn't have the courage to present . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, there will be no change in the practice.  
It will be the same as when the Leader of the Opposition was Deputy Premier 
and House Leader of the day back in '76 in terms of how that was handled.  



 

 

It's the same as when tobacco taxes have changed virtually every year in 
the last 15 years.  The practice will be the same into the future as it has 
been in the past, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- New question to the Premier.  Mr. Premier, perhaps as 
much as anything, what has the public of Saskatchewan so angry is the 
manner in which this whole thing began.  Mr. Premier, it's obvious to 
everyone in Saskatchewan that this tax was not intended as a revenue 
measure.  It was a cheap, crass election gimmick which you did not expect 
to present to the legislature before an election. 
 
Mr. Minister, the election which this measure was designed to serve has 
been aborted.  Won't you agree, Mr. Minister, that you ought to abort the 
child of that and abort this thing as well? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I've been accused of a lot of 
things over the last while, but raising taxes, which is always difficult . 
. . I've never been accused of using that as an election gimmick.  I can 
tell you that much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There's no question that the decision to raise $125 million by leaving the 
rate at 7 per cent . . . we're agreed on harmonization.  What we're really 
arguing about is the rate and by leaving it at 7 per cent this year we'll 
net out and we'll raise $125 million.  Why did this party and this Premier 
and this caucus think it important to raise $125 million, Mr. Speaker?  Two 
reasons. 
 
First of all, it would be irresponsible to let the debt and the deficit 
rise by another $125 million.  Secondly, we need it to pay the bill, the 
premium, that will lever . . . because of this new generation of farm 
programs that our Premier has negotiated, it is necessary to lever $1.3 
billion into this economy.  And that's $1.3 billion that's going to help 
stabilize and revitalize every rural and urban community across this 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Effects of Provincial GST on Border Communities 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to the Premier, 
Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, one of the major negative effects of your unfair 
provincial GST is how it's harming Saskatchewan's retail business people.  
This is particularly evident for those communities near the Alberta and 
international borders who are losing customers because of this provincial 
GST imposed on top of the Mulroney GST. 
 
Mr. Premier, do you have any contingency plans to compensate these 
businesses who are losing business because of your illegal and your unfair 
tax, or are you just going to tell them, tough luck? 



 

 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- I sense from the member's question that he may not 
understand totally how harmonization works, Mr. Speaker.  Because effective 
January 1, '92 -- and one of the reasons for going to this kind of system 
-- is that the business people in Saskatchewan who have been faced with 
Alberta that had no tax, those businesses will now be on a level playing 
field compared to the Alberta businesses.  Through the input tax credit, 
Mr. Speaker, through the input tax credit, they now will see . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order, order.  I'm sure the hon. members are 
having difficulty hearing the minister.  I am.  And I'm sure our guests in 
the gallery would certainly like to hear the debate.  Now I know it's the 
first day back after a long time away from the Assembly, but I'd ask you to 
just refrain somewhat from interrupting too vociferously.  Next question. 
 

Vacant Constituencies in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my question 
is also to the Premier.  And for this question, the Premier is clearly the 
one to respond, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, there are people in the 
galleries today, as have been introduced, watching the proceedings because 
this is the closest they can get to the democratic process, Mr. Premier.  
The people of Kindersley constituency have gone without representation for 
almost 16 months, the people without an elected member; the people from 
Indian Head-Wolseley, almost 15 months without representation; in 
Turtleford, almost 10; Souris-Cannington, almost 9. 
 
In the 11-year history, Mr. Premier, of the previous administration, no 
election vacancy was anywhere close to this length of time.  Is this what 
your government calls a commitment to democratic practice? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the hon. member that in 
talking to the various constituents in a year of an election, that we've 
asked several of them in saying, do you want a by-election and possibly a 
general election at the same time or within months?  And they, Mr. Speaker, 
said look, if it's in a year of an election we might as well . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order, order.  Order.  Order!  We're having 
difficulty in hearing the Premier and we're going to give him the 
opportunity to add to his remarks if he wishes; otherwise we will go to the 
next question.  But we were having difficulty hearing him. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Well thank you, Mr. Speaker; I appreciate you calming 
the House down.  I will just say to the hon. member, in discussing the 
issue of by-elections and general elections with the constituents and the 
people in the ridings that he mentioned, they would say to me, if you're 
going to have a general election soon, then why should we bother having a 
by-election and then have a general election at the same time, Mr. Speaker. 
 



 

 

And what we found out is perhaps that not all would agree, but an awful lot 
of them would say, don't go through the expense of by-elections and then go 
through the double expense of a general election on top of that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  New question to the Premier.  Mr. 
Premier, your cause to reluctance has been that there's no use holding a 
by-election in any of these ridings when a general election would be in a 
matter of weeks.  You started saying that last fall, Mr. Premier.  And I 
don't suppose you've had any requests not to call a by-election.  Your 
interpretation of a matter of weeks has stretched into months and months 
and months, and again the second budget in a row coming within 10 days, the 
people of Kindersley and Indian Head-Wolseley have not had any 
representation, Mr. Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you admit that the only reason the people of these 
communities have been deprived of their most basic right, which is to have 
representation in the Legislative Assembly, for more than a year has been 
that you're afraid to put your record to the test of the people in the 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, as I said before, as we talked to those 
constituents and we said that there may be the possibility of a general 
election as in a four-year term which would have been last fall or this 
year, they said if there's going to be a general election in the next few 
months, then why have by-elections and then force us through another 
election. 
 
So we agreed, Mr. Speaker, particularly during a time of constraint.  And 
the opposition has said, well don't be wasting the people's money; we said 
fair enough, if that's what your wish is, we'll do it all at the same time 
in a general election, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  A new question to the 
Premier.  Mr. Premier, I have given notice today of a private member's Bill 
which would restrict the time a constituency could go unrepresented to up 
to six months.  If you are serious about democratic reform, as you claim 
today, you would see the necessity of this Bill.  We are serious about 
this, Mr. Premier; the people of Saskatchewan need proof that you are. 
 
Will you give this House your personal assurance that you will support this 
Bill and do all that you can to speed up its passage in this House? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member knows that there will be 
an election within the next six months.  He also knows, Mr. Speaker, under 



 

 

the British parliamentary system that it has been in the call of the 
government and the Premier with respect to the general election and the 
date.  Under the American system we know that the date is set every four 
years; you know exactly when it is.  The British parliamentary system that 
we operate under, it is the Premier that will pick and have the opportunity 
to choose that date.  Now, Mr. Speaker, we have looked at the history of 
the British parliamentary system.  I only say to the hon. member in the 
next few months he can rest assured that there will be an election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Supplementary, Mr. Premier.  Will 
you give your personal commitment right now that as soon as question period 
is over, that you will meet with this delegation of people who have driven 
many many miles to come here to express their concern about no 
representation?  Will you meet with them after question period? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, I would say that there is certainly . . . 
the candidates from various ridings are probably in the legislature today.  
I know our candidate from Kindersley, Mr. Bill Boyd, is in the legislature 
and he probably is quite prepared as well to represent the people of 
Kindersley and looks forward to that opportunity.  And, Mr. Speaker, I'm 
sure that all the members of the legislature will be more than too happy to 
participate with the constituents at any particular time, Mr. Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 
Bill No. 52 -- An Act to provide for the Division of Saskatchewan into 
Constituencies for the Election of Members of the Legislative Assembly 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  With leave, I give notice of 
motion to move first reading of a Bill respecting An Act to provide for the 
Division of Saskatchewan into Constituencies for the Election of Members of 
the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next 
sitting. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Constituency Vacancies 
 
The Speaker: -- Before orders of the day, I wish to announce resignation of 
members of the legislature and I wish to . . . It is my duty to inform the 
Assembly of the following vacancies in representation.  In the constituency 
of Souris-Cannington, due to the resignation of Mr. E. Berntson, and in the 
constituency of Turtleford, due to the resignation of Mr. C. Maxwell. 
 
I now lay on the Table the original letters of resignation. 
 

PRIORITY OF DEBATE 



 

 

 
Penalties for Non-Collection of Provincial GST 

 
Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I think I'm going to have to ask the hon. 
members to show some courtesy to the House.  We've had a fairly 
interruptive, if I may put it that way, question period and I believe now 
we're moving to new business, and I'm asking hon. members to allow the new 
business to proceed in an orderly manner. 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Following on today's question 
period in which we outlined the turmoil in which businesses find themselves 
with respect to the imposition of the penalty for not collecting the tax 
under the GST, I move, pursuant to rule 17, that leave be granted to make a 
motion for priority of debate on a matter of urgent public importance.  The 
nature of that motion would be: 
 

 That this Assembly recognize the urgent need for the Government of 
Saskatchewan to table immediately in the Assembly the legal opinion upon 
which it bases its threat to impose, in violation of the Canadian Charter 
of Rights and Freedoms, a fine or penalty on persons who refuse to collect 
the provincial GST before it has been introduced and passed in the 
legislature, and that that now be given priority of debate. 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- The notice regarding this matter, proposed for priority of 
debate, was received by the Clerk's office at 11:47 a.m. today for which I 
thank the hon. member. 
 
I have no doubt in judging this matter to be serious and important and of 
significance to the authority of the Legislative Assembly and to the public 
interests.  The proposed matter is in compliance with the conditions set 
out in rule 17(10). 
 
The question that remains to be addressed is the issue of urgency.  In such 
notices for priority of debate, members must clearly establish the urgent 
need to debate the matter today in order for the Assembly to set aside its 
regular business to debate the matter immediately under rule 17(1).  I 
submit that the hon. member has not sufficiently demonstrated in his notice 
the urgency of debating the issue today. 
 
There are other avenues available to the hon. member.  Rule 39 may be used 
by the member, thereby enabling the question to be debated by the House if 
it considers the question sufficiently important to debate today.  The 
member could also place a motion on the order paper in the usual manner. 
 
I therefore rule that while the question is a matter of substantial public 
importance, the urgency of the issue has not been sufficiently established 
to warrant a debate today, and that there are other opportunities available 



 

 

to the member as mentioned above for this question to be debated. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 39 
 

Penalties for Non-Collection of Provincial GST 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Taking up by your suggestion, 
I'm going to move, pursuant to rule 39, a motion which we regard as urgent 
and pressing.  A brief word of explanation with respect to the urgency of 
it seems to be necessary, although it's necessary probably only to the 
members opposite. 
 
Businesses in this province, Mr. Speaker, are in a turmoil with respect to 
this tax.  They are meeting enormous consumer resistance, and the consumers 
say to them: we don't like the tax, it hasn't been passed by the 
legislature, and we don't have to pay it.  And on all of those points the 
consumer is right. 
 
So far as I'm aware, Mr. Speaker, there is no penalty on any consumer who 
refuses to pay it.  The consumer can tell the business people . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  I believe that now the hon. member is actually 
entering debate, and the remarks must be very brief, as he is well aware.  
I ask him to stick to that rule and then propose the motion so that the 
hon. members know what they are agreeing or disagreeing to. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker, outlining the urgency of it, businesses 
have to know they are being asked now to collect something which they are 
in real doubt about.  The least that this government under its new guise of 
an open government, the least this government ought to do is share with the 
business community the legal basis for imposing this.  We frankly don't 
think it exists, Mr. Speaker.  We have read others who have said the same 
thing. 
 
I'm therefore going to move pursuant to rule 39 
 

 That this Assembly recognize the urgent need for the Government of 
Saskatchewan to table immediately in the Assembly the legal opinion upon 
which it bases its threat to impose, in violation of the Canadian Charter 
of Rights and Freedoms, a fine or penalty on persons who refuse to collect 
the provincial GST before it has been introduced and passed in the 
legislature, and that that now be given priority of debate. 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Leave not granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 
Referral of the Report of the Provincial Auditor to the Standing Committee 
on Public Accounts 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I'd like to 



 

 

move just a couple of motions here.  I would firstly like to move, seconded 
by the Deputy House Leader, the member for Rosthern, by leave of the 
Assembly: 
 

 That the Report of the Provincial Auditor for the fiscal year ended March 
31, 1990 be referred as tabled, to the Standing Committee on Public 
Accounts. 

 
Leave not granted. 
 
The Speaker: -- What's your point of order?  What is your point of order? 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The point of order, Mr. Speaker, I want for point of 
clarification, we have no copies of the report. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Nothing's tabled. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Nothing is tabled as far as the opposition is 
concerned.  So we have a difficult time dealing with the motion being put 
by the minister. 
 
The Speaker: -- In response to your point of order, hon. member, this 
motion is in fact in order.  It's a normal motion moved at the beginning of 
House sittings.  It refers . . . the operative clause or phrase is "to be 
referred as tabled", and therefore when tabled it becomes . . . this motion 
is effective.  However, I might add to the hon. member that later this day 
I'll be tabling it. 
 
Order, order.  Order, order.  Having made that brief explanation to the 
hon. members, I once more ask if they grant leave for the motion. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  Order, order. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Referral of Public Accounts to Standing Committee on Public Accounts 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to move another routine 
motion that is moved traditionally at the start of the session.  And I'd 
like to move, seconded by my Deputy House Leader, the member for the 
constituency of Rosthern . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  Order, order.  Order! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I apologize for the 
technical error in timing, but none the less I would still like to move, 
seconded by the member for Rosthern, by leave of the Assembly: 
 

 That the Public Accounts of the Province of Saskatchewan for the fiscal 
year ended March 31, 1990 be referred as tabled to the Standing Committee 
on Public Accounts. 



 

 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: -- I wish to inform the members of the Assembly that the 
Auditor, Provincial Auditor, has sent me the following letter: 
 

 Dear Sir:  In accordance with Section 14(a) of The Provincial Auditor Act, 
I present herewith my report to the Legislative Assembly for the year 
ended March 31, 1990.  In accordance with Section 14(b) of the same Act, I 
request that you table this my report for the 1990 fiscal year. 

 
I now table the report. 
 

CONDOLENCES 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- By leave of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
move, seconded by the member from Riversdale: 
 

 That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the passing of a former 
member of this Assembly and expresses its grateful appreciation of the 
contribution he made to the community, his constituency, and to the 
province. 

 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

 Edward Milton Culliton, who died in Regina on  
 D March 14, 1991, was a member of the Legislative Assembly representing the 

constituency of Gravelbourg from 1935 until 1944, and again from 1948 
until 1951. 

 
 Mr. Culliton was born April 9, 1906 in Grand Forks, Minnesota, and came to 

Canada with his parents in May 1906.  He grew up in rural Saskatchewan and 
was educated in Elbow.  Mr. Culliton went on to the University of 
Saskatchewan where he earned a Bachelor of Arts and law degree in 1928.  
In 1930 Mr. Culliton was admitted to the bar, whereupon he moved to 
Gravelbourg to practise law. 

 
 In 1935 he launched his political career by winning the Gravelbourg seat 

in a by-election.  In the general election of 1938, Mr. Culliton retained 
the Gravelbourg seat.  Later that year he was appointed to cabinet as 
Provincial Secretary.  In 1939 Mr. Culliton married Katherine Hector of 
Dysart.  He remained Provincial Secretary until 1941, when he resigned to 
serve in the army with the Royal Canadian Artillery as a legal officer.  
Mr. Culliton was posted overseas and remained in the army until January of 
1946.  While in the army he continued to be a member of cabinet, serving 
as Minister without Portfolio.  He held that post until his defeat in the 
1944 election. 

 
 In 1946 Mr. Culliton contested the leadership of the Saskatchewan Liberal 



 

 

Party but was narrowly defeated.  Two years later, in the 1948 general 
election, he was again elected to represent Gravelbourg.  Mr. Culliton 
served as his party's Finance critic until 1951, when he quit politics to 
take up a judicial appointment with the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal. 

 
 During Saskatchewan's golden jubilee year in 1955, Mr. Culliton helped to 

organize various events and celebrations.  In 1962 he was appointed Chief 
Justice of the Court of Appeal and continued in that position until his 
retirement in 1981. 

 
 As the head of Saskatchewan's highest court, Mr. Culliton had a 

distinguished career.  After retirement, however, he continued to serve 
his province in a wide variety of ways.  In 1983 he headed a commission on 
freedom of information and most recently a provincial electoral boundaries 
commission. 

 
 Throughout his life, Mr. Culliton devoted much of his time to volunteer 

work.  He served organizations such as the Red Cross, the Canadian 
National Institute for the Blind, and many others.  Mr. Culliton was also 
a very dedicated Roman Catholic and was recognized by the Vatican, being 
named Knight Commander of St. Gregory the Great. 

 
 Mr. Culliton has been widely recognized for his many contributions to his 

province and country, most notably by being named a Companion of the Order 
of Canada and being named a member of the Saskatchewan Order of Merit. 

 
I know that members of both sides of the House join me in paying a very 
sincere tribute to a great Canadian and this outstanding leader from the 
province of Saskatchewan, this man, Ted Culliton.  Every premier of 
Saskatchewan since William Martin in the 1920s knew Mr. Culliton and valued 
his advice.  Parties of all political stripes recruited him for both 
commissions and inquiries on important matters. 
 
(1530) 
 
Our own government and myself personally were certainly no exception to 
this, Mr. Speaker.  I treasured the opportunity to discuss current issues 
with the man.  I found him wise, objective, helpful, and blessed with an 
abundant degree of common sense.  He knew Saskatchewan and its people like 
the back of his hand and he dedicated his life to their well-being. 
 
I had the privilege of calling on Ted Culliton to be the first chairman of 
the advisory council of the Saskatchewan Order of Merit when it was 
established in 1985.  He was the ideal choice for our new provincial 
honour.  Under his firm and visionary leadership, the order quickly became 
prestigious and respected all across Canada.  It was fitting that he 
himself received the order in 1988. 
 
Ted Culliton, in my view, Mr. Speaker, and I believe in the view of the 
members of the legislature and those who have been members of the 
legislature, will go down in history as one of Saskatchewan's greatest 
sons.  He will indeed be sorely missed by all of us. 
 



 

 

 And in recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, this Assembly 
will express its most sincere sympathy with the members of the bereaved 
family. 

 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise to second the motion 
advanced by the Hon. Premier with respect to the contribution of the late 
Edward Milton Culliton.  The career of Mr. Culliton, as described by the 
Premier, is certainly one of outstanding service to the people of this 
province and, I would say, to the people of Canada. 
 
This was truly a unique person -- a prairie jewel, if there are these 
things, and there are these things in actual life.  In certainly human 
terms, that was the case with Mr. Culliton.  He glittered in everything 
that he did, whether it was a legal career or political career, judicial 
career, and ongoing service to the people of Saskatchewan and Canada with 
respect to numerous studies. 
 
As the Premier has pointed out, his political career was perhaps somewhat 
shortened, inasmuch as he was elected in the late '40s and then retired in 
the period of 1951. 
 
I remember talking at one time with the late Tommy Douglas who was a 
long-time former CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) premier of the 
province of Saskatchewan, about some of the political personalities of the 
day.  And Tommy's assessment of Mr. Culliton's political capacity was such 
that he felt that if the Liberals had chosen -- this is always the big word 
in politics, I suppose in life, the word "if" -- if they had chosen Mr. 
Culliton the leader, the campaign in 1948 might very well have turned out 
differently.  It certainly would have been a very much more difficult one 
for the CCF and Mr. Douglas. 
 
But none the less, that's the way it works out.  And his contribution 
having been completed in the political field, then saw him move to the 
judicial field where he served with absolute distinction.  I have a 
recollection of my very first appearance as a young lawyer before the Court 
of Appeal with the Chief Justice sitting on the bench.  It was a rather 
serious case; I was defending an individual who had been charged with 
murder.  It was my first case before the Court of Appeal. And one thing I 
learned, that you could simply not count on receiving very much tolerance 
room with respect to your arguments.  They had to be succinct and to the 
point and made very efficiently and made very directly. 
 
The dossier had been studied completely. His knowledge of the law of course 
was superior and superb, and from that experience I learned that when you 
appear before his court and his matters that he dealt with, you had to come 
well prepared and well briefed. 
 
Afterwards, as life turned out and I served as Attorney General for the 
province, like the Premier I had occasion on many, many instances to sit 
down with Mr. Justice Culliton to receive the benefit of his advice.  
Frequently that advice was tendered very -- how should I put it? -- 
diplomatically and carefully.  Sometimes it was tendered very vigorously, 
saying it diplomatically. And it was particularly vigorous when it came to 



 

 

matters pertaining to the court -- the structure of the court, the 
functioning of the court, the efficiency of the court, funding the judicial 
system in such a way which met these very demanding standards. 
 
And then of course after his retirement, as the Premier has pointed out, 
his contribution to the province and the country in a variety of other 
consultative ways is well-known. 
 
I had occasion during this period to engage from time to time in personal 
reminiscences about his career, and as it so turned out, my career, which 
was certainly, in the political world, in a period of hiatus at that time. 
And one could see that this is a person who had depth of knowledge and a 
passionate commitment to views and ideals -- and most importantly, a person 
who kept up to date with the issues, not only in the country but in the 
world.  And one could always learn, as I did in my talks with the late Ted 
Culliton. 
 
The passing certainly is untimely and unexpected.  We very much grieve for 
his widow and for his family.  The contribution, however, of Ted Culliton 
will live in the history of the province of Saskatchewan -- a great 
individual, a great civil servant, a great public servant, and a great 
adornment to the Canadian family.  And it's in that spirit that I second 
the remarks made by the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I take a great deal of 
pleasure in joining with my legislative colleagues in recognizing Ted 
Culliton and remembering Ted Culliton.  I have some difficulty and I know 
all hon. members who attended Ted Culliton's funeral will share the same 
difficulty of matching Dr. John Archer's eulogy which so epitomized Ted 
Culliton and his contribution to Saskatchewan society. 
 
I, like the Leader of the Opposition, had the experience of appearing 
before the Court of Appeal.  The Leader of the Opposition remembers, as he 
said, quite well, the need for a very succinct argument.  That was one of 
the hallmarks of Mr. Justice Culliton's court. 
 
But as well, I'm not aware of a circumstance where a counsel was not 
treated with the most utmost courtesy by Chief Justice Culliton on the 
Court of Appeal.  I had seen very young counsel treated with respect and 
courtesy.  And as I say, that was very much a hallmark of his court. 
 
As well, one was constantly struck by the intelligence and the breadth of 
knowledge and experience of the individual.  He was aggressive -- 
aggressive in a polite way in that he didn't hesitate to phone you up and 
say, you know, think about this, or have you considered this, or what are 
you doing here, and can we talk about a matter of interest. 
 
I had the pleasure over the last few years as Minister of Justice of 
getting to know Ted Culliton even better, and it's one of the highlights of 
my life.  And I do remember in his later years how much interest he had in 
various commissions that he was appointed to.  Every time there was an 
opportunity to serve, it just seemed to pick him up and he was enthused. 
And for someone 80 years old, in his 80's, to have that awareness, 



 

 

intelligence, desire to serve -- and the youth. He always, as the Leader of 
the Opposition said, he was very contemporary in his thinking.  He was 
always up on the issues. 
 
The province of Saskatchewan will miss Ted Culliton and his contribution.  
He was, as it has been said, probably the ultimate public servant -- as a 
judge, as an MLA, as a lawyer, as a retired judge.  Above all, he believed 
that he had a contribution to make and that he could continue to serve the 
public right up to the time of his death. 
 
To Mrs. Culliton this will be a tremendous, and it is a tremendous loss for 
her, and our sympathies go to her.  But again, Ted Culliton's death is a 
great loss to the people of this province, and we thank him for his 
service. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to add some remarks of my 
own which will be of a personal nature, and I want to say that I listened 
carefully to the remarks of the Premier, the Leader of the Opposition, and 
the Minister of Justice.  It certainly struck responsive chords in me as 
they spoke of Mr. Culliton, Chief Justice Culliton as I knew him, and the 
contribution that he has made to the life of this province. 
 
I had the experience, indeed the pleasure of arguing many, many cases in 
front of the Court of Appeal at the time that he was a Chief Justice.  And 
I am acutely conscious of the contribution that he made to the 
jurisprudence of this province during his years on the bench. 
 
He was not, of course, always the Chief Justice.  He entered the court as a 
relatively young man, relative to the ages of the other justices who were 
on that court and who had been on that court, Mr. Speaker, for many, many 
years. 
 
Indeed at that time the Chief Justice was a former premier of this 
province, Mr. Martin, Chief Justice Martin. And Mr. Culliton did his 
apprenticeship on the Court of Appeal under Chief Justice Martin's 
leadership.  After his elevation as Chief Justice, we began to see Chief 
Justice Culliton moving the court in important new directions and 
establishing lines of authority within this province, which in a number of 
instances led the country. 
 
I give you, for example, the deference which the Saskatchewan Court of 
Appeal began to pay to the administrative tribunals in this province.  The 
one that I was most concerned with in my practice were decisions of the 
Labour Relations Board.  And under the leadership of Chief Justice 
Culliton, the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal, and as a result all of the 
courts in Saskatchewan, began to pay appropriate deference to the decisions 
of the Labour Relations Board.  And I think it no exaggeration to say that 
the principles laid down in the cases he decided have been picked up across 
this country, refined, and now form the basis of administrative law as it 
relates to deference paid by the courts to the decisions of administrative 
tribunals.  And he will certainly be remembered, and remembered very, very 
. . . with great respect by lawyers who work in this field, and I among 
them. 



 

 

 
On a personal note, I recall the terror that I felt the first few times 
that I stood up in front of the Court of Appeal and began to advance my 
case.  One thing that the Minister of Justice referred to in an oblique 
way, and I'd like to enlarge upon, is that you knew where you stood when 
you argued a case before Chief Justice Culliton.  He didn't just sit there 
and allow you to waste the time of the court, making arguments that didn't 
go anywhere or that he didn't agree with.  If he challenged, if he didn't 
agree with what you were saying, he would say so and he would get into an 
argument with you, a discussion with you, testing your ideas, testing to 
determine whether he should change his own thinking.  But there was no 
question, Mr. Speaker, about where he stood. 
 
One of the most perplexing experiences or one of the most unsatisfactory 
experiences for a counsel in court is to make an argument to a judge who 
doesn't respond, who sits there and takes it in, and you don't know whether 
you're making an impression or not, or whether the judge is understanding 
the point that you're making.  With Chief Justice Culliton, that was never 
the case.  You either knew that he was agreeing or you knew that he was 
disagreeing, and that gave you the opportunity in the latter case to try 
and reach down and find ways to try and persuade him, and through him the 
court, as to your client's point of view. 
 
(1545) 
 
His comprehensive knowledge of the law and his understanding of the law are 
well accepted by all of the bench in this province and greatly admired and 
respected for it, as well as his incisive mind and his analytical ability.  
And I want to join with the Minister of Justice in recalling the courtesy 
and the kindness with which he treated lawyers of all ages and all 
experience.  And when we walked away from his court room, we felt good 
about the job that we had done and the experience that we had just had. 
 
I'm not going to repeat the remarks that have been so well stated today 
about other aspects of his career except to say, Mr. Speaker, that we in 
Saskatchewan are very fortunate that this man lived among us and made the 
contributions that he made to us and to our way of life. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm pleased to stand here in 
the Assembly today, Mr. Speaker, and say that I knew Ted Culliton and that 
I knew him as Chief Justice Culliton, as I knew him in my legal career. 
 
I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that I first met him in the most unusual 
circumstances.  As a law student in my second year of study of law at the 
College of Law in Saskatoon, I was walking out of the college, down the 
sidewalk to the parking lot when I met Chief Justice Culliton coming up the 
sidewalk to the College of Law. 
 
Recognizing him I said hello, Chief Justice.  And he said hello, are you a 
student here?  And I said, yes I am.  He stopped on the sidewalk and he 
carried on a conversation with this somewhat lowly law student.  We had 
never met before.  And not only did he speak to me as the Chief Justice, 
but as a fellow student of the law.  He showed me a great deal of respect 



 

 

as a law student, and thereafter always I showed him a great deal of 
respect as Chief Justice of Saskatchewan. 
 
He was very open that very day I met him on the sidewalk in front of the 
College of Law, and he was that way all the days that I knew him during the 
course of his life. 
 
I might say that later, once I'd been elected to this Assembly, one day 
when we had an opening ceremony, he was here as our guest, and I raised the 
incident with him.  And while he did not recall, he said, certainly we in 
high places leave a different impression upon people than we realize.  And 
I thanked him for the kindness he showed me at that time, and he said that 
he always tried to treat people that way and he was pleased that he could 
show me kindness that day. 
 
Well later I had the pleasure of appearing in his court where he was the 
Chief Justice of Saskatchewan.  It's a very unusual feeling when you appear 
in a court, Mr. Speaker, and you discover that the Chief Justice has been 
on the bench longer than you have been alive.  Certainly it is a humbling 
experience.  Having met the Chief Justice before, I had no fear, for I knew 
that he was a fair and honest and polite and reasonable man. 
 
And that is the way he always treated us young lawyers in the Court of 
Appeal for Saskatchewan -- always with politeness.  He always took time, as 
has been indicated earlier, to point out the errors in our arguments, to 
agree with us on occasion.  But he certainly did participate so that you 
knew where you stood.  In some way he was an example to me that you should, 
when you are in office, let people know where you stand. 
 
Well in his court, Mr. Speaker, he was always polite, as I indicated, but 
above all he was always fair and he was always in control.  As a matter of 
fact, you might say that he ruled the court.  And that is the way it should 
be for a Chief Justice, to be in charge. 
 
Well I can say, Mr. Speaker, that not only was he a man of the law, a man 
who understood politics and leadership, but he also had a heart. 
 
I recall one day being in the Court of Appeal waiting for my client's case 
to be heard when a man from northern Saskatchewan came before him.  This 
man had burnt his own house down in anger against his family.  I remember 
the man coming without a lawyer, asking that the Chief Justice reduce his 
sentence because he was truly sorry for what he had done. 
 
I will never forget the Chief Justice, Chief Justice Culliton, sitting 
there, the chief judge of Saskatchewan, but more like a father to this man, 
saying to him, now you know what you did was very bad.  And the man said, 
yes he understood and he was truly sorry, and he wanted to go back north 
and be with his family.  I remember Chief Justice Culliton scolding him and 
then reducing his sentence and telling him to go back and take care of his 
family and beware that he ever come back to his court again. I'm sure that 
man never did come back and I'm sure his family is better for it. 
 
I want to say in conclusion, Mr. Speaker, that Chief Justice Culliton sat 



 

 

and judged people on earth here for many, many years -- for decades. And I 
am certain with the way he lived his life and with the way he treated his 
fellow human beings that when he arrives in heaven he will be there with 
high marks, and that when he is judged by God, that the outcome will be as 
fair and generous as when he judged here on earth. 
 
So I wish him well in his new life and I want to congratulate him for the 
life and for the things that he has taught us here in Saskatchewan and for 
what he taught me personally. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I second the motion. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: -- Mr. Speaker, I too wish to join with all the members of 
this Assembly in paying tribute to the late Ted Culliton, a former 
distinguished member of this Assembly and a man who had enjoyed a long and 
distinguished career in the service of the people of this province.  He was 
one of the leaders that we follow in building a loving and caring society 
that we all cherish so much in our province, that he certainly had a lot to 
do with establishing.  He seemed to take the service of his fellow citizens 
as indeed the entire mandate for his life. 
 
When the judiciary called in 1951, Mr. Culliton accepted the appointment to 
the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal that began a 30-year career with the Court 
of Appeal that saw Ted eventually serve as our Chief Justice for some 19 
years from '62 until he retired in '81. 
 
And Mr. Culliton was indeed a tireless worker and never seemed to accept 
the meaning of the word relax.  And I would like to speak for a moment I 
suppose on that side of his warm personal attributes and would like to 
share some personal remarks regarding the limited time that indeed he must 
have had to spend in relaxation that I was aware of fortunately and because 
of the tireless energies that he spent elsewhere. 
 
My wife, Shirley, and I have had the pleasure of knowing the Cullitons 
through our church and through our golf-course for many, many years.  And 
there is no question that his love of golf and maybe more importantly, Mr. 
Speaker, sharing most of his time spent on the golf-course with his wife.  
And we enjoyed watching as they shared their quiet moments together on the 
few weekends that they must have had to enjoy each other.  And my wife, 
Shirley, and I enjoy our time together on the golf-course as well, and so 
we often watched the Cullitons as they played and shared that time that was 
available to them.  And this sight I know, Mr. Speaker, will be missed by 
all of the members of our golf-course. 
 
We know too that for many, many years they left for Hawaii shortly after 
Christmas on their annual vacation.  And as they journeyed there, I know 
that they would play golf together almost daily during their short vacation 
period.  So I mention this because of the small amount of time that he must 
have had to set aside for relaxation, only because throughout his life he 
devoted such a tremendous time to all of the efforts that he put in 
elsewhere and that I won't repeat. 
 
Except I must mention a couple of volunteer activities that I know, through 



 

 

my discussions with him, he had a great deal of time for.  One of course 
was the Canadian National Institute for the Blind and the other was the Red 
Cross.  He also gave much attention throughout his entire life, as we have 
heard, to his Alma Mater, the University of Saskatchewan, where he was a 
member of the university board of governors and served as the chancellor of 
the university. 
 
We have heard throughout his life he gave freely of his time to many, many 
inquiries and commissions.  Indeed that was his life, Mr. Speaker, giving 
freely of his time to the service of the people of this province as a 
lawyer, as a soldier, as an MLA, as a cabinet minister, justice, volunteer 
worker -- a life of service to his fellow citizens. 
 
I know that all the members of the legislature join me in paying tribute to 
Mr. Culliton and extending condolences to his wife, Katherine, his sister 
Magdalina Flegel of Saskatoon, and indeed to all of his nieces and nephews. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise to say a few words 
about Mr. Ted Culliton.  I refer to Mr. Culliton in that fashion because my 
relationship with Mr. Culliton was of a more informal relationship than 
those which have been cited previous to my comments. 
 
Mr. Culliton was elected to this Chamber in 1935, and that preceded my 
father's election to this Chamber in 1938, so therefore they were peers in 
this Chamber and adversaries.  This is not to say that their adversarial 
role bore any long-term recriminations of any kind whatsoever.  I recall 
meeting Mr. Ted Culliton when I was quite young, with my father.  And later 
on when my father passed away, Mr. Ted Culliton was one of the principal 
contributors to his memorial service where he uttered generous comments 
about my father's political life in Saskatchewan, for which we were 
thankful. 
 
It's clear from the comments that have preceded mine that most of them have 
been directed to the formal legal career of Ted Culliton.  And that's 
understandable because it, at least in my mind, is a period of time during 
which he really established himself as part of the history of Saskatchewan.  
Not that being in the Assembly is not part of the history of Saskatchewan; 
that is important as well. 
 
I can recall that Mr. Culliton and my father were, as I said, adversaries, 
but were always on a friendly footing and I followed in that same relation 
with Ted Culliton.  It was a pleasure to know him.  I hereby acknowledge 
his accomplishments in the legislature and in so far as I am capable of, in 
the legal circles of Saskatchewan.  It was fortunate for the people of 
Saskatchewan to have a person of that stature involved in the public life 
of the province.  In conclusion I want to extend my sincere condolences to 
Mrs. Culliton and members of the family. 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- Mr. Speaker, I knew Ted Culliton through family 
relationship for many, many years and I really appreciated what others have 
said here today in terms of his contribution to the law which was obviously 
a great . . . made a great impact on law in this province and probably in 
the country -- also his personal impact on the lives of young lawyers who 



 

 

have spoken here today, when they were young, the impact he had on their 
lives. 
 
Others have talked about his contribution to society as a whole -- his work 
with the CNIB (Canadian National Institute for the Blind) as a president 
for many, many years and also his extensive work with the Saskatchewan and 
Canadian Red Cross. 
 
He was a man of immense intellectual capacity.  He was a man of immense 
compassion for his fellow man and in addition to that he was a fine, fine 
person -- very generous with young people as one of the members opposite 
had spoken about earlier. 
 
Now I did not know him in the legal capacity.  I did not know him in a 
legislative capacity, on a professional basis by any means.  I knew him 
more as a friend and I knew him as someone who sat beside him at the 
Saskatchewan Roughrider games for many, many years. 
 
Every time I think of Ted Culliton . . . and by the way, I saw him 
recently. I saw him after his recent hip operation, the first hip operation 
he had at the Pasqua Hospital and he was just getting ready for his . . . 
or I guess he'd had the second hip operation just shortly before he died.  
The reason that he wanted to be mobile again was because -- and the member 
for Regina South spoke about his golf -- was because he loved to walk on 
the golf-course.  He abhorred the idea of anyone using a golf cart.  I 
admired him for that.  A man in his 80's who insisted on walking on the 
golf-course in this day and age is someone to be admired, I assure you.  He 
took his golf very seriously. 
 
He took his football very seriously too, Mr. Speaker, because in sitting 
beside him, he had a great pair of elbows.  And when he would be . . . when 
the Roughriders were doing well, the elbows would be flying and he'd say, 
throw the ball, throw the ball, etc., etc., getting really into the game.  
He was a man of intense emotions at a football game.  And I enjoyed some 
lively arguments with him, I might add too, about things that were going on 
in the field at the time.  And I didn't always agree with him but he always 
had the last word. 
 
(1600) 
 
He was really fun to be with.  And I know that those who were very close to 
him for many years will miss him for many reasons.  Others have spoken 
about their reasons here today.  He was a nice man and he was fun to be 
with.  And I know that Mrs. Culliton will miss him a great deal as will 
many of his friends. 
 
I want to join with others here today in extending my condolences to her, 
and tell her that those of us who knew him well will think for many, many 
years how kind he was to us and what he meant to our lives on a day-to-day 
basis.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  By leave of the Assembly, I 
would like to move, seconded by the member from Saskatoon Fairview: 
 

 That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the passing of a former 
member of this Assembly and expresses its grateful appreciation of the 
contribution he made to the community, his constituency, and to the 
province. 

 
 Walter Adam Tucker, who died in Saskatoon on September 19, 1990, was a 

member of this Assembly for the constituency of Rosthern from 1948 to 
1953.  Mr. Tucker was born March 11, 1899, at Portage la Prairie, 
Manitoba, where he was educated at Nairn Rural School and Portage la 
Prairie College Institute.  In 1918 he graduated from the University of 
Manitoba, receiving a Bachelor of Arts and a gold medal for academic 
achievement. 

 
 Shortly thereafter, Mr. Tucker enlisted in the Royal Canadian Army Medical 

Corps and served overseas as a stretcher-bearer with the 12th Canadian 
Field Ambulance.  He was discharged from military service after surviving 
a poison gas attack at Valenciennes, France, in 1918. 

 
 After the war, Mr. Tucker settled in our province and taught school at 

Hudson Bay Junction.  In 1923 he moved to Saskatoon to attend law school 
at the University of Saskatchewan where he graduated as a gold medalist.  
And in 1925 Mr. Tucker established a law practice in Rosthern, the  

 D town where he would live until 1958.  He was elected town councillor in 
1927 and in May of 1929 married Hertha Friesen of Rosthern.  They had nine 
children.  Mr. Tucker was made King's Counsel in 1937 and elected as 
bencher of the Law Society of Saskatchewan in 1940.  From 1925 through 
1935, Mr. Tucker served as secretary to the Rosthern Agricultural Society. 

 
 In 1935 he successfully contested the newly created federal seat of 

Rosthern and was re-elected in 1940 and 1945.  The Second World War 
interrupted his parliamentary career when he rejoined the Canadian Army in 
1942 to serve with the 19th Infantry Brigade.  He returned to parliament 
in 1944, served as Rosthern's Member of Parliament until 1948 when he 
resigned his seat in the House of Commons to successfully contest the 
provincial Rosthern seat during the Saskatchewan general election.  Two 
years earlier he had won the leadership of the Saskatchewan Liberal Party. 

 
 As a member of the Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly, Mr. Tucker served as 

leader of the opposition from 1949 to 1953.  He was re-elected in the 1952 
election but resigned his seat and the leadership of the Saskatchewan 
Liberal Party to again successfully contest the federal Rosthern seat in 
the 1953 election. 

 
 He retired from active politics in 1958 and moved to Saskatoon where he 

practised law.  In 1963 he was appointed a Justice of the Court of Queen's 
Bench, a post he held until his retirement in 1974. 

 
 In the meantime, Mr. Tucker served in 1965 as the chairman of a provincial 

task force studying nursing education in Saskatchewan.  He was a member of 
the Canadian Bar Association, the Royal Canadian Legion, a Freemason, and 



 

 

was also active in the United Church of Canada. 
 
 In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, this Assembly 

expresses its most sincere sympathy with members of the bereaved family. 
 

If I may say a couple of personal words, Mr. Speaker, I did know Mr. 
Justice Tucker.  I didn't spend a great deal of time with him, but I knew 
several members of his family, and one of his sons was a class-mate of mine 
at law school. 
 
So I would like to take the opportunity to thank the Tucker family for 
their contribution -- former Mr. Justice Tucker for his contribution to not 
only the political life of this province, because he was a very active 
participant in the political life of this province, but also the public 
life and the judicial life of our province.  We thank him for his service, 
and our most sincere sympathies to the members of his family. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's an honour for me to be able 
to second the motion with respect to the Assembly's expression of sorrow 
and regret with respect to the passing of Mr. Justice Tucker.  Again I 
refer to him in that way because that is the way in which I knew him best.  
I remember Mr. Justice Tucker's appointment quite well.  I was then a 
beginning lawyer, a very young lawyer, and I appeared in counsel on the 
first case that he tried as a judge. 
 
It was a case that is also memorable to me because the lawyer on the other 
side was Percy Gordon, P.H. Gordon, Q.C., who had retired after about a 
hundred years on the Court of Appeal in Saskatchewan and was at the time 
the leading legal light. 
 
And he was a handful for Mr. Justice Tucker and for me to handle during 
that trial because he had easily forgotten more law than I knew, and 
probably had forgotten as much law as Mr. Justice Tucker knew too, which is 
no reflection on Mr. Tucker but rather a comment upon the legal abilities 
of Mr. Justice Gordon, as we'll always remember him, who was a very 
distinguished judge on the Court of Appeal in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Justice Tucker decided against me on that case and I think he came to a 
proper decision.  But it was a long and difficult trial and I think every 
time we met after that, Mr. Speaker, he would recall that trial and we 
would exchange a few words with respect to it.  It was indeed our point of 
contact and was a springboard to the many conversations that we had in 
subsequent years. 
 
My first memory of Mr. Tucker was when he was the leader of the Liberal 
Party and he appeared on the same platform as Premier Douglas in debates in 
the open-air amphitheatre at Crystal Lake.  Now I was born and raised in 
Sturgis just a short distance from Crystal Lake and my family has summer 
cottages at that lake.  And as a very young boy I attended the debate 
between Mr. Douglas and Mr. Tucker in that open-air amphitheatre and it was 
jammed with a crowd that I don't suppose you could number.  The whole 
hillside was covered with people, and people among the trees and on the 
roadways, listening to Mr. Douglas and Mr. Tucker debate. 



 

 

 
We thought that Mr. Douglas won the debate hands down.  That probably is 
not an unbiased judgement and particularly not from a young boy like I was 
at the time.  But I, in remembering it more objectively, I think he 
certainly held his own and he held his own in an environment which is not 
all that easy to do because it was on the CCF grounds.  And how he ever got 
talked into accepting a challenge to debate in that forum I'm not sure.  
But he certainly was appearing before an audience that was unfriendly and 
showed a great deal of personal courage and debating skill in maintaining 
his side of the arguments against a very, very skilled debater in former 
premier Douglas. 
 
I, like the Minister of Justice, am personally acquainted with Mr. Tucker's 
family, a very distinguished family; a family of lawyers, Mr. Speaker, who 
have contributed a great deal to the legal life of this country.  His 
daughter Shirley is a long-time civil lawyer with the federal Department of 
Justice and has spent many years in very senior positions with the federal 
government.  And his sons in Saskatoon are well-known for the contribution 
that they have made to the life of this . . . legal life of this province.  
And I know them well and have a great deal of respect for that family.  And 
I want to express my sorrow and regret at the passing of Mr. Tucker and the 
very high level of my respect for the contribution that he made to the 
legal and the political life of this province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I too would like to 
join with members of the Assembly this afternoon in sending condolences to 
the Tucker family, and certainly to express our appreciation in the 
Rosthern constituency for the life and the work that Mr. Tucker has done 
for the Rosthern constituents.  I know that he became the first Member of 
Parliament back in 1935 in the newly formed Rosthern constituency at that 
time. 
 
And as previous members have outlined his distinguished political career 
already, I do not have the advantage at this time of having known Mr. 
Tucker personally.  I certainly know of his family in Saskatoon as was 
mentioned by the previous speaker.  But also I think second best perhaps is 
what I did when I learned of the passing of Mr. Tucker.  I started to phone 
some of my constituents and listen to some of the comments that they had 
about Mr. Tucker. 
 
I know that my dad used to talk about him.  That was back in the days of 
the horse and buggy.  And when a politician rolled into the small towns in 
those days, it was an event.  And they would certainly turn out in the 
schools of Pembroke, as my dad used to say, to hear and listen to Mr. 
Tucker and they were always very impressed with him. 
 
And the gentlemen that I talked to last night and the day previous about 
these kinds of conditions that Mr. Tucker was involved in, had nothing but 
praise for Mr. Tucker and the way he conducted himself.  And I think that 
when we look at what he has done for the constituency of Rosthern, the 
province of Saskatchewan, and indeed for the country of Canada, I think we 
can be very, very proud of his contribution. 
 



 

 

And I would like members of this Assembly now to recognize that along with 
me, and also to pass on condolences to his children and to his 
grandchildren for a service well done to our country.  Thank you very much. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I shall be very brief in my 
remarks because I think the remarks of those who have spoken before me have 
covered off the very distinguished career of Walter Tucker.  But I would be 
remiss if I didn't rise in my place to remember him.  As a lawyer, I've had 
experiences with him on the bench.  As a young law student, I remember a 
lecture which he delivered to several of us on various aspects of what it 
means to be a practising lawyer. 
 
I have viewed Mr. Justice Tucker to be one of the very insightful and, in 
my mind, witty people that I'd ever run into.  He had a dry sort of sense 
of humour -- at least that was the impression that I had -- but he was a 
very thoughtful person, almost an intellectual, in his descriptions and 
analyses. 
 
(1615) 
 
Sometimes as a student listening to him -- perhaps it was my inability to 
understand -- I felt that his description or his analysis of a particular 
problem was so complex, and perhaps based from an intellectual point of 
view, that a lot of us weren't quite sure where he was heading.  At the end 
of the day, at the end of a lecture, the message came home but he was very 
engaging and very stimulating in the consequence. 
 
When he retired from the bench, he lived in Saskatoon and I happened to 
meet him on a number of social occasions where, again much like Ted 
Culliton and the people that we have honoured thus far, Mr Culliton, he 
displayed -- Mr Justice Tucker did -- this worldliness about him, this 
interest in the events of the world, and more than just sort of commenting 
in a passing way, as we might by reading the popular press, but commenting 
from the basis of some deep understanding, some deep knowledge about the 
facts and the circumstances surrounding the particular event which was the 
topic of our discussion. 
 
I've known members of the Tucker family, as the Attorney General has and 
others in this Chamber.  John Tucker, for example, served as a judge of the 
Provincial Court for a number of years and a lawyer, and this is a very 
distinguished family.  It's a large family, a very distinguished one.  And 
it's sad and in a way perhaps typical or maybe not so typical but I think 
typical of Saskatchewan that today we're remembering in Ted Culliton and 
Walter Tucker giants among us.  They were people who really had so much to 
contribute in victory and in defeat in public life, in legal life, and the 
community at large. 
 
And I just simply want to pass on my sympathies and regrets to all the 
Tucker family from myself and my wife, and to remember as the member from 
Rosthern, current member from Rosthern says, remember a life well spent in 
service of the other citizens of our province and country.  Thank you, sir. 
 
Motion agreed to. 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I move, seconded by the member 
from Saskatoon Riversdale: 
 

 That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the passing of a former 
member of this Assembly and expresses its grateful appreciation of the 
contribution he made to the community, his constituency, and to our 
province. 

 
 Donald Gilbert MacLennan, who died in Ottawa on December 28, 1990, was a 

member of this Assembly for the constituency of Last Mountain from 1964 to 
1971. 

 
 He was born on August 24, 1936 in Regina and was raised in Lebret, where 

he received his early education.  He graduated from Campion College in 
Regina before attending the University of Saskatchewan, and in 1968 Mr. 
MacLennan married Crystal Walker.  He was also a member of the Knights of 
Columbus. 

 
 In 1960 Mr. MacLennan ran unsuccessfully in the provincial general 

election.  In 1964 he ran again but this time was elected.  The following 
year he was appointed as Legislative Secretary to the Premier and given 
responsibility for the Saskatchewan Emergency Measures Organization.  He 
was reappointed as Legislative Secretary to the Premier in 1966. 

 
 After retaining his seat in the 1967 general election, Mr. MacLennan was 

appointed Minister of Labour in September of 1970, a post he held until 
the 1971 election when he and his government was defeated.  In 1970 Mr. 
MacLennan took the opportunity to attend the school on parliamentary 
procedure at Westminster. 

 
 In 1972 Mr. MacLennan took a position in Ottawa at the Unemployment 

Insurance Commission.  He worked at that Commission until his death last 
year. 

 
 Recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, this Assembly 

expresses its most sincere sympathy with members of the bereaved family. 
 

Mr. Speaker, if I may, I had the pleasure of knowing Don MacLennan and his 
wife Crystal.  Don, as it is obvious, died at a relatively young age.  He 
was born in 1936, died, I understand, of cancer, in the last year. 
 
Don was a very, very vigorous partisan and participant in not only the 
debates of the day, but in the Liberal Party he was always considered, 
because he was a young age when he first ran, as being "the" young Liberal 
in the Liberal Party, and the former premier Thatcher always looked upon 
him that way. 
 
He had a great deal of political experience in the battles.  And I remember 
when I first ran in 1971 -- Don MacLennan's riding of course of Last 
Mountain adjoined mine -- he was the experienced political and I was the 
rookie, and we bordered at the community of Craven.  And for those familiar 
with Craven, there is the small river bordering that.  And we debated 



 

 

through the course of the 1971 election -- he and I and his campaign 
manager and my campaign manager -- as to which community Craven was in or 
which riding Craven was in.  And as a result, I was convinced I was right 
that it wasn't and MacLennan was convinced that it was, in my riding. 
 
The upshot of the 1971 election, neither one of us campaigned in the 
community of Craven and it wasn't until after the election that Don 
MacLennan phoned up and said, well I checked it out and you're right.  A 
little late at that time but we chuckled about that debate for some time 
after, when we would occasionally run into each other. 
 
But as I say, he was a very vigorous debater; he was a very vigorous 
participant in the political life of this province.  And I would like to 
extend my personal condolences to his family.  Again it's with even more 
regret that someone has passed away at such a relatively young age, and I 
know all members will join with me in extending our sense of loss to Don 
MacLennan's family. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I too want to join with 
the Attorney General and say a few words of remembrance about the late Don 
MacLennan. 
 
Don MacLennan and I served in the legislature actually together.  I was 
elected in 1967, which basically covered a portion of his time of service 
in this House.  He was elected, I think, first in 1964 in the government 
which elected the late premier, Ross Thatcher.  I came in in 1967.  And 
what the Attorney General has said about Don is my recollection as well. 
 
This was the consummate politician -- a person who held his views very 
strongly and debated them very passionately.  And for quite some time I've 
been trying to figure out where the present Attorney General picked up so 
much of his political prowess.  And if the story he says is only a small 
sample of the number of times that he and Don MacLennan talked about 
politics or perhaps had their paths cross, then I know that he picked up a 
lot of it from a person like Don, who as I say, in my judgement, was the 
consummate politician. 
 
It was quite a Chamber in those days, Mr. Speaker -- 1967 to '71.  The 
debaters were a combination of hard and eloquent -- people like the late 
Premier Ross Thatcher who really was a dynamic personality and a very 
effective speaker.  Allan Guy was in the same category.  Cy MacDonald was 
the minister in the Thatcher government; of course, Woodrow Lloyd, Premier 
Blakeney, as he came to be, post '71. 
 
And Don MacLennan was not quite, in my judgement, of the same calibre, in 
the context of the dynamism of the debate.  In fact, I almost got the 
feeling that he shied away from the debate.  This was not his forte; that 
his forte really was doing work at a constituency level in the cabinet room 
for the political party, doing grass roots work for the political party. 
 
But none the less in that period of '64 to '71, or in my period '67 to '71, 
you pretty well had to be a pretty good speaker to be anywhere near the 
field, if you wanted to be listened to or heard, and Don MacLennan was one 



 

 

of the people who, whenever he rose in his place, some of us sort of 
stiffened up a little bit because we thought there was going to be a pretty 
tough political attack, not a personal attack, but a pretty good attack on 
policies and differences and sure enough he never disappointed. 
 
I think sometimes one would have gotten the impression that perhaps that 
this was a person who was so partisan that he was harsh in his personal 
relationships.  I certainly didn't know him as well as my colleague the 
Attorney General did, but in my acquaintances and contacts with Don 
MacLennan that was not the case.  He was, at the end of the day, a pretty 
decent guy, one who you could talk to, at least I could, discuss quite 
frankly mutual problems, put aside political partisanship, be able to 
discuss quite freely and openly without worry that it would appear on the 
floor of the House in a misconstrued way.  And I think his contribution in 
that regard is very important because he was able to use this personality 
trait, facility, to do the job that he and his Premier and his leader and 
his party wanted done. 
 
I'm very saddened by his death.  As the Attorney General says, it's an 
awfully young age, it's a young age I guess at whatever age when it's our 
time, but certainly I think Don's contribution to public life, to the 
country, might have been and would have been much longer if not for this 
illness which ultimately cost him his life. 
 
I'm very sorry to have to rise to remember him, a man of such youth, but 
none the less on the positive side it was a contribution to our province 
and I too share the fond memories and the congratulations, if I may put it 
that way, to Don, the memory of Don, and to his family with respect to his 
years of service here. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Don MacLennan and I arrived in 
this Chamber at the same time.  And as I recall the situation, Don was one 
of the very young members on that side of the House.  I recall it well 
because on this side of the House I was the youngest member, and Don 
MacLennan is five years younger than I was, and there were others younger 
than him.  So he was in the position where he was around the edge of the 
activity in the cabinet in that first term of office. 
 
However, he did rise to the position of cabinet minister at a later time.  
And I recall that Don MacLennan was a person, while he made a very strong 
speech in the House and which contained its share of partisan view, he was 
not without humour, and that humour occasionally showed itself in the twist 
in the speech, and the repartee across this Chamber. 
 
So I got to appreciate Don MacLennan in this Chamber and had the 
opportunity to have our paths cross a few times after he had departed from 
this Chamber. 
 
So on the whole, I was a person that appreciated the contribution that Don 
MacLennan gave to the province and to the legislative picture of this 
province, and regret the passing of him at what is a relatively young age.  



 

 

I want to extend my sincere sympathy to members of his entire family. 
 
The Speaker: -- Before putting the question I would ask leave of my 
colleagues to say a few words. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
The Speaker: -- I thought it would be fitting to just say a few words 
regarding Mr. MacLennan since he served Last Mountain, as has been 
mentioned, for the years 1964-71. 
 
Last Mountain represents approximately half of the constituency which I now 
represent.  When he was a member it was Last Mountain, and where I lived 
actually was Touchwood.  As a result, I haven't had the opportunity of 
knowing Mr. MacLennan personally, so my observations are only those which I 
have heard this afternoon from my colleagues and from the constituents who 
have spoken of him over the years, in the eulogy which I listened to at the 
funeral which I attended. 
 
(1630) 
 
At that eulogy, Mr. MacLennan was recognized highly for his love for his 
wife and family.  He was recognized for his love for his country, and this 
was spoken of at some length, and also the dedication he had to his 
constituents and to his province. 
 
In my constituency I have heard constituents speak about the dedication of 
Mr. MacLennan and his competence while he was a member in this House, and 
therefore I would like to recognize the contribution that this man has made 
to our province, to our country, and unfortunately had a relatively 
untimely death at a young age.  I know that his family, his friends, and 
all those who knew him will miss him.  Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to move, seconded by the member 
from Saskatoon Riversdale: 
 

 That the resolutions just passed, together with the transcript of the oral 
tributes to the memory of the deceased, be communicated to bereaved 
families on behalf of this Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 

 
I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:32 p.m. 
 


