





























































Hansard: June 13, 1991


 

 

June 13/91 
EVENING SITTING 

 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I move that we 
rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 69 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the 
Hon. Mr. Lane that Bill No. 69 -- An Act respecting Referendums and 
Plebiscites be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- We're prepared to move ahead with this Bill at this time, 
Mr. Speaker, and our understanding is that after this is done, we'll be 
going to committee on Bill 70 first and then to committee on this Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and, by leave of the 
Assembly, referred to a Committee of the Whole later this day. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 
Bill No. 70 -- An Act respecting a right of access to documents of the 
Government of Saskatchewan and a right of privacy with respect to personal 
information held by the Government of Saskatchewan 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  It won't take too long.  
I would like to welcome the minister's officials this evening and thank you 
in advance for your co-operation. 
 
I've spoken at some length about this Bill, but I would just like to make a 
few brief comments, and first of all to make the point that at long last, 
after many, many years, we do finally have this freedom of information 
Bill.  And there are a couple of positive features about it that I would 
like to start off with, one being the establishment of the information and 
privacy officer.  I think that's an important step and I commend the 
minister on that.  And the second aspect is that the onus is on the 
government and I think that's another proper onus. 
 
I will also give some credit.  The fact that this is a small step towards 
legitimate freedom of information in the province, and to that degree, I 
say this is a positive step.  Upon examining the Bill,though, I have to 
say, Mr. Minister, that's it a very, very small step -- but not 
insignificant -- but a very small step because I think that overall the 



 

 

Bill has many, many faults.  There are many weaknesses and loopholes and 
the Bill is relative to some other freedom of information Bills that I've 
seen; certainly relative to the one that I introduced last June in this 
Assembly. 
 
This Bill is very complex, involving some 40 pages and I think that it 
dwells too much on the exemptions to information that will not be available 
relative to the focus of sharing more information which, I think, is the 
concern that the public has about the way in which this government has been 
closed and secretive. 
 
And so I'm . . . what I will say, Mr. Minister, is if we're elected in a 
matter of days or weeks or months, that we will . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . I'm glad you agree with me -- that we will likely have 
no option but to reintroduce a Bill that really focuses on providing more 
public information about how the public's government does business. 
 
And so for the time being, I will point out some of the areas that I think 
the Bill is weak in, and I've raised those already.  And I don't suppose I 
would have your support on the kind of amendments that I'm looking for.  
But we'll shift the focus from the exemptions to legitimate government 
information, to providing more information to the public.  But as I said, 
I've started off in a positive vein.  There are some positive features to 
the Bill and to that degree, I'm pleased. 
 
I find it a little bit ironic that in the day that we stand here discussing 
this Bill and the details of this Bill, once again for this fourth, well, 
fifth, sixth, or seventh day, we've been unable to get real true answers 
and vital information regarding the legitimate questions to the costs of 
decentralization, the Fair Share, that is, your Fair Share scheme.  And so 
I find it kind of ironic as we're talking about freedom of information that 
we can't seem to get verification of what appears to be in some cases 
legitimate internal documents that give quite a different picture than what 
the Deputy Premier's prepared to say. 
 
I also find it interesting we're discussing this Bill at a time when we're 
not able to get any answers, either last Thursday or today, about what led 
to the decision to close Myers House, the residential facility for people 
with drug and alcohol addictions.  Nor are the Myers House people or the 
friends of Myers House able to get information from the minister's office 
about why their funding is being cut. 
 
And I guess my point here is that there has also got to be a will to share 
information.  And I don't see this Bill changing very much unless the 
government takes on a will to be more open, which has not been the case in 
the last nine years.  So I'm not very optimistic that that's going to 
occur. 
 
So I see this Bill . . . While it's one wee, wee, small step in the right 
direction, it's . . . given the actions of the government this very day, 
it's somewhat hypocritical.  This Bill will not change the style of a 
government that's been very closed and secretive.  That's not me speaking.  
I think that's the view of the vast majority of Saskatchewan people.  And I 



 

 

know . . . I feel pretty sure that you would agree with that perception.  
You may not agree that that perception is correct.  But I am sure you would 
agree that that's a perception that a large number -- or a large percentage 
-- of the public has about this Premier's government. 
 
So I see this Bill as window-dressing and I see it as badly flawed.  And I 
see it as being more geared to accessing personal information about myself 
in government records than it is geared to providing government information 
about public business, that I would say citizens have a right to know. 
 
I find this Bill is very complex and I've got a number of questions 
regarding how to interpret some of the sections, at least in your best 
judgement, how you and your officials see that some of these sections 
should be interpreted.  And I will refer you in advance for example to 
section 18(1)(f) and (g) on page 12 and I'll come back to that. 
 
But I discussed this section with a number of groups and they're kind of 
worried about those two sections.  And I can't help them out because I 
don't know what they mean.  And I wouldn't be so concerned about that if 
the government and the cabinet and the Premier didn't have the kind of 
authority to challenge and to restrict information that they appear to 
under this Bill.  I think that this Bill will provide or allow cabinet to 
continue operating in a way where the Premier and the cabinet make the 
decisions as to what information will not be shared.  And I think that's 
one of the worries that many people have about this particular Bill. 
 
Some of the information you are suggesting that would be available in your 
release, that under this freedom of information Bill I would say that the 
public has had a right to all along, Mr. Minister, for example, salaries of 
employees of government institutions.  Those are public employees.  The 
public should have a right to know what those salaries are already and 
those benefits.  Details of personal service contracts, that should already 
be available, in the public domain.  Costs relating to travel at government 
expense -- that should already be available; it shouldn't take this Bill.  
Results of polling and so on -- this should already be available to the 
public.  And these are the examples that you've chosen to use to highlight 
the progressiveness of this Bill . . . I find quite staggering.  This is 
information we should already have. 
 
And so, as I said, there has got to be a will to be open and honest with 
the public.  As we've seen through some of the auditor's statements, even 
where there are laws and rules, they're not complied with, where the 
auditor had to write a special report to say that he can't access certain 
information.  And so even when laws are in place, you are not meeting the 
requirements.  And I think that is something that worries the Saskatchewan 
people.  And there appear to be no consequences to that. 
 
So the credibility of the government is at stake and that's why it was more 
vital for you to come in with a true, progressive, meaningful, freedom of 
information Bill, and that is very much lacking.  And I don't think the 
government is going to change its behaviour, because this Bill is really 
not going to force you to do that. 
 



 

 

Mr. Minister, I have several questions then that I would like to ask about 
the Bill.  I guess initially . . . And I may have missed it; it may be here 
but this is a long Bill.  Is it the intention of the government, or of each 
department, to publish once a year, say, the information that it has 
available, that is, the public information that it has available?  Or how 
would people know, particularly as we keep reorganizing departments -- 
which is a bit of a side issue but it's another thing that your government 
has continued to do since 1986, without coming into the legislature -- how 
will people know where to go to, what department to go to for information 
that they want available?  And I'm not referring to something that's 
obvious, like the Department of Health.  But will there be something 
published each year that tells the public where they can go for 
information? 
 
(1915) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Let me respond to several points and the argument that 
the hon. member makes that this can be simplistic information that an 
individual can basically get whatever they want, subject to certain 
exemptions.  And I'll go through the private members' Bill just to show 
some rather noticeable weaknesses. 
 
For example, the way it is written, does it mean that the information has 
to be given out except in certain cases, for example, information involving 
cabinet confidences?  Now how broad is that?  It's not defined.  Whereas, 
in the Bill before the Assembly we start getting into a lot of the details. 
 
Information regarding draft legislation or regulations.  That again, how 
broad is that information?  Is that statistical information?  Is it, as I 
say, statistical information leading to a policy decision?  All those 
policy inputs, are they all privileged?  In which case, you're drawing some 
very, very . . . you're giving a very broad mandate to an exemption right 
there. 
 
Information involving trade secrets -- that's obvious.  But what about 
information that is prejudicial to a third party, for example, a SEDCO 
(Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation) loan?  Are you saying you 
give out the information on the SEDCO loan even though it could impair the 
commercial position of the company receiving the loan?  That again is an 
obvious one. 
 
Let's talk about budgetary information.  I mean is that cabinet 
confidences?  How wide does that go?  Let me go back, and you say you had 
some problems and maybe I can answer some of them right now as we're going 
through your general remarks, I think it was section 18: 
 

 information, the disclosure of which could reasonably be expected to 
prejudice the economic interest . . . 

 
Or (g): 
 

 information . . . which could reasonably be expected to be injurious to 
the ability of . . . Saskatchewan to manage the economy of Saskatchewan. 



 

 

 
Let me give you an example that can fit into both those categories.  Surely 
you would agree with me that it is not wise for the Government of 
Saskatchewan to have to give out information as to what its borrowing 
requirements are.  In other words, what date are you going to go to the 
market to borrow?  I insist on knowing.  And someone would be quite happy 
to have that information.  Someone would be quite happy to want to know the 
amounts to be borrowed at a specific time. 
 
Those are very, very fundamental questions which, if the information was 
out in advance, could cost the taxpayers of this province literally 
millions and millions of dollars.  So that's generally a prime example of 
the type of information that I don't think anyone believes should be 
disclosed.  Obviously it can be after.  It's usually public information 
after the fact anyway because it's usually announced in most of the 
financial papers -- treasury bills and that sort of thing. 
 
So having said that, that's a prime example -- borrowing, fundamental 
budgetary decisions in terms of management of the economy.  Some of that 
information, I think you would agree, would have to be kept confidential 
and is not information that should be disclosed.  I think I've tried to 
answer some obvious examples of (f) and (g) as to the type of information 
that I think we would all agree should not be disclosed. 
 
You ask about the type of annual requirements.  Let me refer you to section 
64.  Section 64: 
 

 The minister (responsible) shall cause to be produced, and updated as 
reasonably required, a directory . . . 

 
And the directory will list the government institutions: 
 

 a general description of the categories of records in the possession . . . 
(and) control of each government institution; and 

 
 the title and address of the appropriate officer for each government 

institution to whom applications for access to records should be sent. 
 

And there shall be a copy of the directory: 
 

 . . . be made available to any government offices, public libraries and 
municipal offices . . . 

 
So that there will be a reasonably wide distribution of that directory.  So 
people will have the focus of where to look when they want to access the 
appropriate information. 
 
The difficulty with all of this . . . And I might add on the economic and 
other interests, that provision or similar provisions are in every other 
freedom of information Bill in all the other provinces.  Obviously freedom 
of information legislation is difficult legislation to draft because you 
are trying to walk the balance between an individual's right to know and 
what information either is of a personal nature, which should not be 



 

 

disclosed, or information that governments need for the operation of 
government and the protection of the province.  So in general terms, it is 
a balance and always a difficult one. 
 
If over time . . . I suggest to the hon. member, if over time the 
legislation and the comfort level of everyone has improved once it's up and 
operating, I can envisage that from time to time there will be amendments.  
But certainly I believe it is more than a modest first step.  I've never 
made the argument that it is perfection or the ultimate in freedom of 
information legislation.  But I do say it's a very strong first step for 
the province of Saskatchewan.  And I think once it is up and operating with 
the commissioner, that the public will be reasonably satisfied as to their 
ability to access information that they believe they should have. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  When talking about section 18 -- 
and I respect your interpretation on that -- I wasn't suggesting that 
advance information should be made available that would put, you know, put 
some government project at risk or anything like that.  But I think that 
it's fair to say that there is some anxiety about this section as to how it 
could be interpreted. 
 
For example, I am aware that the Saskatchewan association of taxpayers has 
some concerns about these particular two sections that I've pointed out, 
because where you said that information will be available after the fact, 
and . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes.  Generally though, I think 
one of the concerns that not only the association of taxpayers but many 
other groups have is that some information never does come out.  And that's 
been one of the concerns related to the secrecy of this government, and I 
think that it's that section, particularly section 18(1)(g), that could 
mean anything.  It could literally mean anything.  And you don't agree with 
that, but that is another interpretation.  That section could mean 
anything, and given, with all due respect, given your record of 
secretiveness, you may hide behind some of these sections, interpreting 
them as you see fit. 
 
Mr. Minister, regarding the commissioner's office, I realize if this Bill 
received Royal Assent tomorrow that you couldn't have the office in place 
on Monday.  But how do you see this office being established?  When do you 
see it being established?  Do you . . . given as I understand it, this 
office, this individual would be accountable to the Legislative Assembly, 
that there would be some form of all-party input into the selection 
process. 
 
Now I know that . . . and I've read this fairly carefully and I think I 
know what the duties are.  I'm not sure -- I may have missed this -- but 
I'm not sure I know just how you intend on proceeding to establish the 
office and to select the commissioner for this five-year term. 
 
And I'd be very concerned, Mr. Minister, if, as was the case when the 
Ombudsman was appointed, or the Chief Commissioner, or for that matter, the 
Provincial Auditor, and I'm not making any comment on the work of those 
people.  I think they've done a fine job, but those people were appointed 
without consultation with the opposition, and I hope that that isn't the 



 

 

intention with the commissioner.  I wonder if you wouldn't mind responding 
to that. 
 
(1930) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- First of all, I have a couple of matters to respond to.  
When you talked about section 16 and the two points on that section -- or 
I'm sorry, 18 -- understand that it's not a discretion to this extent, that 
there must be a degree of reasonableness, if you look in 18.  So it's just 
not a wide-open discretion.  And then secondly, ultimately anyone 
dissatisfied can appeal, one, to the commissioner, and ultimately to the 
courts. 
 
So that's put in there that if that . . . I find it interesting when I 
advised the taxpayers of that and said, look if you're not satisfied with 
that, you've got the point of going to the court; that's why it's there.  
That that seemed very fair to them; that that's ultimately where the test 
should be.  You would have a legitimate concern, or if there wasn't that 
right of review by the courts.  But as long as that's there, I suspect 
that's where a lot of the questions are ultimately going to be decided.  
But that's why the provision is there.  So it's taken out of the hands of 
government and given to the courts. 
 
The final point was . . . oh, the commissioner . . . we would like to get 
it up and going as soon as reasonably possible.  We have no one in mind and 
we are a long way away in terms of getting the processes established.  And 
obviously when the legislature is not sitting it would be Lieutenant 
Governor in Council to make the appointment.  I don't know how formal the 
consultation process is. 
 
I would expect that . . . At least let me put my personal views that I 
would believe the first one should have probably some legal background.  
And I would tend to lean to a lawyer, but I'm not committing to that.  And 
secondly then, someone who has an understanding of the processes of 
government.  And I would look . . . understanding of the processes of 
government and it's a given that the individual must be one that . . . I'm 
not so concerned as to frankly whether the opposition agrees or the 
government agrees.  It's whether the public sees the individual as being 
credible, because we may have our differences.  You may have people; we may 
have people.  But I do view the appointment as one that if the Act is to 
have credibility, then certainly the Information and Privacy Commissioner 
must have personal credibility. 
 
So I can give the hon. member that assurance.  Again, we're not at the 
stage where we have -- or I have, because I have the responsibility for it 
-- but as to anywhere near looking at individuals for this. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- I'm not looking to toss out names tonight and agree to 
names.  But when you say that the important thing is not whether the 
government feels good about the person, or the opposition, because we may 
agree to disagree, what I'm asking for is a commitment from you -- as a 
minister of the government of the day bringing this Bill in -- that unlike 
with the appointment of the Provincial Auditor and unlike with the 



 

 

appointment of the Human Rights Commission or the Chief Commissioner, you 
will consult with the opposition in some fashion about the qualities -- 
about the duties.  And ideally as a gesture of good faith, and as a gesture 
of good faith in terms of co-operation, that the opposition -- given that 
this person is a servant of the Assembly -- that the opposition would be 
part of, in some way, a party to the selection process -- the application 
selection process. 
 
And related to that . . . I may just ask you another question because you 
and I talked about this a year ago, and I talked about this with the 
previous deputy premier two years ago, and that is the notion of who this 
person would report to.  In my discussions with the Ombudsman, with the 
Chief Commissioner, and with the Provincial Auditor . . . The Provincial 
Auditor for example, like the Clerk, the Provincial Auditor has the Board 
of Internal Economy to interface with and relate to regarding the resource 
needs of his office; the Clerk, of her office; and whereas the Chief 
Commissioner and the Ombudsman, their only interaction with the legislature 
is the report that they file once a year. 
 
Now the Provincial Auditor tells me that the forum of the Board of Internal 
Economy where he can sit down and discuss with members of government and 
opposition, the needs, the human resource needs and the financial 
requirements of his office and some of the issues that all members should 
be aware of, both government and opposition, that he has to deal with, he's 
got some forums, some committee that he can talk to and finds that very 
valuable, plus then he's also got the Public Accounts process.  So he's got 
a way to relate to the legislature that the Chief Commissioner nor the 
Ombudsman have, and, as you would know, in their reports they're requesting 
that an all-party committee be established for that purpose. 
 
And I was wondering . . . this is my second question, the first one being a 
commitment today that the opposition will be consulted on the appointment, 
the selection and appointment of the Privacy Commissioner.  The second 
question being:  would you be willing to meet and discuss the possibility 
of this individual having the Board of Internal Economy on an ongoing basis 
to work with, rather than setting up a special legislative committee.  The 
Clerk and the Provincial Auditor already relate to the Board of Internal 
Economy, and the auditor and the Privacy Commissioner would have that 
opportunity as well.  And that may very well be the committee that those 
two watch-dog agencies or those two servants of the Assembly could have 
access to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I would be happy to give a commitment of consultation to 
this extent.  I mean we will obviously look for individuals and run the 
name by you.  I think that's the way it happened with the Ombudsman in the 
past.  But again we're very conscious of the fact that the individual must 
have public credibility. 
 
Secondly I'm not, frankly, persuaded by either the Provincial Auditor or 
others that want to avoid the normal budgetary review process and have 
their budgets set by others that are outside the budgetary process.  I say 
that for another reason: that the public acceptance of these individuals 
and their office depends on their credibility. 



 

 

 
Their power of public suasion is the greatest power that they have, and 
they have it in their power to persuade the public that they should be 
better funded than, say, other government departments.  Some have been 
successful doing that, others haven't been as successful.  But they all 
fully understand that their power of public suasion is a fairly significant 
power.  And to let them avoid the normal routine processes of budget, like 
I say I just, frankly, don't buy into the argument. 
 
I have seen situations where provincial auditors, Auditor General of 
Canada, over time persuading the public that they needed more resources to 
do their job; did it in a way that was not seen to be criticizing any 
particular government or anything else but the benefits of doing this.  And 
government responded because of the public recognition that that individual 
in the office needed more resources. 
 
So I just have never been persuaded of any -- and I respond only to the 
ones you have mentioned -- that they need to avoid the normal budgetary 
processes in order to convince the public -- or they should be convincing 
the public  
_- and using the powers of office of their needs for additional resources, 
whatever they may be. 
 
So having said that, I've given the commitment.  I know you're not at the 
other side saying, you know, we want to veto this, that and the other 
thing, and I'm not interpreting what you're saying.  That process that I've 
indicated to you is exactly the one that was followed when the first 
Ombudsman, for example, was appointed.  The name was run by the opposition, 
and there was no big objection to it or concerns, and so it was accepted.  
I suspect if there had of been an objection at the time, that the name 
probably would have been pulled, but I'm going to make that assumption. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Well, Mr. Minister . . . sorry . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Oh and let me just respond on the Provincial Auditor.  My 
understanding is that that name was in fact done . . . run by the chairman 
of Public Accounts, which it is required to be done, so that that process . 
. . there was some consultation on that. 
 
Mr. Pringle: --  Well you got to be careful with words, Mr. Minister, and I 
know you're very good at words and you're very selective.  The chairman of 
Public Accounts was advised -- not consulted -- he was advised regarding 
the selection.  I make the point about consultation because when you say 
the first Provincial Auditor was run by the opposition, I can buy that.  
That wasn't the case with the appointment of the current auditor.  And 
having said that, let me say that I think the current auditor -- current 
Ombudsman, sorry -- has done a very good job. 
 
But you did not consult with the opposition in that appointment.  In fact 
you were probably part of the debates that were very heated during that 
period.  You certainly did not consult with the opposition with regard to 
the appointment of the Chief Commissioner.  And the, you know . . . I won't 
say any more about that.  But you did not consult and we may or may not 



 

 

have had anything to say about those appointments.  But you didn't consult.  
What I am saying is that we have made a commitment -- and I guess I was 
asking you to do the same thing -- we have made a commitment in our 
democratic reform paper that we would do that.  And we've also made a 
commitment that we would establish an all-party committee so that the 
agents of the Assembly would have a committee of all parties to discuss not 
only their budget and human resource requirements, but also . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Sorry? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Let's assume that this legislature's not in session.  
You'll note that if the office of the commissioner is vacant, Lieutenant 
Governor in Council shall appoint an acting commissioner to hold office 
until that person is appointed pursuant to section 38.  Okay?  That's on 
the recommendation of the Assembly.  So that the appointment is an interim 
one.  A new legislature or a subsequent meeting of the legislature may 
reject it.  So with respect, I think this one covers that off. 
 
The government does not have the power to make an appointment for a term of 
five years of a commissioner when the legislature's not in session.  It's 
only an interim until the legislature is in session, and then it must be 
approved by the legislature in any case. 
 
(1945) 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Well I understand that.  But the way you've been operating, 
in a sense these appointments have been made by the government not the 
legislature.  For all intents and purposes, it's been the government making 
these appointments.  I know what you're saying in terms of formalities.  
But I was asking for a commitment that the opposition would be involved in 
and consulted in that process, unlike the appointment of the Ombudsman and 
the Chief Commissioner. 
 
So section 40 doesn't cover off the concern, the point I'm trying to make.  
And I'm saying that the commitment we would make is that the opposition 
would be consulted, as had been our practice on those positions; all-party 
consultation, and to some degree even in a selection process in terms of 
acceptable names. 
 
So I'll leave that point now, Mr. Minister, but I would hope that you would 
be prepared to make the commitment that the opposition would be consulted 
because we're prepared to make that commitment to the Assembly here. 
 
And I don't think I agree with you because I've been thinking of this for 
two or three years.  I think I side with the Chief Commissioner and the 
Ombudsman on this point, that in some ways they're not like a line 
department who has the minister to go to bat for them.  They have no way, 
really, except through Treasury Board, to do their lobbying.  And in terms 
of the government of the day establishing their budgets, that's precisely 
one of the concerns.  One of the concerns is the independence from the 
government of the day that these offices need to have. 
 
So while you can throw up your hands . . . If you like, for example, in an 
all-party committee, you say the Provincial Auditor has got the power to do 



 

 

an independent audit of a Crown corporation if he's not satisfied with the 
private audit.  But then the auditor says that he doesn't have the 
resources to do that.  So that could be discussed with the committee, an 
all-party committee, and if the auditor doesn't have the resources to do 
that, obviously the government has not been very sensitive to the staffing 
and financial requirements of his office as it stands now. 
 
Again, Mr. Minister, because . . . And I have sat down with the association 
of taxpayers on this Bill specifically, and I can tell you as of today they 
have reaffirmed with me that they are leery of section 18, the two points I 
raised.  But because the Bill is so complex, it's hard to know.  People 
know what information that they're not able to access now that they want to 
be able to access.  And so what I'd like to do is to find out, for example, 
with this Bill, would the tendering process, as an example, of the 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation, and a specific tendering 
project -- for example, the relocation of the liquor store in Saskatoon 
recently -- would one be able to access that kind of information -- that is 
the tendering process, the tendering process in the Property Management 
Corporation and secondly, specific projects that we're tendering, that were 
tendered and what the bids were and whether the lowest bid was accepted and 
whether the taxpayer got a good deal.  Would that kind of information be 
available under this freedom of information Bill and if so, under what 
section? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Let me just respond to earlier questions.  One of the 
weaknesses in the argument of those that say that they should be able to 
bypass the process and get budgets set independently by the legislature -- 
let's assume the government of the day says that, all right, the 
Legislative Assembly is going to have a 2 per cent increase.  And all of 
those then reporting, there would be a cap that way.  So it's not an 
absolute that they can set their own budgets, frankly, as many of them 
would like to do. 
 
I might remind the hon. member that it was the previous New Democratic 
Party government that took away the Provincial Auditor being a servant of 
the Legislative Assembly and making him responsible to the government of 
the day.  And it was in, I think, 1983 that our government again made the 
Provincial Auditor . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, that's 
absolutely right.  The hon. member from Rosemont, that is absolutely right.  
As a matter of fact I can even remember the debate when it went through.  
It was in the dying days of a particular session, as a matter of fact, 
where everybody was quite happy to go home when it was done.  So it didn't 
engender any lengthy debate but it was heated for a short period of time. 
 
With regard to the tendering -- obviously some information will be 
available, such as tendering policies and procedures.  Some third party 
information would be protected pursuant to section 19.  For example, 
financial or commercial information supplied in confidence will be 
protected.  Information, the disclosure of which could result in a 
financial loss to a third party or threatens competitive position interfere 
with this negotiations, will be protected. 
 
And understand -- and I refer the hon. member again to the court's ability 



 

 

to rule on any of this.  Okay.  And one should never lose sight of that 
ability to have the decisions reviewed by the court. 
 
Because I can certainly see, if some of the United States' activities are 
an example, where competitors in a business will try and get information 
that may be supplied by a competitor, so there has to be the protections.  
But again you should not forget that if one is not satisfied with the 
decision, that there are the review processes to be followed.  And 
ultimately a court could say, yes that information must be supplied, or no 
that information was supplied in confidence, or it would prejudice the 
third party.  So with that protection there, it again is not absolute for 
government.  Ultimately it can always be reviewed. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Minister, I'll ask the question again.  Maybe I didn't 
make myself clear.  Would one be able to access -- a citizen or a business 
person -- what the tendering process in the Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation is? 
 
And specific deals for example, and I'll use this as an example, the 
relocation of the liquor store in Saskatoon, because there's a lot of 
suspicion surrounding that particular deal.  And there are many people who 
would like access to what that tendering process was all about; what the 
bids were, whether the specs were met or not, and whether the project in 
the end -- which we assume was a long-term project but nobody really knows 
-- whether that deal was in the best interest of Saskatchewan taxpayers.  
In that example, under this legislation, could one . . . could a citizen 
access that information? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I've gone through the list of what information would be 
available, and I included tendering policies and procedures . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Yes.  Well I went through them. 
 
Some third party information . . . We're going to assume that most events 
will arise because of specific deals as opposed to general broad policy 
statements.  That's where challenges will come out . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Yes, well what I'm saying is that the vast majority of 
requests for information will be on specific matters. Okay?  But I did 
include the tendering policies and procedures. 
 
I then went through what would be normal exceptions, based on the 
legislation -- information, the disclosure of which could result in the 
financial loss to a third party or threaten its competitive position or 
interfere with its negotiations.  That type of information would be 
protected.  Commercial information supplied in confidence -- those are 
provisions that, I believe, are in all Acts. 
 
But let's assume you'd get a situation where the information is refused 
because someone says that the . . . could result in the financial loss to a 
third party, so it cannot be disclosed.  The individual that would object 
to that then has the right to go to the, you know, the appropriate review 
process.  The court may come back and say, no, that information has to be 
supplied. 
 



 

 

So I just get concerned that that overriding right of review -- which is 
not the government's; it is the court's -- is being missed as we look at 
the exceptions and exemptions and the rights that are set out in the 
legislation.  We should never forget that, because ultimately the decision 
as to whether the information should be released or not will be the court. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Well, Mr. Minister, that's precisely why, in our Bill, we 
also have that appeal procedure, and you refer to that earlier as a 
safeguard.  But it's a much more easily Bill to relate to.  This Bill is so 
complex that I assume by what you said . . . I listened very carefully to 
that criteria, and that liquor store example, the relocation example in 
Saskatoon, then a citizen would be able to access the details of that 
decision because it didn't violate any of the provisions you've talked 
about. 
 
Mr. Minister, given what you said about the exemptions, I assume that a 
citizen or even the opposition for that matter would be able to have access 
to the actual costs -- the actual costs, the verified costs -- of moving 
people under the Fair Share program.  Given what you've said, I assume that 
the public would have the ability to access monthly revenue to the 
Government of Saskatchewan.  Because what we don't want to do ever again is 
get into a situation like we did in 1986-87, when you were the Finance 
minister, where we wait to the end of the year and find out that we're $800 
million out.  So I assume that an individual could access the revenues of 
the government on a monthly basis, if he wanted to or she wanted to, based 
on what you've said. 
 
Based on what you said, I assume -- correct me if I'm wrong in any of these 
-- but I assume that as you would know, your government recently stopped 
publishing the population statistics in the Department of Health.  I assume 
that's because you were concerned about the heavy flow of out-migration and 
you didn't want the people to know about that.  But I assume, based on what 
you've said, that an individual would be able to access those population 
statistics like we used to be able to. 
 
And you see that's where I was talking earlier about the . . . there's got 
to be a will to be open because there's all kinds and ways in which you 
people have shown and reinforced your secret, closed government.  And this 
Bill, which is so complex, not just for me -- and I'm not a lawyer -- but 
many others have told me that they read this and they read ours and they 
can relate to ours.  This thing is so complex.  It's full of legal jargon 
and it's full of exemptions and at the end of it they don't know what they 
can access and what they can't.  So I'm trying to get some clarification so 
I can talk to people about it in terms of what information would actually 
be available. 
 
As you know one of the concerns about a number . . . from the point of view 
of a number of business people is the secret deals with regard to SEDCO and 
the funding of SEDCO.  Now once . . . because that's taxpayers' money and I 
can see that you may not provide that information in advance where you're 
setting up a business venture, but once the venture's up and going and it's 
now operating well, would one be able . . . would a citizen be able to 
access how much public money is in a particular company in SEDCO and what 



 

 

the terms of that agreement are? 
 
(2000) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- The intent is that the SEDCO accounts would be released.  
But then you get to the exceptions, "trade secrets of a third party" for 
example.  And I'm talking about section 19.  They're set out specifically: 
 

 financial, commercial, scientific, technical or labour relations 
information that is supplied in confidence, implicitly or explicitly, to a 
government institution by a third party; 

 
 information, the disclosure of which could reasonably be expected to: 
 
  result in financial loss or gain to; 
 
 . . . a third party; 
 

And I can go through all of these but . . . They're set out specifically.  
I mean start with the assumption the information's available and then go 
back and say all right, it sets out in here why it couldn't be.  That's why 
the Act gets more complex. 
 
Let's for example . . . And you keep talking about rental.  Surely you're 
not expecting the government to put out, when it's looking for space, what 
it's prepared to pay.  I mean that could be the dumbest thing a government 
ever did because that would then become the floor price of what people 
would be submitting proposals on, so . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- I think the deficit in '86 would be the dumbest thing. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Oh no, no.  No.  The one in Ontario is much worse.  And 
the one was quite sound, actually, in 1986 . . . (inaudible interjection) . 
. . Who?  Soon to be again, I might add. 
 
So you have to start . . . I can't answer you with saying that that 
information's available; that information is not available.  What you have 
to do is start with the assumption that it is available and then go through 
the Act and see what exceptions.  Start with the assumption the information 
is available and then go through what exceptions there are. 
 
Now let's assume that a decision is made, no we cannot give you the details 
of that because it hurts the financial position of the corporation and 
gives information to competitors.  Then someone can challenge that.  It's 
very interesting that we're now seeing in the Ottawa freedom of information 
the same thing that's happened in the United States, which is the highest 
growth area in federal applications is industrial espionage -- people 
wanting to know what their competitors are doing.  And I mean, you quite 
frankly could not give a precise statement as to when you'd give out 
financial information.  You simply could not do it. 
 
What the Act does, it sets out that it's the assumption that the 
information should be made available.  If it can't, here are the reasons 



 

 

why it can't.  And if someone challenges those reasons, the decision will 
ultimately be made, assuming all the review process, by the courts -- not 
by government itself.  And that is fundamentally key, that it is not 
government that has the absolute prohibition here, that it may have to 
prove its case before the courts on occasions.  Third parties may have to 
prove their case before the courts.  So you've always got that ultimate 
review.  You start with the . . . as I say, assuming that the information 
would be made available. 
 
Now you can keep raising specific circumstances.  I'm not able to say 
absolutely because one, I may not know the details, but secondly, there may 
be one of those legitimate exemptions which everybody would agree is a 
legitimate one, which says that the information should be refused.  So I 
mean we're having a . . . I'm not trying to stonewall or be oblique on this 
but I'm just stating how the process would work. 
 
But they're all going to arise, as I said -- not all of them, but most of 
them -- are going to arise on specific incidents, specific events.  That's 
usually what triggers the operation of the Act.  And again ultimately the 
review will be made by somebody independent of government. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I'm not accusing you of stonewalling, 
but I think that this, your answer, reinforces my point that this is a 
very, very complex Bill, much more complex than it needs to be, because I 
asked you five examples, none of which related to information that would 
put any company at risk or put any competitor at an advantage.  The 
Minister of the Family wants to ask you a question . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . But I've asked you these examples and you're telling me 
you can't really say that, you can't really say. 
 
I asked you very specifically, for example, where you people stopped 
publishing the population stats from Health, would one be able to access -- 
because you're concerned about the out-migration -- would one be able to 
access that information through this Bill?  Very specific question. 
 
Secondly, would one able to access who actually owns the land at the Silver 
Lake farm?  I mean, those are answers we can't get here.  Would one be able 
to access that information? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I mean, first of all, deal with statistical information.  
And that information would be available under the Act -- okay? -- section 
17.  Who owns the Silver Lake farms?  Nobody.  I think several people think 
they do. 
 
But having said that, I mean, you know I don't . . . I think is an 
inappropriate question this way, is that that matter, as to who does in 
fact own it, is a matter of some dispute.  So it's now a dispute and the 
courts are going to decide who does own that land.  Let's assume that the 
court makes a decision as to who owns the land.  Then in fact that will 
show up in the Land Titles Office and be a matter of public record.  But if 
someone's disputing over land in the meantime and it's before the courts, 
freedom of information is not going to be the one to tell you who owns it.  
I mean, that's not the place for that.  But again in that specific example, 



 

 

freedom of information legislation couldn't give you that, but ultimately 
the courts will. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Minister, given that for some reason the government is 
not prepared to call a Crown Corporations Committee -- when Crown 
corporations spend over 50 per cent of the taxpayers' dollar, and there's a 
Crown Corporations Committee -- given that the government is not prepared 
to call that committee, could a citizen or a member of the opposition -- 
since the process doesn't seem to be working here, the legislative process 
-- could a citizen access some information regarding last year's 
expenditures of the Crown corporations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Yes. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Well that's good.  Well then maybe I'll give this Bill more 
credit then I initially did because we can't seem to get at this 
information through the legitimate legislative process.  And it's absurd 
that we've got to . . . the legislative process here and we've got to go 
through the freedom of information Bill to access legitimate information, 
legitimate expenditures from the Crown corporation that we can't access 
now.  I mean, I accept your point and I'm glad you said yes, but it's a sad 
commentary on the way this Premier conducts government business. 
 
Mr. Minister, in section 7(2), as I understand it, the departmental head 
would have 30 days to respond with the information requested, if that is 
correct.  And if the department head does not have the information in his 
or her department, that in fact but that the information may be in some 
other department, the citizen is required to be advised of that within 15 
days, if that is correct.  When the new department head receives the 
request -- that is the redirected request -- is it 30 days from that point 
that the new department head has to respond to the request? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Thirty days from that transfer provision, which is up to 
15 days. Okay?  Then it's 30 days from that point. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you.  Now it mentions, I think it's section 9 -- I 
could be wrong there; I'm just going from my notes here -- it mentions a 
fee.  And do you have any figures in mind?  And I must confess I'm not 
familiar with the fees charged in other jurisdictions, but I'm just wanting 
to clarify what that fee normally is, and is it a standard fee no matter 
what the request is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- We haven't set that fee schedule.  I can forward to you a 
list of what the other provinces charge, for guidance, and I'm not 
committing to following their fee schedules or their amounts, but I can 
give you that information if it's of assistance to you.  Do you need it 
tonight or can I give it to you tomorrow? 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Minister, section 19(1)(d) . . . I guess really (d), 
(e), and (f).  Could you just clarify for me what is meant by those three 
subsections. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Let's take (d).  That would include things like the 



 

 

corporate accounts of SaskTel customers or SaskPower customers, SaskEnergy, 
Trans Gas, that sort of thing.  And the other one would be like farm 
corporate loans of Ag Credit Corporation, for example.  And then (f) is the 
supporting information which can also be refused. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Okay, thank you.  Section 20 as well, I'm not sure, I'm 
just not familiar with testing procedures, what that means. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Well it . . . testing techniques could be school testing, 
for example; audit testing, for example; Finance can be doing audit tests 
on corporations for revenue purposes.  That would not be released, either. 
 
(2015) 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- I think that that answers my questions, Mr. Minister.  Just 
in summary, though, I would say that I've been trying to listen carefully 
and I know you've been trying to answer my questions.  I still find this a 
very complex document and I have some faith, like you do, that over time a 
higher power than your government will in fact be able to open up your 
government and make it less secretive and less closed. 
 
I wish I could feel convinced and satisfied that this freedom of 
information Bill was going to do that, but the exemptions are so complex 
and open to interpretation in a way that it makes it really difficult to 
know how this Bill is going to work.  But I guess what we'll have to do is 
see how it works and press you for amendments if we find there are 
problems.  Or better yet, maybe correct it ourselves in a matter of a few 
short months.  I'd like to thank your officials for their patience and help 
tonight, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Well thank you.  I would just indicate, as I said at the 
outset, that obviously the legislation is complex, and I didn't deny that; 
that secondly, it is walking a balance between the public's right to 
information, an individual's right to information, and the need to protect 
privacy and the need to protect the information that it would be 
detrimental to the province from having it released, or detrimental to 
other individuals.  That's difficult; that is difficult. 
 
I did raise some of the points in the draft, or the private member's Bill 
that the hon. member introduced in 1990, about some of the uncertainties 
and vagueness -- for example, cabinet confidences.  That can be so broad 
that one could never get information if you took that.  Would that include 
what is said to a cabinet minister?  Who knows? 
 
That would ultimately be decided by the courts, but you know, the 
difficulty of having it that broad -- you're just going to have that many 
more challenges and it would be much less likely to get precision quickly, 
whereas, you know, the Bill is complex.  Once rulings are made, I think we 
will very rapidly get precision for the public and for the public officials 
who are responsible for complying with it.  So, over time, and I think a 
very short period of time, I believe that you'll find the legislation very 
workable, and I doubt that there will be many substantive changes. 
 



 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- If the hon. member has no questions . . . and it is a 
lengthy Bill, we've been through several of the sections.  If we can just 
go through it by page, if that's . . . And there are, I believe, four House 
amendments.  We can just stop when they come up. 
 
Clauses 2 to 15 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 16 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Amendment to section 16.  Is that agreed? 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 16 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clause 17 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Section 17 as amended agreed? 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 17 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 18 to 23 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 24 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Amendment to section 24 agreed? 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 24 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 25 to 28 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 29 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Amendment to section 29. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 29 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 30 to 70 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I move the committee report the Bill with amendments.  
Before I do, again I would like to thank the officials.  They spent a great 
deal of time on a very complex Bill and I very much appreciated their 
efforts. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- I join the minister again, Mr. Chairman, and I certainly 



 

 

endorse the comments he's made and thank his officials. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 

Bill No. 69 -- An Act respecting Referendums and Plebiscites 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- We have new officials, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Yes, Darcy McGovern, I believe, is joining us.  He is 
Crown solicitor. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Chairman, just take a second here to switch gears, Mr. 
Minister, I have to reflect on this Bill now. 
 
I spoke earlier today on this referendum plebiscite Bill and tried to make 
the point that while certainly everyone endorses -- and we've released a 
major paper on democratic reform which spells out some 25 reforms that 
would hopefully make the legislature more accountable and allow for more 
participation by the public in public policy decision-making which is a 
goal that we certainly endorse -- I find it interesting that given the 
record of this government of ignoring public opinion on so many issues . . 
. and I think of the issue of the Free Trade Agreement where the vast 
majority of Saskatchewan people opposed it but it was strongly endorsed and 
supported by this government. 
 
The GST (goods and services tax) which initially and I think it was obvious 
in the end as well that this government supported the GST.  We sent our 
retired Deputy Premier down to Ottawa to the Senate to approve it -- that 
same individual who is now the campaign manager for the Premier in the next 
election. 
 
Of course the PST (provincial sales tax) -- the high degree of opposition 
to the PST -- and at the time you introduced initially this Bill on 
referendums and plebiscites you also introduced, I think the day after, a 
Bill which represented the biggest tax grab in the history of the province, 
with some 84 per cent of the Saskatchewan public opposed to it, and you 
weren't that concerned about public opinion and then chose to ignore some 
123,000 petitioners.  Not only ignore but in fact make fun of those people 
and I think show disdain for that form of democratic participation in a 
very legitimate way where people express their opposition to your tax in 
this Assembly. 
 
In the same way, members were not allowed to come into the legislature here 
-- into the building -- during the demonstration last week.  So your record 
with regard to a genuine concern about the public opinion of the people of 
Saskatchewan is very, very sorry to say the least. 
 
And I think that this Bill . . . To give the appearance that you're going 
to increase the opportunities for the general public to participate in a 
meaningful way into government decision making by initiating plebiscites, 
by citizen-initiated plebiscites, is somewhat hypocritical to say the 



 

 

least. 
 
And I think your Bill reflects that you're not really serious about the 
citizen-initiated plebiscites because there are many ways in which, by this 
Bill, you can delay those requests.  And you can in fact challenge the 
wording and so on. 
 
And so I think the other thing that the Bill does, which is very evident, 
is that you don't have to act, for example, on a citizen-initiated 
plebiscite for a full 12 months after you receive from the Chief Electoral 
Officer a verification that the 15 per cent of those voters which represent 
some hundred, hundred eight thousand members to initiate a plebiscite.  
You've got still a year to put that to the people after you receive a 
confirmation from the Chief Electoral Officer that that list is in order. 
 
Now there's no requirements, there's no time lines, for the Chief Electoral 
Officer to verify that those are legitimate names on that plebiscite, which 
means that that process could take . . . I don't know whether it would take 
a week or a month or a year.  So there are plenty of opportunities for you 
to basically ignore the citizen-initiated plebiscite. 
 
Now there are a number of other concerns I have about the Bill and I'll try 
to go through those as we go along.  But one obvious concern would be that 
in order to be a valid petitioner on a citizen-initiated plebiscite, as I 
understand it from the Bill, you have to have been . . . to have your name 
on the previous voters list.  Given that in this province we have not 
called an election for almost five years, that the last voters list is 
almost five years old, then anyone who has turned 18 since 1986, first of 
all, would not be on the last voters list, and would be ineligible to be on 
that list of names. 
 
So in a sense you've disenfranchised from this process -- I don't know -- I 
would say tens of thousands of young people in Saskatchewan who would not 
be on the last voters list, and you've also disenfranchised any new 
residents to the province who may have come here in the last four and a 
half years and were not on the 1986 voters list.  So they're still 
taxpayers of the province; they're still voters of the province, and I 
would say, Mr. Minister, that that is undemocratic. 
 
So the Bill, in a general sense, the Bill disenfranchises from the process 
literally tens of thousands of Saskatchewan residents.  The Bill allows you 
to delay the ability of citizens to initiate plebiscites, and only speeds 
up government-initiated referendums, which you could hold in as short a 
period as 29 days on issues that you consider to be of importance.  Now the 
public would have considered the PST to be of importance and significant, 
and the decentralization plans -- that is your Fair Share scheme -- and the 
costs associated with that. 
 
So you may have a different set of concerns than the public does, yet the 
process is unfair and it's tipped in favour of government continuing to act 
in a way in which you have, and that has been to have the Premier and 
cabinet continue to make decisions in a manner that you have, against the 
will of the people. 



 

 

 
(2030) 
 
This Bill, I would submit, Mr. Minister, is not quite as bad as the freedom 
of information Bill, but it's drafted with a number of flaws as well.  It 
raises a lot of questions . . . a lot of flaws, I would say.  It was 
drafted very quickly and it still gives cabinet and the Premier too much 
power, which raises the suspicion that it was . . . the provisions of this 
were conceived in secret and in the dead of night, in the late at night, 
and that you have accomplished your ability to continue functioning in the 
way you are now, but giving the appearance through this window-dressing 
Bill that in fact you're going to open up the process for the public of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
It also does not speak to many, many areas.  One small example -- I'll 
raise others -- but one small example is the actual administration of a 
vote on the actual voting day and who makes those decisions. 
 
Now with regard to some specific sections, Mr. Minister, I refer you to 
section 3(1) regarding referendums offered.  And as I say, this section 
speaks to the matters of public interest or concern.  I would say the 
public today may be concerned about, as I said, the PST or, a year ago, 
your privatization plans or they may be concerned that four constituencies 
have not had representation anywhere from a year to 18 months, which is 
undemocratic.  They may have concerns about your health care and education 
cuts. 
 
Yet the referendums, yet the referendum cuts in terms of real dollars . . . 
yet the referendums can only be ordered when the cabinet thinks that public 
opinion on a certain issue is desirable, not when the public thinks that's 
the case.  So your focus here, as I read this section, is not on the public 
interest, Mr. Minister, but rather on your political interests.  And I 
think that section very clearly makes that point. 
 
And I would ask you, Mr. Minister . . . My question is: is it fair that the 
cabinet . . . that only the cabinet can choose binding decisions by issues 
that are binding on the government?  Citizens can't do that.  Why aren't 
plebiscites binding if referendums are going to be binding? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I don't disagree with some of the points the hon. member 
has made.  We are certainly going down a new road under the British 
parliamentary system with the legislation for referenda and plebiscites.  
It's not something that's endemic to the British parliamentary system.  The 
American system, we use it for comparison, but it's not a fair comparison 
in my mind.  And I don't know ultimately whether the public involvement and 
the take up of the public of their options under this legislation, whether 
the take up is going to be like California where in many cases you've got . 
. . government is basically unable to do much. 
 
And I don't think that's an objective that anybody had in mind when we set 
out to draft the legislation or those that advocate the legislation, I 
don't think, want to go that far.  So we are walking a balance as to the 
situation where there may be weighty matters, significant issues that 



 

 

should be determined by a referendum, that the government of the day may 
want the public to make the decision. 
 
Plebiscites are certainly, as has been discussed, not binding.  But I think 
they're very persuasive.  It may well be that once we go through the 
process down the road that a future government will want to have binding 
public-initiated initiatives, if I can say that.  But as a first walk down 
this new road, I think that we've gone a long way. 
 
The question you asked about someone being eligible to vote if it . . . For 
example, if one was on tomorrow, whether someone turned 18 today, whether 
they could vote.  With respect they could.  Under our interpretation of the 
Act, they are eligible electors.  Section 9: 
 

 . . . individuals who are electors when a referendum or a plebiscite is 
conducted are entitled to vote. 

 
And if you then go to the definition of electors under The Elections Act, 
you will find that it applies to those who are -- and I think we can . . . 
we know the rules: they're a Canadian citizen, or in the interval, a 
Canadian citizen is a full age of 18 years, has ordinarily resided in 
Saskatchewan for at least 6 months.  So those provisions would allow an 
individual who turns 18, to be able to vote. 
 
Now you do make a fair comment on the question of signing the plebiscite, 
okay.  Because that, as you say, does make reference to the previous voters 
list.  The difficulty we had there was getting a list that the Chief 
Electoral Officer could in fact use for verification. 
 
Now what we're going to look at, if it meets with your approval, is making 
a House amendment which will allow the Chief Electoral Officer to either 
use the last voters list from the provincial election, or if there's an 
intervening federal election, use that voters list. 
 
Now if that doesn't take it right up to today, for the purposes of signing 
the plebiscite, but I think it updates it considerably and would give the 
Chief Electoral Officer the option of taking the most recent list.  But I 
suggest that don't confuse the eligibility to sign the petition or the 
plebiscite with the eligibility to vote.  Because as long as you're 
eligible to vote . . . you are eligible to vote if you are an eligible 
elector at the time it's held -- the time that the vote is held, okay.  But 
you do have a legitimate point with regard to the actual eligibility to 
sign a publicly initiated plebiscite.  We chose the one, just again, to 
give the most recent list that the Chief Electoral Officer would have.  But 
we're certainly prepared, if you wish, to look at giving the Chief 
Electoral Officer the option of taking the most recent list, either from 
the provincial election or if there's an intervening federal election to 
use that list. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Minister, would it be possible to use the SHSP 
(Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan) number?  Anyone who is of voting age 
. . . Or is that too complex in terms of the . . . 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: -- You may not be a Canadian citizen to get an SHSP number.  
You could be a resident here, take it out, and may not be eligible to vote. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Yes, I get your point.  I've been elected three years and 
I'm amazed -- that was about the time of the last federal election -- I'm 
amazed at the turnover in the riding in the last three years.  So I'm not 
saying this is an easy solution but I wish there was some way that every 
citizen could have equality with each other in terms of signing the . . . 
initiating the plebiscite. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- You and I are not disagreeing on this, but it's not that 
we didn't look at some solution.  Probably the ultimate solution in this 
case is a permanent voters list.  But we're not at that stage yet and 
that's not always a perfect solution either, as the hon. member knows.  But 
I am sympathetic to the point that if it's four years or five years from 
the last provincial election, and that's the latest list you can use, you 
do exclude a lot of people. 
 
We have one or two solutions, if you are agreeable, to using the most 
recent voters list, federal or provincial.  We can . . . Clause 7(1)(b) -- 
and take out the words after the clause, or just leave the following 
clause: "is signed by not less than 15% of the electors" and take the rest 
out.   
 DOkay?  Delete that. 
 
Or we could say, determined from the voters list as set out in the 
regulations.  And then that would simply allow the Chief Electoral Officer 
to use the most recent voters' list.  Does that . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Do it by the regulations and let the Chief Electoral 
Officer choose the most recent . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well I 
think it would, yes.  Is that acceptable?  Then we'll work on an amendment 
to that effect. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Minister, I want to come back to one point you raised 
earlier.  I didn't repeat the comments I made earlier today, but I'm not 
sure if you were here when I made those; I assume you were. 
 
I would not want to get into a situation that California's into -- I agree 
with you on that -- where California's in pretty well a state of paralysis 
in terms of the ability of its government to operate.  And as I indicated 
this afternoon, one of my major concerns about this whole -- our major 
concerns -- about this whole referendum Bill is that decisions would be 
made in isolation from other important considerations. 
 
And in a society that's increasingly complex, where oral discussion is 
required and all perspectives are presented and you come to the best 
decision possible, referendums work against -- in a major way -- they work 
against that kind of decision making. 
 
And I've heard you say that issues are becoming more complex for 
governments to deal with.  And I think that the real danger with this Bill, 
with this approach, is that you've chosen -- as I said earlier this 
afternoon in a number of quotes from various articles -- you've chosen a 



 

 

procedure that's pretty well the same as the Reform Party's resolution on 
referendums. 
 
But you've chosen a procedure that in fact is going to likely, if it's 
anything like the experience in the States, allow special-interest groups 
-- powerful financial special-interest groups -- to in fact determine, by 
expenditures of large amounts of money, what issues will be placed on the 
public agenda. 
 
(2045) 
 
In the States there are professional organizations that just do . . . that 
have developed just to do and advise a well-to-do interest on how to 
mobilize public opinion and force governments to make decisions which, in 
fact, mean that low income people and people who are less powerful do not 
have a government that looks after their interests in the same way as we've 
had, through history, in the British parliamentary system. 
 
And as to the motivation, it's interesting you mention motivation because 
I'm not sure what your motivation was for this Bill, other than that you 
had a political problem that you don't listen to people.  The best recent 
example being this PST where we had 123,000 petition names -- and there are 
more going to be coming, Mr. Minister -- where if you were really serious 
about public opinion, that's more than the number required to initiate a 
plebiscite.  And you people didn't reconsider for one moment this PST Bill 
in the face of massive, massive public opposition to that Bill, where 
people took the time and trouble to sign their names, to have those names 
presented in the legislature. 
 
That would have been the real test of . . . Or another test would be as to 
whether you would be prepared to put the privatization of SaskEnergy, where 
you tried to privatize that through the back door.  Would you have put that 
issue on the agenda in terms of a referendum?  I suspect that you wouldn't 
have because you only would choose issues that you know you might win on. 
 
And who knows?  I think because of your political problem we're likely 
going to see, one of these days, a Bill regarding budget deficit 
legislation.  After 10 deficits in a row by this Premier, he's talking 
about some wingy idea he has about budget deficit legislation when he's 
brought us, as a province, to a point where we've got the highest per 
capita debt in all of Canada, likely of any jurisdiction in the British 
Commonwealth. 
 
Mr. Minister, with regard to section 7, number 5.  As I read that, when you 
receive a citizen-initiated plebiscite, number 5 says: 
 

 Where the minister is of the opinion that: 
 
 a change in wording of the question set out in a petition would more 

clearly express the intent of the petitioners; 
 

I'd like you to comment on that section, if you could, because it seems to 
me that that is somewhat arrogant on your part to assume that people who 



 

 

initiate a question on a plebiscite wouldn't know what they were intending, 
and that somehow the cabinet is in the best position to determine what 
those 110,000 people think they meant rather than what they said on the 
petition. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Let me respond to the several points.  You talked about 
special interests.  One can make a very strong argument that this 
legislation can in fact take away the powers of special interest groups in 
that right now special interest groups are aligning themselves with 
particular political parties, generally, and then they have a great deal of 
influence. 
 
And I think we . . . there's a recent report in the paper about deep 
concerns in the province of Ontario, for example, of that very thing 
happening.  This can offset that influence with either citizen-initiated 
plebiscites or the referendum which will cause both sides to be able to 
participate.  So one can make that argument, I think, quite strongly.  This 
may be a good defence against governments becoming hostage to special 
interest groups. 
 
With regard to your point about the funding of third party special interest 
groups as a result of this, and the limiting of funding or the allocation 
of public moneys, we did look at that.  The difficulty we run into, in our 
view, is the Charter and whether limiting that expenditures does not . . . 
be contrary to freedom of speech.  And we're satisfied that it may well be 
and that was one of the difficulties that we came up with.  I forgot to 
mention when I talked about how this road is going to develop, this is, of 
course, not new in Saskatchewan; that in 1913 the government of the day 
introduced legislation in Saskatchewan, direct legislation Act.  And when 
it went to the people of Saskatchewan it was defeated.  And so when they 
did have a vote on whether there should be referendum or direct plebiscite 
the people of the province did in fact defeat it at their last opportunity. 
 
Finally, the point you make with regard to where the minister is of the 
opinion that the change of the wording of a question set out in the 
petition would more clearly express the intent of the petitioners, I think 
you used the word arrogance.  Obviously the hon. member is not from the 
city of Regina.  And if the hon. member -- as the member from Regina 
Rosemont will attest -- was aware of the machinations, the interpretations, 
and the definitions of Sunday opening and closing and whatnot that we went 
through in plebiscites here in the city of Regina, one would not be so glib 
as to be critical of the need for precision on these. 
 
And as a result this is not a matter of arrogance, but is taken from The 
Urban Municipality Act where in fact: 
 

 If a petition requesting the submission of a bylaw concerning a matter 
within the jurisdiction of the council signed by the greater of 5% (and I 
can go on technically) . . . the council shall introduce a bylaw in 
accordance with the request of petitioners within eight weeks (etc.) . . . 

 
 Where the council is of the opinion that a change in the wording of a 

petition received . . . would more clearly express the intent of the 



 

 

petitioners, the council (city council) may apply to the court, by notice 
of motion, for an order directing a change to the wording of the petition. 

 
So it's not an original provision -- but understand -- and not an unfair 
one.  People could design . . . word a petition which may be interpreted 
differently by different signatories, so that there should be clarification 
to reflect that intent.  It's not something that the . . . as I say that's 
new.  But it's one . . . And it's not an arbitrary decision of the 
minister.  The minister has to go to the court to have that done.  And as I 
say there is precedent for it in Saskatchewan:  The Urban Municipality Act. 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, by way of 
introduction, let me say first of all that I support the concept of 
referendums and plebiscites.  It's not, as you had suggested earlier, 
foreign to the British parliamentary system.  In fact, within the British 
Commonwealth there are a number of jurisdictions that I'm sure you are well 
aware that utilize referendums and plebiscites.  One can only look at, for 
example, Australia and New Zealand in which this is a commonly used form of 
finding the expression of the public will.  And it's from that experience 
that I have some concerns as to this particular Bill. 
 
Let me first of all begin by suggesting a few things that my colleague from 
Eastview, perhaps more polite than myself, alluded to.  And that is that 
this Bill is, I think, a political document not only in the sense of trying 
to give to your government a veneer of validity to the claim that you 
listen to people, because I think that that claim cannot be substantiated 
by your record, but more importantly it is a political document intended to 
be utilized at the next election for your government to take the public's 
mind away from your government's record of nine years of waste and 
mismanagement -- one could characterize it in other terms but we'll leave 
it at that for now. 
 
And that one could suggest that, as part of the political agenda of this 
government leading up to the next election, that we will see a series of 
referendums instituted.  I would suggest that this is some of the thinking 
that's going on on your side of the House at this time. 
 
A number of referendums, one of them dealing with the balanced budget 
legislation and some form of referendum initiated by your government, 
motivated no doubt out of your concern from political pressures by the 
Reform party, but more importantly by a right-wing organization such as the 
National Citizens' Coalition who have a great, great deal of money to put 
behind raising the question in the public's mind of a balanced budget 
legislation. 
 
Now we all know that the National Citizens' Coalition has the support of 
the insurance industry and some other fairly wealthy right-wing individuals 
in this country, who would dearly love to be able to spend their millions 
of dollars in the province in an election campaign to prop up your 
government and to try to create a political climate which is more conducive 
to your re-election. 
 
Which is the . . . The member from Eastview has raised the concern of the 



 

 

spending limits.  And I guess in terms of this particular piece of 
legislation, this is my greatest concern.  Again, for example, we can see 
the nuclear industry working hand-in-glove with your government, Atomic 
Energy of Canada Ltd. using the taxpayers' dollars through the Canadian 
Nuclear Association to try to promote the notion that nuclear power or 
nuclear reactors would be a good thing for the province of Saskatchewan.  
And I would not be at all surprised to see that around the time of the next 
election that your government would utilize this legislation to try to put 
a question on nuclear reactors on it, in order to divert public attention 
away from the record of your government. 
 
So what I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, is this:  would you be prepared, 
by way of House amendment, to concretely limit the spending of third 
parties in the referendum process, and to put a limit -- as much as was 
placed on, for example, the referendum which was conducted in Quebec in 
which very strictly adhered to spending limits were instituted around that 
referendum on the question of sovereignty association -- would you be 
prepared tonight to indicate to this House whether or not you would include 
directly in the language of the Bill, a restriction on spending limits by 
third parties? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Well I will certainly take the hon. member's suggestions 
for questions for the plebiscite and pass them on to the appropriate 
officials in the government and the party.  And I'm sure they can . . . 
they will take your suggestions to heart and give active consideration to 
your recommendations as to questions. 
 
Having said that, I did answer the hon. member earlier when I said that the 
difficulty we had with the matter of spending limits is the legal opinion 
that limiting that ability to spend moneys may well be contrary to the 
Charter of Rights in limiting freedom of speech.  That's the difficulty.  I 
don't necessarily share the concern of the hon. member that those with a 
great deal of money win these battles.  As a matter of fact, there is some 
strong evidence in California that the expenditures of the money are 
backfiring, and we've had two examples: one was the insurance referendum 
which was fairly recent, that the insurance companies, I gather, lost that 
debate. Then we had one where there was a considerable amount of money 
spent on the side of the environmental side in California, and not that 
there wasn't on primarily the agriculture side.  But that debate certainly 
was not won, I gather, by money. 
 
(2100) 
 
So the over-expenditure of money can be a serious political miscalculation 
in these types of debates.  As I say I'm not as persuaded as the hon. 
member that money will determine the success of a plebiscite or a 
referendum. 
 
So having said that, I've indicated the legal difficulty.  You should keep 
in mind that the limitation on expenditures on the Quebec referendum took 
place prior to the implementation of the Charter.  And so from the legal 
point of view it may not be relevant to discussion, given the Charter. 
 



 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, now with all due respect to the hon. 
member, who certainly is a well-known figure in legal circles in this 
province -- maybe not judicial but certainly legal -- that the hon. member 
knows that there is a provision in the Charter -- it's called the 
notwithstanding provision -- which would certainly get around any legal 
obstacle that may in fact deal with the question that you've raised. 
 
As you are well aware, Mr. Minister, your government has used the 
notwithstanding clause of the Charter to implement legislation which may 
have very well been contrary to certain sections of the Charter in regards 
to individual and collective liberties in the past, and that there would 
absolutely be no difficulty in the use of that notwithstanding section to 
place before the place in this Bill a provision which would create a level 
playing-field. 
 
I mean your government has been great in the past talking about level 
playing-fields.  Well on issues such as may be put before the public of 
Saskatchewan on referendums, there is the absolute necessity to have a 
level playing-field in terms of the amount of money which can be spent on a 
particular issue. 
 
In fact the member has alluded to several referendums that have taken place 
in California.  It was precisely the spending, and it wasn't just by 
agricultural interests I may remind the member, in terms of the so-called 
green referendum in California which took place last year, that it was the 
spending by the other side which in the final days tipped the scale of 
balance towards the defeat of that particular initiative. 
 
We can point to the linkage between the Conservative Party, Decima 
Research, the national council on business issues, in the free trade debate 
in which millions of dollars were put into the free trade debate in the 
last few days of the last election campaign to try to tip the scales.  And 
there's documented evidence, including by the chief honcho of Decima, Mr. 
Gregg himself, to indicate it was precisely the expenditures of those 
dollars in that referendum, if you like, on the free trade in that 
election, that tipped the scales towards the election of the Conservative 
government.  And a great deal of that election success is credited to the 
fact that many large corporations in this country, in the last week of that 
election campaign, poured millions of dollars into a pro Free Trade 
Agreement, or pro free trade approach to the question. 
 
So it seems to me that the legal impediments that you raise in terms of 
having a level playing-field built into this Bill are not in fact real 
arguments against it.  It's precisely your refusal to consider putting 
spending limits on this . . . to write those spending limits into this 
Bill, and putting spending limits on referendums, which causes me to 
suggest that it's precisely those issues that have already been discussed 
in the back rooms of the Conservative Party and the strategists.  And Nancy 
McLean and Mr. Gregg and those people have already discussed this in terms 
of trying to do as I earlier suggested. 
 
Given that, in fact, you can use the notwithstanding clause of the Charter 
to overcome those legal objections, I ask you again, will you put spending 



 

 

limits on . . . to write spending limits into this Bill, to put spending 
limits on the use by special interest groups in the conduction of 
referendums? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Well again I've given the legal opinion and you're 
correct that the notwithstanding could be used.  I'm not sure it's an 
appropriate use of the notwithstanding clause in that . . . you would 
probably need the notwithstanding clause in each situation.  I happen to 
think that the appropriate course of action is to let's let it work and 
then see.  I mean one can then make the next logical extension all right.  
If we're going to have limits then these should be publicly funded, and 
that the taxpayers of Saskatchewan should be forced to support both sides 
of an issue that obviously follows logically.  And that's not something 
that the government is considering, but I did indicate that it is a first, 
rather long, step down this road. 
 
Again I appreciate the suggestion from the hon. member as to possible 
questions.  Obviously a lot of back-room strategists on the other side have 
been giving much thought to this and we will take them under advisement.  
But at this stage, in our view, it would not be appropriate to bring in the 
limitations.  Again there could be a Charter challenge, and I appreciate 
the argument on the notwithstanding.  But it always strikes me as a rather 
interesting argument from some in the opposition who argue most strongly. 
 
And I just noticed the last national convention, the New Democratic Party, 
that there was quite a heated argument about removing the notwithstanding 
clause from the constitution.  And I don't know what the ultimate result of 
that debate was; perhaps the hon. member could inform the House.  But at 
this time our view is, let's let this new process work.  And I'm sure over 
time there will be amendments and changes, but there is the opportunity to 
involve the public and I think we should let it try and work. 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- I mean that's all very well, Mr. Minister, to say, except 
that we cannot -- given your record of ignoring the will of the public, and 
given your response to particularly powerful and wealthy interest groups in 
this county, the oil industry, the nuclear lobby, and so on and so forth -- 
one cannot expect that you and your government would allow a fair and even 
referendum to take place. 
 
And your answers again tonight seem to me to deepen my suspicions, to put 
it mildly, of what the ulterior motive you have at this time to not include 
spending limits, and in fact to bring this Bill forward.  Now you can 
attribute the use of referendums on nuclear power or budget legislation or 
whatever to the opposition. 
 
The fact of the matter is that it's your government which is bringing this 
forward.  It's your government which is floating these ideas.  And it's 
your government which is refusing to place spending limits so that, quite 
frankly, people who are wealthy organizations which have a great deal of 
money behind them -- Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd. for example has just been 
given an extra billion dollars by Mr. Epp in order to carry out a 
propaganda campaign or an information campaign to give through the Canadian 
Nuclear Association -- one will expect that the great portion of that 



 

 

money, or certainly a portion of that money, will be spent here in 
Saskatchewan trying to promote the concept of a nuclear reactor. 
 
Similarly, one can expect a right wing organization like the National 
Citizens' Coalition to pour a great deal of money into one of their pet 
projects, which is the balanced budget legislation which right wing 
organizations throughout this country have been promoting. 
 
People who do not have that money, and people who are on the other side of 
that issue, will not have a level playing-field to be able to oppose that.  
And part of the reason they won't have that level playing-field is 
contained in section 12, in which political parties and political 
candidates themselves are limited in spending around the questions which 
are raised at the time of a general election. 
 
And given that, Mr. Minister, that political parties and individual 
candidates will be restricted in their spending on these issues, will you 
then -- and given your reluctance to include spending limits during the 
period by third parties, during the period of a referendum -- will you 
entertain a House amendment then to forbid the use of referendums or 
plebiscites during the time of a general election here in Saskatchewan; 
during the period in which a general election is held? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Well I mean, just because the hon. member has some modest 
political paranoia, I don't think that you want to make that an absolute 
prohibition, because there could be future elections where it's highly 
appropriate to have those and you're singling out this election as opposed 
to looking at the broader view of down the road.  And so having said that, 
I don't think that would be particularly appropriate. 
 
I do make the point again that there's ample evidence . . . And it was 
interesting in the free trade debate that not many of the wise political 
analysts attribute the win or loss on the free trade debate to the question 
of moneys being spent.  And many wise analysts, as a matter of fact, say it 
was not ultimately the decisive voting issue.  So I happen to have a view 
that if someone overspends, they tend very much to turn people off. 
 
As well, to now exempt candidates and pull them out of it, section 12 is in 
there so that the existing voting limits can apply.  They want to be part 
of the process, then it should be part of their election expenditures.  But 
it may well be that the appropriate time -- and the public may see it as 
the appropriate time -- to deal with referendums is at a provincial 
election.  It may be far more convenient to the public to choose that time.  
And I can see, and I think the hon. member can, obvious circumstances where 
the public would see it's far more convenient and far wiser to do it at 
that time rather than running separate campaigns. 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Well, Mr. Minister, with all due respect, one may be . . . 
mentally be accused of having a moderate level of political paranoia when 
it comes to this particular Bill, but one has to also recognize the facts 
of life in this province, given the politics that's been conducted by your 
government over the last nine years.  And one probably would have the 
support of the public in not accepting everything that is put forward by 



 

 

this government and by the members on the opposite side, at face value.  
And particularly given the great reputation for political wizardry by the 
member from Qu'Appelle-Lumsden, I think everybody in Saskatchewan is 
rightly paranoid over your ulterior motives in regard to this Bill.  And 
your answers here tonight have just reinforced that paranoia among the 
populace precisely around those questions that have been raised. 
 
You refuse to set spending limits for third parties which would then allow 
those wealthy and powerful interests, who have a particular cross to bear 
or a particular torch to bear, to bear aloft and get their way on a 
particular piece of referendum legislation or question put forward.  And 
you refuse to back down from that stance. 
 
You're limiting the ability of people who are involved in the political 
process -- the candidates and registered political parties in the province 
-- to express their view in a full manner before the public.  You limit, in 
fact, you limit the field of legitimate political debate.  You narrow it 
down. 
 
This Bill ties the hands of those who do not have the financial resources.  
And whether or not you happen to believe overspending causes a reaction . . 
. I mean, that may be a convenient excuse for tonight.  But the facts of  
 Dthe matter is, the facts of life are, in this country that we all know -- 
and Allan Gregg will confirm that -- that as we saw in the free trade 
debate at the last election, the infusion of large amounts of funds in the 
dying days, and Mr. Gregg says it himself, did in fact affect the outcome 
of that particular debate. 
 
(2115) 
 
So you will excuse that moderate paranoia that you talk about if I have to 
raise these kind of political questions.  Perhaps, Mr. Minister, you can 
put this paranoia to rest and maybe the question of motive to rest, if 
you'll inform the House whether it's not the intention of your government 
to use this legislation in the upcoming provincial election.  Or perhaps 
let me put it the other way: will you give this House an undertaking that 
the government will not use the provisions of this legislation in the next 
provincial election?  Will you tell the people of Saskatchewan that you 
will not use this legislation at the time of the next provincial election? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Well I am a little surprised because the hon. member 
raised some, what I thought were some rather significant issues of public 
interest that should be considered under a referendum and a plebiscite.  
And I'd already undertaken to take the member's suggestions back to the 
government, to cabinet.  And I thought he was being helpful with the 
suggestions and I know some of the issues are of particular interest to 
him.  So I'd already made that undertaking to the hon. member, to take 
those issues forward for possible consideration. 
 
Understand that during a provincial election, the candidates of all 
political parties do have an advantage.  They can speak out.  They don't 
have to spend moneys, obviously, on a referendum or plebiscite.  They do 
have the advantage, the natural advantages of simply being able to speak 



 

 

out.  But I'd already made the undertaking to the hon. member to take his 
suggestions and good ideas forward. 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Well I appreciate the comments of the member.  But, Mr. 
Minister, let's just say this.  Don't do me any favours along this line, 
okay.  I mean, we've already seen the former president of the Conservative 
Party and the present president of Saskatchewan Power agree with the 
statements I have made regarding SaskPower and printed widely in the 
newspapers.  Now all of a sudden we have a prominent member of the 
Conservative cabinet taking my suggestions to the cabinet.  You really know 
how to hurt a guy, right?  I mean we are trying to ensure that there is a 
clearly delineated difference between the position of our party and the 
position of your party in the coming election.  Let's not cloud the issues 
on that. 
 
Having said that, and in a little more serious vein, Mr. Minister, are you 
saying here tonight that you, as a member of cabinet, and the cabinet and 
your caucus have not considered putting questions on the referendum or the 
use of the referendum in the next provincial election?  I notice you 
side-stepped those issues rather adroitly.  So let's put it directly: are 
you considering the use of the referendum at the time in the next 
provincial election -- yes or no? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I didn't for one minute -- and let's be clear -- suggest 
that I would take all of the hon. member's ideas to cabinet.  And if I give 
him some comfort by saying that, I've also given a lot of comfort to my 
cabinet colleagues by stating that.  I said I would take forward the ones 
you brought forward this evening for consideration.  I did indicate at the 
second reading that certainly at this stage the government has no plans for 
questions.  But no, I certainly wouldn't rule it out, but I did indicate at 
this stage the government has no plans for specific questions. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, just three or four 
more questions here.  Section 5, I want to go back there just for a minute.  
Section 5 it seems to me is a little bit, or has a potential to be . . . 
it's a little bit ambiguous.  Where in practice it's not very binding, even 
where a referendum could be binding of course, is what the section speaks 
to. 
 
It says as soon as practical the government would take steps, and while I 
see that as reasonable, I guess the question would be who defines 
practical.  You know eight months ago the mayor of Kindersley would say 
that we've had a vacancy for a year, it's time for a by-election.  This is 
18 months now with a vacant seat and the government has not found it 
practical or whatever to have had a by-election in that riding.  And there 
are many other examples of where the government has taken steps that it 
considers practical and the consequences have been severe for Saskatchewan 
families.  That really isn't a question other than, I guess, a comment of a 
bit of concern that I have in terms of the problem with definition in some 
of the provision of this Bill. 
 
Now 5(b) again indicates that the action would occur during the first 
session after the results.  Again that would seem reasonable, except your 



 

 

administration has a habit of keeping the opposition out of the House for 
anywhere from eight to nine and a half months; therefore, another way of 
delaying action, which is a concern that's even on binding referendums.  
You could delay action by eight or nine and a half months, which has been 
the length of time we've been out of here over the last couple of sessions, 
or last couple of years. 
 
Now with regard to section 10(2), it says that the minister would release 
the results of the decision, the public's decision, as soon as practical 
after the results are determined.   And I guess a couple of questions 
there: what minister?  Why not immediately rather than as soon as is 
practical?  And what if the legislature isn't sitting?  Would the results 
of a referendum be released? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Well understand on the latter that after the results are 
in, the Chief Electoral Officer announces them.  All that the minister does 
is file the report to the Assembly.  So the results are announced by the 
Chief Electoral Officer under section 10. 
 
The other one on the introducing of the Bill; understand in section 5 that 
you can't bind a future government.  I mean all that the government can do 
is introduce it to the Assembly.  You can't bind the Assembly.  The 
government could be defeated on the Bill in the Assembly.  So its 
obligation is to introduce it.  Okay?  Can't make the Assembly pass it. 
 
You could certainly . . . could be into the similar-type question on the 
French language question.  Are you doing it quickly enough or whatever?  
The courts may ultimately make some rulings, but there has to be some 
flexibility because it could be very complex questions on the plebiscite.  
It could well . . . for example, if it's a matter of balanced budget, do 
you then do it immediately, depending what the terms of plebiscite or 
referendum are?  Could be major expenditure items which require fundamental 
program and policy changes, budgetary changes. 
 
So the wording was chosen to allow the government, who will ultimately make 
that decision, the necessary flexibility to be able to comply with it. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Okay, thank you.  Section 11, Mr. Minister . . . I must say 
I join my colleague from Regina Rosemont regarding, I guess, a related 
matter of government broadcasting.  I recognize that the Bill says that 
there will be no advertising pertaining to the referendum or plebiscite 
question.  Only routinely, ". . . routinely broadcast or published . . ." 
information. 
 
That makes me a little nervous, Mr. Minister, because where we recently saw 
the agricultural program on provincial TV, at the expense of some 26, 
$30,000, where the government deemed that to be an informational program.  
I think it was pretty well regarded by the majority of the population as 
blatant government propaganda.  And so I don't take much comfort in the 
government having the ability to routinely broadcast or publish information 
because you people have gone over the line on many occasions, to spend 
taxpayers' money on blatant, political propaganda, for lack of a better 
phrase.  And so I worry about that section. 



 

 

 
And I guess what I am saying is that I don't trust your government in this 
regard.  Who defines routinely?  I think that there should be the 
opportunity for citizens or opposition or someone to make sure that some 
independent body would define that.  In this regard would the court be able 
to do that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Well it's the intent that it would be an offence to not 
comply with this.  It's basically taken from The Election Act as to what 
can be done.  But given the fact that a plebiscite or referendum may not be 
during the general election, it wasn't as restrictive as it is under The 
Election Act. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- I'm sorry, Mr. Minister, I was thinking about another 
matter.  Could you just repeat what you said, if you don't mind?  Sorry. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I said, it's basically taken from The Election Act.  It 
is the intention to put under the regulations that it is an offence to 
breach that.  And if it is an offence to breach that, then ultimately the 
court would decide whether it's routinely broadcast.  I mean seat-belt 
safety, that sort of thing; SaskTel, usual advertising.  But the operate 
one, it's any information or particulars of the activities, etc. that 
pertain to the question or questions put to the electors.  So that's the 
operative.  If it has anything to do with that then it would be an offence. 
 
(2130) 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- I'm not exactly sure how that would work.  There could very 
well be advertising that would come very close to relating to the question.  
For example, we're bombarded right today with Fair Share ads, with SaskTel 
ads, with Power Corporation bond ads, with community bond ads, and with Get 
Smart ads.  We're being bombarded with ads that are obviously have . . . I 
mean the taxpayers viewing this is a blatant waste of money, but I'm sure 
your attempt is to create an impression in the public mind that you're 
doing great and wonderful things.  So I worry about the subtleness with 
which you're trying to influence public opinion -- it isn't working. 
 
But there's a potential in this Act to come very close to advertising 
related to questions on the referendum or plebiscite that may not be 
determined to be blatant violation of the Act.  Section 11(2) worries me 
because this oath refers to two months after the referendum or plebiscite 
that would be submitted to the Chief Electoral Officer, and I guess that 
means there's no process leading up to the referendum or plebiscite whereby 
the Chief Electoral Officer could make the determination as to whether or 
not the ads were in violation of the Act. 
 
Two months later, after the date of the referendum or plebiscite, I guess I 
wonder what would be the consequences if someone were found violating the 
Act in that case. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I understand that this is the same as section 229 of The 
Elections Act, that two months after they must file their solemn 
declaration.  So it's taken from section 229 of The Elections Act.  And 



 

 

again it would be an offence and the offence penalties would be set out in 
the regulations. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Minister, with regard to this Bill, I just summarize a 
few concerns, I guess, that I have.  You've answered some of the questions 
to my satisfaction.  And others, while I accept your attempt to satisfy the 
questions of myself and my colleague from Rosemont, I'm not sure that I 
agree with your explanation in that it will force your government to change 
some of its behaviour. 
 
The government can delay for up to one year, a citizen-initiated plebiscite 
-- one year once it is considered in order from the Chief Electoral 
Officer.  I don't know how long it would take the Chief Electoral Officer 
to determine that a list would be in order.  As a matter of clarification, 
do you have any sense of that time frame, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- It was left that way because it's conceivable that you 
could have two or three petitions during the course of a year and it gives 
the government time to maybe do all three at the same time.  And that's why 
that year provision was put in. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Well, sorry, Mr. Minister.  I wondered if you had any time 
frame as to how long you think it would take the Chief Electoral Officer to 
verify.  Do you have any expectation in this regard? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I couldn't answer that.  I could . . . we could all see 
circumstances where the Chief Electoral Officer may have other things -- 
by-elections, everything else -- going on.  But . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- By-elections? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Yes, by-elections.  But the year was given just in case, 
as I say, there could be a situation where there could be two or three 
different plebiscites or referendums come up, and the government could then 
stage them all at the same time.  And so this gives that flexibility. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Well, Mr. Minister, that concerns me a little bit because 
what you're really saying is that the Chief Electoral Officer . . . there's 
no expectations on that office to get the citizen-initiated plebiscite list 
verified. 
 
Now your example of the Chief Electoral Officer being busy with 
by-elections was a poor example because you've only had two by-elections in 
the last five years out of six vacancies.  But I realize that the Chief 
Electoral Officer may be busy redoing boundaries and this kind of thing. 
 
But my point is that . . . my initial point was that you've tipped the 
balance in favour of government because you can hold a referendum initiated 
by government within 29 days, yet you can drag out for . . . you're not 
even prepared to say; maybe two years, an issue that the citizens consider 
important through this citizen-initiated plebiscite.  In fact, you could 
draw it out two and a half or three years because if you keep the House not 
sitting for nine and a half months, you could really drag out a citizen 



 

 

concern for two and a half to three years.  So obviously that's weighted in 
favour of the government determining what issues are important.  I'm still 
uneasy about a number of citizens . . . While I accept your amendment as 
the best we can do at the time, I'm still concerned that a number of 
citizens, likely in the tens of thousands, would not be eligible to have 
their names on that . . . or to initiate the plebiscite.  I'm concerned 
that plebiscites do not have the same binding effect as 
government-initiated referendums, another imbalance in favour of 
government. 
 
I'm concerned that the government can -- I realize the court is the final 
determination -- but the government can decide, in its wisdom, that the 
wording of the citizens' plebiscite is not done properly, yet there's no 
way for the citizens to challenge whether or not they feel the 
government-initiated referendum is worded properly.  And when you consider, 
in jurisdictions that have this legislation, that wording is the sticky 
point most of the time, that again weights this Bill too much in favour of 
the government in relation to the general public. 
 
And obviously while I support increasing the opportunities for citizens at 
large to have direct input into government decision making, I guess I'm a 
little leery that that's the motivation for this Bill because you continue 
to ignore public opinion at the time we're discussing this.  I guess this 
is why, in my view, very little will change, and I wouldn't be at all 
unhappy if you withdrew this Bill because I think that it's . . . I don't 
see how it's going to serve the interests, other than a perception of the 
interests of the public, in terms of greater influence and greater 
participation in decisions of your government. 
 
Fortunately we may not have to worry about that for very long, given that 
your government is very low in the polls.  But I think we should do this 
correctly if we're going to do it at all. 
 
And one final worry I have about this referendum legislation, Mr. Minister, 
is that I worry about the American context here, particularly as this 
Premier has looked so often to the U.S. for solutions to Saskatchewan 
issues -- and often right wing solutions -- and trying to transplant those 
ideas in Saskatchewan -- which haven't worked, clearly haven't worked.  And 
so the idea of referendum decisions made by powerful lobby and interest 
groups influencing public opinion in isolation of other issues, I would not 
want us to be put in a state of government paralysis like the state of 
California. 
 
So those are some of the concerns I have, Mr. Minister.  And I'm very 
concerned that this Bill will not force this PC government to change 
anything it's doing now.  That in the final analysis, the Premier who has 
blatantly abused, in my view, his authority and mandate as Premier, it will 
allow the Premier and the cabinet to continue functioning in the arrogant 
way that it has over nine years.  And therefore I don't have very many 
positive things to say about the Bill. 
 
Before I take my place, I would like to thank your officials for their 
advising you and the responses that you've given to me.  Thank you. 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I, in closing, would express some disappointment that the 
opposition are voting against the Bill, given the hon. member's comments 
tonight that he wished it was withdrawn and that he has a lot of concerns. 
 
So as I say, I express some disappointment, but I do join with the hon. 
member in thanking the officials for all their work and help, again another 
issue of a very complex one.  A great amount of research has gone into it 
and I appreciate the work that they've done. 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you very much.  Mr. Minister, I want to express my 
support for the comments made by the member for Saskatoon Eastview in our 
concerns that have raised about this Bill.  If you want to draw the 
conclusion that we're intent to vote against it, I guess that's up to you; 
you'll find out when the vote comes. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, I want to refer you back to a statement that you made at 
the time that this Bill was being introduced -- or the announcement that 
this Bill would be introduced I guess is probably the more correct way of 
putting it -- in that you raised a number of other initiatives that you 
thought you might undertake.  Now I know it's not within the Bill, but I 
wonder just as we conclude this portion of the passage of the Bill, whether 
you'd care to comment on why there is not reference to proportional 
representation, particularly given the political atmosphere of the province 
at this time. 
 
It certainly would be something that I know that I'd be prepared to look 
at, and other members of our caucus would certainly want to look at.  Are 
you perhaps going to follow along as the next step and move in that 
direction? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- What I indicated during the electoral boundaries matter, 
that these questions such as proportional representation, such as possibly 
reduced number of ridings, the possibility . . . and I've been an advocate 
for some time of special ridings for natives.  I think that those are very 
much worthy of consideration and debate in this province. 
 
I thought that I did make those comments in conjunction with the electoral 
boundaries matter in the context that, given the need for certainty after 
the Court of Appeal decision and the establishment of the Boundaries 
Commission, that we were going to keep their terms of reference as close as 
possible to the previous mandate, and that those broader questions would be 
best left for a review by a future legislature.  And that's what I said.  I 
happen to believe that to be the case. 
 
I think they are worthy of the debate in the province.  I'm not sure.  
Maybe ultimately the decision as to any or all of those will be done by a 
referendum.  I can't answer that, but I didn't think . . . all I said was I 
didn't think they'd be appropriate as part of the mandate of the Archer 
Commission. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 



 

 

Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
(2145) 
 
Clause 7 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- The amendment to section 7, is that agreed? 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 7 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 8 to 15 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 
Bill No. 71 -- An Act respecting a right of access to documents of local 
authorities and a right of privacy with respect to personal information 
held by local authorities 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I move first and second reading of the amendments, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- I move the Bill be now read a third time and passed 
under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Bill No. 70 -- An Act respecting a right of access to documents of the 
Government of Saskatchewan and a right of privacy with respect to personal 
information held by the Government of Saskatchewan 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that the amendments be now read a 
first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- With leave, Mr. Speaker, I move that the Bill be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 69 -- An Act respecting Referendums and Plebiscites 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that the amendments be now read a 
first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- With leave, Mr. Speaker, I move that the Bill be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:52 p.m. 
 


