





























































Hansard: June 04, 1991


 

 

June 4/91 
EVENING SITTING 

 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 
SECOND READINGS 

 
Bill No. 61 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth that Bill No. 61 -- An Act to amend The Education and 
Health Tax Act (No. 2) be now read a second time and the proposed amendment 
thereto moved by Mr. Van Mulligen. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was 
mentioning before supper that there are a number of ways in which the 
revenue that this tax is generating could have been raised in alternative 
ways that would have had much less of a negative impact upon taxpayers in 
the province of Saskatchewan.  And I was pointing out before supper, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that the of my greatest concerns is the revenue that this 
government has forfeited from not levying the royalties it ought to have 
levied in the resource industry, and particularly in the oil industry in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I was making reference to a news-letter prepared by Sask Trends Monitor 
that pointed out . . . And I want to cite here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of 
the references in the April 1990 news-letter that I didn't quote from 
before supper. 
 
 iSask Trends Monitor r says, and I quote: 
 

 Even with the declining (oil) prices, had the royalty and taxation levels 
remained at their earlier levels, the current provincial debt of $4 
billion would simply not exist. 

 
In other words, Mr. Speaker, this research organization has reached the 
conclusion that the revenues that the government has chosen to consciously, 
as a matter of policy, forgo from oil alone, over the last decade, account 
for some $4 billion in revenue.  And that had those oil revenues -- those 
oil royalties -- been collected on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, we 
would have virtually no provincial debt in this province today. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that that illustrates perhaps more clearly 
than any other revenue option the fact that the government did have choices 
here.  The government could have increased its royalty levels on oil and 
raised the money that it needed for provincial finances there instead of 
levying this massive new tax increase upon individual taxpayers in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the government had at least three alternative 
options.  First of all it could have . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Come in for the kill, Peter. 



 

 

 
Mr. Prebble: -- The member for Meadow Lake says, come in for the kill.  Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, it is he who has been killing taxpayers in Saskatchewan 
since April 1.  And it is he, Mr. Deputy Speaker, who comes before this 
Assembly and begins levying this massive new tax increase without even 
bringing down a budget first, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  It is he who introduces 
this new tax without even having the legal authority to do it.  It is he 
who chooses to levy fines against businesses who won't collect this tax -- 
again without the legal authority to do it.  And we on this side of the 
Assembly have been asking what right does he have to kill Saskatchewan 
business in this way, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  We say he has no right to do it. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I said, the government had at least three 
choices.  The government could have levied a fair . . . could have asked 
the corporate sector in this province to pay their fair share of income 
tax.  It could have asked a lot of the larger companies like Saskoil, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, to be coughing up some of the deferred taxes that they owe 
to the provincial and federal treasuries, but it didn't choose to do that. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the government had a second choice.  It could have 
chosen to eliminate its waste and its patronage, and it again opted not to 
do that. 
 
And then it had a third choice, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  It could have chosen 
to levy a fair royalty on the resource industries and particularly the oil 
industry in this province.  And once again it chose not to do that, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker.  So it had at least three other options other than the 
levying of this provincial GST (goods and services tax).  And instead it 
chose to take yet another major bite out of the Saskatchewan taxpayer. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, before I sit down I want to comment on one other 
major impact of this tax, and that is the impact that it is having and is 
going to have on the business community in the province of Saskatchewan.  
Because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we believe that this tax is crippling the 
Saskatchewan economy.  We believe that it is making the Saskatchewan 
recession ever deeper.  The economy is being driven into recession by this 
tax.  You only need to walk into the average restaurant in Saskatoon or 
Regina to see the devastating effect that this tax has had on the 
restaurant industry throughout the province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, already in the last five years we have a situation in 
this province in which 80,000 more people have left Saskatchewan than have 
entered the province.  And what this tax is going to do, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is hasten the out-migration more than ever.  More than ever people 
are going to be aware of the fact that in Saskatchewan taxes are heavier 
and more burdensome than they are now in any other province in western 
Canada.  And they are going to be leaving Saskatchewan to escape this tax 
burden, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and the provincial GST is simply going to 
accelerate that process. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I notice that the Saskatchewan Business Coalition held 
a news conference a couple of weeks ago, led by a number of people in the 
clothing industry, in the restaurant industry, and a variety of other small 



 

 

businesses in the province of Saskatchewan.  Many of the business operators 
openly identified themselves as traditional Progressive Conservative 
supporters, but they indicated that they could not possibly accept this 
provincial GST being rammed down their throats by this increasingly 
unpopular PC (Progressive Conservative) government. 
 
And I want to quote from the news release that they issued some 12 days 
ago.  They said, and I quote: 
 

 This huge new tax (referring to the provincial GST) is very detrimental . 
. . especially at this time, because it takes hundreds of millions of 
dollars of disposable income out of the pockets of consumers.  Less 
disposable income for low and middle income families means they will have 
less to spend at local businesses.  Lower sales at local businesses will 
mean lower profits and lost jobs.  The consequences of this . . . new tax 
are widespread and severe. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, even the PC government's traditional base of support in 
the business community is rejecting this tax.  And I say to the government 
opposite, why don't you listen to people in the business community and 
respect the fact that their very survival in some cases is at stake if this 
tax is not withdrawn.  Heed their message and withdraw this tax before it's 
too late. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, this 7 per cent provincial GST is 
literally destroying many small family businesses in the province of 
Saskatchewan.  And it is forcing more and more of our retail sales dollars 
across the border, whether it be into the United States or into Alberta or 
even into Manitoba, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because the reality has been that 
since the new federal GST and then the new provincial . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, order, please.  Order, please.  One of the 
rights of the Assembly, I believe, is the right to speak.  And another 
right of the Assembly is the right to be heard.  And I would appreciate 
being able to hear, and I think there's a couple of people that are having 
meetings across both sides of the Assembly.  If they could take that 
meeting outside, we'd be able to continue listening to the remarks of the 
member from Saskatoon University. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Thank you very much.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am very 
concerned about the fact that we have seen an alarming increase in 
cross-border shopping since the implementation of the provincial GST.  And 
we have daily reports from border communities like Estevan, Saskatchewan 
where some 800 cars a day are crossing at the border station south of that 
community.  And many of those people are going to shop across the border 
because the provincial GST is not levied on goods and services that they 
can buy in the United States, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  And the tax burden has 
become so severe that they are in effect forced to go outside their 
community to make a lot of their basic purchases because of the money they 
can save. 
 



 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it should be obvious when people are flocking across 
the borders in these large numbers that in effect the Government of 
Saskatchewan is forgoing retail sales in this province and is losing jobs 
as a result of those lost retail sales.  And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is 
one of the reasons why the business community in this province, and 
particularly in border towns and cities, cannot afford this tax. 
 
This tax, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this new tax is going to sap the 
competitiveness of our local industries who must compete against industries 
in other provinces like Alberta where there is no 7 per cent provincial 
GST.  And this puts Saskatchewan business at a very unfair disadvantage 
because the tax is being levied in this province, but it is not being 
levied in either Manitoba or Alberta.  They will have no provincial GST, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, and that puts Saskatchewan business men at a very 
unfair disadvantage.  And inevitably, as a result of losing that 
competitive edge, opportunities for new job creation that might come to 
Saskatchewan will end up going to other western provinces instead. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I indicated earlier, this tax is going to hurt our 
publishing industry in Saskatchewan.  And that is a very important small 
business opportunity that is growing in this province, and that was growing 
until this tax was levied.  And the tax on reading is inevitably going to 
make life much more difficult for the publishing industry.  Some of our 
publishing houses may close as a result of the 7 per cent provincial GST. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this new 7 per cent tax is going to hurt our tourist 
industry.  It is going to make it less attractive for tourists to come into 
the province of Saskatchewan and spend as much time here as they would have 
otherwise, when if they travel in any other western province they will not 
be levied with the kind of consumer tax burden that they'll be forced to 
pay in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I note with some concern the remarks that have 
been made by the Saskatchewan section of the Alliance of Canadian Travel 
Associations.  They've analysed the new provincial GST and they've analysed 
its impact on the tourism and travel sector in the province of 
Saskatchewan.  And they have this to say, and I want to cite from their 
submission.  They said last month, sir, and I quote: 
 

 . . . that "tourism . . . will suffer greatly as a result of the P.S.T.", 
and that "the end result would be lost jobs, and ultimately lost revenue 
for the (people) . . . of Saskatchewan." 

 
The association concludes, and I quote: 
 

 . . . "the application of the Provincial Sales Tax in the travel industry 
would be detrimental to that sector of the Saskatchewan economy to the 
point of being counter-productive. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it is clear that this industry feels that it is 
going to be hurt by the new tax.  It's concerned about what a tax on basic 
tourism services will mean -- things like the taxing of boat rentals, for 
instance.  And additional taxation throughout the hospitality industry is 



 

 

going to hurt that sector of the economy very severely and it's another 
reason why this tax ought to be withdrawn. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the housing industry has expressed concern about this 
tax.  The new provincial GST will be imposed on all housing construction, 
renovation, and repair services.  This sector, I might add, has already 
been in a major slump over the last two or three years.  New housing starts 
in Saskatchewan are at a record low.  If you look at the pattern of new 
housing starts over the last decade, we're in an all-time slump.  And all 
that this new tax is going to do is make that recession in the housing 
industry even more severe, not only because the tax is being levied on new 
housing construction and on home renovation, but also because the general 
effect of the tax in the Saskatchewan economy is to leave the average 
Saskatchewan family with significantly reduced disposable income.  Meaning 
that the capacity of that family to purchase a house and to save money for 
purchasing a house is going to be correspondingly reduced, with the result, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, with the result that the housing slump that we're 
witnessing now will continue to become more severe. 
 
(1915) 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to mention one other serious shortcoming of 
this tax as it relates to the general economy.  I pointed out that it's 
going to mean reduced retail sales.  I pointed out that it's going to mean 
a loss of jobs. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in addition to that, this tax will inevitably fuel 
inflation in Saskatchewan.  And I note with a lot of concern that the 
statistics are now out for the month of April and they show that 
Saskatchewan's inflation rate for the month of April, since the new 
provincial GST took effect, is the highest in the country, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker.  We have an inflation rate in this province for the month of April 
alone, of 1.4 per cent in Saskatoon and 1.3 per cent in Regina.  And that 
compares, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with a national inflation rate in the cities 
across Canada for the month of April of zero per cent.  So I think it is 
clear that this is a tax that is going to fuel inflation. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is also a tax that is going to hurt voluntary 
organizations.  And I want to throw out to the Minister of Finance who 
continues to endlessly heckle me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that charitable 
organizations are going to be hurt by this tax.  They will have to pay the 
7 per cent provincial GST on the goods and services they purchase to carry 
out their activities.  And that will obviously make these non-profit 
organizations who have to work hard to raise the money that they operate 
off of on a year-by-year basis, all of which is collected through 
donations, it will make their year-to-year operations even more difficult 
to finance because they'll be paying a tax on goods and services that they 
purchased at an unprecedented rate, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now I want to comment on two things in closing.  First, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
I want to comment on the fact that the planning for this tax has been a 
disaster.  And secondly, I want to comment on the question that the 
Minister of Finance has been shouting from his seat endlessly since I began 



 

 

speaking this evening about what's our plan, what's our plan.  And I want 
to answer his question on that before I sit down. 
 
But first of all, let me say a word about the planning of this tax for 
which the Minister of Finance has to bear a primary responsibility, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker.  It is truly unbelievable that we witnessed the 
introduction of this tax without any formal studies, when the tax was first 
levied, on what its impact would be.  The Government of Saskatchewan, 
despite constant questioning on this matter, was unable to release a study, 
and after weeks of questioning had to rapidly prepare one which was 
conjured up for the occasion more than six weeks after the tax had already 
been collected. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the method for introducing the tax in this 
province, in our judgement, is clearly illegal.  This is a tax, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that was introduced prior to a provincial budget being brought 
down, with no authorization in a budget prior to the time it began to be 
collected, and it was a tax, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that was levied without 
any legislative authority by the government to levy it.  At least when the 
federal Tories levied the burdensome federal GST, they at least waited 
until the tax law was through the Assembly . . . through the House of 
Commons and through the Senate in Ottawa before they began to collect it. 
 
This government didn't even have the decency to bring the tax Bill before 
the Assembly before it began to levy the provincial GST among all 
Saskatchewan residents.  So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what we witnessed, 
unbelievably, was a tax that was announced by press release in February of 
this year. 
 
Now it is also interesting to note, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that fines on this 
tax are being levied by the Minister of Finance on those who refuse to 
collect it, again without the tax law having been passed by the 
legislature, and at this point, without the Minister of Finance having the 
legislative authority to levy such fines. 
 
This, I think, points to a very dictatorial attitude on the part of the 
government with respect to the handling of this tax.  So, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we see an approach to tax collection that is probably illegal.  
And equally important, we see an approach to tax collection that I think is 
unethical in the sense that the government's mandate in all moral terms has 
long since expired.  And yet the government introduces such a tax in its 
dying days of office. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Minister of Finance has been shouting from his 
seat: what's our plan, what's our plan?  And so I want to conclude my 
remarks tonight by telling him and the people of Saskatchewan exactly what 
our plan is. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the first element in our plan is to . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Open the books. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- The member from Prince Albert says the first step in our 



 

 

plan is to open the books.  Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to say we have 
even one step before that.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, our first plan when we are 
elected to office is to repeal the 7 per cent provincial GST.  That's the 
first step in our plan, because we have no doubt about the fact that this 
tax is driving Saskatchewan's economy into a recession.  This tax means 
lost jobs.  It means lost opportunities for our young people.  It means 
lost retail sales to other parts of western Canada and the United States, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker.  So our first step will be to repeal this tax. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, our second step will be to open the books and to have 
an independent audit done in the province of Saskatchewan so that we can 
accurately assess the true extent of the provincial debt and the true 
extent of the waste and mismanagement that this government has imposed upon 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And our third step, sir, I say to the Minister of Finance, our third step 
will be to go with a fine-tooth comb throughout every one of your 
departments and to weed out the waste, sir -- to weed out the waste.  And 
it is there by the tens of millions of dollars. 
 
And I say to the Minister of Finance, the money you're spending on 
Corporate Strategy Group for image consulting -- that's gone.  Most of the 
money that you're spending on government advertising, almost $2 million a 
month, a large part of that will be gone.  The money, I say, that you're 
spending, $500,000 a year on cabinet travel, that'll be cut in half, Mr. 
Minister of Finance.  The money that you're spending on GigaText, it'll be 
gone; it won't be wasted any more. 
 
I say to the Minister of Finance that the money that you're spending on 
empty lease office space . . . You're building new space here in Regina 
while you decentralize your government operations around the province.  
Well I say that that empty lease space, those leases, Mr. Minister of 
Finance, those leases will be terminated with friends of your party.  This 
government is not going to continue leasing empty lease office space from 
friends of the government opposite. 
 
I say to the Minister of Finance, there are millions of dollars to be saved 
there and he knows it.  I say to the Minister of Finance, the money that 
you're spending every month to keep Graham Taylor and to keep Bob Andrew 
going in the little trade offices that you created for them, well those 
arrangements are going to be terminated if we can terminate them, Mr. 
Minister of Finance.  No more patronage to PC hacks I say to you, and 
there'll be significant savings there. 
 
I say to the Minister of Finance when he says what's our plan, I say to the 
Minister of Finance that we will look at the resource industry in this 
province and we will ask the resource sector to pay its fair share just 
like individual taxpayers in this province are paying their fair share, Mr. 
Speaker -- I would say more than their fair share in this province. 
 
I say to the Minister of Finance when he says what's our plan, I say to him 
that we will look at the income tax, the lack of income tax that is being 
paid by your corporate friends, and we will see what can be done to levy a 



 

 

fair tax from companies like Saskoil and WESTBRIDGE Computer Corporation 
who under your government pay not a single penny in income tax.  That's our 
plan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Our plan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is to work to build, to rebuild the 
Saskatchewan economy.  To rebuild the Saskatchewan economy by working with 
our small-business sector in this province and our co-op sector and the 
public sector again to re-establish a mixed economy in this province, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker.  A mixed economy in which co-ops and small, private 
Saskatchewan business and the Saskatchewan government will work hand in 
hand with assistance to our local business operators, our local, small 
Saskatchewan business people. 
 
And no more grants and no more give-aways to Cargill and to Weyerhaeuser 
and to Peter Pocklington in the province of Saskatchewan.  If there is any 
assistance being given to business, it's going to be to small Saskatchewan 
business in the province of Saskatchewan.  That's our plan, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker.  Our plan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is to concentrate on creating jobs 
through working together with local business and not with the Cargills of 
the world.  That's our plan. 
 
Now I say to the Minister of Finance that he may not like that plan but we 
have a plan on this side of the Assembly.  And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 
believe that when an election is called, that the people of Saskatchewan, 
as indicated by the poll tonight that CKCK television released, that the 
people of Saskatchewan will reject the PC plan opposite, will reject their 
huge tax grab, and will vote for the plan offered by the New Democratic 
Party.  Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gleim: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  It gives me great pleasure 
this evening to speak on Bill 61, in favour of Bill 61, and against the 
amendment.  Why, Mr. Speaker?  Well Bill 61 was brought in for many 
reasons.  One of the reasons Bill 61 was brought in, probably one of the 
biggest reasons, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is to balance the budget. 
 
One of the other reasons, Mr. Speaker, is the farm programs.  Without 
bringing this Bill in, Mr. Speaker, farm programs would have to be paid 
for, cut-backs would have to be from somewhere else to help off-set and pay 
for these programs.  These programs are out in rural Saskatchewan, and I do 
believe in urban Saskatchewan, as much as the people across the way would 
try to tell us that it's not popular.  It is going to be the saviour of 
rural Saskatchewan.  It's not going to be easy but when you take a look at 
it, down in my area alone, it's over 95 per cent of the producers have 
participated in the GRIP (gross revenue insurance plan) program. 
 
The opposition says, we don't need this Bill for this program.  They may be 
right, but where is the money going to come from, Deputy Speaker?  That is 
the part that the people keep asking, where is the money going to come 
from?  Well they keep saying waste management, waste management.  We'll get 
the money from the waste and the mismanagement.  Well, Mr. Speaker, there's 
only so much money comes, and there's only so many times you can spend a 



 

 

dollar. 
 
I guess maybe what you'd call waste and mismanagement . . . My waste and 
mismanagement views are a little different than theirs.  I have felt that 
waste and mismanagement, Mr. Speaker, was when they bought, didn't build.  
They bought our farm land, Mr. Speaker.  They bought potash mines; they 
bought oil wells -- something that was there, didn't create any new jobs, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1930) 
 
That was something that was owned, already owned and well looked after -- 
well.  I would say the business people owned it, and those are the people 
that should have owned it and kept operating it. 
 
The opposition keeps saying, this is the biggest tax grab ever.  I have to 
say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that memory is pretty short.  One of the 
big tax grabs were . . . and maybe some of them can't think back that far 
or don't remember.  In the 11 years that they were in power, from 1971 to 
1982, income tax went from 34 per cent to 58 per cent.  I don't know what 
you call that, how many dollars that generated, but just figure out what 
the percentage of that was, Mr. Speaker.  I call that a big tax grab. 
 
They keep saying, $440 million you're taking from the people.  What are you 
doing with the $440 million?  We're giving it away to families, Mr. 
Speaker, families.  And it tells you right in here in this book the rebates 
that are coming up for families, the lower income families, Mr. Speaker, 
plus to small business, Mr. Speaker.  That's where the $440 million comes, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
There's rebates to the small-business people, Mr. Speaker, the first time 
ever, Mr. Speaker.  And the first time low income families have had a 
rebate on for their families.  And the difference there is, Mr. Speaker, 
the difference there is, Mr. Speaker, it's how you talk about it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
They say we are taxing low income-tax families, Mr. Speaker.  There's over 
$35 million worth of refundable sales tax credit moves back in the 
provincial lower for income families resulting from the broadening of the 
sales tax base to that of the GST, Mr. Speaker.  That's where the money is 
going, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We talk about waste and mismanagement again.  All these dollars are coming 
from waste and mismanagement.  I have a release here by the Leader of the 
Opposition which says they're going to . . .through waste and mismanagement 
they can . . . they know where there's over $100 million.  Well, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, this here letter is from Saskatchewan Graphic Arts Industries 
Ltd., Mr. Speaker, and it's a statement made by the opposition across the 
way.  I wanted to read this to you, Mr. Speaker: 
 

 Roy Romanow's statements at his recent conference held in Saskatoon have 
created quite a stir in the Saskatchewan printing industry.  The statement 
that deeply concerns us is the following: 



 

 

 
  In this context, (this is by the opposition leader) even before we 

get an opportunity to 'open the books' of the current government, we 
have identified more than $100 million a year in government waste and 
mismanagement which could be cut. 

 
  (And he goes on) For example, an 80 percent cut in government 

advertising would save $17.6 million a year.  A 66 per cent cut in 
government printing would save another $24.6 million a year.  A 33 
per cent cut in government travel would save taxpayers $17 million a 
year.  Even a 25 per cent cut in leased office space would save the 
taxpayers $17.7 million a year." 

 
You add all that up it only comes to $76.8 million a year, so I don't know 
where the miscalculation comes from.  But as he carries on here: 
 

 A 66% cut in government printing would put current spending at around 
$37,500,000.  The entire printing budget for 1990-91 according to 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation, is only $13.2 million.  We 
would like . . . (to make you aware, it says) of the fact that his entire 
savings is double what is being spent!. 

 
How can you save twice as much as you spent?  This is what these people 
would like to know.  And it says: 
 

 It is interesting to note that total print procurement for all of Western 
Canada . . . is around $60 million. 

 
What is very interesting is -- this is from the association -- they say: 
 

 If the current bare-bone budget of 13.2 million would be slashed to an 
unrealistic $4.49 million we would have a disaster in our industry.  
Somehow, I have a feeling that someone did not do his homework very well. 

 
And that feeling is not only with him, Mr. Speaker.  When you start 
calculating, it's like the 7.5 and the .75 calculations are way out. 
 
And it also adds that: 
 

 Mr. Romanow's cut would mean the possible demise of those firms. 
 
 Our association (this is still in the letter) which is made up of small 

business supports harmonization.  It would help to make us more 
competitive against other printers in Canada, the United States, Europe, 
Australia and the Far Eastern Countries.  (So it says) Please do not back 
down from the harmonization program that you implemented. 

 
 Thank you for your kind consideration. Martin Zip, President. 
 

Some more of the places where he wanted to get that $100 million from . . . 
this comes from Saskatchewan Weekly Newspapers Association, from the 
president and the directors, Mr. Speaker.  It's right here. 
 



 

 

 A sizeable portion of this $17.6 million that reportedly would be saved is 
much needed revenue that is going directly into . . . smaller centres to 
keep very important elements of those communities -- their weekly 
newspaper and local radio station -- alive.  In the case of our industry I 
would estimate that there are some 500 people employed which is obviously 
a large industry that is still based in small town Saskatchewan. 

 
And it goes on to say that some weekly provincial government advertising 
can count for as high as 30 per cent of some our smaller newspapers, for 
their revenue.  To cut that by 80 per cent would be devastating. 
 

 "So what's the loss?" some might ask.  It's a question that properly 
should be asked of the residents of the community that the newspaper has 
served. 

 
This all comes from the Saskatchewan Weekly Newspapers Association 
president, Bill Johnston. 
 
Then we go on a little further, as a news release that was released by the 
member from Regina, sitting right along side of the opposition leader -- I 
can't say his name.  But he keeps saying . . . (inaudible interjection) . . 
. The one formerly from Humboldt.  He says instead of making such 
statements as we have been accused of being made, we should check some of 
the weekly newspapers about the impact of federal-provincial GST on their 
subscription rates and numbers.  We should check with them.  Well you just 
go back here and the statement that's come from the weekly newspapers said 
don't go the other direction; go on with the harmonization. 
 
One of the other ones that were supposed to be against this is called the 
Saskatchewan Association of Broadcasters, Mr. Speaker.  This is a letter to 
Mr . . . the opposition leader, Mr. Speaker. 
 

 In a statement given by you in Saskatoon on May 21, 1991, you talk about 
an eighty percent cut in government advertising saving $17.6 million 
dollars a year.  As President of the Saskatchewan Association of 
Broadcasters, I voice serious concerns about this sort of attitude towards 
advertising dollars, particularly those spent within the province of 
Saskatchewan.  Our broadcasting community is a fragile one, and many of 
our members are actually losing money.  Government spending on advertising 
not only fills a need by various government departments, it also goes 
directly to help support an industry that is in financial crisis. 

 
 A significant loss in advertising dollars to the private broadcasters 

would have to mean reduced employment in the broadcasting industry.  A 
$17.6 million dollar saving in a $4.8 billion dollar budget is only about 
one third of one per cent.  Surely much more significant savings need to 
be found. 

 
 The broadcasting industry also provides vital links between government, 

politicians and communities they serve.  A healthy broadcast industry 
provides healthy communications, which is so important in our society 
today.  I would ask you to please reconsider this particular area when 
looking at government savings.  This is not government waste, but 



 

 

government spending that make good sense. 
 

This comes from Rick Friesen, president of the association of broadcasters, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
My point is, Mr. Speaker, is here we are trying to prop up rural 
Saskatchewan, and there's somebody coming along behind us trying to chop it 
down, Mr. Speaker.  Where else is there a cheaper way of letting the people 
out there know what the programs are, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member across the way says we should spend more.  The 
critic for Social Services said we should spend another $1.2 billion on 
Social Services -- Ontario style, one of my colleagues said, Ontario style.  
If that's the way you want it, go out and tell the people this, that this 
is what you're wanting to do.  Tell the people where you are going to get 
the money, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The people out there want to know where this money comes from.  They want 
to have a plan.  We just heard a plan over there; it didn't say anything, 
Mr. Speaker.  They talk about their plan.  They want to debate the Bill 
before they announce their plan.  Well, Mr. Speaker, they did come up with 
what they call a plan a couple of weeks ago.  That plan was . . . the only 
thing that come out is a strong message on that . . . was moratoriums on 
farm land -- moratoriums on farm land, Mr. Speaker.  That was one of the 
strong points that come out.  They said, we don't think it's going to work, 
but we'll do it anyway. 
 
They talk about the people out there want us to withdraw this Bill, Mr. 
Speaker.  They talk about their petitions, Mr. Speaker.  As of last Friday, 
Mr. Speaker, there was only 20,200 . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order. Order, please. Order.  We ruled on this a few 
minutes ago and I would ask members, particularly the member from Lakeview 
and the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg and the member from Weyburn, if 
they have another debate that has to take place at this time, could they 
kindly do it outside the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Gleim: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I appreciate that. 
 
As I said before, Mr. Speaker, they talked about the people out there 
wanting us to withdraw this Bill.  They talk about the hundred thousand 
names on petitions, Mr. Speaker.  As of last Friday, that was tabled in 
this House here, there was 20,230 petitions tabled in this House as of last 
Friday.  That is why I say you are misleading the public out there.  You 
are misleading the people and you should not get away with it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gleim: -- Yes, that isn't counting everybody.  And that is not counting 
the imports from the United States like Elmer Fudd and those people . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- What about Bugs Bunny? 
 



 

 

(1945) 
 
Mr. Gleim: -- Well we run across his name too.  Mr. Speaker, I think it 
should be against the rules of the House to mislead people.  And that's the 
reason I have quoted this and why I've read from these letters, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the reason this Bill is here in this House, Bill 61, Mr. 
Speaker, is for here . . .  it's not that everybody likes taxes, because 
nobody likes taxes.  But if you want to pay the bills, Mr. Speaker, and you 
want something in this hand here, you've got to put something out on this 
hand here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They talk about how it's going to hurt business, Mr. Speaker.  The resource 
companies are saying, if you're going to do anything, harmonize, Mr. 
Speaker -- agricultural, resource sector which is mining, gas, and oil. 
 
They talk about waste and mismanagement, Mr. Speaker.  I just want to get 
back to that again because they keep using this line of waste and 
mismanagement.  I have to compare it to buying and to building.  When I say 
we are putting this to a good use, that we are going to build and we're 
going to prop up rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, I know it's put to good 
use.  When we talk about building water projects, when we talk about 
building fertilizer plants, which they're against . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Well you're spreading enough of it tonight. 
 
Mr. Gleim: -- That's fine.  You just keep listening because fertilizer does 
something for a lot of things.  And I know you people don't understand it 
over there.  With the GRIP and the NISA (net income stabilization account) 
program, Mr. Speaker . . . and we're building; this is what we're calling 
propping up rural Saskatchewan. 
 
When the members over there laugh when we talk about this, there's maybe 
only two of them over there that I know of -- maybe there's only one -- 
maybe that if . . . I'm sure that the member from Elphinstone does, but 
there's none of the rest of them over there know what I'm even talking 
about when I talk about GRIP.  They don't even know what . . . they're just 
against it. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Get a grip on it. 
 
Mr. Gleim: -- Yes maybe we'll do.  Maybe we'll use it, but maybe we'll 
change it.  Change what?  You don't even know what's in it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- In what?  In what? 
 
Mr. Gleim: -- In what, the member from Elphinstone says.  I just gave you a 
compliment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- You gave him too much credit. 
 
Mr. Gleim: -- That's right.  Maybe I gave you too much credit.  But no, you 



 

 

are the only one that knows how to fill out a GRIP program paper out there; 
that's right.  But there's 25 other ones over there that don't, Mr. 
Speaker, and that shows that they are against rural Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to say just a little bit about decentralization.  I want to say a 
little bit about decentralization -- what it's going to do for rural 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  I remember . . . I have to just go back a few 
years.  I remember working for the government for eleven and a half years.  
When they centralized Saskatchewan . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- I think we hired you, didn't we? 
 
Mr. Gleim: -- I was there a part of it.  No I was there before you were 
part of any part of government, thank gosh.  They come out . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, order please.  I'm going to rule on this one 
last time.  Order please. 
 
I'm going to ask that members on both sides of the House allow the member 
that has the floor the opportunity to make his remarks.  One more outburst 
of having different conversations and meetings across both sides of the 
floor, hollering back and forth, and not giving the member that has the 
floor the opportunity to speak, you can leave the Assembly for the evening.  
I hope it's understood.  I recognize the member from Shaunavon. 
 
Mr. Gleim: -- Thank you very much, Deputy Speaker.  I just wanted to finish 
what I started talking about -- thank you very much -- about 
centralization.  It was that government of the day across the way when they 
come to us and said, we are going to centralize; we are going to move 
everything into Regina and Saskatoon.  It was accepted; you didn't have any 
choice.  But it was accepted.  And I have to agree with it -- it was not a 
bad move at that time.  But nobody actually thought what it was going to do 
in the future. 
 
And that's the same as the today.  You take a poll out there right now, you 
talk to all the people, not just a few of the people, Mr. Speaker.  The 
grass roots of those people that are working here in Regina are from rural 
Saskatchewan.  Most of them, Mr. Speaker, I'm sure, would like to raise 
their families out in rural Saskatchewan.  There's nothing wrong with 
Regina, but it is a different setting out in rural Saskatchewan.  And I 
feel proud that I've raised my family out in rural Saskatchewan, and I 
think most of the people here would probably feel the same, especially the 
ones that grew up in rural Saskatchewan and had to move into the cities. 
 
I just wanted to make a couple of more quotes.  Go back to . . . about the 
harmonization, because this will lead to something else.  It says, the 
Leader of the Opposition, quote in the Star-Phoenix, he said: 
 

 . . . he recognizes the loss of business tax rebates under the PST will 
hurt and promised to find some other way to help business. 

 
Promised to find some other way, like you he know which way.  And he 
quotes: 



 

 

 
 Dale Botting and Doug Elliot . . . were cited Tuesday by Romanow as 

experts who endorse his party's analysis of the PST.  However they say: 
the NDP ignored several important questions.  For example: 

 
  Revenue from tax will be used to pay for farm safety net programs 

which will boost economic activity the NDP chose not to assess. 
 

But what was really said after that: 
 

 In spite of Romanow's claims, Elliot says he supports harmonization . . . 
and Botting also supports harmonization. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, a surprise opponent to Romanow's proposition was Dale 
Botting; Botting was listed as one of the four experts that endorsed New 
Democrats' report on income tax, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have to say that misleading again, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 
Speaker, the government has to be in touch with their people.  How will 
they do it if they don't advertise in the media?  This goes back to some of 
the . . . These are just some of the quotes.  This is Larry Mitchell, the 
publisher of the Tisdale Recorder, Mr. Speaker: the government advertising 
is important to the people.  This is from Ron Phillips, The Melfort 
Journal: I don't think it's wasted money; I think that the government has a 
duty to inform their constituents of the work they carry out and the 
programs that are available. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to say that once more.  I don't think it's a waste 
of money, he says; I think the government has a duty to inform their 
constituents of the work they are carrying out and the programs that are 
available.  And that's what I meant before, going back to what I mentioned 
before.  That is the cheapest way to advertise; that is one of the 
advertising that does help the rural people out in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I want to talk a little bit about what the decentralization -- which I 
started . . . I'm jumping around here a bit, but I want to just quote; this 
is only going to take a few minutes -- about what decentralization is going 
to do for rural Saskatchewan.  What's going to happen to recreation, our 
health care system, and our education system out there if we don't do 
something. 
 
We have an infrastructure out there, Mr. Speaker, that is second to none, 
Mr. Speaker.  We have to utilize those infrastructures, Mr. Speaker.  The 
best way to utilize those infrastructures, Mr. Speaker, is people.  Mr. 
Speaker, I am sure that anybody that goes out into rural Saskatchewan, that 
comes from Regina and sees the facilities that are sitting out there that 
are just as good as the facilities sitting here in Regina, are going to be 
pleased and are going to enjoy the move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gleim: -- Before closing, Mr. Speaker, I listened across the way about 



 

 

them talking about the federal government off-loading, Mr. Speaker.  
They're not happy about it, and they wouldn't let them get away with it.  
Well, Mr. Speaker, it sounds awful funny when you take the Leader of the 
Opposition . . . talks about he's going to go down there and crack the 
whip, and Brian is going to say, here, how much do you want? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gleim: -- Mr. Speaker, I just want to say he was sent down there once 
before, in 1981 and '82, Mr. Speaker.  He was sent down there along with 
his partner, Jean Chre pétien; another partner, John Wells; and another 
good friend of theirs, Pierre Trudeau.  They went down there.  What did 
they bring back here into Canada and into Saskatchewan?  They brought back 
something that nobody really wanted.  They brought back a constitution and 
a Charter of Rights that we are still living with. 
 
And they say they're going to send him down there to bring back . . . and 
he's going to stop the off-loading, Mr. Speaker.  Well, if that's what he's 
going to bring back, things like that, Mr. Speaker, don't bother to pay 
their air fare to send them down there, Mr. Speaker.  That is something we 
don't need to bring back here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to go through a couple of the things before I sit 
down here, Mr. Speaker, what harmonization is going to do.  What it's going 
to do for people in business, for manufacturers.  Machinery, it's 
refundable; tools, computer equipment, software equipment, cash registers, 
polishing wheels, vehicles, office furniture, safety clothing, safety 
equipment, many things, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I imagine, I guess maybe it's a little tough to accept for somebody that's 
never been in business.  And I can see why they don't understand.  Because, 
Mr. Speaker, it is $260 million that is going to come back to the business 
people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  And that is something that is the 
first refund for business in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I just want to say, Mr. Speaker, that in Saskatchewan we have come to the 
situation where I guess the people are telling us to hold the line.  And I 
guess maybe it's a little tough to take something away once you've had it.  
But I guess that time is come.  This tax is not something we wanted.  But 
with the recession on, Mr. Speaker, I do think it is coming around, Mr. 
Speaker, that times . . . we've been down to the bottom, the price of our 
commodities are going to change. 
 
We could just take a look at the weather out.  It was only six weeks ago 
that the people were saying across the way that we were going to have a 
drought.  Well, Mr. Speaker, the drought is over.  The drought is over, Mr. 
Speaker.  So we really don't have any control over the weather, Mr. 
Speaker.  We can implement programs like this, Mr. Speaker, but we cannot 
forecast the weather, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if they think they can forecast the weather, Mr. Speaker, look 
into this globe and wet their finger . . . what so they want to do, and say 
this is how we're going to do it.  This is our plan, but you've got to wait 



 

 

until after the election or until somebody calls an election, Mr. Speaker.  
The people out there don't accept that, Mr. Speaker, and I don't blame them 
for not accepting.  The people want to know where their stand is, Mr. 
Speaker.  We know where our stand is, Mr. Speaker.  We put it up front. 
 
When the Minister of . . . Finance minister goes around with his meetings, 
Mr. Speaker, last fall and in January, this is what the people said: if 
you're going to put a tax on, put it on and tell us about it.  Don't wait 
till an election or after an election, Mr. Speaker -- the approach that you 
people are taking across the way, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You have a plan, but you still haven't told us where you are going to get 
the money because you have been proven wrong by these people here.  You've 
been proven wrong by these people here and the letter that I have from your 
leader over there hasn't said anything, Mr. Speaker, where he is going to 
get his money from, Mr. Speaker.  Where is the money going to come from, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I just want to say, I will vote against the 
amendment and for Bill 61.  Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, I'll be taking part in this debate on the tax 
Bill that is the largest tax grab in the history of Saskatchewan, the 7 per 
cent provincial GST.  What I want to do, Mr. Speaker, is to do an outline 
of what I will be presenting, as well as then taking my outline step by 
step in mounting what I consider to be one of the strongest oppositions by 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
We well know right now that over a hundred thousand people in Saskatchewan 
have said no to the tax Bill.  And we also know that it affects many people 
from many different walks of life.  We know that it affects trappers.  We 
know that it affects people who do fishing.  We know that it affects 
workers.  We know that it affects small business.  We know that it affects 
farmers.  We know that it affects the youth.  We know that it affects 
children.  We know that it affects seniors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is very important for people to try and get a firm 
understanding in regards to how not only this tax affects them, but also a 
bit of an historical overview in regards to taxation. 
 
(2000) 
 
So first of all, I will give a bit of the outline of what I want to 
present, and then later on move into the debate itself on the specific 
areas.  The outline I will give, Mr. Speaker, is this.  I will start out by 
giving an overview of this provincial tax with federal GST because of the 
harmonization aspect of it.  It's also very important to learn not only the 
specific detail of the federal GST and its relationship to provincial GST, 
but also the taxation history of Canada as it relates to people in general.  
So I will be moving in then to do an overview on the Canadian tax system, 
and more particularly, the effects of the federal GST.  And I will also 



 

 

then look a bit at the historical records in Saskatchewan. 
 
A lot of people have talked about the fact that they are more taxed than at 
any time in the province's history.  But it's also very important to look 
at the facts.  We have to look at the facts, not only in regards to the 
provincial sales tax but also as it relates to other taxes such as the 
personal income tax and also the corporate tax itself, so that people then 
get an overall view in regards to tax. 
 
I also want to give the totals on the taxation, not only the comparison 
between the NDPers and the PCers; I would also like to do a comparison with 
the Liberal leaders so that the people will have a fair understanding in 
regards to the changes that have taken place in the tax system. 
 
As well, I will look a little bit at the past and, when I deal with the 
federal level, about how tax has changed quite a bit since the turn of the 
century and where most of the tax did come from, and when different changes 
in taxation took place, when the personal income tax got started, and when 
the sales taxes, you know, started developing and how they were impacted 
both at the federal and then on to the provincial levels.  I think that is 
a very important part of the debate, Mr. Speaker.  So after we get into the 
historical overview of taxation and more particularly in how it relates 
then to the sales tax, I will then move into the aspect of the rationale as 
to why the tax has occurred.  Therefore I will then get into the whole 
issue of deficits and more particularly the Saskatchewan deficit.  And 
lately there's been some news as well on the federal deficit and because 
we're being harmonized there is a problem of deficits, you know, not only 
at the provincial level but also at the federal level.  And the other thing 
that I will talk about is the patronage, of course, as well as 
mismanagement in our province. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  Order, please.  I would just remind the 
member . . . and I've been listening very closely to his opening remarks 
and he indicates that he is going to use the federal taxation system as an 
overview and go into taxation from the turn of the century, along with 
patronage and deficits and the federal level and everything else. 
 
I would just caution the member that that's fine, use that as an overview, 
but I would hope it would not be the dominating remarks of his remarks, and 
I'll be listening for that carefully. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Well, thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Those were going to 
be my introductory comments and where I wanted to get into the . . . I was 
going to look at interconnecting policies as well, you know, of the 
government as it relates to taxation.  But I wanted to get as well, into a 
bit on privatization, not to spend too much time on it but to provide an 
understanding for people as to where the money is going, at least what it 
says in the public records.  There's a lot of things this government has 
done that we know nothing about.  For example, the auditor's report a 
couple of years ago saying that we could not access half of the records.  
So I will be dealing with things like that as well. 
 
Then I will move into the aspect of taxation and where we put to use some 



 

 

of our taxes, and I'll be looking at the aspects of tax concessions as I 
mentioned historically, not only federally but also at the provincial 
level.  I will then move into the impact of the tax here in the province of 
Saskatchewan and look at the history of taxation and the interconnection 
between the gas tax, the flat tax, and this particular tax, and also its 
impact.  I think it's very important to let people know that this tax . . . 
this is a tremendous tax burden on the people of Saskatchewan and they 
would like to know how it is being used in their system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also . . . in any new debate that I make as well for 
my own constituents in northern Saskatchewan, I usually send some tapes 
back in regards to the proceedings of the legislature.  And I always do a 
summation in my own language which is Cree, and I will do that as well 
tonight, Mr. Speaker.  So a lot of the . . . especially seniors and 
middle-aged people whose first language is English and they know very 
little of the . . . I mean the first language is Cree and who don't know as 
much of the English, it's also very important for them to have a good 
understanding of the whole debate that is taking place in the legislature 
from time to time.  I would also be doing that then, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now when I was doing my preparation on the taxation, on the history of 
taxation, I more or less looked at the new information.  I also had a 
chance to look at different books.  For example, there was an overview on 
taxation at the federal level, and now I'm starting on the federal level 
component of it.  It was a book by Linda McQuaig.  It's published by a very 
important international publisher which is Penguin Books.  Every time there 
is an important book worthy of note in history, Penguin has usually . . . 
their connection is there, and they publish these books.  And it was very 
interesting that they did make a publication of this book by Linda McQuaig, 
called Behind Closed Doors.  And actually, the subtitle to it is "How The 
Rich Won Control of Canada's Tax System and Ended Up Richer."  So that's 
the essence of the book.  I don't want to cover a lot of the book; I just 
want to cover some aspects of the book in regards to my debate. 
 
The other one that I thought was very interesting in regards to my own 
research on the taxation system was another one by Leon Muszynski, The 
Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives.  And I think this must have been 
written about 1989, and the title of the book is called Is It Fair: What 
Tax Reform Will Do To You.  And here again I just want to pick out some 
aspects from this book.  I also had a look at some other books in regards 
to revenue systems in Canada systems, and I looked at a fiscal history of 
Canada during the post-war years by J. Harvey Perry by the Canadian Tax 
Foundation, and they've done a tremendous amount of work on the history of 
taxation.  And again I just wanted to just pick on some different aspects 
of it, and so J. Harvey Perry wrote A Fiscal History of Canada: The PostWar 
Years. 
 
Now there are some other texts that were important.  He also wrote another 
book called Taxation in Canada, you know, the 5th edition.  And this is a 
more recent book.  It's a 1990 book again by the same Canadian Tax 
Foundation. 
 
There are other books as well, for example, The Provincial Tax Reforms: 



 

 

Options and Opportunity by David W. Conklin and France St. Hilaire.  This 
is again the Institute for Research on Public Policy.  So, Mr. Speaker, my 
own knowledge of taxation was fairly general when I first started doing a 
bit of the research in regards to tax.  I don't say that I know very much 
about the tax system because I found out it was fairly complex, and there 
was a lot of detail in many different aspects of it. 
 
But I was able to at least get a fairly general understanding, and I think 
these books pretty well catch, you know, the gist of it.  I was very 
interested in the early years of taxation that most of the moneys that were 
collected were basically the taxes on custom and excise.  And during the 
early history of Canada, many of the debates took place in around that 
question.  And it's very interesting that during that debate, many of the 
people felt that the customs and excise tax was too hard from an economic 
view and also too hard in regards to a lot of the consumers.  And in many 
cases a lot of the farmers particularly, and a lot of the poor, and a lot 
of the small business, as well as many of the workers, you know, were 
against this tax.  And they debated quite a bit during the early days, you 
know, in around the war period.  And they were saying that they wanted to 
have a system of taxation where the burden was not so much on the middle 
income people and on the poor; that they should have a tax system that 
really does take a fair share from the rich.  And a lot of the debate 
during that time took place concerning that issue. 
 
Now as time went on during this debate it became to be recognized that the 
rich simply weren't going to stand by and take everything on the chin in 
regards to the introduction of new taxes.  And the first one that a lot of 
people thought, interestingly enough that I found, was that they thought 
that the progressive income tax would be the most fairest and the best form 
of taxation. 
 
So by the 1920s there was an introduction of the income tax policy, and it 
was more or less progressive.  The only thing that the people . . . and 
it's very interesting that it was a lot of the workers of the day, and a 
lot of the small business, and a lot of the farmers were really asking for 
this tax.  And the lobby by the rich for a long time prevented them from 
introducing such a thing as income tax. 
 
And as time went on . . . Mr. Speaker, since you are in the Chair, what I'm 
doing is a bit of an overview on the history of taxation in Canada because 
of the harmonization of the PST (provincial sales tax) and the GST.  So 
that I was very intrigued myself when I was studying a little bit of that 
history on how the taxation system, you know, has worked for a long time. 
 
So what I was saying at the beginning was that a lot of the taxes were on 
international trade.  Most of it was on customs and excise taxation; a lot 
of the things that were imported over here, etc.  So the majority of the 
moneys that were collected during that time came basically from that 
source.  And it was not until the 1920s that such an important part of a 
tax structure such as the income tax arose.  It was interesting.  A lot of 
the rich at that time fought against that income tax because a lot of the 
people who were introducing it saying that it was going to be progressive 
-- meaning people who earned more would pay more taxes, and that it would 



 

 

be a person who earned less would be paying less taxes of course. 
 
(2015) 
 
So it was a progressive form of taxation where those who were capable of 
paying more would pay more.  And it was a very simple idea, but it was a 
very, I suppose, a very change-oriented idea of the day.  And they debated 
that for a long time.  And they finally did get it in. 
 
Now what a lot of the people did not know is that as the taxation went on 
they didn't know that there would be such things as loopholes.  And a lot 
of the rich during that period were able to get the tax loopholes.  And as 
time went on, while a lot of people thought that it was still important for 
the excise tax, other things started getting into place such as sales 
taxes.  And we got into sales taxes and a lot of people then said sales 
taxes weren't enough and we got into what we call the corporate tax as 
well. 
 
And those are the major taxes that we look at today, Mr. Speaker.  We look 
at the corporate tax, the personal income tax, as well as a sales tax.  So 
when we're debating this issue, it's important to try and get a good 
understanding of the history of this taxation. 
 
Now when I looked at the . . . when I was looking at that aspect, 
therefore, Mr. Speaker, on the taxation in regards to the federal level, I 
also had an opportunity to read a few of the books and I'd like to quote 
certain things that I found from the books.  I read this one by Leon 
Muszynski on this book on the tax system, and he was saying that there's 
been a massive shift in regards to the sales tax and excise tax as well as 
the personal income tax and also the corporate income tax.  And I'd like to 
just look at examples that he presented in the more early days from 1961 
and '62 as it relates to . . . as compared to '87-88. 
 
And it's important to note that the corporate income tax in 1961-62 is 21.6 
per cent.  And by the time '87-88 rolled around, it was 11.4 per cent.  In 
other words it had dropped by more than 10 per cent.  The corporate income 
tax, therefore, was cut in half in those periods of time between '62 and 
'88. 
 
Then I looked at the personal income tax levels, and I found that in '62 
the personal income tax level was 34 per cent.  Then I looked at the '88 
income tax level, and it was 50.3 per cent.  In other words it had taken a 
jump from 34 per cent to approximately 50 per cent.  There was a 20 per 
cent jump. 
 
In other words when you compare corporate and personal income tax, there 
was a drop even in just . . . in the past 30 years there's been a real drop 
on taxation by about close to 20 per cent.  I mean there was a drop, excuse 
me, by 10 per cent.  It's been cut in half for the big corporations, and 
for the ordinary person it's been increased quite a bit.  So now our share 
is about half of the revenues for the whole of Canada and so on. 
 
In regards to sales and excise tax, for the record because of the debate, 



 

 

it's noticeable that the sales and excise tax total in 1962 was 36.5 per 
cent.  And surprisingly that has dropped to 26 per cent.  In other words, 
the sales tax, the sales and excise tax in total -- between '62 and '88 -- 
has dropped from 36 to 26. But I notice in this thing, the only thing that 
has really gone up is the personal income tax. 
 
Now when I further looked at this book, I therefore wanted to look at the 
total taxation system of Canada to see how we fared with the rest of the 
world.  And I wanted to see how we fared with countries such as in Europe.  
Canada's taxation rate as of '84, according to this book, was about 33 per 
cent.  But when I looked at Sweden it was up to 53 per cent, and when I 
looked at the United States it was 32.  The place such as Germany was 43 
per cent.  So in Europe everything was around 43, 45, 50 per cent, and in 
Canada we were at about 33 per cent in 1984.  But of course the tax rates 
have gone up since then. 
 
The other thing that this person, Muszynski, wrote about was the impact on 
not only the rich but also the poor as well.  What this person said at that 
time was that the poorest 20 per cent of Canadians get about 4 per cent of 
the national income, while the richest 20 per cent take about 43 per cent 
of the money. 
 
So when you're looking at the national income, you know, close to half is 
taken by 20 per cent of the richest people, and 4 per cent on the 20 per 
cent that are the poorest in Canada.  So there's quite a discrepancy in 
regards to the income. 
 
The other thing that I did notice on the debate is this . . . on the 
research.  I found that I was looking only at the tax system, but it was 
interesting, just a point of note, that this person was saying that there's 
also hidden tax measures and he was saying that the hidden tax measures are 
often less fair than the more visible ones.  The less visible the tax or 
tax measure, the less accountable government is to the people.  And so we 
had a hidden tax, hidden tax loopholes is what he was talking about. 
 
One of the interesting ones that he did mention, Mr. Speaker, was the 
depreciation.  It says that in 1981 the excess of tax depreciation over 
book depreciation was $2.2 billion.  In other words, $2.2 billion . . . I 
don't want to get into the whole aspect of the other questions, other 
non-tax issues, but I just wanted to give that as another example of a 
loophole in the system. 
 
A lot of the people, a lot of the rich businesses were not able to get 
that.  Utilize, you know, depreciation as part of their accounting system, 
and when it's over-inflated it becomes a beneficial aspect so that then 
they don't have to pay taxes on it.  And it totalled during that one year 
to be over $2 billion.  So when you look at it over the years, after a 
10-year period that's $20 billion.  It's a tremendous sum of money.  In a 
10-year period at the federal level, just on depreciation alone, they save, 
you know, $2 billion. 
 
There was a whole history of taxation during the period in time by Linda 
McQuaig as well. 



 

 

 
The Speaker: -- Order.  I've been listening carefully to the hon. member's 
remarks and they're interesting -- they're interesting.  However, up to 
this point I fail to find the relationship between the general history of 
taxation and a very specific Bill which we're discussing -- Bill 61.  So 
I'm going to have to ask the hon. member to make it much clearer than he 
has up to now how that directly ties into the discussion of our Bill.  
Because I don't believe that through this Bill we are given a forum whereby 
we can discuss the whole history of taxation in general.  I don't believe 
that this Bill gives you that opportunity. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- I guess the connection, Mr. Speaker . . . when I did my 
introductory remarks I talked about taxation and the reason why we raised 
taxation is because usually the debt load in that situation.  And when we 
have a tremendous deficit in the province right now where it is $5 billion, 
and we're now paying about $500 million worth of interest payments alone, 
we then are forced to get into that whole area of taxation. 
 
Since this was harmonized with the federal GST and so on, I just wanted to 
touch briefly on the history of taxation.  I didn't want it to be a major 
part of my speech.  My speech won't be, you know, too short.  I was just 
trying to get a little brief description of taxation.  So that's why I was 
getting into the thing. 
 
I was connecting the harmonization of the tax, you know, with the federal 
level.  So I wanted to make sure that my listeners were having an 
understanding between . . . and its interconnection at the federal level 
and its interconnection provincially.  I'm not going to spend, you know, an 
overly excessive amount of time on it.  I just wanted to, you know, get a 
general idea that where the same problem we're having at the provincial 
level is the same problem, you know, we're having federally.  I mean there 
is a tremendous debt there as well. 
 
I was just looking at this federal and provincial debt . . . A little note 
that I just received, you know, on March 31 of '91 and I was looking at 
Burns Fry economics of May 24, 1991.  And when we look at the federal debt 
they say that the federal debt is expected to be $419 billion.  We figure 
it's a tremendous burden on taxation here in the province and we're talking 
about 5 billion, and it is.  It's a tremendous, tremendous burden.  But 
when you look at the federal level and the mismanagement there as well, 
we're looking at a burden of $419 billion.  And it's going to be such a 
massive, massive problem, not only provincially, but I guess at the 
federal.  So there's a tremendous debt. 
 
I was looking at this thing overall.  It seemed to me that when we look at 
the sales tax which burdens everybody on an equal basis, the tax 
provincially will burden the . . . I mean when a child wears clothes at 7 
per cent, the child in essence . . . their parents have to pay for the 
child's 7 per cent and their clothes in the same way as for a senior.  And 
when you have the corporation not having to worry about that, a lot of 
people talk about the unfairness of it.  So the flat tax systems which 
treat everybody equally actually are unequal in a sense that people who 
have less amount of money are being hurt most by it. 



 

 

 
And it's interesting when I was doing the taxation history of it on that 
length, in the 1950s the people . . . the personal income tax, people were 
paying about half and half between the corporations.  But today when I 
looked at the federal level, the corporations are now paying only about 9 
per cent, but the rest of the citizens are paying about 50 per cent.  And 
now we are being saddled with this tremendous federal GST and the 
provincial GST as well.  So that was the basically the connection there 
that I was making in regards to the taxation issue. 
 
There was another little article that I had received on knowledge 
internationally in regards to this GST at the federal level.  It said that 
as it regards inflation, a lot of people will talk about the inflation as 
well as in Saskatchewan, but it's very important to look at the facts. 
 
When New Zealand put on their 10 per cent GST in 1986, the inflation went 
up from 11 per cent to 18 per cent overnight, almost overnight.  And when 
we were debating, my colleagues have been raising this issue quite a bit 
from a fiscal policy and how it affect such things as inflation, that it 
indeed will affect that. 
 
The other thing is, federally, that on the tax reform, the middle income 
people have been bearing the burden of it.  This tax really, really hits 
hard on the middle income people in the province.  And I was looking at 
this federal document on the big tax picture, and it says that the middle 
income tax went up by about 10 per cent.  And for the working poor, it went 
up 44 per cent; while for the upper income people, it went down by 5.9 per 
cent. 
 
So what we're seeing overall in the taxation history, Mr. Speaker, is this, 
that the rich have fought very, very hard in making sure that they got the 
best deal for themselves in regards to taxation. 
 
(2030) 
 
They fought hard so they would have tax loopholes even when income tax 
situation came in.  And also when their corporate tax was up into around a 
25 per cent bracket, they were able to drop it down to 9 per cent today.  
And they've been very adept at impressing upon politicians the old aspect 
of getting their benefits from the tax structure. 
 
Now in regards to the provincial level, Mr. Speaker, I would like to do a 
bit of the feedback that I've got on the provincial GST.  So in general on 
the provincial level, these were some of the people that have raised 
concerns.  We've heard the . . . There's been a new coalition for example.  
So, Mr. Speaker, so the next little series of presentation is going to be 
on some of the people who have been opposed to this tax. 
 
We stand here and we talk about 100,000 people signing their names on the 
petition, but there's been a lot more groups that have formed.  People have 
a very tough time making a living.  They don't want to take time away from 
their work to have to organize in regards to the . . . against the 
government.  But in this case, a lot of people have been very angry, and 



 

 

although they don't want to have to start organizing, they have in fact 
done so, Mr. Speaker.  And it's a sad state in Saskatchewan history for 
that to happen. 
 
And here I looked at the independent automobile dealers and suppliers 
against the tax.  Mr. Speaker, it's not too long ago that there was a 
used-car tax and there was quite an outcry, you know, by a lot of probably 
the same people who felt that the used-car tax was hurting them too much.  
And a lot of the lower income people who were buying from them were also 
being hit hard at that level.  And of course the government at that time 
then changed its idea and that thing was repealed. 
 
But this is what they're saying right now.  It says that they've done their 
own surveys -- this is the independent automobile dealers and suppliers 
against the tax.  They say that the survey showed that the GST has resulted 
in a decline of business of up to 20 per cent in 29 instances and a decline 
of 20 per cent in 54 businesses.  So what we're seeing is a decline of 20 
per cent in 54 businesses, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that's why a lot of these people are being frightened, you know, by not 
only the information that they're getting, but in fact they're feeling the 
brunt.  They know that a lot of the people are going across the border 
doing other types of retail shopping and that type of thing, but they 
themselves in regards to their car dealerships are really feeling the pinch 
from this taxation.  So they've chosen to organize. 
 
The other one that I've noticed -- And the government always talks a big 
line of being "open for business", you know back in '82; then they had a 
new way of saying they were going to help out small business and they had a 
lot of information just prior to the last election that small business was 
the backbone of Saskatchewan and Canadian history and all that type of 
thing.  But you know as we looked . . . there was a lot of cut-backs on the 
business grants to small business, but not to Cargill Grain or to 
Pocklington or to the big businesses, but to the smaller ones. 
 
And when I looked at this next one, this one was from the Star-Phoenix on 
May 25, '91.  And it was by the Business Coalition to STOP the PST.  Here 
you have a specific organization that has taken the time out to organize 
against the PST.  And what they're saying is that, and I quote, 
 

 The group claims the expanded sales tax, which took effect April 1 comes 
at the worst possible time for many businesses, which have seen a dramatic 
drop in consumer spending. 

 
And so it's hurting them. 
 
When they had their meeting with Minister of Finance, this is all he had to 
say when they asked him for some changes . . . .Because in their initial 
meeting with the Premier a lot of the same people were feeling that there 
might be some changes in regards to the harmonization on the tax itself.  
But when the Finance minister was confronted by the issue he says, I don't 
think you will see any changes in terms of Bill 61 which is currently 
before the legislature. 



 

 

 
And these same people have been hearing this government since last year 
with Consensus Saskatchewan.  And you hear it all the time. They say, oh 
we're really going to listen to the people.  You know, we're going to have 
these plebiscites, referendum.  We're going to do this, we're going to do 
that, and really we're going to pay attention to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We know they simply don't pay any attention to the poor.  We know they 
don't pay any attention to Indian and Metis people.  We know they don't pay 
any attention to farmers.  We know they don't pay too much attention to the 
workers and the small businesses, especially as it relates to this tax, 
because they're not listening to the people. 
 
So here you have these businesses organizing, taking their time away from 
their business at the same time that this government policy is putting them 
out of business.  This is a highly unfair aspect of this tax.  But will the 
government listen?  No, the government simply won't listen. 
 
And I looked at the people; I've seen a lot of the students come to the 
legislature and I've gone through my travels.  Last week I was up in 
northern Saskatchewan in my home area in Cumberland constituency, and a lot 
of people were very concerned as well about the fact that in the North they 
weren't able to get their library grant of 3.5 per cent.  And this had been 
raised to them by various of the libraries in northern Saskatchewan.  And 
they didn't even have the so called 3.5 per cent increase up in northern 
Saskatchewan for the libraries, but we hardly have any books towards it.  
And the few books that we do have in the stores are going to be saddled 
with this 7 per cent tax, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So here you have another group that said that active forum . . . it was 
Saskatchewan Alliance Against Tax on Reading.  And there was quite a few of 
the publishers.  I mean we had the Saskatchewan Library Association, the 
Saskatchewan publishers' group, the Saskatchewan booksellers, the 
Saskatchewan Writers Guild.  We had publishers: Northland Books, Coles 
Bookstores, Bookworm's Den, the two university bookstores, Broadway books 
in Saskatchewan, and Fifth House publishers, and many other libraries and 
bookstores, who have said no to this provincial GST because what it is, is 
not only something that economically hurts people, but it's a tax on 
knowledge. 
 
It's a tax on one of the most important, long-term resources that our young 
people rely on, and that's knowledge.  And when you have to tax books . . . 
And knowledge comes in various forms and so on, and so we've had this group 
that had to organize to let this government know that they were highly, 
highly displeased with this tax. 
 
So this is the type of thing, Mr. Speaker, that is very, very problematic, 
I guess, for this government because they're not listening to the people.  
We have these many groups forming, the 100,000 petitions that have come 
into this legislature, and now we have this situation where they work hard. 
They try hard to make a living, but they have to organize and organize 
against this government's unfair tax.  And it affects everybody.  It 



 

 

affects our children.  It affects our youth.  It affects our seniors, and 
it affects anybody who's trying hard to make a living. 
 
Now, a lot of people have been asking me . . . they have said this deficit 
in Saskatchewan is one of the main reasons why we have this historic tax.  
So I would like to look a bit on the aspect of the deficit, Mr. Speaker.  
And when this government came into power in 1982, of course everybody now 
knows that there was no deficit.  As a matter of fact, this government was 
operating with a surplus of $139 million.  By the time 1983 rolled around, 
the deficit that year was 45 million, and it kept on climbing and climbing 
during the years.  And by the time '86 rolled around it was 192 -- I mean . 
. . and these are the interest payments on the deficit, Mr. Speaker.  So 
you had 45 million of interest payments and by the time '86 rolled around 
you had a 192 million.  Now, when we look at it today, it's turned up to be 
approximately 4, about $500 million in interest payments.  That's a 
tremendous amount of money. 
 
You know, there's a lot of seniors out there that want a level 3 and 4 care 
home in northern Saskatchewan that would really have used that $500 million 
to help them out.  There's a lot of small business who want wild rice 
production, who want to be able to compete with the California markets, and 
do quite well all over the world by helping . . . by having them helped out 
in their marketing schemes, and there is no help.  And a lot of them are 
saying, this government will help out Cargill Grain at $370 million but 
they won't help out the small tax . . . that the small-business person in 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
So here you have a tremendous, tremendous deficit which is now at 4.4 
billion.  Now, for the record I'd like to read how it has grown.  First it 
was $139 million to the good, as I said in 1982.  By '83 it was 227 
million, by '84 it was 558 million, by '85 it had reached close to a 
billion dollars; it was 938 million.  Now it took them only 3 years to put 
us $1 billion in the hole. 
 
Then by '86 it jumped up to 1.52 billion -- that's when they were making 
their election promises, and that's the same year that the minister of 
Finance underestimated his deficit by $800 million.  I don't think in the 
history of Canada there's been any provincial government that has been out 
by $800 million.  But this particular Finance minister was just not telling 
the people the truth at that time, because he was running for the election, 
wanting to get re-elected.  And today now, you know, four or five years 
later, this government is trying to be the essence of fiscal 
responsibility.  And at that time they didn't even tell the people the 
truth.  So a lot of people are wondering whether they're even telling us 
the truth today.  And that's why I think that we have such an important 
strategy on opening the books in this province. 
 
By the time '87 rolled around, of course, it was 2.74 billion; and '88 it 
was 3.29; and by '89, 3.62; by '90, 3.9; by '91 it was 4.4 billion.  Now 
that is a tremendous amount of money.  It's going to take many, many years 
before we're going to ever be able to repay this deficit. 
 
And when I looked at this . . . I saw an article on the cover story on the 



 

 

Star-Phoenix on May 27.  And it says, "Deficit devours province's 
revenues".  This person's figure says that the overall debt amounted to 
$10,626 per person in Saskatchewan in 1988, compared to $6,430 for the rest 
of the provinces.  In other words, here we are in the province of 
Saskatchewan; we're $10,626 per person.  But for the other provinces it's 
6,400.  In other words, they're only 60 per cent of what we are.  We are 
approximately one and two-thirds times more than the other provinces, and 
sometimes you have a gumption to point to other provinces but they should 
be talking about this super big debt. 
 
(2045) 
 
There's many other aspects this person chooses to talk about, but what it 
does do is that it's taken about $500 million away from our expenditures on 
a yearly basis. 
 
When I looked at the . . . I want to look a bit again, back again, Mr. 
Speaker, in regards to the . . . some of the things that happened in 
Saskatchewan history.  You know I was talking about the minister of Finance 
and the fact that he was out by $800 million back in '86.  A lot of people 
of course questioning the facts of the government in this year just prior 
to the election again.  Who knows?  They may be another $500 million out; 
they could be a billion dollars out, who knows?  I think, for them, they 
don't seem to regard the public purse with a great deal of honesty or for 
that matter a great deal of respect on how they spend the people's money. 
 
But I looked at the minister who is in charge of Economic Development and 
Trade, the member from Melville.  And back in 1982 he was of course saying 
that, in regards to taxation, he says, we will roll back the gasoline . . . 
the gas tax.  And at that time he said he would also reduce the provincial 
income tax by 10 per cent . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The member 
from Cut Knife-Lloyd said that he wasn't the minister of '82.  Later on he 
became the minister and now he is in charge of having the worst tax grab in 
the history of Saskatchewan.  We're not only talking about, you know, 
reducing . . . and not keeping up with promises.  This is the greatest tax 
grab in provincial history. 
 
But here he was doing his own . . . And we have the member from Melfort, as 
well, who was of course sending an advertisement in The Melfort Journal.  
They said they would phase out the sales tax.  And here I see it here, it 
says they will completely phase out the sales tax.  And I've never heard of 
a government who increases the tax from 5 per cent to 7 per cent and now 
harmonizes with the federal GST, and calls that phase-out.  That's the most 
outrageous . . . that the most ridiculous form of meaning for the word 
phase-out that I've ever heard. 
 
So here you have a lot of these ministers were advertising during that time 
when they were making all kinds of promises of this and that tax, and doing 
away with that tax.  And they said, as long as we're government you will 
never, ever see gas tax and now, of course, I'll be reviewing those figures 
in a little while. 
 
And during that time there has been more modern and up-to-date clippings.  



 

 

And I've already mentioned the business tax for the coalition to stop the 
PST.  I've mentioned them and also the used-car dealers.  I might add also 
the new-car dealers as well are very, very concerned, you know, about this 
tax. 
 
 DSo, Mr. Speaker, we have here a tremendous list of promises that this 
government has made in regards to taxation and Saskatchewan taxation 
history.  And they haven't bothered to live up to them.  So I will go 
through a few of the other taxes. 
 
I remember in regards to the taxation, they said there would be no . . . 
The member from Cut Knife-Lloyd says that I have to bring in more 
information.  I certainly will, Mr. Speaker, because this type of 
information is very important because I don't think it has sunk in through 
his head yet that the people of Saskatchewan are saying no to this tax. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- The member also says I should thank him for helping him out, 
and I think a lot of people may say that that's the last thing to ever 
thank anybody out is to put on such a regressive tax like the 7 per cent 
GST.  And in this debate, after I finished with it, I don't think he will 
be thanking me in regards to how I deal with his own support of this 
provincial GST. 
 
Now I was very interested in regards to the provincial tax history.  I was 
looking at the remarks made also by the Liberals.  And I was looking back 
at how the taxation changed in Saskatchewan history.  I looked back in 1963 
on what the individual income tax was and the corporate income tax at that 
time.  I found that it was . . . They collected individual income tax of 
14.2 million, I mean 14.3 million in 1963.  The corporate income tax was 
about 10.8 million. 
 
Now when the Liberals got out of office in 1971, that tax -- the individual 
income tax -- had climbed from 14.2 million to 61.2 million.  It had 
increased by over four times.  It was a 430 per cent increase on the income 
tax between the NDP (New Democratic Party) of the day and the Liberals, you 
know, from '63 to 1971.  But in the corporate income tax, I noticed that it 
increased from 10.8 million to 13 million.  There was only a 3 million 
increase as it pertained to the corporate income tax, and as it pertained 
to the individual income tax it had increased by a total of $45 million.  
Actually it was $47 million. 
 
So there are very many things that we look back in regards to the history.  
When I looked at the more modern-day history, I looked at the period of 
1981 to the period 1990.  And this time it's a comparison between the NDP 
and also the Conservatives. 
 
At that time, in 1981, the corporate income tax rate was $128 million; 
that's how much was collected by the NDP.  The individual income tax they 
collected was $392 million.  So 128 million for the corporations and 392 
for the individual income tax.  But in the Tories, the PCs in 1990 
collected 108 million from the corporations and $898 million -- $898 



 

 

million -- from the individual, personal income tax people. 
 
So here we have from '81, in a nine-year period, the corporations have paid 
$20 million less tax -- $20 million less tax from '81 to 1990, and the 
personal income tax level, the individual income level is 392 to 898.  It's 
an increase of $506 million -- $506 million -- for your regular earner in 
the province.  A lot of the people are saying that the system is indeed 
very unfair and that we should be looking at a system that starts having a 
situation where the larger corporations also pay their fair share. 
 
The other thing in addition to the facts, I was looking at a family average 
wage between '81 to '89 and the increase in many things from the provincial 
income tax, you know, to the utilities, to the sales tax, the gas tax, the 
prescription drug costs, the property taxes, and the loss of the property 
improvement grant, and the total increase in that regard is $2,294.  It's  
2,000 -- rounded off, $2,300 has been the increase to the average family in 
the province; $2,300 would buy a lot of books, a lot of clothes, a lot of 
things for the household to the average family. 
 
And now the province here will utilize any collection that they do to pay 
for the deficit and to help out their friends.  And all the people in the 
province are going to have to pay for this but they will never see that 
money again. 
 
I look at the provincial income tax comparison, you know, with other 
provinces in Canada.  And it's very interesting.  I looked at Manitoba and 
theirs was 1,958; whereas Saskatchewan in 1990, for a family with a family 
income of 40,000, was $2,426.  It was approximately $500 more.  The income 
tax in the province of Saskatchewan was $500 more than in Manitoba. 
 
When I looked at Alberta -- you know, our next door neighbours on the other 
side -- the provincial income tax in 1990 was $1,664.  And in this case, 
Saskatchewan was 2,426.  So here we have another case where approximately 
$800 less tax, income tax, is paid in Alberta.  So $800 better for people 
of Alberta in regards to the income tax and in Manitoba, it's $500 better.  
So here we have a situation wherein the province of Saskatchewan is us 
simply paying quite a bit. 
 
And here another statistical figure as we compare the personal and 
corporate income tax.  In 1981-82 and the increases to 1991 -- in the past 
nine years from '82 to '91 -- the increase in corporate income tax is 54 
per cent, but the increase in personal income tax is 75 per cent -- a 75 
per cent increase. 
 
But the total amounts really tell you, you know, a lot more when you look 
at the actual figures.  When you look at 8, close to $900 million for the 
ordinary taxpayer and approximately 100 million for the corporations.  The 
big corporations pay a lot less.  And when I looked at the sales tax, it's 
now $502 million. 
 
The member from Cut Knife-Lloyd asked me which corporations, and he wants 
to know more about which corporation . . . 
 



 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order, order.  I asked the hon. member to not 
mention the presence of members and engage them in debate.  I ask, on the 
other hand, other hon. members to allow the member from Cumberland to 
proceed without interruption. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I was comparing the income tax 
comparisons, of course, between the federal and provincial tax.  And when I 
looked at the income tax I started looking at the corporate taxes, and I 
started looking at some of the lists in regards to the corporate tax.  And 
I know that certain of these particular corporations that I'm listing here 
pay a lot of money to the federal PCs and also to the provincial PC party. 
 
It's very interesting for example that Michelin Capital doesn't pay income 
tax at all, North Canada Oils doesn't pay any tax at all, the PreCambrian 
Shield Resources doesn't pay any tax at all, and the Westar Group pays a 
total of 1 per cent.  WESTBRIDGE Computer, zero; Xerox Canadian finance 
less than half a per cent, and that was in 1989, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(2100) 
 
When I looked at 1988, on income tax, Hudson Bay Mining and Smelting which 
is of course owned basically by South African companies in majority 
ownership, they paid about zero per cent, a total of zero per cent.  Amok, 
in 1987, in northern Saskatchewan, paid zero per cent.  So here we have 
Hudson Bay company in 1987 actually had a tax credit of $15.7 million.  And 
so when we're talking about which corporations . . . I could list many 
other corporations, but because of time these were just pointed as 
examples. 
 
Now I also looked . . . Many people have been asking as well, in 
Saskatchewan, well how come we are paying so much tax?  Why is it that 
we're paying so much tax?  And as I mentioned, the corporations don't pay a 
lot of their fair share.  But I'll give you an example.  When we did the 
Potash Corporation debate and we had Chuck Childers, of course, with his 
salary of $700 million.  And so here we have Chuck Childers in Potash 
Corporation making over $3 million over a few years, and a lot of people 
are just trying hard to make a living in this province. 
 
You have the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, and I recall royalty tax 
system of the day when we were in that long debate during the privatization 
of potash.  I recall -- when we were debating that issue -- the facts that 
I got out . . . and this was a comparative view on six years of Liberal 
rule, six years of NDP rule, and six years of Tory rule.  And the facts 
that I got in regards to the taxation policy of Saskatchewan was quite a 
telling tale as to why the NDP had balanced budgets and as to why there was 
so many more programs during the NDP era. 
 
And the reason was very simple.  The resource taxation policy of the day 
was such that it had increased over the Liberal years.  And I recall when 
we were debating potash, the taxation structure for potash was about 2 per 
cent, you know, prior . . . in 1971.  While everybody was paying about 30 
per cent tax, income tax and so on, here you had a big corporation paying 
about 2 per cent.  We raised the taxation after the first year to about 6 



 

 

per cent and the following year, in '73, to 12 per cent. 
 
And after that there was a tremendous fight by the big corporations; 90 per 
cent of them were owned by the Americans.  And of course Thatcher at that 
time had come out with a policy which was helping out the potash industry 
in the United States, and as such they were not able to collect that much 
tax.  And then when I recalled the tax history of the day, the amount of 
tax that the Liberals were able to gain was about $14 million from the big 
corporations during the last six years. 
 
And when I looked at the NDP years and the last six years, the amount that 
they were able to get from the corporations was a total of $986 million.  
Now you compare that to the Tories when they do royalty tax roll backs, and 
they do other types of gains that are not even part of this formula.  By 
the time six years had rolled by in regards to potash, the Tories had 
collected $274 million.  In other words, we lost $712 million in a six-year 
period.  A lot of people at that time said, well you're taking facts 
wherein we, the NDP years, sold more potash.  And actually there wasn't 
very much difference. 
 
The debate showed that there was 32 million tonnes of potash sold in that 
six-year period, during the NDP years, and 31 during the PC years.  So it 
didn't have anything to do with the amount.  And the cost was $109 per 
tonne during that time, 106 for the NDPers.  There was only a $3 difference 
on the average of that six years. 
 
So what I'm saying here, Mr. Speaker, is just that the royalty, the 
taxation that was collected during that time was very, very poor in 
connection with the Liberals and the Tories.  Fourteen million as I said, 
for the Liberals and later on it was 274 million.  We lost $700 million 
with the Tories. 
 
When I looked at the debate in oil, it was about one and a half billion 
dollars to $2 billion in what we've lost during these years.  When I looked 
at the debate . . . right after the debate in April of 1990, what we were 
debating during potash was brought out by the research of Sask Trends 
Monitor, and this was in April of 1990 and this is what they said: 
 

 Even with the declining prices, had the royalty and taxation levels 
remained at their earlier levels, the current provincial debt of $4 
billion would simply not exist. 

 
And I want to read this again: 
 

 Even with the declining prices, had the royalty and taxation levels 
remained at their earlier levels, the current provincial debt of $4 
billion would simply not exist. 

 
So when I looked at the facts in regards . . . So when we look at the tax, 
here you have an independent magazine, an independent business, who was 
saying exactly what we have been saying for the past nine years.  And when 
people look at the taxation history, we had the flat tax of 2 per cent that 
was put on; we had the increase that went here on the sales tax from 5 to 7 



 

 

per cent, the one that was supposed to be phased out.  Later on we had the 
used-car tax and then we also had the bingo tax, you know, all over 
Saskatchewan.  I remember people used to complain quite a bit about that 
particular tax, basically because of its effect not only on the support 
that the bingo people had and crushed the recreation structure of the 
province.  But later on the province did change their mind on it, but a 
tremendous amount of taxation. 
 
So when we look at this history of Saskatchewan, therefore, what we're 
seeing is a lot of benefits in the tax structure to the larger 
corporations.  But to top it off, it's not only taxation benefits or the 
hidden tax measures.  I mentioned earlier on that the hidden tax measures 
provides about 2.2 billion for Canadian businesses just on depreciation 
alone right across Canada. 
 
But there are many other aspects as well.  But in regards to Saskatchewan, 
we have a situation where you have give-aways.  We have, of course, 
Pocklington, and everybody knows about Pocklington and the give-away there.  
Manalta Coal from Alberta was given away -- our coal resources.  We also 
look at the resources in regards to Cameco.  We have about a one and a half 
to two billion dollar business in Saskatchewan Mining Development 
Corporation such as Cameco.  And they were doing a healthy business. 
 
The Tories were always saying that from the early days that the Crown 
corporations could never run anything.  And of course they proved they 
could run something in regards to many aspects of our daily lives whether 
it was the best insurance rates in Canada or others as well. 
 
But we were able to see situations such as SaskTel and SaskPower and so on.  
So they were able to make a . . . The Crown corporations were able to make 
a profit.  But in SMDC (Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation) they 
made $60 million that last year before it was privatized.  So they couldn't 
use the excuse that it was being run poorly because it has one of the best 
rates of return at over 19 per cent during that year in 1988.  So it was 
making a lot of money, and it was making a lot of returns for the province.  
And we were getting a lot of money for the people of Saskatchewan.  But 
they privatized that.  And I notice that there was a treasury share 
offering this week to try and privatize because of the cost of uranium at 
$89.  The market conditions were such that they were unable to privatize 
although they wanted to during that time.  So the corporations were 
benefitting quite a bit during that time. 
 
So when you look at the debate in regards to this Bill, it not only 
extended from mining and tremendous benefits for Cameco in regards to the 
largest uranium reserves in the world and the best reserves the world has 
ever seen, but we've also seen that in potash -- you know, the potash 
resource being given away.  And the government said, we are giving it away 
because we'll solve the deficit -- in 1985-86, that's what they said.  But 
we haven't seen that; all we've seen is the deficit has grown. 
 
So a lot of people are saying, what does this government do with all the 
money?  A lot of the corporations, of course, don't have to pay.  I know 
that Weyerhaeuser doesn't have to pay a cent unless they make over 12 per 



 

 

cent.  And I know they still haven't paid 1 cent. 
 
In northern Saskatchewan when we have an unemployment rate of 50 to 80 per 
cent, there is less hiring for people in the mines; there is less hiring by 
companies like Weyerhaeuser, but they haven't paid a cent to the provincial 
treasury.  Weyerhaeuser supposedly paid 248, we learned, 248 million; we 
learned later on it was 236.  They haven't paid a cent of this money.  Not 
even 1 cent, and they've been operating now for over a couple of years as a 
matter of fact -- I mean the sale took place in December of '86.  So they 
can get away with . . . even if they have to pay, it will be at 8 per cent 
and many of us are paying higher rates than that in regards to any amount 
that we do borrow. 
 
So that's a main aspect of . . .. that's the main reason when a lot of 
people ask me about the rationale for why the tax.  Part of it is because a 
lot of the big corporations pay into the . . . the PCs a lot of money.  A 
lot of the -- I was just telling to one of my friends.  I said when I look 
at even the banks and a lot of the banks getting farm land and things like 
that  throughout the province, the banks pay $86 million each -- not $86 
million each -- $86,000 each to the federal PCs, and they also pay their 
fair share to the provincial Tories as well.  And they pay both to the 
Liberals and to the Conservatives, you know, at the federal level, that 
$86,000 a year each. 
 
So, when you're looking at patronage and you're looking at the aspect of 
the history of patronage, this is probably the worst form of patronage.  I 
mean, when we look at smaller scales of patronage, they pale in comparison 
to the amounts that are provided in regards to the corporations.  Like Sask 
Trends said: we wouldn't be having a deficit of $4 billion if the rates had 
remained the same as they were in '82. 
 
(2115) 
 
Now, the other aspect of patronage, of course, is to their friends.  I 
remember when we've had famous MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) in 
this provincial legislature who've gone to work, you know, on getting a 
fairly good salary.  And we've had many people who were in that situation. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I wanted to do . . . before I wanted to get to that 
aspect, what I wanted to do, first of all, is to do a quick little overview 
of the situation that I've come across to some of my own constituents in 
northern Saskatchewan.  And I would like to shift off and do a part of the 
summary that I've just done in our own language, which is Cree.  And Mr. 
Speaker, I haven't had the opportunity this time around to get into a major 
debate and haven't been able to speak my language in this legislature in 
this particular session. 
 
So I'm going to shift off into Cree and outline a bit of the history of 
taxation that I went through on Canada as well as Saskatchewan and outline 
the fact that a lot of the tax benefits have gone to the larger 
corporations while a lot of our own people are suffering in the province.  
So that's what I'm going to enter into. 
 



 

 

So with due respect to all the speakers of all the different languages in 
the province of Saskatchewan and more particularly about the language of 
the House, Mr. Speaker, I would like to shift off into Cree. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
Mr. Speaker, you will notice that because the word tax is a more recent 
word because there was never any taxation in Cree culture, you'll notice 
the word that I threw in there, tax, once in a while.  I'll give it a bit 
of my Cree accent when I mention it. 
 
So as I looked at the taxation, Mr. Speaker,. . . I notice sometimes, Mr. 
Speaker, when I'm travelling around, a lot of the people in Qu'Appelle 
Valley who also speak my language, the Cree language, sometimes are 
listening in on the radio.  And I notice a lot of the older people who have 
moved into the city -- whether they are at the hospitals or whether they 
move with their children, you know, from northern communities to there from 
the rural areas -- they just appreciate it when I speak Cree and explain to 
them what is going on in this legislature, so I will continue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
The member from Melville asked me whether or not this makes sense. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- No, I didn't say that.  I said it's inaccurate. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Oh, it's very accurate.  I wish I had an interpreter that 
would do a situation off the block.  But I always do my interpretation.  I 
do the presentation in English already, and I'm doing that particular type 
of translation right now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- I will also be raising this issue later on when I speak 
English for the members' benefit.  I'll be raising the issue of the 
taxation, the provincial PST as it affects Indian people as well, because a 
lot of people . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The person from 
Melville, of course you know, he keeps interrupting me while I'm trying to 
speak my own language, and I think he wants to know whether or not I'm 
accurate.  I'm as accurate in English as I am accurate in Cree.  I would 
like to let him know that.  As a matter of fact, my respect for the truth, 
you know, occurs in both languages. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: --  Which is what I can't say for the member of Melville, 
because during that time he promised that there'd be no sales tax here and 
we already have a sales tax.  And he said there would never be a gas tax . 
. . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order, order.  I think it's best that hon. 
members don't enter into debate back and forth.  I think that's the best 
for the House.  From time to time an hon. member may interject, as is the 



 

 

custom, as long as it's within reason.  These are things that go on in 
parliament.  But I don't think we should carry on debates between each 
member who interjects because then we'll lose track of your . . . of the 
remarks you're trying to make. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  So I'll continue my 
remarks again then in Cree. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
(2130) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was relating and doing the summary again in Cree and trying 
to read the first part of my speech in regards to what was taking place on 
that first part. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I will then proceed a bit into the provincial sales tax 
information and talk a little bit about its effect.  I mean, what we are 
talking about is a tremendous sum of money -- the 7 per cent.  Well I've 
already talked about the issue as it relates to not only the tax loopholes, 
but also the benefits to the larger corporations.  But I've also done that 
as well in Cree.  I've also mentioned a little bit of the Canadian tax 
history although I didn't do as much as I wanted to, but I did cover a bit 
of that history and a bit of the Saskatchewan history. 
 
Now when we look at taxation in Saskatchewan, a lot of the people have been 
saying that we have this tax and we know that we need a fair taxation 
system.  But a lot of the people are saying we also need a common sense, 
deficit reduction plan.  We need to be able to look at this tremendous 
deficit in the long run and be able to manage it.  We need to be able to 
look at . . . we need to be able to be truthful and look at the history of 
how our province has been managed. 
 
Everybody knows of course there was $139 million to the good, but a lot of 
people have been asking, why is it that we have such a tremendous, 
tremendous, tremendous deficit?  Now of course the Premier, when he took 
over that $139 million of the day, had said this; he says that Saskatchewan 
has so much going for it you can afford to mismanage it and still break 
even.  This was in 1983, a year after he took office.  He said Saskatchewan 
has so much going for it you can afford to mismanage it and still break 
even.  Mr. Speaker, this ideology of . . . this idea that you can go into 
government and have such disrespect for an institution that all the people 
take part in and come in, and make a statement that you can go ahead and 
mismanage it, is indeed not a very good one for any leader to make. 
 
It's as if you see that in regards to certain of the happenings; sometimes 
there's been many legal cases going on, whether it's with STC (Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company) bus scandal or whether it's the scandal as it 
relates to the Indian and Native Affairs Secretariat, Indian and Metis 
Affairs Secretariat now.  And there was a lot of scandals.  Those scandals, 
of course, are basically individual oriented, Mr. Speaker.  And those 



 

 

people who are suffering those scandals have to pay for what they've done. 
 
But there is a pervasion of ideology where you say that only the business 
community can run business and only the business community can run things 
in proper order.  And there seems to be an underlying ideology that you 
cannot run things properly and so on.  And that was the type of ideology 
that came out very clear from this Premier's statement in '83. 
 
And I've always thought about it as very problematic because whether you're 
in government or you're in  
 Dprivate corporations, you've got to run with balanced budgets.  I mean 
that's pretty clear.  And you can't take a careless attitude, which I deem 
this to be, and say you can just go ahead and figure you can spend all over 
the place and not worry about it.  As a matter of fact, there was some 
other statements made that was very problematic, which I can't find for the 
time being.  But I'll stick to this idea of mismanagement. 
 
This idea of mismanagement is something that I had seen not only with the 
right wing government in Saskatchewan, but I had seen that in England, and 
I'd seen that in the United States; tremendous over-spending that led to 
tremendous debt.  And when you have this type of ideology, and I'm talking 
about right wing governments, you know, such as Reagan administration and 
now followed up by Bush, as well as the Thatcher government -- which the 
same government have also . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order, order, order.  Once again I must call 
the attention of the hon. member to the Bill under discussion which is Bill 
No. 61, An Act to amend The Education and Health Tax Act (No. 2) be now 
read a second time. 
 
I know we can get into philosophical dissertations and wander world-wide as 
to various governments and leaders.  However I believe we're getting away 
from the topic and we insist on doing that, except by way of example, and I 
believe that perhaps you should stick a bit more closely to the subject 
under discussion which is Bill 61. 
 
Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, when I looked at the taxation on Saskatchewan, 
I looked back at the then Finance minister's statement.  Which was again in 
the same context as today where we saw that $800 million mistake.  And at 
that time the Finance minister said this in '88, and he says, tax reform 
was initiated in Saskatchewan in 1985. 
 
The Saskatchewan flat tax was an important first step.  This flat tax, of 
course, was a very similar sort of tax where everybody pays the same, you 
know, whether it's low income or high income people and so on.  It's a flat 
tax; a tremendous amount.  And he said this was an important first step and 
he said, federal tax reform takes another step forward.  And of course that 
federal tax reform then . . . I mean there was even talk about the food 
tax, you know the flat tax, GST, and that type of thing, and there was a 
lot of promises to come work with another step forward.  Of course the step 
forward as we now know is provincial GST. 
 
And a lot of these things have been talked about in regards to the debate 



 

 

at the provincial and federal level and I'm sure that in the cabinet there 
was a lot of discussions on this but whether or not they were followed is 
questioned because of a fundamental principle of a more progressive tax 
system, which this tax isn't.  Everybody has to pay exactly the same. 
 
I talked with a lot of the . . . last week as I met with some people who 
make a living from fishing.  And they were talking about the extra taxes 
that they had to pay.  They said, make sure that when you get back to the 
government you tell them that in northern Saskatchewan we've been treated 
pretty tough.  You know, we've had a lot of our subsidies cut off.  And 
although we have subsidies for liquor we had a lot of our economic 
subsidies cut. 
 
But now he says this tax is really hurting us.  This tax . . . our food 
costs are a lot higher.  We pay more for everything in northern 
Saskatchewan.  We pay more for our nets; we pay more because of the gas 
tax; we pay more for our gas.  Everything costs a lot more in northern 
Saskatchewan.  And what they were telling me in regards to this sales tax 
was that it is just unreal. 
 
I mean, we are already being chased off our land in many ways.  Now we only 
have a little bit of buying power left and now the sales tax will really, 
really hurt us.  They said our land has been taken over by the big 
corporations.  A lot of our jobs have been taken away; we only have a few 
more left.  The only thing that we have left is a few jobs and we try hard 
to make a living on our trap lines and our fishing and a few jobs that we 
have in the mine and also in the forestry area and also in the wild rice 
area.  Now we go in and try and buy our goods and we have to pay this tax. 
 
Is it not enough that we pay a higher transportation rate in northern 
Saskatchewan?  Is it enough that the province can subsidize whisky and 
liquor but they will not subsidize, you know, fresh food for our children 
in the North?  And now when they won't even subsidize our fresh food for 
northern Saskatchewan, they will put a sales tax on top of it.  They said 
it makes it really, really hard; it makes it really, really tough.  And I 
saw the same thing with a lot of the seniors, a lot of the elders as I 
moved throughout the North.  They're really hurt.  And I mean, many times 
they come up and just tell me, they'll say, just make sure you go and raise 
it in that House, that this thing is really unfair; that, you know, our 
pensions are being squeezed by the federal government, you know, our old 
age pensions.  You know, there was a few benefits we used to get and 
they're being cut away and the province is cutting others away as well.  
We're not getting as much as we used to.  We're having more illnesses and a 
lot more sickness, and we don't even have the proper services in the North 
and here this sales tax is put on top of it. 
 
So that's a . . . it's a real sad situation for people in northern 
Saskatchewan.  And so they talk about the thing. They say to me, well why 
don't you get them to pay the big corporations.  And that's where the term 
"progressive tax structure" comes in.  They say this is a flat-type tax; 
it's a regressive tax where the children will pay, you know, the same as 
the rich and the seniors will pay the same as well.  So they should have a 
tax system that does that. 



 

 

 
I talked about the tremendous amounts of profits, you know, to them on 
northern Saskatchewan.  I look at Cameco and they made approximately $100 
million last year.  And I said to them, well even if they tapped you 1 per 
cent, you know, on the big corporations, if they put 1 per cent on the big 
corporations in northern Saskatchewan in regards to the uranium 
development, what the people will get in the North is $10 million.  
Approximately a billion dollars is produced in the North in regards to 
uranium.  And what I suggested, and I have suggested this this past three 
years to this government, I suggested that they should tax, you know, 1 per 
cent.  They said it wouldn't put them out of business -- $10 million from 
that $100 million would still leave them with $90 million.  And they would 
still have a lot of money. 
 
But what it is, is that the poor get the brunt of the attack.  And so a lot 
of the . . . I remember the minister of Urban Affairs at that time -- three 
years ago.  I raised that point in a public meeting in La Ronge.  And lo 
and behold! the following year they don't raise the tax on the corporation; 
they lower it by 1 per cent.  They gave them -- at that time it was over 
$700 million worth of production -- they gave them a $7 million benefit. 
 
(2145) 
 
And that was the same time that they took away the subsidies for the people 
who were doing fishing in regards to pickerel and also to sturgeon.  So I 
have mentioned this time and time again in regards to the different 
ministers, whether it is the minister of northern Saskatchewan and so on.  
And you know it was funny as I was travelling around a lot of the 
municipalities -- I was speaking to the municipalities again -- and we were 
talking about this tax.  And they were relating it back to me in regards to 
this year's budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And they were saying, how is it that the government comes out with a brand 
new report?  You know they had a government just before a re-election.  
This is back in 1985.  They had a tremendous report.  They said they had 
done their wrong thing in the past four years and they are going repent and 
they were going to make some changes for northern Saskatchewan.  And this 
was in 1985. 
 
And they were going to really come out with a Northern Development Advisory 
Council of the day.  Of course, some of the key leaders had seen this 
before in '82 and they said, well we're not going to buy that.  This is all 
just window-dressing.  This is no way for a government to act.  We want to 
see the results prior to an election.  We want to see any contracts and 
that type of thing with the towns and development programs done before that 
time because they simply didn't believe the government. 
 
Well lo and behold!  Northern Development Advisory Council was done away 
with.  And one of the ministers was from Swift Current who ended up to be a 
minister of the North -- ended up doing away with a Northern Development 
Advisory Council with absolutely no involvement from people from northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 



 

 

They never involved the people in northern Saskatchewan to develop this 
Northern Development Advisory Council which was to be the saviour on 
economic development and fairness for people of the North in the '85-86 
period.  But they didn't involve them as well when they took it away. 
 
Now there was public pressure by the municipalities on this government.  So 
the government had to come out with something.  So there was going to be a 
demonstration up North in a couple of locations, and the government rushed 
up North and they quickly tried to make a deal with the mayors, and they 
did say that they were going to come out with this report.  So they come 
out with this report and they tabled this a few weeks ago in the 
legislature. 
 
And basically the report talked about revenue sharing.  Revenue sharing -- 
I mean, it's a basic question.  When you do taxation, then you do revenue 
sharing.  Well they were saying they were going to do revenue sharing with 
the communities.  The top recommendation was revenue sharing.  A lot of the 
people were quite frustrated and they were quite a bit angry at this 
meeting because the government had turned around. 
 
They had this bright, glossy little report which they spent money on and 
they cut back revenue-sharing grants to the communities at $210,000.  So a 
lot of the urban municipalities were saying, when I was discussing this 
issue of the provincial GST with them, they were saying, my goodness, this 
tax will get revenue.  Sure, we knew it will get tremendous hundreds of 
millions of dollars worth of revenue, but will we see it?  The government 
gives us the glossy report.  They say they're going to revenue, and yet the 
same time they're giving us the report, they cut back $212 million.  They 
cut back $212 million from the revenue-sharing formula to the communities. 
 
They reminded me about the economic development proposal the year before 
when they were completely left out of the new legislation.  They were 
supposed to . . . in regards to the economic development corporations 
throughout the province.  Those economic development corporations in rural 
areas were able to get the legislation to help them out to be able to spend 
the revenue they get from taxation at their local levels and to promote 
economic development. 
 
It's interesting -- this government completely forgot about the North.  I 
always recall this story back in 1983.  They said that the North was 
populated with beautiful lakes and rivers, but no people.  They said there 
was no people in the North.  And of course it sort of reminded me about 
this map that they put out back in 1983. 
 
And the people were again saying, they said maybe they've completely forgot 
about us again.  And when I travel around, they say, we're hearing them; 
they're finally coming out with proposals and we heard that back in 1985.  
And they say they're going to start using these revenue-sharing dollars 
that they get from taxation and spend it for economic development, they 
said. 
 
But we haven't seen too many things, they said.  One person I was speaking 
to at the urban municipalities meeting said this to me, he said:  look, 



 

 

they cut this 212,000 million . . . $212,000 from our revenue sharing 
formula.  They said they'll probably use that in the election and so on. 
 
 DAnd the connection to the taxation, of course, is this: you tax and you 
provide revenues for municipalities, and I was just relating to the brand 
new report that was just tabled here in the legislature just very recently.  
So when people ask me about taxation, a lot of people say, well what are 
you spending it for?  And they said that the government did have a good 
idea on revenue sharing.  They were saying, my goodness I was just hoping 
they would follow what they were saying.  But indeed the province simply 
was not following up on spending these tax dollars. 
 
The taxation system also affects a lot of the work force in northern 
Saskatchewan.  Some of the people that do get hired do have a bit of 
earning power and they come back to Saskatoon with their salaries -- 
although there used to be 50 per cent employed, you know, it's dropped down 
to 15 and 20 -- and they do have a little bit of spending money now to buy, 
but they've really raised a concern to me. 
 
I was in Cumberland again this week and then they said: my goodness, I 
thought I was going to be buying this car for this next while, he says, but 
I don't think I'll be able to do it.  You know, I'm going to have to save 
some more money and keep this money in -- whatever little that I have -- in 
the bank and try and save some for the future.  Because last year, he said, 
I thought I had enough money, but now I can't have the money because of the 
tax.  So the tax itself is causing a lot of problems in regards to the 
expenditures, you know, throughout all their expenses.  So I'm getting it, 
I'm getting information not only from the seniors, as I mentioned, but also 
the workers who do have a bit of money.  And I mentioned the people who do 
fishing and also the people who do trapping. 
 
But I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, when I travelled around, I had never seen 
this in my nine years' experience as a politician in northern Saskatchewan.  
The small business, the small-business people -- I've seen them very 
disappointed before, you know, in regards to some of the business plans 
that have gone down, but this time they were really, really, really . . . 
(inaudible) . . . And the petitions last week, you'll notice that they 
started coming in.  You know, out of the 100,000 you'll notice La Ronge 
being mentioned and another northern community being mentioned, and as time 
goes on you'll see more and more of it.  But it's very interesting that on 
that petition a lot of it is done by the business community.  You know, 
sometimes it is done by our individual people, you know, our trappers and 
our other people in the community, but a lot was done by the business 
community. 
 
I had come in and visited the community, the business people in La Ronge, 
and I'll tell you, they were very very angry.  I had never seen that much 
anger displayed.  Usually people are very, very, I would say very patient.  
A lot of the people are usually very, very aware.  They try to be as kind 
as possible. 
 
The first phases that when people are a little bit frustrated with you they 
won't say anything to you.  You know, they just leave you, exchange a 



 

 

couple of pleasantries and so on.  But this time a lot of them were 
talking, and they were talking about the effect it would have on their 
particular retail store, in regards to their gas sales, in regards to this 
and that aspect. 
 
And they were telling me.  They said this is the worst thing that could 
ever happen to us.  We already pay extra costs for transportation, they 
were saying.  And here we are.  Here we are in northern Saskatchewan trying 
hard to make a living.  We know, they said, that it is hard for the farmers 
down South.  We know that it is hard for the small businesses in the South; 
but in the North, they said, we have these extra costs. 
 
And a lot of the people will purchase things.  They tell me that they don't 
have that extra money.  We have 50 to 80 per cent unemployment.  Therefore, 
the effect on them is even worse than he would find in another city where 
there is a little bit more expenditures.  So a lot of the small businesses 
are really hurt.  And they're coming up and explaining that to me. 
 
They're saying, make sure you let the government know that we are saying no 
to this provincial GST.  We are also saying no to the federal GST, but they 
want to make a living.  They said nobody wants welfare.  None of the 
trappers want welfare.  The people who do fishing don't want welfare.  None 
of the people want welfare.  They want jobs.  They want economic 
development.  They want the government to support them. 
 
They hear about the Cargills.  They hear about the Pocklingtons, and they 
hear about all this, Mr. Speaker.  And it's a very, very tiring thing, you 
know, when they keep hearing that money.  Not back in 1982, but it happens 
this year, and that's what really hurts them.  I stand up here in this 
legislature, Mr. Speaker, looking at these different sectors in the 
community, and I really say that the tax really hurts them. 
 
And I looked at the . . . I had a meeting with a lot of the women at the 
community level, and a lot of the women have to deal with the high rates of 
social services.  I mean there was a 25 per cent increase on social 
services and that type of thing recently, in the past few years.  And 
they're saying, with the unemployment rate, there's a tremendous amount 
social problems.  And there's a tremendous amount of . . . there was 
increase in suicide rates, there was increase in the level of family 
problems.  And a lot of people were not getting into revenue that they 
could use at their community level for economic development.  And the taxes 
. . . they were saying, sure this tax is going to be collected, but how is 
it going to help our children?  We see our children having to pay more tax, 
they said.  Our children are going to university for the first time in many 
years; we've never had that opportunity to go to school, they said.  And a 
lot of our children, they said, are having to pay these student loans -- 
you know, 20, $30,000 going in the hole. 
 
And they're telling me, we have to deal with the tremendous sense of 
frustrations people have with rising alcoholism and a lot more drugs.  And 
they said, we feel the brunt of it as women in the community level.  And 
this sales tax, it makes it worse.  They said, it's really a disturbing 
thing for us, they said.  We see this tax, you know, taking . . . You add 



 

 

the federal one at 7 per cent, and this one at 7 per cent; it will be 14 
per cent, they said.  And there is hidden steps along the way, they said; 
it may be even as high as 15, 20 per cent. 
 
And they're saying, how could it be that we can be hurt, you know, by this 
tax to such an extent like that, while the other big businesses get 
scot-free.  The big businesses get big benefits, and we don't as people, 
you know, from northern Saskatchewan.  So here we have many people, Mr. 
People, who are hurt.  We have trappers who are hurt, people who do 
fishing, the children are hurt, the seniors are hurt, the business people 
are hurt. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, seeing that it's near 10, I'd like to adjourn the House. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10 p.m. 
 


