





























































Hansard: May 30, 1991


 

 

May 30/91 
 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I have today a number of 
petitions: 
 

 To the Honourable the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan in legislature 
assembled: 

 The petition of the undersigned residents of the province of Saskatchewan 
humbly sheweth: 

 That the closure of Myers House and the failure of the Provincial 
Government to provide an in-patient facility in Regina for the proper care 
and rehabilitation of alcoholics and people suffering from drug and other 
abuse problems is unwarranted and improper. 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Honourable Assembly may 
be pleased to urge the Provincial Government to properly fund and provide 
in-patient facilities such as Myers House in Regina so as to ensure the 
proper level of care to people suffering from alcoholic, drug, and other 
abuse related problems. 

 And as in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the close to 20 signatories on this petition -- 
all from Regina -- it is my duty and pleasure to table this petition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a second petition with the same prayer.  
This one has eight Regina signatures, one from Outram, Estevan, a number 
from Regina, four more from Estevan, and half a dozen signatures from 
Bienfait, Saskatchewan, with the same prayer as the petition I just tabled.  
It is my pleasure to, on behalf of these people, table this petition. 
 
I have another petition with the same prayer, this one with 24 signatures 
exclusively from Regina, with the one exception, that being a signature 
from Lumsden.  On behalf of these two dozen people, it is my duty to table 
this petition, Mr. Speaker.  Thank you. 
 
Another petition with the same prayer, relating to Myers House -- 24 
signatures from Regina with the exception of one that is from Zehner, 
Saskatchewan, just outside of Regina.  On behalf of these two dozen people, 
it is my pleasure to table this petition. 
 
Again 24 more signatures -- same petition, same prayer.  This time 
primarily again from Regina, but a signature from Vibank, one from Regina 
Beach, and I apologize if I miss some other out-of-Regina signatures, but 
primarily Regina.  It's my pleasure to table this petition. 
 



 

 

Again two dozen signatories on the petition with the same prayer, Mr. 
Speaker.  Again Regina, with the exception of one from Earl Grey and one 
signature from a Saskatoon resident.  On behalf of these two dozen 
petitioners, Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure to table this petition. 
 
Next petition has the same prayer relating to the same issue, again a full 
two dozen people.  This one has signatories from Balcarres, Regina, 
Goodeve, Okanese.  And on behalf of these signatories, I am pleased to 
table this petition today. 
 
I have another petition, same prayer.  This time there's eight signatories 
from P.A., a signatory from Saskatoon, the balance are from the fair city, 
the Queen city of Regina. On behalf of these petitioners it's my duty and 
pleasure to table this petition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition with the same prayer.  This time there 
is one signatory from Lumsden and the balance are from Regina.  On behalf 
of the people who've taken the time to sign this petition, that we might 
present it in the Legislative Assembly, I am pleased to table this 
petition. 
 
A petition with the same prayer as all the petitions I have presented 
previously this day.  This time signatories from Regina, scattered 
south-east and north end of Regina, south and central Regina.  On behalf of 
these residents scattered throughout the city, it is my duty and pleasure 
to present this petition today. 
 
I have yet another petition to add to the obviously growing list of 
petitions on this one issue.  This time, Mr. Speaker, the petitioners are 
all again from the city of Regina.  And they are very concerned about the 
matter they're petitioning the Legislative Assembly.  I table this 
petition. 
 
Another petition with the same prayer, signatories from Estevan, Balgonie, 
and Regina . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  I think hon. members, even though 
they are not on their feet, should be conscious of the fact that we have 
guests in the gallery.  I'm not sure they appreciate some comments they 
hear. 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  This petition has signatories from 
Balgonie, Estevan, and Regina.  On behalf of the people who signed this 
petition, it is my pleasure to present the petition to the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: -- Why is the hon. member from Yorkton on his feet? 
 
Mr. McLaren: -- Mr. Speaker, I would ask for leave to introduce some guests 
in the gallery, please. 
 
Leave granted. 
 



 

 

The Speaker: -- Leave is granted for all members to introduce guests. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. McLaren: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It is my pleasure today 
again, Mr. Speaker, to introduce to you, and through you to members of the 
Assembly, there's 24 students, grade 3 and 4 from Angus Spice School in 
Yorkton, Saskatchewan.  And they're in the west gallery, Mr. Speaker, and 
they're accompanied today by their teacher, Tom Koroluk, and chaperon, 
Kathie Grmidolov.  And we would like to welcome the students here to the 
Assembly.  We hope you enjoy the proceedings, you find it interesting and 
educational, and I will meet a little later with you to have pictures taken 
and have some refreshments in the members' dining-room. 
 
We hope you have success with your exams that are coming up shortly and 
that you have a very happy holiday season.  So I'd ask all members to 
please recognize and welcome these students from Angus Spice in Yorkton. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Saxinger: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to introduce through you 
and to you to the members of this Assembly a group of grade 8 students from 
Almighty Voice Educational Centre.  There are grade 9 and 10.  They are 
seated in your gallery.  They are accompanied by their teacher, Brian 
Chipperfield and Brenda Fast; the chaperon, Peggy Baldhead; the bus driver, 
Douglas Baldhead.  I look forward meeting with them at 3 o'clock for 
pictures and refreshments.  I wish them a good stay in Regina.  I hope you 
find it interesting, and I look forward meeting with you.  I would ask all 
the members to please welcome these people to Regina. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I wish to introduce to you and 
other members of the Legislative Assembly a group of people here in your 
gallery today, Mr. Speaker, known as the friends of Myers House, and I'd 
ask that group to stand please. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- These individuals, Mr. Speaker, have come here today 
expressing deep concern with the fact that Myers House in Regina, which is 
a drug and alcohol addiction treatment centre . . . they are expressing 
deep concern that it's being shut down.  And they are hoping that the 
government will rethink its position and put its decision on hold to shut 
down this house . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I think that the hon. member's are 
inappropriate.  They are comments which certainly provoke debate.  It is 
not the forum for it, not the forum for it and ask her to carry on in the 
proper manner. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I was simply indicating the reason 
for their attendance in the legislature, and I would ask you once again to 



 

 

welcome these people to the legislature.  Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I want to join my 
colleague from Regina Lakeview in welcoming the friends of Myers House.  My 
colleague has described their purpose.  They're struggling to keep a 
facility open which they think, and many agree with them, has been very, 
very effective.  I'm going to ask the group to stand, so that the Assembly 
may welcome them in a proper fashion.  I'll ask the friends of Myers House 
to stand. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, on behalf of my 
colleague, the member from Saskatoon Eastview who was unable to be here 
today, I want to introduce a number of students -- 28 in number, I guess 30 
in number -- from Wildwood School.  They are accompanied by their 
vice-principal, Donna Hrytzak, and their teacher, Carol Thiessen.  I will 
have the opportunity to meet with them probably after . . . well there may 
not be a question period today.  Later on today, Mr. Speaker, I will 
discuss with them the procedures in the House and any questions that they 
may have. 
 
I ask my colleagues on both sides of the House to welcome the people from 
Wildwood and hope they have an excellent day here in Regina.  Thank you 
very much. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce to you, and 
through you to all members of the Legislative Assembly, some 62 grade 8 
students seated in the west gallery.  This is the second group in as many 
days, Mr. Speaker, from the Weyburn Junior High School in Weyburn. 
 
As I said yesterday, the schools, the teachers, and the parents, and the 
students obviously, place a great deal of importance on the students having 
an understanding of what the legislature is all about and what 
parliamentary democracy is all about, and so annually we have these visits 
from the junior high.  I look forward to meeting with them around 2:30 for 
some pictures, refreshments, and a chance to answer some of their 
questions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They are accompanied today by their teachers Joanne Jensen and Janice 
Bernard, as well as bus drivers Anita Meyers and Roger Belevance.  I would 
ask all members of the legislature to join me in welcoming this group from 
Weyburn Junior High, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, with leave I would 
like to move a motion that we interrupt the presenting of petitions this 
afternoon to consider second reading of Bill No. 73, An Act to amend The 



 

 

Oil and Gas Conservation Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Leave not granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to ask leave of this Assembly to 
move to government business and specifically Bill No. 61, if the opposition 
so chooses. 
 
Leave not granted. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS (continued) 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have some more petitions . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order!  Order, order. 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am pleased that the friends of 
Myers House are here today to witness the presenting of the . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  The hon. member is out of order in his remarks.  I 
wish to remind him of that, and I believe that we have to stick fairly 
closely to the format in presenting petitions and I ask the hon. member to 
do that. 
 
Mr. Trew: -- I thank you, Mr. Speaker, and will present a number more of 
petitions relating to the matter that I was presenting petitions on before 
I was interrupted by the introduction of guests. 
 
This petition is signed by some 24 people, virtually all from Regina.  On 
behalf of these two dozen petitioners, Mr. Speaker, it's my duty and 
pleasure to present this petition today. 
 
I have another petition with 24 signatures on it, again primarily from the 
City of Regina -- one signature from Regina Beach, other than that, all 
from Regina.  On behalf of these two dozen people who are concerned about 
the issue I'm presenting the petition on, it's my pleasure to present this 
petition today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I've got another two dozen names, this time from Regina, 
scattered throughout, but safe to say primarily north and north-central 
Regina.  On behalf of this whole page of petitioners I table this petition 
today. 
 
To add another petition with the same prayer, Mr. Speaker, I have another 
full petition, again from Regina -- one signature from Moose Jaw, and one 
from Lajord, Saskatchewan, and one from Pense.  Both Lajord and Pense, as 
you know, are just outside of Regina.  On behalf of these people I table 
this petition for our consideration. 
 
I have another full petition, Mr. Speaker, a signature from Odessa, a 
signature from Lumsden, one from Pilot Butte, the balance from the city of 



 

 

Regina.  On behalf of all of these people who took the time to sign the 
petition and on behalf of the person who collected the signatures, I'm 
proud and honoured to table this petition today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have yet again another full petition with the same prayer, 
primarily from Regina, the city of Regina, with a signature from Lumsden 
and one from Findlater.  On behalf of these people, Mr. Speaker, it is my 
pleasure to table this petition to the Legislative Assembly.  Thank you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have again a full petition of signatories with the same 
prayer.  These people are from Regina, exclusively from Regina.  And on 
behalf of the great and growing number of people who have signed this 
petition, it is my pleasure to table the petition today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: -- I have, Mr. Speaker, again another petition with the same 
prayer.  Again the people are from Regina.  And on behalf of this petition 
full of people, it is my duty and pleasure to table this petition today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the list of petitioners with same prayer obviously grows and 
grows.  This is the last petition on this matter I will present today.  And 
I'm pleased to note again a full page, 24 names -- this time signatories 
from Moose Jaw, from Big Beaver, from Turtleford, Melville, White City, and 
Regina.  It has been my distinct honour and pleasure to present these 
petitions this day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Mr. Speaker, in keeping with your ruling and desire to present 
petitions, I have a: 
 

 . . . petition of the undersigned residents of the province of 
Saskatchewan humbly sheweth: 

 That the Provincial Government does not have a mandate from the people of 
Saskatchewan to impose the major tax increase which would result from its 
proposed provincial GST. 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Honourable Assembly may 
be pleased to urge the Provincial Government to stop the provincial GST 
until the people of the province have an opportunity to pass judgement on 
it in a provincial election. 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a list of 20 signatories from Walsh Acres 
in Regina, from Cupar, from Uplands area of Regina, and a signatory from 
Saskatoon.  On behalf of these 20 people, I am honoured to present and 
table this petition today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a petition again with 20 names, same prayer as the 
previous petition.  This time the signatories are from Clavet, Dundurn, 
Saskatoon, and Wishart.  Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to table these 20 
signatories today. 



 

 

 
I have another petition with the same prayer, Mr. Speaker.  This time the 
20 signatories come from Arborfield, Tisdale, Star City, Gronlid, and 
Melfort.  And on behalf of these 20 signatories it is my pleasure to table 
this petition today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a petition with the same prayer, this time from the 
city of Regina -- some from Uplands, some from the south-east part of the 
city, one from Walsh Acres in Regina, and one from Silton, Saskatchewan.  
On behalf of these people who took the time to sign the petition, it is my 
duty and pleasure to table the petition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a petition this time from the Walsh Acres area of 
Saskatchewan, from Argyle Park in Regina, from the south-east part of the 
city of Regina, and a couple of signatories from central Regina.  Mr. 
Speaker, on behalf of these petitioners, I table the petition. 
 
I have two more petitions I wish to present today, Mr. Speaker.  This 
second to last one comes from Saskatoon  
 Dand Dundurn, the vast majority of signatories being from Saskatoon.  It 
is my pleasure on behalf of these signatories to the petition to table the 
petition today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the final petition I have is from the city of Regina and a 
signatory from White City.  On behalf of these petitioners it is my 
pleasure to again table this petition opposing the provincial GST until 
after the election.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I would again ask 
leave of this Assembly to move directly to Bill No. 61. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Mr. Speaker, if I could on a . . . get a point of 
clarification from the minister.  I don't think there's any rule that 
applies to this, but I just wonder is the minister saying . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order, order.  I believe perhaps to make it 
proper, you should ask leave and then we could proceed.  If you would do 
that. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I just ask leave to get a 
point of clarification from the minister.  My understanding is that the 
minister, the Government House Leader, is offering to go directly to Bill 
61 and bypass the motion that would deal with time allocation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Yes, Mr. Speaker, that is correct.  And my thinking is 
that it's time we just get on with Bill No. 61.  We were very pleased with 
the very famous debate that took place in this city of Regina last night.  
And, Mr. Speaker, based on the debate that took place there, it's now time 
to debate that Bill in this Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 



 

 

 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, with that commitment from the Government 
House Leader, our caucus offers to give leave and also we very much 
appreciate the fact that we now are allowed to debate Bill 61.  The only 
thing that I would say is that we should have been doing this two weeks 
ago, but two weeks later is better than nothing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Leave granted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 61 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth that Bill No. 61 -- An Act to amend The Education and 
Health Tax Act (No. 2) be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it is my 
pleasure to stand in this Assembly on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan 
who declare a victory over the repressive PC (Progressive Conservative) 
government by being able to allow the debate on this repressive tax to 
occur again, starting today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Speaker, this is the point that we should have been at 
two weeks ago.  This is the point that the PC government has prevented from 
occurring by day after day after day insisting that this Bill could not be 
debated without limiting it to five hours.  Mr. Speaker, it is time for the 
people of Saskatchewan to be heard in this their Legislative Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- And, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the members of this 
Legislative Assembly, and I think on behalf of both sides of this 
Legislative Assembly, I want to say thank you to those thousands upon 
thousands of people who have signed petitions all across the province of 
Saskatchewan, expressing their view that this government does not have the 
right to introduce this tax without the mandate and that it must, it has a 
moral obligation, to seek a mandate with this tax by calling a provincial 
election so that the people can decide. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- And, Mr. Speaker, this is clearly a day of victory for the 
people of Saskatchewan and for democracy.  The people of Saskatchewan have 
spoken, Mr. Speaker, and I'm very pleased to note that the Legislative 



 

 

Assembly, that both sides of the Legislative Assembly, that the government 
side of the Legislative Assembly has heard the message that the people of 
Saskatchewan must be heard. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I stand on behalf of my constituents, on behalf of the 
constituents of Moose Jaw North and I believe, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of 
the large majority of Saskatchewan people -- I stand firmly opposed to the 
government's provincial goods and services tax proposed in Bill 61. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I stand opposed for a large number of reasons -- a large 
number of reasons.  When I go door to door in my constituency, Mr. Speaker, 
and I talk to people across this province of Saskatchewan, I sense that 
there is a mood.  There is a mood which prevails in this province.  It is a 
mood, Mr. Speaker, which I can describe only as anger, anger which is 
bordering on a sense of despair.  Frustration reigns supreme in the 
province of Saskatchewan today, Mr. Speaker, because the people of 
Saskatchewan are feeling that their wishes, their will, is not being heard 
by their government in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I want to make the case today, Mr. Speaker, in my presentation to this 
Assembly on behalf of my constituents, that the goods and services tax is 
not required to be passed in this Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the time that I am allotted in this Assembly to debate . . 
. and I'm pleased to note that I will not be limited, Mr. Speaker, in 
making my remarks, that I will be able to give full and free debate in this 
Legislative Assembly.  Mr. Speaker, I am going to be addressing this Bill 
and I will be making eight points, Mr. Speaker, as to why I oppose the 
provincial goods and services tax. 
 
In the time, Mr. Speaker, that is before us in my debate in this Assembly, 
I will be making the case, number one, Mr. Speaker, that the provincial 
goods and services tax is unnecessary.  This government had other choices 
and it can make other choices.  It does not need the provincial goods and 
services tax. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- I will be making the point number two, Mr. Speaker.  I will 
be making point number two, the provincial goods and services tax is 
unfair, that it is philosophically unfair.  It is not progressive.  It does 
not measure the criteria, pass the criteria of progressiveness in taxation, 
Mr. Speaker; that the goods and services tax is unfair. 
 
And number three, Mr. Speaker, in my address I will be making the point 
that the provincial goods and services tax is in fact counter-productive.  
Not only does it not achieve what this government says it is intended to 
achieve, Mr. Speaker, but in fact the goods and services tax itself will 
become and has already become an economic deterrent in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And fourthly, Mr. Speaker, I will be making the point in my address that 
the provincial goods and services tax was ill conceived; that it lacks 



 

 

analysis, the defence of proper economic analysis.  And it makes 
predictions, Mr. Speaker, about the benefits, the so-called benefits, 
according to the government, without any attempt to support those in this 
Legislative Assembly or elsewhere, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That number four, the goods and services tax is ill conceived. 
 
Fifthly, Mr. Speaker, I will be making a point in my debate that the 
provincial goods and services tax is legally questionable.  I will want to 
make some comments, Mr. Speaker, in making that point, as to the way that 
this tax was introduced in the province of Saskatchewan.  And I will also 
be making the point to this Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker, contrary to 
the arguments of the Minister of Finance, that normality is not the case in 
Saskatchewan right now, and that in fact the government does not enjoy the 
confidence of the Legislative Assembly, as is normally the case when 
introducing taxes and imposing taxes before they are legally passed. 
 
Number six, Mr. Speaker, I will be making the point in my debate that this 
tax has been introduced to the people of Saskatchewan as part of a 
despicable, a despicable political agenda of the PC government; that it is 
part of a despicable strategy that is intended to drive a wedge between 
rural and urban Saskatchewan for partisan, political gain prior to an 
election. 
 
And number seven, Mr. Speaker, I will be making the case that the PC 
government introduced the provincial goods and services tax without a 
mandate. And that is clearly the point, Mr. Speaker, that those whose 
petitions have been read in this Assembly over the last two weeks have been 
making.  I will be making the point, Mr. Speaker, that it has been 
introduced not only without a mandate, but in direct contradiction, in 
violation, of commitments made at election time by the PC Party.  And I 
will be making the case, Mr. Speaker, that it can be introduced with a 
mandate, and a mandate can be earned by calling a provincial election. 
 
And eighthly, Mr. Speaker, and perhaps most importantly, perhaps most 
importantly, the first seven items that I've referred to, Mr. Speaker, in 
outlining my address are items that could fall into the topic, I suppose, 
of political analysis or political debate.  But very clearly, Mr. Speaker, 
as I go door to door in my constituency and talk to my own constituents, 
and I think not inconsistent with the feelings of people all across 
Saskatchewan, the fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan 
people simply cannot afford the provincial goods and services tax.  
Saskatchewan people are feeling that they are taxed out; that they are 
taxed to the limit.  And, Mr. Speaker, I say that it is not an option for a 
democratic government to introduce a tax when the people of Saskatchewan 
very clearly say that they cannot afford the tax. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I've outlined to you the eight points that I want to 
make in my address here this afternoon in opposition to the Bill 61, the 
government's introduction of their provincial goods and services tax. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, let me -- after having outlined what I intend to cover 
in my debate -- now proceed through those points and to enter on to the 



 

 

record in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, my arguments contrary to the 
provincial goods and services tax and to deal with them in order. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, I say that the provincial goods and services tax 
in Saskatchewan is unnecessary. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Speaker, I say this government had other choices.  It's 
interesting that when that budget document produced by the Minister of 
Finance in this Assembly was tabled some several weeks after the provincial 
goods and services tax was first announced, and three weeks after it was 
actually implemented, that he introduced it with a document called CHOICES. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, how appropriate that was, because in many ways that is 
crucial to the issue here before us.  I say this government had choices; it 
had other choices.  It could have dealt with its patronage.  It could have 
dealt with its cabinet travel.  It could have dealt with its foolish 
spending.  It could have re-evaluated its resource revenues being realized.  
And, Mr. Speaker, it could have given the people of Saskatchewan a sense of 
hope, a sense of optimism, a sense of encouragement about the future of the 
economy of our province.  Instead, Mr. Speaker, it gave us none of those.  
What they said is people of Saskatchewan are going to have to dig deeper 
into their pockets, that we had no choice. 
 
Well I say, Mr. Speaker, that is blatantly wrong.  It is blatantly 
incorrect.  They did have a choice.  They chose the provincial goods and 
services tax.  And I think, Mr. Speaker, given a chance to exercise 
judgement, the people of Saskatchewan will choose not to have anything more 
to do with the political party that introduced the provincial goods and 
services tax. 
 
Well let me speak to those more specifically, Mr. Speaker.  I'll refer to 
the fact that this government seems to have spent a fair amount of its 
money, seems to have spent a fair amount of its money in foolish ways. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- This is the worst speech I've ever heard. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Well the Minister of Finance says that this is the worst 
speech he's ever heard.  I say, Mr. Speaker, it is a victory for the people 
of Saskatchewan that there is a speech that is able to be heard in this 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- And, Mr. Speaker, I have to bring to the attention of this 
Assembly as well, the Minister of Finance likes to speak from his seat.  
Perhaps that's because when he gave his address on budget night in this 
Assembly, it did not meet with the favour of the people of Saskatchewan. He 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order.  Number one, I would like to 
ask the Minister of Finance to stop interfering.  Number two, I would like 



 

 

to ask the member for Moose Jaw North and other members who will follow him 
to not refer to the presence of members in the House, even though some 
member may slip and make a comment from his seat.  I think debate will 
function more smoothly if we all follow that rule. 
 
Order, order, order, order.  Just allow the debate to function smoothly.  I 
think that if we all co-operate, this debate could carry on. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I will resist the urge to 
comment any further on the matter with which you just arose, and I 
appreciate your ruling. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we can all ask ourselves, and I think the people of 
Saskatchewan are asking themselves too, at this time in which we're faced 
not only with the introduction of a very unpopular -- a very painful, I 
think, is not an overstatement expression -- tax, but also, Mr. Speaker, at 
a time in which we are by law, by Canadian constitution, within five months 
of being required to go to the polls in an election, we have to ask 
ourselves, Mr. Speaker, and I'm sure people of Saskatchewan are, just how 
is it that government should ought to be run. 
 
Clearly in the time that I've been in this Assembly, if there's anything 
that I've seen increase in terms of public awareness and public concern, it 
has been an increase, Mr. Speaker, in the attention of people across 
Saskatchewan to focus on the fiscal management of the Government of 
Saskatchewan, of their government.  As taxpayers and citizens of the 
province, are they receiving value for money, value for their taxes?  Are 
we receiving value for the revenues of the province of Saskatchewan in its 
many sources, many of which are not taxes on people? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think if we were to conduct a serious discussion and 
ask the people of Saskatchewan and ask the members of this Assembly, what 
is the most expensive way that you can possibly run government -- give me 
the plan; tell me the most frivolous way that you can spend the taxpayers' 
money and you can get the least return for the highest expenditure -- you 
know what the plan would be, Mr. Speaker?  They'd say, run a patronage 
government.  Pay your friends lots of money to do a lousy job so that . . . 
a lousy job which can either then be left undone or you can pay somebody 
else some more money to do all over again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a patronage government is something that we have been getting 
for these last several years in the PC government here in Saskatchewan.  
And is it any wonder that the people of this province are feeling cynical 
about politicians, about politics, about government when they see with 
their own eyes what is happening to the money, how the money is being 
spent, their hard-earned tax dollars are being spent, along with all those 
other revenues that the government realizes? 
 
I want to draw the attention of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, to an editorial 
which was written in The Estevan Mercury, in August of last year -- an 
editorial and an article entitled "Patronage Pain".  This is an editorial 
written by the newspaper in the home riding of the Premier of Saskatchewan.  
And I quote directly from that article, Mr. Speaker.  It says in part, and 



 

 

I quote: 
 

 Patronage appointments escalated to a new high last week when former 
Conservative MLA received an early Christmas present. 

 
 Larry Birkbeck of Moosomin received a 10-year appointment to the 

Saskatchewan Municipal Board at a starting salary of $57,820.  The 
appointment was made through a cabinet order (a cabinet order, decision of 
cabinet) released publicly on July 31. 

 
And the editorial goes on to say, Mr. Speaker: 
 

 While Birkbeck's appointment has gone beyond the normal limit, since most 
are a few years, there have been notable others made recently as well.  
For example, two former cabinet ministers, Graham Taylor and Bob Andrews, 
have also received a healthy payoff for their faithfulness to the party 
over the years. 

 
One has to kind of wonder, Mr. Speaker, when you look at the experience of 
the PC Prime Minister in Canada, who has the ability to make his patronage 
appointments to the Senate, one has to wonder why it is that it's the 
Liberal party of Saskatchewan that's proposed a Saskatchewan senate, and 
not the PC party.  Because clearly this is the PC version of appointments 
to a Saskatchewan senate, if we had one. 
 
Well Mr. Speaker, it goes on to say this: 
 

 Taylor was appointed to the trade office in Hong Kong and Andrews to the 
trade office in Minneapolis. (And we're all aware of that and again I 
quote.)  If you add up these three appointments, they alone are costing 
the Saskatchewan taxpayers over $250,000 a year. 

 
Two hundred and fifty thousand dollars a year for cushy appointments to 
Larry Birkbeck and Graham Taylor and Bob Andrew, who no one would deny are 
anything other than strong PC partisans, obviously -- they all represented 
their constituents in this Assembly -- and who went on to the great beyond 
after their life in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, at a cost to taxpayers, of 
$250,000 a year. 
 
(1445) 
 
But Larry Birkbeck and Graham Taylor and Bob Andrew aren't alone, Mr. 
Speaker when it comes to taking care of the great . . . one can't say the 
great unwashed, Mr. Speaker, but to those friends of the PC government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if I may refer just, just to some friends of the PC government 
who are former members of this Assembly who are being taken care of, who 
have been taken care of just quite comfortably, Mr. Speaker, by their PC 
government. 
 
You see, it is false to say -- some would say -- that nobody has benefitted 
in the PC government years.  I disagree with that argument, Mr. Speaker.  
The fact of the matter is, some have been very well taken care of in the PC 



 

 

government years.  However one of the things that many of them have in 
common is that they carry PC blue membership cards, and in fact many of 
them sat in chairs in this Assembly. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we've seen the experience from this PC government, some 
financial support for defeated PC cabinet minister, Paul Schoenhals.  He 
went from this Assembly to become the first full-time chairman of the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
And we saw defeated PC cabinet minister Gordon Dirks, who received a 
consulting contract with the Department of Education in 1986-87. Defeated 
PC cabinet minister Tim Embury, he also turned from a cabinet minister to a 
consultant whose brilliance just couldn't be overlooked by the Government 
of Saskatchewan in 1986-87.  And defeated PC cabinet minister Sid Dutchak. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these folks seem to be . . . they fall by the wayside from the 
Assembly, and then up they pop into some contract supported by the PC 
government and paid for by the taxpayers of the province. 
 
Sid Dutchak, of course, was the interim president of the Saskatchewan 
Housing Corporation in 1986.  And defeated PC cabinet minister Louis 
Domotor, he was a special projects co-ordinator for the Property Management 
Corporation.  Now, Mr. Speaker, the Property Management Corporation is not 
internationally renowned for its special projects, and I suspect that he 
had a pretty creative job description. 
 
Well former PC cabinet minister Paul Rousseau, he went from Saskatchewan to 
become the agent-general in London, England, Mr. Speaker.  And former 
cabinet minister Gordon Currie is the board chairman for the youth 
treatment centre.  And former PC MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) 
for Moose Jaw North, Keith Parker, moved to the Liquor Board and from there 
to Tourism.  And former PC MLA Ralph Katzman has been serving as special 
assistant to the minister for the Department of Highways. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, these former PC members seem to have done not badly at 
the expense of the taxpayers, as part of a patronage plan for operating 
government.  But the patronage goes beyond those who served in this 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker -- former president of the PC Party of Saskatchewan, 
George Hill, now the president of SaskPower, with responsibility for 
Rafferty and the privatization of SaskPower and other matters. 
 
And the PC campaign manager in Saskatoon Eastview by-election, Don Morgan, 
now the chairman of the Legal Aid Commission.  And Gary Lane's former 
political chief of staff, Bill Wheatley, the senior vice-president for 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well it's gone not only, Mr. Speaker, to those who were active in support 
of the PC Party, but they take care as well, Mr. Speaker, of their defeated 
members of parliament.  Defeated PC member of parliament John Gormley, who 
was a senior advisor of policy communications with the department of 
privatization. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the list goes on and on, but I'll stop there.  Those are 



 

 

some of the high-profile people that people across the province of 
Saskatchewan can recognize -- can recognize very clearly as patronage 
appointments, blatant patronage appointments from their provincial 
government. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I say, I say there is another way of raising revenues.  
There is another way.  There is another way of cutting costs, and one of 
the ways of cutting costs is to get rid of the patronage from the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, it's not only through patronage that money 
has been wasted frivolously, needlessly, aimlessly, over these last years 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I remember some years ago there was a little quip going around 
the province of Saskatchewan.  People of Saskatchewan were saying, Mr. 
Speaker, if you haven't had a holiday for a while, if you hadn't had a trip 
for a while and you want to see the world, then the way to do it, Mr. 
Speaker, is to join the PC cabinet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think some of the most used pieces of luggage in the 
province of Saskatchewan belong to the ministers opposite who have, Mr. 
Speaker, they have seen the world. 
 
 DAn Hon. Member: -- They've got stickers on top of stickers. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, that's right.  As my colleague says here, 
some of them are all stickered out.  Their luggage has doubled in weight 
because of the stickers that are stuck on the thing, Mr. Speaker.  And they 
have seen the world, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have in front of me, I have in front of me just a small list 
of some of the places that the PC cabinet have gone to see on behalf of the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- They've got the trips and the taxpayers . . . 
(inaudible) . . . 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Well as the member from Regina North West says, they got the 
trips and we got the bill, and ain't that the truth, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let me just run through these, Mr. Speaker.  And for those who may be 
taking in these proceedings either on television or reading Hansard, Mr. 
Speaker, let me ask if anyone in . . . well there may be some in this 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker, but let me ask if anyone in Saskatchewan got a 
postcard from any PC member and any PC cabinet minister who's been to any 
of these points around the world. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, where have they been spending taxpayers' money to visit 
on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan?  And I'm referring to places that 
have been travelled to by our Premier and by the PC cabinet ministers. 



 

 

 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, our cabinet has 
travelled to Reno.  I suspect they may have been doing a little investing 
there, Mr. Speaker, and taking care of some investment decisions. 
 
Not only that, Mr. Speaker, for the people of Saskatchewan, they've gone to 
Paris -- they've gone to Paris.  And they've been to London, Mr. Speaker.  
I don't know if they've been to London to see the Queen or not, but they've 
been to London. 
 
And they've gone to Brussels and they've gone to Geneva and they've gone to 
Tokyo and they've been to Honolulu. They've been to Honolulu on behalf of 
the people of Saskatchewan.  In fact if I remember correctly, before my 
coming to this Assembly the former minister of Highways went to Honolulu on 
a very important trip to consult with those who construct highways in this 
province.  And if I remember correctly, Mr. Speaker, he said he was so busy 
at that convention he didn't have time to sleep. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we do have to admire the dedication of the PC cabinet 
ministers and Premier who have travelled the world on behalf of the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, not only have they gone to all of these places, they've 
been to Athens on our behalf.  And they've been to Phoenix and they've gone 
to Helsinki and they've been to Miami; they've been to Seoul. 
 
Oh, the Minister of Rural Affairs -- he probably is perturbed -- maybe he 
would like to offer some destinations that I have not yet reached, referred 
to, that he's been to.  And I'm sure that all the members opposite will 
want to put these on the record, just so the people of Saskatchewan 
understand where you've travelled on their behalf in the interest of 
conducting government frugally and responsibly and responsively in the 
interests of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, they've also gone to Denver for us, and they've been to 
Moscow on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan.  And they've been to Zu 
 pürich and they've been to Vienna and they've gone to Berlin and they've 
been to Amsterdam; they've been to Sao Paulo and Palm Springs.  They've 
even gone to Singapore and Rio de Janeiro and New Delhi and Brasilia. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the list goes on and on, but I think we get the idea.  
The PC cabinet and the Premier of Saskatchewan have travelled the world.  
They've seen the world for all of us.  And, Mr. Speaker, I say it is a 
shame that they got the trips and the people of Saskatchewan got the bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, it can be said as well that they've made 
the occasional expenditure here in the province of Saskatchewan which would 
strike many people of Saskatchewan as a bit on the silly side. 
 
It's kind of interesting, Mr. Speaker.  There are some examples that I was 
part of, some presentations around the province of Saskatchewan earlier 



 

 

this year, when the New Democrat caucus toured the province of Saskatchewan 
in response . . . presenting some information in response to a question 
that the people of this province have been asking all across the province 
for some time.  People of Saskatchewan were saying: where has the money 
gone?  Well, Mr. Speaker, that is an important question and one I'm 
addressing right now, and it's gone some other places as well. 
 
Quite interesting too, Mr. Speaker, that at one of those presentations the 
Minister of Finance actually appeared.  He came to find out where the money 
has gone, and was told where the money has gone.  Not only that, Mr. 
Speaker, he was given an opportunity at that meeting to dispute any of the 
information, and he chose not to.  And so one can only assume, Mr. Speaker, 
that the information being presented is not only accurate, it is accurate 
in the mind of the Minister of Finance. 
 
It was at those meetings as well, Mr. Speaker, that an important commitment 
was made on behalf of the New Democratic Party caucus to the people of 
Saskatchewan in response to the question: where has all the money gone? 
 
The commitment that was made was this: is that one of the first acts of a 
new New Democrat government, if the people of Saskatchewan should choose to 
give us a mandate following the next election, one of the first actions of 
a New Democrat government would be to open the books, to open the books  -- 
an independent audit to review the expenditures of the Government of 
Saskatchewan and to let the people of Saskatchewan know, not just the 
elected members of Saskatchewan, but to let the people of Saskatchewan 
know, where the money has gone. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, and from that there would be decisions 
made as to where we go from there.  But let me just bring to the attention 
of this Assembly -- in response to the concerns of those people in our 
province who have said, where have my tax dollars been going -- well 
they've been going to patronage, they've been going for trips for cabinet 
ministers and the Premier.  Are they going anywhere frivolous, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Well one of the things that we note, Mr. Speaker, is an expenditure of 
$17,423 in expenses run up by the Premier's office at Regina's Hotel 
Saskatchewan in just one year.  No explanation, $17,000 in expenses by the 
Premier's office at the Regina Hotel Saskatchewan.  I don't think he's been 
staying there overnight, Mr. Speaker, so one kind of wonders what that's 
all about. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, an expenditure of $64,253 paid to the British 
merchant bank N.M. Rothschild & Sons for two months of privatization 
consulting.  Let's just reflect on this for a moment, Mr. Speaker.  There 
would be many people in this province, myself included, who are of the view 
that $1 spent on two months of piratization consulting is a dollar 
foolishly spent.  But, Mr. Speaker, this was not $1 for two months of 
privatization consulting, this was $64,253 for two months of piratization 
consulting.  That's not bad, Mr. Speaker; 32,000 a month ain't bad money. 
 



 

 

Remember what I said before, Mr. Speaker. You want to run government the 
most expensive way possible, you do it through patronage.  You pay your 
friends big bucks to do a lousy job which is either left undone or done 
over by people who know what they're doing -- $64,000 for piratization 
consulting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, obviously a plan that not even this government . . . although 
a year ago they said this was the central theme of their economic plan for 
Saskatchewan, they said.  Oh, they said, this is going to be the political 
Waterloo for the NDP (New Democratic Party) they said, because we've got 
the economy in firm grip.  We know where we're heading; we're charging 
bravely forward into the future, they said.  And we're going to do it 
through piratization; that's the way it's going to be done. 
 
And just to make sure that they were doing it right, Mr. Speaker, they paid 
somebody to come from Great Britain, $64,000 for two months to tell them 
what to do. 
 
(1500) 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan told them what to do with 
piratization.  The people of Saskatchewan told them.  And now, Mr. Speaker, 
here we are, 1991, and the months before a provincial election, you can't 
get them to utter the P-word.  Piratization has become the P-word.  They 
won't even mention any more this brave, bold, new, world that was going to 
cure everything that ails us here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Is there a minister in charge any more? 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- And so, Mr. Speaker, you have to ask . . . well the member 
asks, is there even a minister of piratization any more?  The answer is no.  
There is not even a minister of piratization. 
 
Let's just put this into context.  We had a minister of piratization who 
said that the best way to do anything was in the private sector and he was 
in charge of transferring everything to the private sector, out of the 
public sector, that he possibly could.  And he retired from this Assembly. 
 
Well surely, Mr. Speaker, this minister who believes that nothing could be 
done anywhere near as well in the public sector as the private sector, 
surely when this minister of piratization resigned from this Assembly, he 
got himself a job in the private sector.  Surely that's true.  Did he? 
 
Well he's got himself a suite in Hong Kong now, Mr. Speaker.  He's got 
himself a suite in Hong Kong with a great big fancy office being paid for 
by the people of Saskatchewan.  The minister of piratization. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, they paid $64,000 for two months of consultation to tell 
them how to do piratization.  Mr. Speaker, for nothing, for absolutely 
nothing, they got advice from the people of Saskatchewan that they should 
ought to undo piratization.  And I say they got better value for their 
money from the people of Saskatchewan. 
 



 

 

Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, the list goes on.  We are now in the habit 
in this province of paying $1.9 million a month for pre-election government 
advertising. 
 
Now some would like us to believe that this pre-election government 
advertising -- that it's costing the people of Saskatchewan nearly $2 
million a month -- is absolutely necessary for the dissemination of 
information.  And they would ask us to believe that it is pure coincidence, 
pure coincidence that when Department of Agriculture ads are displayed on 
TV or in print with that waving flag up in the corner, and the fact that it 
looks exactly, exactly like the little flag that's up in the corner of the 
PC Party ads, that that's pure coincidence.  It's got nothing to do with 
the fact that these are, by Canadian Constitution, the final months before 
an election.  This is not pre-election advertising, they tell us.  This is 
strictly for the dissemination of information, and we have to spend $1.9 
million a month of the people's money to let them know. 
 
Well I say, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan know all they need to 
know, and this government can reduce that expenditure to zero in order to 
respond to the desire of Saskatchewan people to know what they need to know 
in order to make a decision, come the next election. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I referred earlier as well to Paul Rousseau, the 
agent-general in London.  Not only did we send good old Paul to London, we 
sent him a Citroe pën.  His own little car for $27,000 -- $27,089 for 
Paul's private Citroe pën.  We don't want Paul walking around the streets 
of London, Mr. Speaker, at night like the common folk.  He should ought to 
have his own little Citroe pën for over $27,000 compliments of the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I know that the members opposite won't want me to make 
reference to the G-word here, Mr. Speaker, but let me just make reference 
to an expenditure related to GigaText. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, for an executive of Gigatext, the people of Saskatchewan 
coughed up $137,500 for a luxury condominium -- for a GigaText executive.  
Lots of people, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan don't live in $137,500 
dwellings.  And I think . . . I find it a little distasteful that this 
amount of money is being spent from their tax dollars for a GigaText 
executive. 
 
And GigaText executives, Mr. Speaker, well they should ought not to only 
live in luxury condominiums, they ought to have their own fancy cars, and 
so surely the people of Saskatchewan would not object to $1,083 per month, 
per month . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Why is the hon. member on his feet? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- I'd like to make a point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: -- What is your point of order? 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- My point of order, Mr. Speaker, refers to relevancy in 
a debate, and the hon. member opposite is talking about a computer company 
called GigaText.  We've waited for some time to have this debate.  Now that 
we're having it, Mr. Speaker, I think it would be fair and reasonable that 
members opposite stand in their place and speak to the issue of the Bill.  
And I don't think that that was entirely relevant or perhaps not at all 
relevant -- the comments of the hon. member opposite. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Point of order.  I'd like to speak on the point of 
order. 
 
The Speaker: -- The member for Saskatoon Westmount. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- Yes, Mr. Speaker, I want to add to the point of order 
that's been . . . the alleged point of order raised by the House Leader. 
 
The Bill is clearly about obtaining revenue and how that revenue would be 
expended, and the member I think clearly is relating how the government 
record has been established with regard to spending of revenue.  And that 
is clearly in order when you're discussing the passage of a very large tax 
Bill in the province of Saskatchewan.  So I would assume, Mr. Speaker, that 
persons would be led to conclude that the member's comments are quite in 
order. 
 
And I've been listening to the member quite closely and the member is 
relating them to the expenditure of taxpayers and to Bill 61, which is 
before us at this time. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Speaker, on the point of order, in response to the 
member, I simply remind you, Mr. Speaker, when I stood to my feet I 
outlined eight points that I would be addressing, in order.  You may have 
noted them, Mr. Speaker, and I'm sure if he's interested in debate, the 
Government House Leader may have done the same and that I would be . . . I 
outlined those in advance, Mr. Speaker, and then indicated that I would 
address each of them individually.  And I'm now on my first point, that my 
belief that the provincial GST (goods and services tax) is unnecessary, 
that the government had other choices. 
 
I won't take the time of the House to repeat the other seven points, Mr. 
Speaker, but clearly in my view -- and I will respect your ruling, Mr. 
Speaker -- the debate continues to be on topic as outlined at the beginning 
of the speech. 
 
The Speaker: -- I've listened to the hon. member's point of order.  Let me 
speak to the point of order in this way.  We have had some considerable 
debates in the past.  We are now on Bill 61 after waiting a considerable 
time to debate this very important Bill.  Of course because of the present 
circumstances, hon. members will be paying close attention to the contents 
of remarks of hon. members on both sides of the House. 
 
I believe that that being the case, let me just say this: in order to 
facilitate the smooth and the efficient conduct of the debate, I would just 



 

 

bring to all members' attention the fact that they should stick to the 
topic of the Bill in their remarks.  I believe that in this case, yes, it 
could be said the hon. member was on topic.  However, having said that I 
believe hon. members should be careful not to draw long bows, as they know 
they can do.  And debate the Bill; I think this is your opportunity. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for your ruling.  And, Mr. 
Speaker, I trust that it is, from your ruling, in order to continue with 
some description -- although I'm nearly done this point  -- but, Mr. 
Speaker to continue with some reference to other choices that the 
government had instead of inflicting the provincial goods and services tax 
on the people of Saskatchewan in Bill 61.  Clearly there were other 
choices. 
 
This is part of . . . I can understand, Mr. Speaker, I clearly understand 
why members opposite find it frustrating to listen to a list of unnecessary 
expenditures.  Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, the list is long.  I didn't 
create the list, Mr. Speaker.  The members over there created the list by 
their experience day after day and week after week and year after year in 
the office of government.  I don't apologize for the list being lengthy.  I 
think the people of Saskatchewan are owed an apology by the Government of 
Saskatchewan, by their PC government, for the fact that the list is 
lengthy. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, let me make reference to just one other item which may 
be annoying to the members opposite.  I understand that and will listen 
very carefully when they enter into debate.  I'm not sure that the people 
of Saskatchewan consider it to have been a wise expenditure on the part of 
their government to see $182,620 for salary and separation payments for the 
Premier's deputy minister, Norman Riddell, when Mr. Riddell left 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker -- left Saskatchewan to go to work for Premier 
Bourassa in Quebec. 
 
He had a job here in the Premier's office.  He resigned his job here, Mr. 
Speaker, to go work for the Premier of Quebec.  Now, Mr. Speaker, I think 
that's his privilege.  If he doesn't like working for the Premier of 
Saskatchewan, I understand that.  But surely, Mr. Speaker, when he chooses 
then to go to work for the Premier of Quebec, it should not be the 
responsibility of the people of Saskatchewan to pay him $182,620 as a going 
away present.  Mr. Speaker, I suspect that the people of Saskatchewan would 
consider that to be a tad frivolous. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I make the points that there were other choices, in 
expenditures that could have been cut by way of patronage expenditures and 
cabinet travel and foolish spending practices. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, there's two sides to this balanced book.  One is money 
out and the other is money in.  And let me make just the reference, Mr. 
Speaker, let me make a brief reference to the other side of the coin, to 
the resource coming in, resource money coming in.  I'd like to make 
reference, Mr. Speaker, to revenues that the province realizes not from 
payment of taxes by people, but revenues realized by one of our great 
advantages in this province, from our natural resources. 



 

 

 
And I refer the Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker, to an article in the 
Saskatchewan publication Sask Trends Monitor, April of last . . . a year 
ago, Mr. Speaker.  The Sask Trends Monitor, for those who don't know, is an 
independent news-letter on economic issues in Saskatchewan.  It has, to the 
best of my knowledge, no affiliations with any political party and makes 
its money through sale of subscriptions and -- I think by most people's 
judgement, Mr. Speaker -- would be seen to be an objective document. 
 
What did they say in April of 1990, Mr. Speaker?  Let me quote from an 
article entitled: "Resource Industry Statistics."  They wrote and I quote: 
 

 Much of the blame for the current economic situation in Saskatchewan has 
been laid at the feet of the agricultural sector. 

 
Does that sound familiar?  It seems to me we've heard that once or twice 
from the other side.  In fact, it says, 
 

 In fact, the decline in our resource industries has been just as dramatic 
and has had much more of an impact on provincial treasury than 
agriculture. 

 
And then it goes on to say, Mr. Speaker: 
 

 Partly because of the way production taxes and royalties are structured 
and partly because of the government's policy, the revenue to the 
provincial government has been falling throughout this period (referring 
to the period beginning in 1981).  In 1981 and 1982, one out of every 
three dollars of sales was flowing to the provincial treasury.  By 1989, 
the proportion had dropped to about 12%. 

 
Let's just reflect on that for a moment, Mr. Speaker.  We're talking about 
government policy, government revenues realized from our natural resources.  
In 1982, out of every dollar, every dollar of sales from our natural 
resources, 33 cents on that dollar came to the provincial coffers and 
therefore, Mr. Speaker, replaced the necessity for taxing people. 
 
In 1982 the government of the day said it is better to tax natural 
resources than it is to tax people, and apologize to nobody for extracting 
33 cents on the dollar for the people of Saskatchewan from our natural 
resources. 
 
But by 1989, Mr. Speaker, what's been happening with these great managers 
of the provincial treasury?  Surely these best business minds of the PC 
Party, when they came to the Government of Saskatchewan, determined surely 
to act in the best interests of the province of Saskatchewan; and surely 
recognizing, Mr. Speaker, that there is nothing in our province more 
important than our people.  That's why we're here.  That when you develop 
your natural resources policies, you do them in such a way that you extract 
the maximum from your natural resources and the minimum from the people. 
 
(1515) 
 



 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, 33 cents on the dollar in 1982.  But in 1989, Mr. 
Speaker, that had dropped to 12 cents on the dollar.  Let's put that into 
context, Mr. Speaker, in the context of Bill 61 and the PST, the provincial 
goods and services tax. 
 
What this means, Mr. Speaker, when you combine the federal goods and 
services tax imposed on the people of Saskatchewan by their PC cousins in 
Ottawa, with their provincial goods and services tax imposed on clothes, on 
children's clothes, on April 1 of this year, which Bill 61 intends to put 
into statute . . . It has been collected now, Mr. Speaker, for some eight 
weeks -- eight and a half weeks -- still not in law. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you are a parent going in to buy running shoes for your 
child, you will pay 14 cents on the dollar tax for your children's running 
shoes.  But if you were a natural resource corporation in Saskatchewan, 
extracting non-renewable natural resources from the province of 
Saskatchewan, you pay 12 cents on the dollar; 14 cents on the dollar people 
pay for children's running shoes, and 12 cents on the dollar natural 
resources corporations pay to extract natural resources from under our 
soils. 
 
Well I ask you, Mr. Speaker, and I ask the members opposite . . . Because I 
know what the people of Saskatchewan say.  People of Saskatchewan say 14 
cents on the dollar for running shoes and 12 cents on the dollar for 
natural resources is not fair.  And any party that intends to ram that down 
the throats of Saskatchewan people deserves to be booted out when they next 
go to the people of Saskatchewan in a provincial election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Talk about basic injustice in the tax system, that our PC 
governments in Saskatchewan and Ottawa combined, on food, clothing, and 
shelter.  You know we say we live in society in which the basics are food, 
clothing, and shelter.  And what does this tax in Bill 61 introduce?  It 
introduces a 7 per cent tax, Mr. Speaker, on restaurant food.  Food.  
Granted, not home consumption food, but on food.  A tax not there, a new 
tax. 
 
It says, Mr. Speaker, that, for all clothing.  We had an exception, Mr. 
Speaker, until this tax was introduced on April 1. If you bought clothing 
under the value of $300 per article, in fact the large majority of articles 
ever bought by the large majority of Saskatchewan people, in provincial 
sales tax, Mr. Speaker, you paid nothing.  Clothing. 
 
And then on the heating costs, Mr. Speaker, on the heating costs for homes, 
an extra 7 per cent . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the member 
wants to debate this issue, and I will look forward to, I will look forward 
to your defence.  I will look forward to your defence of your government on 
April 1 moving to add a tax on food, clothing, and shelter.  I think, Mr. 
Member, former minister, the only member on the government side who is not 
being paid extra money, I look forward to your enter into this debate.  And 
I think it is with a sigh of relief, Mr. Member, it was with a sigh of 
relief that you know that you will not have to be accountable to your 



 

 

constituents in the next election. 
 
I think it is more than pure coincidence that you have chosen not to run 
again in the next provincial election.  I don't blame you for not running 
again in the next provincial election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Speaker, food, clothing, and heating costs of our 
shelter.  That's what this tax has been imposed upon -- food, clothing, and 
shelter.  Isn't that socially responsible.  Isn't that the responsible 
thing to do. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I say, I say it is an injustice.  It is an injustice 
to the people of Saskatchewan when we have gone from 33 cents on the dollar 
for natural resources to 12 cents on the dollar, and when people in this 
province are paying more in tax on running shoes than natural resource 
corporations are paying to extract our natural resources.  That is a basic 
injustice in the tax system that is being proposed in Bill 61 before us. 
 
And what does it say . . . and I go back to the Sask Trends Monitor article 
again, Mr. Speaker.  It goes on and I quote: 
 

 The reduction is almost exclusively in oil royalties and taxes, which fell 
from 65 per cent of sales in 1981 to 15 per cent in 1989. 

 
Mr. Speaker, in 1981 in this province we said we have been blessed with a 
natural resource -- oil.  And the government of the day said we have an 
obligation to the people of our province to keep down their personal taxes 
and provide them services by getting maximum return from our oil.  And with 
apologies to no one, 65 cents on the dollar in oil came into the coffers of 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
But from the first day that the PC government walked into this Assembly and 
sat on that side . . . I remember the words of the former member from 
Thunder Creek, the first minister of Energy of the PC government.  He said, 
he stood in his place . . . first time he stood, he said two things -- 
wasn't a statement of hope or optimism he expressed but it told the tale.  
It forecasted what was to come, Mr. Speaker.  He said his only regret was 
that there was still some NDP members sitting in this House.  And then he 
repeated a theme that his father had said as premier of this province, that 
he had nothing against American investment.  He said his only complaint 
about it is that we don't have enough of it.  That's what he said. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as minister of Energy he began the first day.  And it is a 
policy that has continued under this PC government since, Mr. Speaker -- 
began to reduce the revenues to the people of Saskatchewan from our oil.  
And was it because the price of oil was dropping?  Was that why the 
royalties were going down?  Not on your life. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I remind this Assembly and I remind the people of Saskatchewan 
that the price of oil did not peak in 1981 or 1982.  It was going like 
that.  The price of oil, Mr. Speaker, peaked in 1984, two years after this 



 

 

PC party came to government.  But what had happened to the percentage of 
royalties being realized from oil by that time, Mr. Speaker?  Was that 
going up along with ability to pay?  Progressive taxation, the principle of 
progressive taxation?  While the price of oil was going up, the royalties 
being charged by the PC government to the oil companies were going down, 
from 65 cents on the dollar in 1982 to 15 cents on the dollar in 1989. 
 
And the article goes on to say, Mr. Speaker: 
 

 The combination of the smaller government share of declining revenue base 
has had a dramatic impact on the provincial treasury. 

 
And I conclude my reference, Mr. Speaker, to this part of my address by 
quoting directly, by quoting directly from the conclusion to this article 
in the Sask Trends Monitor, and I quote: 
 

 Even with the declining prices, had the royalty and taxation levels 
remained at their earlier levels, the current provincial debt of $4 
billion would simply not exist. 

 
Mr. Speaker, we're not talking about New Democratic Party rhetoric or 
documents here; we're talking about the Sask Trends Monitor, an independent 
economic news-letter in the province of Saskatchewan, which said that had 
the policies remained the same, our $4 billion debt would simply not exist. 
 
Well I say, Mr. Speaker, I say the Government of Saskatchewan, in order to 
address its fiscal objectives, does not need to stick its hands in the 
people of Saskatchewan to the extent of 440 million new dollars every year.  
It didn't need to do that; it had choices.  It could have gotten rid of its 
waste and its mismanagement, its patronage, and its cabinet travel, and its 
foolish  
 Dexpenditures.  And, Mr. Speaker, they could have gotten a fair return for 
the people of Saskatchewan from the natural resources that belong to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  We are pleased to have a good number of guests with 
us this afternoon to listen to this very important debate.  However, I 
would ask you to adhere to a long-standing rule in this Assembly that 
guests in the Assembly do not participate in the debate.  Thank you very 
much. 
 
Why are you on your feet? 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I could have leave to introduce some 
guests at this time. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I have a few people I'd 



 

 

like to introduce here today to the Assembly.  They are some people from 
all around the province and a few people from outside.  And I would like to 
at this time introduce several of them.  First of all I'd like to introduce 
Mr. Don Garcia.  Mr. Garcia is the retiring financial treasurer for the 
International Longshoremen's and Warehousemen's Union in Vancouver.  He's 
in Regina at this time attending a convention of the Retail, Wholesale and 
Department Store Union.  There's Mr. Ron McClurg.  He's also from Vancouver 
and is a member of the Retail Wholesale Union in British Columbia.  As well 
there's Brian DeBeck, and Brian is as well a leading member of the trade 
union community, with the Retail Wholesale Union in Vancouver, and Mr. Neil 
Brooks.  Mr. Brooks is a tax expert.  He's the vice-president of the Fair 
Tax Commission set up by the Government of Ontario.  He's a professor of 
taxation law at Osgoode law school in Toronto. 
 
As well as those visitors, Mr. Speaker, I have a number of people here from 
Regina that I would like to introduce at this time.  There's Mr. Vern 
Abbott, Mr. Cliff Knutson, Dave McCall, Mr. Donald Smith, Mike Van Alstine, 
Ramona Coghill, Doug Foote, Don Hallam, Mark Hollyoak, Troy Jessop, Susan 
Latham, Teri McDonald, the Hon. Joe McKeown, the well-known council member 
here in Regina, Kelly Miner, Laura Moser, Julie Nagy, Susan Parks, Larry 
Saip, and Paul Guillet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they've come today, taken time from their busy schedule at 
convention here in Regina, to observe the historic debate over the PST here 
in the province.  And I'd ask all members, Mr. Speaker, to welcome them to 
the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it's my 
distinct pleasure today to introduce to you and to members of this House 
some guests in our gallery, members of RWDSU (Retail, Wholesale and 
Department Store Union).  And I'm pleased to indicate, sir, that a number 
of these guests are from my home city.  Betty Bruner is with us today, 
Grace Harding, Mario Hudon, Rupert Parent, Randy Wick, from my home 
community. 
 
As well there are others -- some from the Premier's constituency, Mr. 
Speaker -- Darcy Doerr, from Estevan, Garry Hanson, Lindsay Roy, Sheree 
Sentes.  Other folks that are with them, there's Richard Gregains from 
Moose Jaw; we have with us Joelann Pister from Rhein, and Doug Markham from 
Willowbrook.  I would ask all members to give them a warm welcome to the 
Assembly this afternoon.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to join with my colleagues in 
welcoming a number of the individuals who are here with us today.  And some 
of them from down in the south-west corner of the province, a fair little 
distance to come to the meeting today -- from Assiniboia, Faith Dayman and 
Colette Sabourin; and from Swift Current, Neil Collier, Lorraine Forde, Tim 
Johnson, Adrian Quintin, Bryan Silvester, and Della Zabel.  And also from 
the Weyburn area, Wanda Bartlett, Elmer Ivan, Shawn Stepp, and Garth White. 



 

 

 
I'm sure all members will want to join with me in welcoming them here 
today, and wish that you have a good return home and a good meeting 
convention that you're here in Regina for. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  On behalf of myself and 
my colleague from The Battlefords, I would like to introduce some guests 
here and welcome them today.  And they are Leonard Combres, Angie Laughlin, 
Colin Lemauviel, and Alex Tkatchuk, all from the Battlefords; and also 
Jason Bacon from Lloydminster.  I'd like all members to welcome this group 
here today also. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The Retail, Wholesale and 
Department Store Union is a large union in the province of Saskatchewan, 
and represents people not only in the urban parts of the province but in 
small urban parts of Saskatchewan as well.  And having been a trade union 
member myself for a number of years, I take great pleasure in introducing 
some of our guests here this afternoon. 
 
They are from . . . beginning with the rural parts of Saskatchewan, we have 
Rod Wall from Dalmeny, Diane Melrose from Langham, Sylvester Zaluski from 
Wynyard, Dianne Wilderman from Wynyard, Tim Bodnar from Wynyard, Mary 
Kostiuk from Elfros, Gary Burkart from Saskatoon, Joanne Brenner from 
Saskatoon; and a number from Saskatoon itself: Randy Hoffman, Terry Turner, 
Tammy Semeniuk, Garry Sears, Linda Reiber, Arlene Penner, Tracy Oleksyn, 
Eric Nimilowich, Kelly Morrison, and Ken McLean. 
 
I know all members will join with me in welcoming these guests to the 
Assembly today and wishing them good luck on their convention that they're 
having in Regina and hope they enjoy themselves today with us.  Thank you 
very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I want to join with 
my colleagues in welcoming the delegates here today.  There are far, far 
too many names from Regina to be read individually.  It would be 
meaningless if I tried to do so.  I simply want to welcome the delegates 
here, express my appreciation for the interest which you have taken in the 
deliberations of this body, and just simply conclude by saying that we look 
forward to working with you on this issue and on other issues as they arise 
in the future.  I welcome you to the Chamber. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- I just want to make one other introduction.  You have 
seated in your gallery an alderman, a councillor of the city of Regina, 



 

 

someone who has consistently led the polls just simply because he has 
stayed close to his constituents and has listened and has been really an 
excellent member of the municipal government.  I ask you to welcome Joe 
McKeown. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to specifically welcome 
people from north-eastern Saskatchewan.  From Melfort there are people in 
the gallery here, Doug Harold and Laura Orobko; from Nipawin, Brenda Kott 
and Carol Scarf; from Mozart, Andy Bucko and Norm Pambrun.  And from 
Yorkton there is a list of about eight or ten people:  Edna Brock, Dale 
Cross, Karen Falcetta, Cyndy Godin, Brenda Kirkham, Cliff Tysowski, Rebecca 
Mapes, Sid Matsalla, Irene Mayfield, Grant Procyshyn, Myles Wasylkowski, 
and Shirley Nagy.  I welcome them to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, through you 
I'd like to welcome a number of guests in both the east and west gallery, 
also members of RWDSU.  I'd like to introduce two Saskatoon members from 
local 496, Darryl Foster and Craig Hannah. 
 
And I'd also like to bring to your attention, Mr. Speaker, a number of 
delegates from local 480 in my home city.  They include Brent Aupperle, 
Kevin Boucher, Stuart Coates, Ben Doucette, Shirley Fehr, Dennis Hicks, 
Cheryl Iwasiuk, Diane Lacoursiere, Cheryl Lanzer, May Lesser, Bonnie Lewis, 
Bill McDonald, Kevin Opsal, Ken Spencer, Sal Twordik, Shawna Twordik, Kerry 
Weibe, and Darryl Foster. 
 
And I'd also like to recognize a member of the delegation who I know well, 
Larry Kowalchuk, who's not only active with the union but also very active 
in a group that I have the pleasure to work with on occasion, Equal Justice 
for All in Saskatoon.  And I'd like to recognize Larry's good work with 
that group and welcome him here today as well.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to join with some of my 
colleagues today in introducing guests that are in the galleries.  It is 
indeed a tribute to democracy in Saskatchewan that this many Saskatchewan 
residents would take time from a busy convention to come here to their 
Legislative Assembly to witness a very historic debate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals that I would like to introduce all come from 
Local 454 of RWDSU here in Regina.  In advance, perhaps an apology for some 
of the pronunciations. 
 
And I'd like to introduce to you, Mr. Speaker, and to all members, Chris 
Banting, Shelley Cassano, Warren Cocks, Maurice Cottril, Debbie Crabbe, 
Brad Dick, Olga Demytrow, Wendy Ekes, Louise Elsner, Debbie Erick, Wendy 
Ferguson, Dan Fuchs, Marty Gergely, Barb Hall, Bev. Hillrich, Leonard 
Klemenz, Art Kurtz, Darrell Lampe, Dave Lozinski, John Mayer, Ken Mayes, 



 

 

and Fran McDermid. 
 
Mr. Speaker, would all members join me in welcoming these guests. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too would like to welcome 
members of the Retail, Wholesale and Department Store Union here today.  I 
have the names of six individuals from Saskatoon -- Mark Dziadyk, Lou 
Lecomte, Sherry Voth, Mike Babiy, Annette Duchscher, and Wendy Larmand. 
 
And I want to thank all members of the union for their very important work 
on behalf of working people across the province. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  If I may join my colleagues in the 
introductions before proceeding to debate . . . continue debate on Bill 61, 
I would like to recognize as well here some people who have not been 
personally introduced from Local 454 of RWDSU here in Regina -- Bill 
McDowall, Mark McInnis, Barry Murphy, Rick Ostlund, Mike Ross, Gord 
Schmidt, Trevor Shire, and Les Snyder -- and join with my colleagues in 
welcoming these people, as well as all of the members of RWDSU who are 
involved in your convention, to say how pleased I am to see you see in this 
building as an important part of your activities in your convention and to 
wish you every success in your deliberations in your convention, and 
success in achieving the aspirations that you'll be considering in the 
hours and days ahead.  I very much appreciate you coming by the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 61 (continued) 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, if I may continue in debate on the Bill 
61, the Bill to introduce the provincial goods and services tax to the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I've been making the case so far in my debate that the 
provincial goods and services tax is in fact unnecessary, that the 
government, the provincial government, the PC provincial government, had 
other choices.  It could have chosen to cut its patronage expenses, its 
travel expenses, its foolish spending.  I've given many examples of all of 
those.  It could have re-evaluated its resource revenues policies, and I've 
just finished describing the impact of that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to also finally -- on this subject of addressing 
my opposition to the provincial goods and services tax on the grounds that 
it is an unnecessary tax -- make a reference to the third part of the 



 

 

picture.  It seems to me that there, as I said before, two ways of dealing 
with balancing the books.  One is cutting expenses and the other -- 
unnecessary expenses -- and the other is focusing on revenue, and I've 
talked about natural resources. 
 
But more importantly perhaps, or at least equally importantly, Mr. Speaker, 
has to be an option that I think was available to the Progressive 
Conservative government which it also chose not to do.  There is another 
way of increasing your revenue, Mr. Speaker, and in fact increasing your 
revenue to the province of Saskatchewan from income tax.  But it's a way 
that exists, Mr. Speaker, without having to touch the rate.  Mr. Speaker, 
simply put, if more people are working in the province of Saskatchewan at 
decent paying jobs, Mr. Speaker, then one of the benefactors of that is the 
coffers of the provincial Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think there are some points that should ought to have been 
addressed by the PC government that have not been, and that are necessary 
for any responsible provincial government to look at when responding to one 
of what I consider -- in fact I would say, Mr. Speaker, in my opinion -- 
the single most important responsibility of a provincial government. 
 
I think there are a lot of reasons that the provincial government is 
important and plays a significant role in the lives of our citizens.  But 
it seems to me that if we have a province in which all of our citizens have 
opportunity for employment, opportunity for decent employment, secure 
employment, long-term employment with decent incomes, Mr. Speaker, any 
provincial government which facilitates that is providing a response to its 
most important obligation to it's citizens.  Simply put, Mr. Speaker, not 
only does it address the cold, callous issue of revenues to provincial 
coffers, but it also responds to very important human needs that we all 
have and impacts on the quality of life of our citizens.  And quite 
frankly, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the justice costs and the health costs 
and the social services costs and so on, Mr. Speaker, in many ways they are 
reduced in the most responsible way possible. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it seems to me then any provincial government attempting 
to act responsibly on behalf of its people, both fiscally as well as 
humanly responsible, will recognize first of all that there is a connection 
in its policies and its approach to the economy and employment and 
education.  And it is impossible, it is impossible to consider government's 
policies and programs and approaches to any one of those three subjects 
without considering the other two, because they are interconnected and 
they're intertwined. 
 
Surely the reason for focusing on economy is the desire of the provincial 
government to facilitate quality employment.  And surely you cannot do that 
without looking at what you're doing to increase the ability of your 
citizens to obtain education to prepare them to assume employment which has 
potential, it has future, and it provides hope for them and their families. 
 
So first of all, Mr. Speaker, the policies of the government that's 
concerned about its income, about its economy, have to also take into 
consideration its effect on employment and education. 



 

 

 
Secondly, it is my view that the economy serves people best when their 
democratically elected vehicle, their government, is helping to set a 
positive environment for employment. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, quite frankly that means that there's an obligation of 
the government to do some planning.  I know that that's a word . . . that 
is a word that is a little foreign, a little negative in the minds of many 
of the members opposite.  They say, oh my goodness gracious, when you 
believe in this free-market economy which just charges ahead all on its 
own, its reckless abandon, that somehow that the elected representative of 
the people, their government, should attempt to put some method into the 
madness, is a repulsive thought.  Is that not the very essence of their 
fixation on piratization?  It was a belief . . . it was a belief that the 
best economy is one that just charges along on its own.  Survival of the 
fittest.  Dog eat dog.  Every man for himself. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that that is a reckless abrogation of the 
responsibility of the government to its people. 
 
(1545) 
 
And so any responsible government . . . You know the wonderful thing about 
this, Mr. Speaker, is that, you know, if you want to address the fiscal 
requirements of our province, you don't even have to care about people.  
Now this should be an added advantage to these guys, Mr. Speaker, because 
it just so happens that the books of the province are in the healthiest 
shape when the economy is healthy and when people are working.  So you 
don't even have to care about people in order for this to make sense, for 
government to intervene in the economy and to lend some direction in the 
interests of the economy, in the interest of employment stability. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all have to recognize as well that clearly in our country 
education is a provincial responsibility.  At the end of the day, when the 
needs for education -- and I won't go into detail on that today, Mr. 
Speaker, -- but the access to education . . . when the access to education 
is being reduced at the end of the day, there is only one body that can be 
held accountable and that is the Minister of Education and the Premier of 
Saskatchewan, along with the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it seems to me as well -- point number three -- that any 
responsible government in the province of Saskatchewan recognizes that we 
have three very important sectors in the province, and that if the economy 
of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is healthy in the interests of our people, 
then all three -- not one, not two -- but all three of those sectors, Mr. 
Speaker, are also chugging along in harmony.  As the Leader of the 
Opposition has said many times, he's referred to them as the three engines 
of the economy.  And I refer, of course, to the private sector and the 
co-operative sector and the public sector.  In our province, Mr. Speaker, a 
healthy economy means three healthy sectors at the same time. 
 
In our province, Mr. Speaker, the reality is that the private sector is 
largely family business.  That's the reality; that's the Saskatchewan 



 

 

reality.  That may not be the Ontario reality, but that is the reality in 
Saskatchewan.  And more than anything else, Mr. Speaker, the private sector 
in Saskatchewan, the family-business sector looks to the Government of 
Saskatchewan for some demonstration of a positive atmosphere with which it 
can function with confidence.  I'll come back to that in a moment. 
 
Secondly, the co-operative sector.  It has been part of the historic 
tradition of Saskatchewan, in fact the very essence of the history of our 
province, that in this province when we've wanted to solve problems we've 
learned a long time ago that you do it best by pulling together. 
 
So the co-operative movement in our province has been a significant factor 
in solving problems in communities and also clearly in our economy.  Mr. 
Speaker, it's obvious as the nose on your face, two of the largest 
enterprises in Saskatchewan are co-operatives here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But what have we seen?  What have we seen as support for the co-operative 
sector from the Government of Saskatchewan?  Mr. Speaker, if you get the 
phone book and you look into those blue pages where they list the 
government offices, you can page through there in the provincial government 
section and you can't find the Department of Co-operatives.  It's not 
there.  It doesn't even exist any more. 
 
When they came to government in 1982 there was a Department of 
Co-operatives which saw as its mandate the promotion of co-operative 
solutions to problems, including co-operative enterprises in our economy 
and support for them.  Well, Mr. Speaker, it just simply doesn't exist.  
The department no longer exists and the services are hard to find at best. 
 
We've seen, Mr. Speaker, in our province, the impact of co-operatives such 
as the wheat pool and the Federated Co-op.  There's hardly a community 
around the province that doesn't have a Co-op store or a credit union, 
housing co-ops responding to needs for housing for seniors and for low 
income people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we look at our economy, clearly in Saskatchewan in terms 
of point number three, we cannot ignore the public sector.  Public sector 
is made up of government departments but also made up of Crown corporations 
-- two kinds. One, those that provide services, and secondly, Mr. Speaker, 
those Crown corporations which function with our natural resources and have 
as one of their objectives to return revenues to the coffers of the 
province of Saskatchewan, to help pay the bills to provide the services for 
people. 
 
The reality is, Mr. Speaker, that there is not a single natural resource 
Crown corporation in Saskatchewan that has not been privatized.  They're 
gone. 
 
What these guys inherited, Mr. Speaker, was an economy in which small 
business, family businesses were doing well because people had disposable 
income in their pockets, the most important thing in a family business. 
 



 

 

They inherited a desire and a structure provided by the people's vehicle, 
their government, to facilitate the development of co-operatives.  And they 
inherited, Mr. Speaker, Crown corporations which function to provide 
services in an equitable kind of way and to maximize the return to our 
Consolidated Fund revenues from our natural resources, apologies to nobody. 
 
But those ones that return the money, those ones that provide the money 
that would be there, that would say that you don't need to stick the long 
arm of a PC government into your pockets for $440 million worth of 
provincial goods and services tax, are all privatized now. 
 
And what do we get for it?  Is there any wonder why the people of 
Saskatchewan ask the question: where has the money gone?  We had these 
money producers.  We had money producers.  They've been privatized.  I say 
piratized.  They've been privatized; they're gone in varying degrees to the 
private sector. 
 
And yet the debt continues to rise and rise.  And so we say we got a debt 
out of control, a debt that did not exist when they came to government in 
1982.  They inherited $139 million surplus.  They say we've got a debt 
that's gone out of control and we've gotten rid of the money-makers and the 
Crown corporations that belong to the people of Saskatchewan.  And now we 
need some more money, they say.  We can't get a grip on our spending. 
 
And so who's got to ante up?  Is it Weyerhaeuser that's got to ante up?  Is 
it Peter Pocklington that's got to ante up?  Is it Cargill that's got to 
ante up?  No it's going the other way, as my hon. colleague says.  It's not 
Weyerhaeuser and Pocklington and Cargill that got to ante up they say.  
Heavens no, we got to dig deeper into the pockets of the people of 
Saskatchewan so we can pay those guys to be here.  And at the same time it 
has been part of their strategy to get rid of the money-makers. 
 
 DWhat foolish government we have had, Mr. Speaker.  There were other 
choices.  I say they made the wrong choice but I say as well, Mr. Speaker, 
that when the people of Saskatchewan have opportunity to exercise judgement 
and to provide a mandate, they will take one look at this PC government, at 
the record of this PC government, and the people of Saskatchewan will also 
make another choice, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, while they were looking at the private 
sector, at the co-operative sector, or the public sector -- clearly 
government policy influences the functioning of all three.  In the public 
sector, with its management of government departments or Crown 
corporations, we can get into some of the cynical actions taken there.  
I'll do that a little later in my speech in reference to their 
decentralization program as part of their agenda to drive a wedge between 
rural and urban Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the policies of employment in the public sector have been not 
only to provide equitable services or bring in revenue, but to, but Mr. 
Speaker, to lend stability, to lend stability to people and to communities 



 

 

in their employment of people. 
 
It's been part of the record, Mr. Speaker, it's been part of the policy of 
provincial governments and the management of the employment policies of 
their Crown corporations to see it as an objective, to keep stability of 
employment for people and for their communities, to stockpile in difficult 
times sometimes, Mr. Speaker, to keep people working when prices are down, 
which may have the consequence, Mr. Speaker, that you don't have the free 
market rise and fall, where you peak your employment when the prices are up 
and you reduce the employment when the prices that are down. 
 
Mr. Speaker, running, administering those Crown corporations with a sense 
of . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Could you not call for order here?  There's some goons 
singing and I can't hear the debate. 
 
The Speaker: -- The Minister of Economic Diversification's point of order 
related to interruption by guests in our galleries.  As I mentioned to them 
earlier on, we have a long-standing rule in this Assembly where guests do 
not interfere with proceedings.  The minister's point of order is well 
taken. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm particularly pleased that the . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  Why is the hon. member for Cut Knife-Lloydminster 
on his feet? 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- Mr. Speaker, I think probably what has taken place here in 
this Assembly this afternoon is been a very disgraceful act upon this floor 
of this legislature.  And I would like you to seriously consider that 
anyone that can be identified that was in the group up here, that they be 
barred from this legislature until there is a formal apology come from the 
whole group. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- Mr. Speaker, rising on a point of order, it's incumbent 
upon the member to immediately go to what rule was broken and identify that 
immediately.  The member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster was making a little 
argument, a little debate.  I think you will recognize that, Mr. Speaker.  
He didn't raise the point of order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Well speaking to the point of order, Mr. Speaker, I 
know that you have the difficult responsibility of trying to keep order in 
this Assembly.  I know that it is difficult from time to time to keep order 
among the members.  But on this particular point of order, I think the 
Speaker has to consider very seriously this institution and respect for 
debate in this institution.  And this Assembly gave leave to the members 
opposite to introduce their guests, and then their guests disrupt the 
debate in the manner that is shown, by shouting and singing in the gallery.  
I think the members opposite should apologize for their guests at the very 
least. 



 

 

 
The Speaker: -- The hon. member's point of order, I have listened to the 
arguments from both sides of the House.  I will consider the issue raised. 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Picking up right where I 
left off, I had been speaking in debate until the member rose on the point 
of order.  I'd like to simply continue by saying this, and in summary, that 
the Saskatchewan economy is most vibrant, Mr. Speaker, in my view, when all 
three of those sectors are working, when they're working well, and that 
government policy clearly -- I've been referring to government policy in 
terms of employment policies in the public sector -- contributes to 
economic stability in the province.  Clearly as well, as I've made 
reference to or implied earlier, Mr. Speaker, the government's support for 
co-operative endeavours is significant in the building of that structure 
and the security of that in our economy. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, as I had previously implied, when the Government 
of Saskatchewan is conducting its own affairs responsibly, part of that, 
Mr. Speaker, responsible in its spending, managing to balance its budgets 
by and large, which was the track record of the New Democrat government 
from 1971 to 1982 -- 11 straight balanced budgets -- clearly that is the 
environment in which the private sector, which is largely family business 
sector, feels most capable of expanding and creating employment 
opportunities in the private sector for our people. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, it is clearly significant to all three -- obviously 
the public, but also to the co-operative and to the private sectors -- the 
kinds of approaches and the kinds of policies and the kinds of 
responsibility that the government demonstrates. 
 
Fourthly, Mr. Speaker, I think what people in Saskatchewan need is a 
government that recognizes that the key to broad economic development is 
diversification; and that in fact what we need to have, Mr.  
 DSpeaker, in Saskatchewan is more secondary activity to reduce the 
vulnerability to international demands and prices for primary products like 
agricultural products and natural resources that has been part of our 
record and our history in the province. 
 
I would also, fifthly, Mr. Speaker, like to suggest that it's important for 
the Government of Saskatchewan to recognize that co-operation gets overall 
better results than competition.  And I know that is a principle, this is a 
principle that's foreign to members opposite who tend to be of the view 
that nothing beats good old fashioned competition where the biggest reign 
supreme, and it's survival of fittest, and it's dog eat dog, and it's every 
man for himself. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I think there is a different way here in Saskatchewan.  
We understand that there is a different principle that makes us stronger, 
that we're stronger when we stand together -- not only individuals, not 
only working people collectively within unions, Mr. Speaker, but, Mr. 
Speaker, also within communities . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . If 



 

 

the Minister of Labour would like to intervene in the debate, I look 
forward, I look forward to hearing his comments. 
 
And I will be very, very interested in understanding a little more clearly 
what his plans for economic diversification and creating employment in a 
sound economy are because, Mr. Minister, clearly the track record is going 
the other way. 
 
There is only one province in all of Canada that has seen a decline in the 
size of its labour force in a number of jobs in all of Canada over the last 
two years.  Mr. Minister, you should hang your head in shame as Minister of 
Labour when the only province that's seen a reduction in the work-force is 
our province of Saskatchewan.  I say shame on you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Is it any wonder that the young people of Saskatchewan are 
leaving in droves.  Over half . . . Mr. Speaker, this will come I'm sure as 
no great shock to the Minister of Labour.  Surely he must understand that 
over the last five and a half years in the province of Saskatchewan we have 
experienced a net loss, a net loss of over 75,000 people -- 75,000 more 
people who have left the province of Saskatchewan than come in, and over 
half of them between the ages of 16 and 34. 
 
Now surely that is an alarming fact to the Minister of Labour.  Surely he's 
not going to stand in defence of the government policies that have driven 
the young people of Saskatchewan to leave our province to look to build 
their futures elsewhere. 
 
I look forward to his response as to how this provincial goods and services 
tax, sticking your hand for 440 more million dollars into the pockets of 
Saskatchewan taxpayers, how that's going to be the solution to employment.  
That is truly a magical act.  That is truly a magical act. 
 
I can understand why you find some of this a bit irritating.  But you've 
got a few more weeks in government.  You've got a few more weeks in 
government, Mr. Minister.  And I say it behoves you to open your ears and 
close your mouth and listen to the people of Saskatchewan, and take some 
responsible action for the future of the people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I can understand it's an irritating point, 
that it's an irritating point to the members of the PC Government of 
Saskatchewan that someone would suggest in this Assembly that we are 
stronger when we work together.  But I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that that is a 
principle that the people of Saskatchewan by and large don't even need to 
debate.  They intuitively know it to be true. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, my sixth point in terms of the economy is this.  It 
seems to me that the Saskatchewan government has the responsibility to 
lead, not to follow.  In addressing the economy of Saskatchewan, the 
government has the responsibility to lead, not to follow.  That runs 



 

 

contrary to the free-market thinking of the members opposite. 
 
And I understand, Mr. Speaker, that part of that philosophy that we've been 
afflicted with these past nine long, lean years, Mr. Speaker, has resulted 
in no Department of Co-operation, of Co-operatives, but piratization 
instead, with shoddy government and deficits running out of control -- all 
signs of a government negating its responsibility to lead. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, what Saskatchewan needs is leadership from its 
government.  It needs a government that's willing to bring the actors of 
the economy together -- not to drive them apart and not to say, stand on 
your own, each in your own corner; good luck to you Jack; every man for 
himself. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- That's how I got my start. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Oh, the member says that's how he got his start.  Well, are 
we happy for him!  And I say, it's kind of interesting.  It's kind of 
interesting because when I recognized the member who made that statement, 
that's how he got his start, and I recognize his constituency, Mr. Speaker, 
I suggest that in the next few weeks the people of Saskatchewan are going 
to say, Mr. Member, you're about to get your stop. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that it is critical to the future of our 
province that we have a government that has the will to bring people 
together, to get them to act in the common good interest of the province of 
Saskatchewan, in the economy of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
We need a government in this province, Mr. Speaker, that has a will to 
bring together in the same room, the co-operative sector and the private 
sector and the Crown corporation sector, all of those important sectors of 
the economy, but also because of a realistic perspective of what the 
economy is, the post-secondary education sector.  And also a very important 
sector as well, Mr. Speaker, labour, because the economy functions by and 
for employment for people.  And to also bring into that room, 
representatives of municipalities, a critical employment body in our 
province, Mr. Speaker.  And to facilitate . . . we need a government that's 
willing to bring together the actors in our economy, and then to facilitate 
among those actors the development of an economic game plan for the 
province of Saskatchewan for the '90s to which they are all committed to 
make work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have reached the point where co-operation is more than 
something that's just a human nicety.  I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that for the 
economy of Saskatchewan, co-operation spells survival.  In order to look at 
the future with a sense of hope and optimism, Mr. Speaker, I suggest it is 
impossible to do that without understanding a co-operative approach to the 
development of our economy and to the development of a plan for our economy 
and a commitment to carry out and to have succeed a co-operatively 
developed plan for our economy. 
 
And given the track record of the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, and given 
the track record of the New Democrat governments in 1971 to 1982 and from 



 

 

1944 to 1962, I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that there is only one political 
party.  There is only one leader in all of Saskatchewan that has got the 
ability to bring together the private sector and the public sector and the 
co-operative sector and post-secondary education and labour and 
municipalities, and that is the member from Riversdale, and that is the New 
Democratic Party of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- And so I conclude, Mr. Speaker, the first section of my 
address in which I make the point that I consider the provincial goods and 
services tax to be unnecessary because this government had other choices.  
They could have chosen to get rid of expenses and patronage and cabinet 
travel and its foolish, frivolous waste.  They could have re-evaluated its 
natural resources revenues.  And it could have chosen positive principles 
to develop and to build our economy to increase activity and employment and 
revenue for the province of Saskatchewan.  And I conclude that the 
provincial goods and services tax was unnecessary. 
 
And I say as well, Mr. Speaker, that the provincial goods and services tax 
is not only unnecessary, it's unfair.  Now what do I mean by that?  It 
seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that it is a responsibility of every government, 
in looking at taxation policies for people, to ask ourselves what is it 
that makes a tax fair. 
 
We will hear the notions floated around and about.  Peter Pocklington, when 
he was seeking the leadership of the Progressive Conservative Party 
federally, he floated the notion that we should ought to have a flat tax, 
he said. Everybody pays the same rate. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that all fair-minded people in our society 
-- and I recognize that there are very few who get a big kick out of paying 
taxes, although the large majority I think upon reflection consider taxes 
to be a very necessary part of life for us all -- are also concerned though 
with another point.  And that's the question of fairness because clearly on 
the provincial goods and services tax, the message I hear loud and clear 
from my constituents, and that my colleagues hear loud and clear, and that 
the government members would hear loud and clear if they listened, is that 
Saskatchewan people are saying this tax is not only unnecessary, it's 
unfair. 
 
And so what makes a tax fair?  Mr. Speaker, what makes a tax fair is its 
progressivity that is based on ability to pay. 
 
As one 70-year-old constituent of mine said to me a couple of months ago -- 
it wouldn't have been a couple of months ago, probably about seven weeks 
ago, just after the provincial goods and services tax which we're debating 
right now was imposed.  He came into my constituency office and he said, 
you know this tax isn't fair.  He said you can be the poorest of the poor, 
or you can be a person with a $500,000 a year income, and when you walk 
into a restaurant for a cup of coffee and the provincial goods and services 
tax is placed on that cup of coffee, you both pay the same amount.  He said 
that's not fair. 



 

 

 
An Hon. Member: -- Who gets the rebate? 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Now some would say . . . oh the member said, who gets the 
rebate?  The minister of Economic Development says, who gets the rebate?  I 
referred, Mr. Speaker, to this being a 70-year-old gentleman.  It may come 
as no surprise that he doesn't have any children at home.  And so, Mr. 
Speaker, because of the rebate policy proposed by the PC government, that 
70-year-old gentleman with no children at home gets no rebate.  No rebate.  
That's your rules.  That's your rules . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Oh, now he says, we wanted . . . oh, jeepers we didn't like the discussion 
on that topic, let's change the topic and let's move on to something else. 
 
Well he says, let's talk about the heritage grant, he says.  Never mind the 
fact that the heritage grant was there and it was there as a result of 
what, Mr. Speaker?  It was there as a result of the fact that they took 
away the property improvement grants.  They took away the home . . . the 
municipal tax rebates being paid to seniors when they came to be 
government.  They took those away and there was an objection across the 
province of Saskatchewan and so finally, parallel to their federal cousins 
in Ottawa, they relented and introduced the heritage tax.  Not because it 
was fair, not because they wanted to, not because that was part of the 
plan, but because they took away the property tax rebate to seniors and the 
heat got on and they decided, well I guess we'd better do something. 
 
The answer to your question, sir, who gets the rebate?  How much rebate 
does he get?  Zero. 
 
So we come back to my point, Mr. Speaker, before I was distracted by the 
member from Melville.  Let me come back to my point.  What this gentleman 
was saying . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well goodness gracious . . 
. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  All members will get an opportunity 
to debate.  Order.  Minister of Highways, I'd ask him to allow the member 
for Moose Jaw North to make his point.  Order. 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I'm going to come back to 
this point because I think it describes very simply the point that I'm 
making.  Some may say it's irrelevant because it's a small amount, that the 
provincial goods and services tax on a cup of coffee is only 5 or 6 cents 
and therefore it's irrelevant.  Well maybe to some.  Unfortunately, Mr. 
Speaker, in our province there's some to whom even that is not irrelevant. 
 
But the point I'm making is this: is that the consumption tax being placed 
on a cup of coffee, the consumption tax being placed on children's running 
shoes or blue jeans, the consumption tax being placed on your cost of 
heating your home, whether you're heating . . . (inaudible interjection) . 
. . Oh.  Well, Mr. Speaker, the government cabinet ministers are certainly 
anxious to get into debate, which makes me wonder what it was that kept 
them two weeks from this House being able to debate this most unpopular tax 



 

 

Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I'll try and stick to my point and I will 
look forward with great anticipation to the debate from members opposite 
who will tell us how wonderful it is that there's no rebate to seniors on 
this tax.  They'll tell us how wonderful it is that they're sticking their 
hands for 440 extra million dollars into the pockets of Saskatchewan 
consumers, and that they're going to . . . Oh we'll come to this one later. 
But not only that, they're going to tax us into full employment, they said.  
Oh my goodness gracious. But we'll come back to that one later, Mr. 
Speaker.  I'm running ahead of myself.  I'm running ahead of myself. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the point is simply this: is that when you're talking a 
consumption tax . . . and let's note what this consumption tax is on.  It's 
on food and clothing and shelter.  It's on restaurant food and it's on all 
clothing and it's on home heating.  That's what it's on. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- That first statement was absolutely wrong. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Oh, Mr. Speaker, goodness gracious, the members opposite are 
having a hard time following here again.  But, Mr. Speaker, let me charge 
along because if I stand here in my place as long as it takes to get these 
guys to figure this thing out, we'll never be done this debate, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So we got this consumption tax on food and clothing and shelter.  It can be 
said to be nothing other than that.  And whether you're paying this tax on 
your heating for your $20,000 home or whether you're paying this tax on 
heating for your $500,000 home, you're paying the same rates.  You're 
paying the same rates . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh the member 
opposite, he's got a $500,000 home, he says.  Oh he doesn't like . . . he 
probably figures his $500,000 home, somehow that's boosting the economy; he 
ought to get a break. 
 
He took a look at his friends at Weyerhaeuser and Peter Puck and Cargill, 
and he says, my goodness gracious, I got bigger; I got better; give me a 
tax break.  Well, Mr. Speaker, it don't work that way in the real world.  
It don't work that way in the real world.  These folks have been living in 
fantasy for nine years.  Fantasy is just about up. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, a definition of fairness in taxation is that it's 
progressive.  It's one to which I subscribe.  And I say because this tax is 
not progressive, it is unfair.  And I won't go into more detail.  I won't 
take the time of the Assembly to do it, unless the members opposite would 
like me to do it. 
 
But I simply refer, Mr. Speaker, to a document that was published by the 
New Democratic Party caucus in January of this year entitled, Tax Fairness 
for the 1990's which outlines some of the expenditures that this government 
has been undertaking foolishly and some of which I've already referred to. 
 



 

 

But it also outlines, Mr. Speaker, a commitment to tax fairness, tax 
fairness based on the principles of progressivity.  And, Mr. Speaker, I 
would say to anyone in the province of Saskatchewan who would like to have 
a copy, this can be made available, Mr. Speaker, to anyone in Saskatchewan 
who would like it.  And all they need to do, Mr. Speaker, if they want one 
is to write to me, to Glenn Hagel at the Legislative Assembly . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  Members are not to refer to 
themselves or other members by name in the legislature. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Are you reading?  Did you read from a document? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- That is not being read. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Oh, sorry.  You're right. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I respect your ruling, and you're quite 
correct; I wasn't looking at an envelop being addressed to me and so I 
should ought not to have said my name, which I won't say again. 
 
But they address it to me by name or simply by constituency, MLA from Moose 
Jaw North, Room 265 Legislative Building, S4S 0B3.  Or they can call, Mr. 
Speaker.  If they want to call, it's 787-1886.  They can call collect.  The 
opposition will accept collect calls, Mr. Speaker.  Then if they want to 
call or to write, the New Democrat caucus would be happy to send this 
document entitled Tax Fairness for the 1990's outlining the policies for 
fair taxation and progressive taxation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I've covered the first two points of my 
address here this afternoon, so let me move along.  Mr. Speaker, I have 
made the point in debate here that I consider this tax to be both 
unnecessary and unfair. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, let me also move to my third point that I had indicated 
when I started, and that's that the PC Party's  
 Dprovincial goods and services tax in fact is counter-productive.  Not 
only is it unnecessary and unfair, it's doing the opposite of what they say 
it'll do.  It's counter-productive.  It's a deterrent in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know it seems to me and it seems obvious to members on 
this side of the House, and if any of those members have the courage to 
stick their necks out when they go home on the weekend and trot downtown in 
their home communities, they'll find out that the PST (provincial sales 
tax) has done no good for the towns and the stores on Main Street.  It's 
become an economic deterrent.  People are buying less because they've got 
less to spend because of the tax.  But also, Mr. Speaker, also because the 
imposition of this tax, particularly on top of the federal goods and 
services tax, has led, Mr. Speaker, to a psychological decline in the 
desire to purchase. 
 



 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it's not surprising to me that it's having this impact 
here in the province of Saskatchewan when I look at what has been the 
result of the imposition of the goods and services tax federally, upon 
which they based their whole assessment as to what this PST is going to do 
for Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to refer the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, to a few articles.  Don't take 
my word for it.  Mr. Speaker, I refer to a Leader-Post article on April 2 
of this year entitled: "GST blamed for economic mess" -- GST which they are 
modelling this tax after.  They're saying that's such a wonderful thing for 
Canada; let's get us one here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Well what does this article say, Mr. Speaker, about the GST. 
 

 The GST (and I quote) the GST has made the recession longer, more painful 
and could delay any recovery until the end of the year, one economist 
warned Monday. 

 
 Another agreed that introducing the seven per cent tax sent the economy 

reeling, but he predicted the worst will be over by May. 
 
 Either way, the economy was a mess in January and today's composite 

leading indicator, pointing to what's ahead in the next few months, will 
bring more bad news. 

 
Well that was for all of Canada.  But on top of that here in Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker, we get the double negative; we get the double negative with 
the PST.  And I see as well, Mr. Speaker, April 3 from the Leader-Post 
entitled: "GST shockwave rattles the economy". And I quote: 
 

 Economists said the outlook for the economy darkened Tuesday as statistics 
showed retail sales plunged in January and the composite leading 
indicator, an important sign of what's ahead, fell for the 12th month in a 
row after the GST hit dazed consumers. 

 
And it goes on: 
 

 "The most recent retail trade figures and the composite leading indicator 
confirm that in the first quarter the recession was deepening at a 
quickened pace," Lloyd Atkinson, chief economist at the Bank of Montreal, 
said in a statement. 

 
And then later: 
 

 The GST walloped the economy, helping push retail sales down 7.6 per cent 
to $14.7 billion in January from $15.9 billion in December after 
accounting for seasonal changes, Statistics Canada also said. 

 
 More than half the steep drop in retail sales was due to replacing the 

existing federal sales tax on manufactured products with a seven per cent 
goods and services tax. 

 
That's what they're saying. It's the GST.  And then in the article it says 



 

 

and I quote: 
 

 "That was a real zinger, a very steep decline," said Atkinson. 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, when the economists refer to the GST and its impact in 
Canada, they call it a zinger.  Well that source of inspiration for our 
brilliant PC government in Saskatchewan and say, let's get us one of them 
there zingers here in Saskatchewan.  We're zinging Canada; let's double 
zing Saskatchewan. 
 
Another article, Mr. Speaker, from The Globe and Mail, April 17: "Survey 
shows GST slash spending."  And again, Mr. Speaker, in the Star-Phoenix, 
February 23: "GST said behind the biggest inflation increase ever." 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I look as well at an article in my home community of 
Moose Jaw from the Moose Jaw Times-Herald from May 13 entitled: "Merchants 
concerned about U.S.'s appeal to Band City shoppers."  Not only are you 
turning off the economy and you're turning off shopping here in 
Saskatchewan by Saskatchewan people, you're also driving them out of the 
province. Ain't that a zinger.  Ain't that what people were looking for as 
they got up on the morning of April 1, April Fool's Day, the day you 
introduced the PC PST in the province of Saskatchewan.  He says, well 
thanks for the zinger; we were looking forward to that one. 
 
I quote from the article: 
 

 There's no doubt the PST and the GST are hurting business, Moose Jaw 
merchants say. 

 
And I quote: 
 

 Sales are down because 14 per cent of all disposable income is not 
available, said Ted Joyner of Joyner's Department Store.  People will wait 
rather than buy a suit they don't need because money isn't around.  It is 
earmarked for taxes and people don't have 14 per cent in their pockets. 

 
That's the real world; that's been the impact.  And so it's no surprise to 
small-business people on Main Street all across Saskatchewan, it's no 
surprise to consumers across the province of Saskatchewan, that the PST is 
hurting already, never mind this harmonization, crazy notion that you got 
about going to that in January of '92. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think it's been said over and over again.  I've heard 
it many times in my home community of Moose Jaw and we've heard it up and 
down the streets even here in Regina, Mr. Speaker -- the best thing that 
ever happened to Minot, North Dakota, was the GST and the PST.  I mean I 
don't know how they did that, whether they got a closet North Dakota or a 
closet Minot economic development officer snuck into your cabinet and 
plunked this idea into the middle of your brains in the middle of night. 
 
I don't know quite how they managed to pull this off but you guys have made 
Minot, North Dakota, a boom town all on your own.  You haven't done a thing 
for Moose Jaw.  You haven't done a thing for Regina business people . . . 



 

 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, now, oh, the minister, oh well we want 
to talk about the Saferco plant.  We'll come around to it.  You just hang 
on.  You hang on, Mr. Minister.  We'll get around to that one.  We'll get 
around to that one. 
 
You guys just trot along, you just trot along to the southern end of our 
province in Weyburn and in Estevan, in Oxbow, Coronach.  Just wander down 
there if you've got the guts, stick your head up in public, in daylight.  
Ask them what they think of your PST.  You're killing the towns.  You're 
killing the businesses because you've driven the shoppers out of the 
province of Saskatchewan.  And I say, shame on you.  This record will hang 
around your necks and beyond your heads. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, we had some used-car salespeople in this 
Assembly within the last week.  And you know what?  This PST isn't even on 
used cars yet and you're killing them. 
 
And it's clear.  Let me quote from a news release of May 24 from the 
Independent Automobile Dealers and Suppliers Against the Tax.  You know, 
you guys have done more to unite people in Saskatchewan . . . there's more 
organizations cropping up just spontaneously to oppose your tax, everyone 
of them against you.  And they all end up with the phrase: against the tax. 
 
You know, I think you must have been . . . you probably had Davey Steuart.  
He's been advising you on your political strategy.  Davey Steuart, he 
understood this retroactively, unfortunately for him. 
 
By the time Davey Steuart got to 1971, he understood.  He said, the only 
people that weren't mad at the Liberal government were people that he 
hadn't met yet . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the only ones not 
mad at you guys are guys you haven't met yet.  But boy, I'll tell you, 
you're doing wonders for organization in Saskatchewan as we get spontaneous 
groups coming up all over the place, all of them with brand-new titles that 
end with: against the tax. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Why won't you let us pass it? 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Well the minister says, why don't you let us pass it? 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order, order, order.  Not necessary.  Debate, 
I think, is best if you contain your remarks to the debate under 
consideration and the debate will be better rather than debating with 
someone across the floor.  And at the same time having said that, I ask 
members across the floor to allow him to continue without interruption. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well, Mr. Speaker, let me come back 
to the point I was making, referring to the Independent Automobile Dealers 
and Suppliers Against the Tax -- the news release, May 24.  Yet another 
group, Mr. Speaker, and what do they say?  I quote, Mr. Speaker: 



 

 

 
 The survey showed that the GST has resulted in a decline of business of up 

to 20 per cent in 29 instances, and a decline of more than 20 per cent in 
54 businesses. 

 
Eighty-three businesses, Mr. Speaker -- 83 businesses directly attribute 
that decline to the GST.  As well 15 per cent of the operations said the 
GST has resulted in their having to lay off one or two employees; 2 per 
cent said they have laid off more than two -- loss of jobs. 
 
When asked what they anticipate the effect of the PST to be, 24 per cent 
predicted a further loss of business of up to 20 per cent, while 24 per 
cent said the loss of business would be more than 20 per cent.  Over half 
-- not over half, 48 per cent -- just about half, half of the used-car 
dealers and suppliers said that with the PST they would lose 20 per cent 
more business or more.  Eleven per cent of the businesses said it would 
cause them to lay off one or two employees, while 4 per cent said they 
would lay off three or more.  Clearly we're talking about one of the most 
effective unemployment projects in the recent history of Saskatchewan. 
 
And then I quote, Mr. Speaker, from this news release -- from the person 
who released it, Mr. Dorn.  And I quote: 
 

 The most frightening part of the survey is that 11 per cent of the 
businesses said the introduction of the PST would cause them to close up 
shop. 

 
He's referring to the harmonization.  Well, Mr. Speaker, that's reality on 
Main Street, Saskatchewan. 
 
You know, I just shake my head, Mr. Speaker, in wonderment.  I shake my 
head in wonderment and I will look with great anticipation if we get to the 
vote.  If we reach the point where this government decides we're going to 
vote on this legislation, it will be interesting. 
 
It will be interesting to see what the member from Estevan does, because 
this tax, Mr. Speaker, is killing the city of Estevan.  And the member from 
Weyburn, Minister of Finance, killing his own community, the Premier and 
his. 
 
And the member from Lloydminster -- maybe Battle River -- he says he's 
running again.  It would be interesting to see how he votes on this tax, 
whether he votes for his community or not, whether he votes for the decline 
of Lloydminster or not. 
 
The member for Maple Creek, she says she's not running again.  She's one of 
the smart ones; she's getting out.  The member for Shaunavon, he's got his 
eyes on Frenchman River, maybe.  He says he's running again.  Well I think 
his constituents will take great interest, will take great interest in how 
he votes on this tax. 
 
The member for Souris-Cannington . . . It's vacant.  There's another of 
those vacant ones that we haven't had filled -- people who aren't even 



 

 

represented in this debate on this tax. 
 
The member for Yorkton; we'll see how he votes.  He's already decided he's 
not running again.  The member for Moosomin . . . I'm talking about border 
communities, Mr. Speaker.  It will be very interesting to the constituents 
of these communities, of these border ridings, Mr. Speaker, how their 
members will vote.  I wonder how the member for Moosomin . . . maybe 
Pipestone Creek.  He says he's running again.  Well watch how he votes.  
His constituents will take great interest in this. 
 
The member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, maybe Wood Mountain.  And the member 
for Bengough-Milestone, Big Muddy, he says he's not running. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Point of order. 
 
The Speaker: -- The Minister of Economic Diversification. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite, while he has a right 
to debate, I believe that he has gone beyond that right.  He is asking how 
members will vote.  And the only really way to understand how members will 
vote is to call question and have a vote. 
 
And until that time arises, Mr. Speaker, I believe it is not relevant to 
the debate to debate in advance how members will vote, and that the member 
opposite should be required to debate the Bill or call question and we will 
see how everyone votes. 
 
The Speaker: -- I've listened to the hon. member's point of order.  In 
essence it isn't, strictly speaking, a point of order.  However, having 
said that, I believe the hon. member should also be conscious of the 
remarks he is making.  And as I said earlier in a previous remark, a member 
should be conscious of a long bow they may be drawing and try to relate 
their argument directly to the topic under discussion.  I believe it's to 
the benefit of all. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I understand.  This is 
doggone frustrating for members on the other side, to have brought to the 
attention of the people of Saskatchewan that they're representing, 
constituencies with border communities that are being killed by this tax . 
. . people who will take great interest in how you personally vote in this 
Legislative Assembly.  And I'll come back to that point later in my 
remarks, Mr. Speaker, because I think that's relevant to what's going to 
happen if we come to voting day here. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the member for Kindersley . . . well, Kindersley is 
vacant.  Wilkie -- to become Tramping Lake -- the constituents there will 
take great interest in how that member will vote.  And the member from 
Meadow Lake will also stimulate interest in his vote on this Bill to kill 
communities in the borders of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the argument has been made -- with a great deal of 
credibility, I believe -- that the worst time to introduce a new tax is 
time of recession.  You can't think of a worse time to introduce a new tax 



 

 

than a recession.  Money's hard to find.  People aren't spending, for 
starters.  And then you simply kill the economy by giving consumers yet 
another reason to not spend.  Well, Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that the 
cost of this tax has already been a demonstration of both loss of spending 
as well as loss of jobs. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to just make some reference to one of the claims 
being made by the members opposite in promotion of this Bill.  They say, 
you know, we need to have this tax because it's going to create some more 
jobs, they say.  In fact, the Minister of Finance has had the gall to 
suggest that this tax is going to create 5,000 new jobs.  Yes, Mr. Speaker, 
he says he's going to tax us right into full employment, is what he says. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I simply have to ask: you know, if this tax, if the 7 
per cent PST can create 5,000 new jobs, why doesn't the Minister of Finance 
do us a great big favour and give us a 14 per cent PST and create 10,000 
new jobs?  But why doesn't he go whole hog?  Why doesn't he get rid of 
unemployment entirely in the province of Saskatchewan and put in a 70 per 
cent PST and create 50,000 new jobs? 
 
Sure, oh yes, he can tax us right into full employment.  And the Minister 
of Education, he says, right on.  Well there's an idea, he says.  Too bad 
we didn't think of that one.  Let's think big.  You guys haven't been 
thinking big.  What's the problem here? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I make that argument.  Well, the Minister of Education, I 
agree.  He's got this point right. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  I'm going to once more ask the hon. 
member not to refer to the presence of members in the House. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I simply say, if that seems to be a 
frivolous argument, clearly it is.  Clearly it is.  To suggest that a 70 
per cent PST would create 50,000 jobs is an absurd statement.  Absolutely 
absurd.  But absurd only, Mr. Speaker, because the starting point is 
absurd.  At the starting point to say that a 7 per cent PST will create 
5,000 new jobs is an absurd statement.  It is indefensible. 
 
Now the minister in his document that he finally released, after being 
pressed for three or four weeks to produce something that even had the 
semblance of an analysis to  
 Dit, an economic analysis to it, finally got a document out that said that 
there would be some new jobs created because of GRIP (gross revenue 
insurance plan) and NISA (net income stabilization account).  That may very 
well be, Mr. Speaker, that may very well be.  I don't take argument with 
the fact that that would lead to employment stability. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, to say that this tax directly, this tax directly will 
lead to 5,000 new jobs is a ridiculous statement. 
 
It's kind of interesting, Mr. Speaker, when you read that analysis of the 
provincial government related to jobs, they wanted to say . . . they had 
two analyses.  One said, what would be the job situation with no GRIP and 



 

 

NISA and no PST.  And then they said, what would be the job situation with 
GRIP and NISA and with PST.  And they said whoa, will you look at this -- 
5,000 more jobs with GRIP and NISA and with PST then without GRIP and NISA 
and without PST.  That's what they said. 
 
Mr. Speaker, did it dawn on any one of those brilliant, academic minds 
opposite that a reasonable, academic, economic analysis would be to say: 
and what would it be like without GRIP and NISA and with the PST?  No, 
never dawned on them.  Because, Mr. Speaker, their claim, their total claim 
for employment stimulus from this has to do with GRIP and NISA, they say.  
Well, Mr. Speaker, we on this side have said GRIP and NISA can exist 
without the PST.  It is foolish to suggest that employment related to GRIP 
and NISA is the impact of the tax.  In fact, Mr. Speaker, the reality is 
exactly the opposite. 
 
In an analysis that was released about a week and a half ago, a couple of 
weeks ago, Mr. Speaker, that was endorsed by a couple of recognized and 
renowned economists -- Neil Brooks, professor of tax law at Osgoode Hall, 
York University; Alex Kelly, professor of economics at the U of R, 
University of Regina . . . Mr. Speaker, an analysis that was released and 
endorsed by those people. In fact, the conclusion that was reached, Mr. 
Speaker, was that there may be, because of the impact of the tax, the 
creation over a five-year period of about some 760 jobs.  That could be 
said with accuracy. 
 
But that, Mr. Speaker, directly related to the imposition of the PST.  And 
the province of Saskatchewan over the next five years -- a loss of 8,225 
jobs over the next five years.  And the net effect of employment on the 
economy, directly because of the PST, meaning a loss of nearly 7,500 jobs 
over the next five years. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, anybody who wants a copy of that analysis can get one.  
And again, if they call my office at the legislature or write to me, I'd be 
happy to send that to them.  It's available to anyone in Saskatchewan who 
wants it. 
 
And I simply want to conclude with the point, Mr. Speaker, that contrary, 
contrary to the claim of this government the PST will create employment, in 
fact, it will do the exact opposite.  It will lead directly to the loss 
from the Saskatchewan economy of some 7,500 jobs over the next five years, 
and we can ill afford that. 
 
(1645) 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to move to my fourth point -- that the provincial 
goods and services tax is ill conceived.  In fact I've covered most of that 
in my remarks that I've just made, in the analysis of the jobs that they've 
done.  But I think there's been some intellectual dishonesty here as well, 
Mr. Speaker.  There's been some intellectual dishonesty.  Mr. Speaker, the 
provincial government says that this is going to bring revenue to the 
province of some $180 million.  They also say, interestingly enough, Mr. 
Speaker, not only will this tax bring $180 million more into the province 
of Saskatchewan, it will also give them $260 million that they can give to 



 

 

large corporations. 
 
Oh, now we're getting down to the nitty-gritty here, Mr. Speaker, and the 
lips are starting to tremble on the other side.  Mr. Speaker, $180 million, 
they say, to come into the provincial coffers and $260 million to give to 
their corporate friends.  They don't like it when the opposition says, you 
know 180, 260 -- that's $440 million.  Whoa, they say, don't use that 
number.  Don't let people know that this is going to cost an extra $440 
million a year; an average of some $450 per person extra in sales tax 
because of the harmonized provincial goods and services tax.  Don't let 
people know that, they say.  Oh my goodness, if they know that, we know 
what they'll do. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we understand.  We understand how the system works.  
We've already had it raised here.  If you're a senior, if you're low income 
senior, you don't get any of the rebate that they say there's going to be 
in provincial goods and services tax.  But they say there are going to be 
rebates for business. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I can only believe him.  When the Minister of Finance 
stands in his place, I can only assume that the Minister of Finance is 
telling the truth.  And I assume that when the Minister of Finance says 
they're going to take $260 million and they're going to shoot it out to 
their corporate friends, that he's telling the truth. 
 
But who's going to get that, Mr. Speaker?  Who will get that rebate?  Mr. 
Speaker, will it be small town, main street clothing stores and 
restaurants, Mr. Speaker, the ones that are paying the price right now, the 
ones that are just trying to survive right now?  Will it be the bookstores, 
the ones, Mr. Speaker, who are paying very little in PST right now? 
 
Or, Mr. Speaker, will it be the big boys, their large corporate friends, 
Mr. Speaker?  Could it be that's where the money would go?  Is it the 
Ipscos of the world?  Is it the Cargills of the world?  Could that be why 
we all have to dig deep in our pockets to pull out $440 million per year 
from the people of Saskatchewan so that we can hand the money to Ipsco and 
to Cargill?  Is that where it's going, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, there is an old saying: he who pays the piper calls the 
tune.  And, Mr. Speaker, there are some people who have been paying the 
piper who I think are calling the tune. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, who are some of these folks that have been 
paying the piper, who may be calling the tune behind this little tax 
strategy? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a document here and it has 1988 corporate donations to 
the Conservative Party -- those who pay the piper, Mr. Speaker.  Who's 
paying the piper?  Well we've got Alberta . . . We'll go through these in 
alphabetical order.  We don't want to hop all around, and so for the 
convenience of members who may be making notes here, you want to jot these 



 

 

down, we'll go through in alphabetical order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well we've got the Alberta Natural Gas Company Ltd.; they paid the piper to 
the tune of $8,000 in 1988.  And Algoma Steel Corporation Ltd., Mr. 
Speaker, $8,750 from the piper.  And Amoco Canada Petroleum Company Ltd., 
Mr. Speaker, $20,000 to the PC Party. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order.  Of course, the debate under 
consideration is that Bill No. 61, An Act to amend The Education and Health 
Tax Act be now read a second time.  The hon. member was reading into the 
record donations made by corporations to the government . . . or, excuse 
me, to the PC Party.  On the surface it's out of order, unless you can 
directly tie it into the debate.  And I believe that each one individually 
must be tied into the debate, if you're going to list each one 
individually. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, okay.  I kind of thought this was obvious 
to members opposite, but that's okay.  I don't mind taking the time to make 
this clear, Mr. Speaker.  I kind of thought this was obvious. 
 
Let me just take for example, Mr. Speaker, and relate this directly.  I see 
here . . . Let me use as an example, in alphabetical order, what pops up in 
front of me here.  Here's ATCO -- ATCO Ltd., Mr. Speaker, $25,000 to the PC 
Party.  Now what do we know about ATCO? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the point I'm making is this, is that this strategy of 
rebating to their corporate friends, where's the money going to go?  It's 
going to go out of the pockets of the people of Saskatchewan, largely to 
their large corporate friends.  Why?  Because they are . . . Mr. Speaker, 
I'm simply making the point.  He who pays the piper calls the tune.  
There's the piper.  There's the piper. There's the Minister of Finance; 
he's the piper.  He's the one who says how this tax rebate is going to 
work.  And so who is paying the piper?  Who's paying the PC Party? 
 
And lets, Mr. Speaker, when you look at ATCO . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  I'm going to once more ask the hon. 
members to allow the debate to continue. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Speaker, when we look at ATCO Industries then, are these 
people who use materials for which they'll pay sales tax?  They construct 
buildings, buy materials, pay sales tax.  What also do we know about ATCO 
Industries because the member over here before, he raised a good point.  He 
said, what about Saferco?  Well what about Saferco?  Let's just reflect on 
this point here for a minute, Mr. Speaker, for a moment.  Well the member 
wants to argue about pronunciation.  He can say it however he wants it. I 
pronounce it Cargill.  There it is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this will be a great surprise to absolutely nobody in this 
room.  But you know what, Mr. Speaker?  In 1988 Cargill -- oh, oh, they 
paid the piper to call the tune, Mr. Speaker.  Cargill paid the PC Party of 
Saskatchewan, or PC Party of Canada, $15,000 -- $15,000 worth of paying the 
piper, Mr. Speaker.  Let's just tie these together.  Cargill's . . . 



 

 

 
The Speaker: -- Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, the item before the 
legislature is Bill 61, An Act to amend The Education and Health Tax Act.  
When I moved that the Bill should have second reading, Mr. Speaker, in my 
remarks I was very precise and concise -- and I invite you to check the 
record -- I was very precise and concise on what this Bill did.  It 
broadened the base to cover some items which are not now covered, and made 
provision for tax on side by side as opposed to tax on tax which is the way 
the law reads today. 
 
I was very precise and concise in my remarks, Mr. Speaker.  They made up no 
more than three or four, eight and a half by twelve pages, Mr. Speaker.  
And not once did I engage in discussion relative to the issues the hon. 
member is raising.  They are outside the Bill that's before the Assembly, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- I want to make a couple of brief comments, one of which 
is, Mr. Speaker, it's such a pleasure to hear the Minister of Finance 
saying something from his feet for a change.  In addition to that I . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order, order.  I ask hon. members to speak 
to the issue and I have asked hon. members many times, many times not to 
refer to the presence or absence of members.  I ask them to discipline 
themselves and stick to that ruling which they are all very much aware of. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- I just say very briefly to Mr. Speaker: the whole 
debate, both in this Chamber and more importantly outside the Chamber, is 
whether or not the tax is needed.  That is the whole public controversy, 
here and outside the Chamber. 
 
As such, the debate is fairly wide-ranging.  We will say here, because I 
think it's relevant, the tax isn't needed.  You should have done X or you 
shouldn't have done Y.  That's relevant.  That's the whole public debate, 
is whether or not the tax was necessary. 
 
The Speaker: -- I listened to the member's point of order which, as I 
understand it, deals with the list of corporations or individuals that the 
hon. member's referring to, who made contributions to the PC Party.  As I 
indicated on that basis as I indicated earlier, the member must relate what 
a contribution has to do with the 7 per cent sales tax under debate.  And 
on that basis, I believe the point of order is well taken, and the onus is 
on the member from Moose Jaw North to make his remarks relevant. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Speaker, you know, I find it interesting.  I welcome 
intervention by the Minister of Finance in this Assembly any time.  Any 
time he wants to speak in this Assembly on this tax, it would be welcome. 
 



 

 

Maybe one of the reasons he was relatively brief when he spoke about it 
here, Mr. Speaker, is that he spoke about it here three weeks after it was 
in place and about eight weeks after he had announced it without even 
having the courage to come into this Assembly to do it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Oh yes, he says.  He calls together a clutch of reporters and 
he says, here's a new tax I'm going to stick to the people of Saskatchewan.  
Then he runs for cover.  And then he has the gall to stand on his feet in 
this Assembly and say, people want to debate this tax in the Assembly.  
What a silly thing. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I understand why the Minister of Finance doesn't want to 
talk about the connection between contributions to the PC Party from large 
corporations and this tax, the rebate of which by the policy that he has 
introduced to this House, the impact will be that it'll go to those who pay 
the largest amount of PST, which will be the largest corporations, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I think that's a pretty clear connection.  And I will understand why he 
doesn't want to have this kind of information provided to the people of 
Saskatchewan from the floor of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
But just to make a simple point and to focus on Saferco, Mr. Speaker, let's 
just look at three actors in Saferco.  In connection with employment, I've 
talked about previously . . . I was previously asked by a member in this 
House to address the matter of Saferco, and I will do that in the context 
of the people who were involved there getting a rebate -- the rebate, the 
$260 million going to large corporate friends from the $440 million being 
paid for by taxpayers. 
 
And how do you get a policy like that?  Does that make any sense to people 
in Saskatchewan?  It doesn't.  But it does if you are providing policies, 
Mr. Speaker, to those who are paying the piper.  If you're paying the 
piper, then you call the tune that rewards those who paid the piper. 
 
The tune . . .  And here's the tune.  Oh, yes, the tune is . . . Oh, the 
minister is disturbed.  The tune is the $260 million.  Well, Mr. Speaker, 
is it any great surprise? 
 
I have brought to this House before, to the attention of this House the 
fact that in the Saferco project, which is being supervised by Stuart Olson 
Construction, that when there came opportunity to provide steel buildings, 
steel building construction on that site, from the city of Moose Jaw a firm 
with an international reputation wasn't even provided an opportunity to 
bid.  Not even provided an opportunity to bid, to create employment in the 
city of Moose Jaw and to provide activity for a Moose Jaw firm. 
 
But who got the contract?  It was ATCO.  Who did they get it from?  They 
got it from Stuart Olson. 
 
The Speaker: -- It being 5 p.m., the House stands recessed until 7 p.m. 



 

 

 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


