





























































Hansard: May 31, 1991


 

 

May 31/91 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, as you know there is 
a matter of very urgent public concern that's been occupying Saskatchewan 
people for the last number of weeks, the past couple of months in fact, and 
that is the matter of the provincial PST (provincial sales tax).  And I 
have here a petition that raises public concerns regarding this provincial 
tax, and I'd like to read the petition: 
 

 The petition of the undersigned residents of the Province of Saskatchewan 
humbly sheweth: 

 That the Provincial Government does not have a mandate from the people of 
Saskatchewan to impose the major tax increase which would result from this 
proposed provincial GST. 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Honourable Assembly may 
be pleased to urge the Provincial Government to stop the provincial GST 
until the people of the province have had an opportunity to pass judgement 
on it in a provincial election. 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Mr. Speaker, I have here a petition with the names of 20 
individuals from the city of Weyburn who are opposed to the provincial PST. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I too rise 
pursuant to rule 11 of the Assembly to present a petition to the Assembly 
on behalf of some residents of Saskatchewan.  These petitioners are urging 
the government to reverse its decision to impose the 7 per cent provincial 
GST (goods and services tax).  And these petitioners, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Regina, Pense, Prince Albert, Southend, and Debden.  And it's my honour, 
Mr. Speaker, to lay these names on the Table before you.  Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise pursuant to rule 11 to present 
a petition, the prayer of which is: 
 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Honourable Assembly may 
be pleased to urge the Provincial Government to stop the provincial GST 
until the people of the province have an opportunity to pass judgement on 
it in a provincial election. 

 
The petitioners on the first sheet, Mr. Speaker, are all from the Queen 
city of Regina, and on behalf of the 20 signatories, it's my duty and 
pleasure to table this petition. 
 



 

 

The second petition I have with the same prayer, Mr. Speaker, has again 20 
signatures, this time predominately from Tisdale, but with some signatories 
from Star City, Prince Albert, Zenon Park, Melfort, and Arborfield.  On 
behalf of these 20 people, it is my pleasure to table the petition today.  
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I have here today, Mr. 
Speaker, a petition that reads in part: 
 

 That the Provincial Government does not have a mandate from the people of 
Saskatchewan to impose the major tax increase which would result from its 
proposed provincial GST. 

 
And it urges the provincial government to stop the provincial GST until the 
people of the province have an opportunity to pass judgement on it in a 
provincial election. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there are some 43 residents of Saskatchewan listed on 
this petition, coming from the communities of Regina; from Saskatoon; I 
notice there's one here from Peter's Hardware from Ogema, Saskatchewan; and 
from other communities in the province of Saskatchewan.  On behalf of these 
petitioners, Mr. Speaker, I would lay this petition on the Table at this 
time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: -- According to order, I have reviewed the petitions presented on 
May 28, 29, and 30.  I find that the petition presented by the hon. member 
for The Battlefords on May 28 to be irregular in form, pursuant to rule 
11(6) and (7); therefore it cannot be read and received. 
 
The following petitions are in order and they are hereby read and received: 
 

 Of certain residents of the province of Saskatchewan praying that your 
Honourable Assembly may be pleased to urge the Provincial Government to 
reverse its decision to tax reading materials; 

 
 Of certain residents of the province of Saskatchewan praying that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to refuse to extend the PST to goods 
and services; 

 
 Of certain residents of the province of Saskatchewan praying that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to urge the Provincial Government to 
stop the provincial GST; 

 
 And of certain residents of the province of Saskatchewan praying that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to urge the Provincial Government to 
properly fund and provide in-patient facilities such as Myers House in 
Regina. 



 

 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, if I could just get a point of 
clarification on the petitions that we have thus read, and I wonder, Mr. 
Speaker, if we could have agreement of the House to strike off some of the 
names here.  And I just have before me one from Saddam Hussein; The Dude 
From Winnipeg, Manitoba; Elmer Fudd, and a few others.  And I wondered, 
just to be fair, if we could have those individuals, ones which are blatant 
abuses, stricken from the record. 
 
The Speaker: -- Is leave granted?  Order, order.  Order!  Order, order, 
order. 
 
Now the Government House Leader has in essence asked for leave to remove 
certain names from the petitions.  Is leave granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on Tuesday next 
move first reading of a Bill respecting an Act to amend The Medical 
Profession Act, 1991. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to introduce to you and members of the legislature with great 
pleasure, the 16 students from the grade 8 class in Preeceville, and 
they're located in the west gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I said it was a great pleasure because I had the honour in March of 
presenting an environmental recognition award to this class.  And I wanted 
to inform the legislature that this class has been instrumental in raising 
the environmental awareness of the Preeceville area and area around 
Preeceville. 
 
I might inform the legislature that they have purchased and protected an 
acre of Amazon rain forest, and have developed a very successful paper 
recycling program in the town of Preeceville.  And I really want to 
congratulate these students for their foresight and commitment to 
preserving our environment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this class is accompanied today by their teacher, Mr. Bill 
Wright.  They have four chaperons with them:  Laurie Meberg, Eugene Gulka, 
Dianne Serhan, and Mildred Prestie. And they're accompanied by their bus 
driver, Neil Fenske. 
 
I would like to inform the class that I will be joining them for pictures 
and refreshments at 10:30, and I look forward to meeting and talking with 



 

 

you and possibly answering some questions for you.  I'd like to ask the 
members of the legislature to please join me in welcoming these students. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's with a great deal of 
pleasure that we welcome to the Assembly some 52 grade 5 students from 
Lumsden Elementary School.  They are accompanied by their teachers Ray 
Tourney and Mrs. Terry Reiger, their bus driver, Stan Shakowsky. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many will of course recognize that Lumsden is usually here 
each year and we always welcome them and enjoy their participation.  I look 
forward to meeting with the students for questions and refreshments after 
question period.  Please welcome these students, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, on behalf of my 
colleague, the member from Saltcoats, I'd like to introduce to you and to 
the members of this Assembly, 29 grade 5 students from the community of 
Langenburg, Langenburg High School.   And they're accompanied today by 
teachers Mrs. Okrainetz and Mr. Haczkewicz -- and I trust I pronounced the 
names right -- as well as bus driver Mr. Bergman. 
 
We'd like to welcome you to the Assembly this morning.  I trust you have 
had an enjoyable time thus far and will have a safe trip home.  As well we 
look forward to meeting you at 11 a.m.  Would the members welcome this 
group of students from Langenburg. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It gives me a great 
deal of pleasure to introduce to you and through you to members of this 
House in the province of Saskatchewan, a group of young people in the west 
gallery.  They call themselves the Regina Youth Love Life Group, and the 
chairpersons of this group and who are leading this group of young people, 
teenagers, is Dana Thompson and Len Parker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it is this group that we see out on the lawn 
demonstrating their desire for continued life.  They are using the 
democratic process in this form to make their views known.  And as we know, 
Mr. Speaker, this is a momentous decision-making time in the province of 
Saskatchewan along this issue.  And if I could just use their words, Mr. 
Speaker, they say that: we, the youth of today and adults and voters and 
leaders of tomorrow, care about the unborn and will stand for their right 
to life. 
 
And I would ask all members, Mr. Speaker, in this legislature today to 
welcome this group as they are demonstrating for the democratic right that 
they have. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

The Speaker: -- I would just like to bring to the attention of hon. members 
that while we are pleased to have guests introduced, I think it is the 
responsibility of members to introduce them in such a way that we don't get 
into what may be construed as debate -- is not the forum for it.  And I ask 
hon. members to introduce members in the proper manner. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it gives me 
great pleasure to introduce to you, and through you to the members of the 
Legislative Assembly, Miss Ruth Clark of Regina.  Miss Clark was formerly a 
school teacher for some many years in our community, but now she is a very 
active and keen student, especially of current affairs.  And I'm pleased 
that she's able to be here today to witness the proceedings, and I would 
ask you and all members to join with me to extend her a warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

RCMP Investigation Relating to GigaText 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you very much.  Mr. Speaker, today I'd like to 
address my question to the Premier, the man who is responsible for the 
overall conduct of this government, and who indicated last Wednesday at the 
chamber of commerce forum he was anxious to get back to questions.  So I 
have one for him today. 
 
Mr. Premier, according to a story in today's Montreal Gazette, Senator 
Michel Cogger is being investigated by the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted 
Police) for criminality in regards to influence peddling to your government 
in the GigaText affair. 
 
Mr. Premier, we must assume that the RCMP knows what it's doing given that 
this is a very serious allegation against a senator of Canada.  Would you 
tell this House who in, or connected to, your government had primary 
responsibility for dealing with Senator Cogger in regards to the GigaText 
deal?  Would you answer that today, sir? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Mr. Speaker, I am not familiar with the matter; I assume 
it's before the courts.  I'll take notice of the matter. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question for the Premier.  
Mr. Premier, clearly the RCMP is pursuing this matter.  And they have 
indicated that they are speaking with . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order.  Order, order.  The hon. 
member has taken notice of the question.  I wish to bring that to the 
attention of the member and I ask him not to repeat the question that the 
member has taken notice of. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question, and I address this 
question again to the Premier.  Mr. Premier, clearly this investigation is 



 

 

ongoing, as reported in the Montreal Gazette, and I ask you again: Mr. 
Premier, who in your cabinet or former cabinet have these people been 
speaking with?  Can you answer that, sir? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I believe I indicated, Mr. Speaker, that I would take 
notice of the question. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I have another question for the . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I have another question for the Premier, 
and I'd ask the Premier if he would canvass the front bench of his caucus 
and find out if any of those people have been questioned by the RCMP with 
respect to the Cogger affair.  Would you ask your front-benchers, sir? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Mr. Speaker, the government has made it clear, and I as 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General have made it clear, that we do not 
interfere with police investigations.  We have followed that practice.  
Whether it applies to members of any political party, Mr. Speaker, there's 
never been any interference.  And I'm sure the hon. members are quite aware 
that there has been no interference, as I said, no matter what political 
party members are being investigated by the police. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- I have a new question for the Premier.  Mr. Premier, I 
want to quote from the Montreal Gazette of today.  It quotes Mr. Couture, 
the RCMP investigating officer, as saying he has questioned about 75 people 
including ministers, former ministers, and deputy ministers of the federal 
government, the provincial governments of Quebec, Saskatchewan, sir, and 
Alberta.  I ask you again: would you confirm and would you indicate which 
members or former members of your cabinet have been questioned by Mr. 
Couture? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Mr. Speaker, I do find the question somewhat interesting 
in that we have . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- We have stated consistently, Mr. Speaker, that the police 
and the prosecutor should be able to act independently and carry out their 
duties appropriately, professionally, and without interference from 
politicians. 
 
I do find it interesting that the hon. members opposite, if they were to 
follow that question and be fair and consistent about it themselves, 
whether in police investigations involving members of perhaps their 
political party, whether they're prepared to publicly announce which ones 



 

 

were consulted by the police. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- I have a new question for the Premier.  And I want to 
say, Mr. Premier, it's not members of the opposition who have been 
indicated that they were speaking to.  It's cabinet members and former 
cabinet members of your government that got us into this GigaText mess that 
are being investigated.  Mr. Premier, I want to say that I don't think 
you've ever grasped the significance of the GigaText affair.  Either that 
or for your own reasons, you want it down-played. 
 
Mr. Premier, GigaText cost the people of this province five and a half 
million dollars.  You and your cabinet ministers were paying for condos and 
company jets.  You were flying around in planes, living off of public 
funds, driving Mercedes, trips to San Francisco.  And now we've got a 
criminal investigation of a senator, a colleague of your campaign manager, 
an architect of the GigaText . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order, order.  Does the member have a 
question? 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier is this:  when 
are you going to come clean?  When are you going to stand up in this House 
and answer some questions about this gigamess you got the province into?  
When are you going to answer? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I note that the . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  I would like to say this, that the 
hon. member from Kelvington-Wadena is interfering, and I'd like to ask him 
particularly to refrain at this time as well as all other members, as well 
as all other members. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I note, Mr. Speaker, that the hon. member did not take up 
my offer in the previous answer to make public those members of his 
political party that perhaps were questioned by the police in other 
matters. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, the public of course well remembers that the 
government has indicated that GigaText certainly was a mistake, and 
mistakes will be made.  But that in fact the investment in Nabu, Mr. 
Speaker, by the NDP in an Ottawa company, lost considerably more than the 
investment in GigaText, Mr. Speaker.  And there, Mr. Speaker, not one job 
was created in Saskatchewan, not $1 was spent in Saskatchewan.  In Nabu, 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP invested in today's dollar nearly $14 million in an 
Ottawa company for the investment of Ottawa people, without creating one 
job in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a final question to the Premier.  
Mr. Premier, will you give this House your commitment that you yourself 
will bring back the answers as to who is being investigated by the RCMP?  
Which one of your cabinet ministers, former cabinet ministers, or deputy 
premiers -- or is it you yourself? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I've asked the hon. member not to repeat a 
question of which notice has been taken.  He has done that and I have 
reminded him of that and I will go to the next question. 
 

Sale of Shares in Cameco 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to the Minister for 
Economic Diversification, who is also responsible for privatization in 
Saskatchewan.  Mr. Minister, the people of Saskatchewan are very interested 
to know the government's plans which were announced yesterday to sell off 
Cameco.  The people of this province know from past experience, Mr. 
Minister, that every time your government privatizes, taxes go up, the debt 
increases, and services are cut back. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question is this.  Could you tell us which of the options 
this privatization will lead to: will taxes increase even more; will the 
debt increase even more; or will Saskatchewan people lose even more 
services?  Which of those three, Mr. Minister, will it be this time -- or 
all of them? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I look forward to 
questions about Cameco because Cameco, as most people in Saskatchewan and 
Canada realize, is a very large, integrated company that happens to do a 
lot of things for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
What we have announced yesterday, Mr. Speaker, was a treasury share 
offering.  It wasn't the shares of the Government of Saskatchewan or the 
Government of Canada, but a treasury share offering by Cameco that will be 
used by that particular corporation to position themselves for a lot of 
investment and opportunities in our province. 
 
Cameco has at the minimum, a half a billion dollars worth of projects to 
build in our province in the next few years, Mr. Speaker.  And it is a wise 
corporate decision, I think, to go forward to the public to garner some 
investment capital to do these projects, rather than relying upon 
taxpayers. 
 
And I think the initial idea behind the amalgamations of SMDC (Saskatchewan 
Mining Development Corporation) and Eldorado Nuclear, Mr. Speaker, was to 
do that -- get a board of directors that would position this particular 
company to bring benefits to Saskatchewan and Canada.  And that's exactly 
what they're doing.  Cameco in all regards has been private for many years. 
 



 

 

Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Mr. Speaker, a new question to the same minister.  Mr. 
Minister, everyone knows, who has ownership of shares, that when you issue 
treasury stock you dilute the balance of the shares that are held by the 
taxpayers in the corporation. 
 
Mr. Minister, the people of this province want to know what the details are 
of this privatization.  How much further will their equity be diluted?  
What are the details of this deal, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, if one talks about dilution of this 
particular company, one only has to take the comments of members opposite 
who would shut down the uranium industry altogether.  Now there you would 
have the ultimate dilution. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, Cameco has gone to the market with 
treasury shares in the amount of 100 to $125 million.  This is a very small 
percentage of the total shares available.  The ultimate ownership if you 
will, Mr. Speaker, by the senior partners, is still in the hands of the 
people of Canada and the people of Saskatchewan.  This is a very small 
percentage.  It may go as high as 15 per cent.  But it will garner that 
needed capital that Cameco needs to, for instance, fulfil, fulfil, Mr. 
Speaker, the commitment to go to 50 per cent native employment by 1995. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Mr. Speaker, a new question to the same minister.  Mr. 
Minister, I shouldn't have to remind you that the people of this province 
own the 62 per cent of Cameco, not the cabinet of your government.  And for 
you to say . . . what you are saying today, Mr. Minister, is the people of 
this province have no right to know the details. 
 
Mr. Minister, for you to say that really is contrary to all of the laws of 
the land.  This is an investment of the people of this province.  I ask you 
again, Mr. Minister, on behalf of the public, what are the details of the 
privatization of the Cameco deal? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, these questions are absolutely incredible 
from a party that has stated on many occasions that they would shut down 
that particular industry in this province.  Now Cameco and the board of 
directors of Cameco have positioned that company to take, for instance, as 
I said before, native employment to 50 per cent of all other operations by 
year 1995. 
 
Cameco are into uranium mining, gold mining.  They're looking for diamonds.  
They are doing many things to build this province, Mr. Speaker.  Cameco, 



 

 

like this government, have a plan to employ and build inside the province 
of Saskatchewan.  That party over there has stated they would close the 
whole darn thing down.  For that member to stand and say: what are you 
doing? -- I think it's a little bit hypocritical, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Mr. Speaker, a new question to the minister.  In light of 
your government's assertion that you need to hit the people of this 
province up for even more tax money than you already have, and given your 
record of privatizing or selling off assets while increasing taxes and 
increasing debt and cutting services, what assurances, Mr. Minister, what 
assurances do you have for us that this time you will make a good deal on 
behalf of the people of this province?  Or do you need an extra $440 for 
each man, woman, and child in this province in new taxes, increased because 
like your potash sell off, you intend to lose the province a great deal of 
money on this deal like other privatizations? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, I will assure the member of one thing.  
We will not close down any mines. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, by allowing people in Saskatchewan and 
Canada, indeed around the world, to buy shares in this particular 
corporation, we are enhancing the value of Cameco.  And when the value of 
Cameco is enhanced the people of Saskatchewan, as the largest shareholder 
in Cameco, have their value enhanced.  A company that is positioning itself 
to spend in excess of a half a billion dollars inside our province in the 
next few years, employing significant numbers of Saskatchewan people in new 
enterprises, I say enhances the value of that company to this province. 
 
And that member over there is using the usual scare tactics of the NDP (New 
Democratic Party) Party for their own political gain. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Proposed Aircraft Manufacturing Plant in Saskatoon 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- To the Minister of Economic Diversification and Trade, Mr. 
Speaker.  Mr. Minister, as you know yesterday CBC (Canadian Broadcasting 
Corporation) news reported that your federal counterparts have expressed 
concern over past lawsuits Promavia has had here in Canada, and also 
expressed concern about the Portugal deal Promavia has for its jets, a deal 
which hasn't materialized yet although it was to have been completed by 
this time. 
 
Can you answer these questions today, Mr. Minister, and clear up this 
uncertainty for the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, there's something a little unclear 
here.  Does that member for Saskatoon want jobs in Saskatoon or does he not 
want jobs in Saskatoon?  That's the first question that has to be raised 
here.  This government has worked hard to bring aeronautics manufacturing 
jobs to Saskatoon.  We are working hard to convince the federal government 
to proceed with this particular project, and now the member for Saskatoon 
criticizes the project and says, well maybe we shouldn't have these jobs in 
Saskatoon.  Could the member for Saskatoon please make up his mind, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, to the same minister.  Mr. 
Minister, what we want are the facts.  Does Promavia have contracts signed 
and deposits made for any of their aircraft? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Speaker, I don't know about their contracts.  I'll 
tell you this: you can't sell airplanes you don't have and you can't sell 
airplanes that you can't  
 Dbuild.  First of all you have to have a factory.  What this province 
needs is an airplane factory.  Then we can sell airplanes.  We can't sell 
air; we're selling airplanes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Supplementary to the same minister, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 
Minister, you just said you don't know about the contracts.  Perhaps you 
can tell us about the dealings Promavia has had with the Government of Nova 
Scotia back in 1986 when it went to set up a factory there and it never 
happened.  Have you contacted the Government of Nova Scotia, and if so, can 
you tell us what you found out there? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Speaker, this is the NDP telling one story in 
Regina and another story in Saskatoon.  A federal MP (Member of Parliament) 
who is NDP, is in favour of Promavia in Saskatoon.  And the Saskatoon 
member is in favour of jobs in Saskatoon when he's in Saskatoon.  But when 
he's in Regina he's against jobs in Saskatoon.  The member for Saskatoon 
should decide who he is serving.  Is he serving the NDP Party or is he 
serving his constituents? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Closure of Group Homes in Prince Albert 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a question to the Minister of Social 
Services and it regards Prince Albert group homes.  Mr. Minister, the 
Prince Albert Group Homes Society has indicated that it plans to shut down 
its four group homes in Prince Albert and deprive 26 residents of 



 

 

accommodation, due to their inability to reach agreement with your 
department. 
 
Since it was your government that decided to close North Park Centre in 
Prince Albert, Mr. Minister, and move some of the residents to a group 
home, can you explain what you intend to do with these residents who will 
find themselves without a place to live as of June 30? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, I think what we have to do is analyse the 
question in the way that the member opposite from Prince Albert asked the 
question. 
 
He states:  it was our government that decided to close North Park.  Well, 
Mr. Speaker, I'm very proud to say that he is absolutely correct.  We 
closed North Park and make no doubt about it.  That member and that 
government at the time, if they would have had an opportunity, North Park 
would never have closed, Mr. Speaker.  And that question that the member 
directed to me is indicative of that.  And I am very, very proud to say, 
Mr. Speaker, that yes, under the former minister of Social Services North 
Park was closed. 
 
And I suggest to the member opposite that that is the best thing that has 
ever happened to the residents of North Park and in particular those 
members of Prince Albert.  The reason I say that, Mr. Speaker, is that the 
de-institutionalization of the public who are disabled, either mentally, 
physically, or both, is the objective that we have had. 
 
We have the objective, Mr. Speaker, of giving those citizens the quality of 
life, the realization of the potential that is within people, that can be 
realized in a group home setting as opposed to being an institution.  So, 
Mr. Speaker, yes we did close North Park. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Mr. Speaker, the member admits to closing North Park 
Centre. And I tell you, Mr. Minister, you closed North Park Centre against 
the wishes of the citizens of Prince Albert, against the wishes of family 
members who had people in North Park Centre, and against the wishes of the 
workers.  And now you're going to demolish the building to destroy the 
evidence of your mismanagement of North Park Centre. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- But that's all very small comfort, Mr. Minister, of the 
people that you've moved from North Park Centre to the group homes, and now 
where are they going to go?  Now where are you going to displace them?  Mr. 
Minister, do you remember that as a result of your closing North Park 
Centre the death rate went up to 13 from 2 to 3 a year?  That's something 
to be proud of. 
 
Mr. Minister, are your priorities so twisted . . . 



 

 

 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order, order.  Order, please.  Order.  
Order.  Deputy Premier and the member for Elphinstone . . . the member for 
Regina Elphinstone and the member for Prince Albert, the member for Meadow 
Lake, and the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, would you settle down and 
allow the question period to proceed. 
 
Secondly, I ask the hon. member to get to his question. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm asking the minister if he would reverse 
his priorities and stop some of the spending on advertising so that he 
could find some funding for the handicapped people in group homes in Prince 
Albert. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, I can say quite definitively, no we will 
not reverse our decision and open up North Park once again.  We will not do 
that.  We have embarked upon the process of the de-institutionalization.  
We will continue on that, Mr. Speaker, because it is the right thing to do. 
 
Now I know the members opposite would open North Park again if they had the 
right -- because they would be following the wishes of their mandate, which 
is CUPE (Canadian Union of Public Employees) and some of these other labour 
organizations and union organizations -- that they would like to do.  But, 
Mr. Speaker, we were following the wishes of the people.  We were following 
the wishes of the Saskatchewan Association for Community Living.  We have 
the endorsement of the Canadian Association for Community Living to 
continue on in our community living project.  And we will continue on, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And for the member's edification, I can assure him that no resident of 
these group homes will be left without a group home.  They will be taken 
care of.  As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, when the House closes this 
afternoon I intend to go to Prince Albert. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  Now we have . . . Order.  We have two members here 
entering debate.  It's not a question and answer; it's debate.  And I ask 
the hon. member to shorten his question and to shorten your answers. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Mr. Minister, I hope that the result of your meeting will 
be a positive one, that you will be funding them. 
 
Mr. Minister, are you aware that part of the problem that the Prince Albert 
Group Homes Society is facing is the home's food budget?  They've already 
stretched the food budget to $4.50 a day per resident, and now it's being 
stretched even further because of the numerous grocery items which have . . 
. are subject to your PST, your provincial PST. 
 
Your tax, your tax, the tax of the this minister is partially responsible 
for their financial problems.  Would you not admit, Mr. Minister, that your 
PST has had a negative impact on all sectors of society, including those 
disabled people in group homes? 



 

 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to reiterate that I will be going 
to Prince Albert.  I will be meeting with the board of directors, the 
elected board of directors of the Prince Albert Group Homes Society, and 
yes, I expect that the outcome of that meeting will be on a positive note, 
but I'm certainly looking forward to that meeting. 
 
I might add, as far as the finances are concerned, the $4 that the member 
is operating . . . or suggesting is a standard fee set across the province.  
And the funding for the Prince Albert group home is a standard fee, a 
standard arrangement across the province.  All other group homes across the 
province seem to be doing reasonably well.  Of course they could always use 
more money, but they're working within the same framework as the group in 
Prince Albert. 
 
And so I look forward to meeting with the group in Prince Albert this 
afternoon to see what kind of a solution we can give to this situation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Prior to orders of the day, 
I'd seek leave of the Assembly to move directly to adjourned debates, Bill 
No. 61. 
 
Leave granted. 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 61 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth that Bill No. 61 -- An Act to amend The Education and 
Health Tax Act (No. 2) be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Mr. Speaker, I had talked for some time last evening about 
the impact of this tax.  I spent considerable time making the argument that 
the economic impact of this tax is going to be very much a negative one. 
 
Before I get back into my remarks and deal with some of the other things I 
wanted to mention, I would like to turn to an anecdotal bit of information 
that I got that I would like to advise the minister on with respect to this 
tax.  And this is with respect to the social impact that it will have in 
some of the areas of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I happened to be in conversation with a small-business person 
in Prince Albert, asking him about the impact of the tax.  And after he 



 

 

told me about the different . . . how it's going to impact on him and his 
community in a business sense, he said to me, he said, but all of those 
things aside, the fact that I'm now sending in $1,300 a month where I used 
to send in $300 quarterly on confectionery to the taxpayer, and the added 
bookwork, he says that's still minor. 
 
He said, one of the things that really bothers me about this tax is what 
happens when I get two kiddies walking into this store -- or one and three 
kiddies walking into this store, and one of the youngsters is of aboriginal 
background and one of the kiddies is a white.  And he said I have to charge 
the white child 71 cents for a bottle of pop and I have to charge the 
Indian child 68 cents for a bottle of pop.  And he said to me, and it 
really took me by surprise, Mr. Minister, because I . . . it always 
occurred to me that any type of racial tensions that might have arisen were 
something that we had inherited, that had been handed down, and we were 
trying to even out. 
 
(1045) 
 
He said can you imagine what effect this is going to have on the attitudes 
of those children?  For example he said an Indian child would pay 75 cents 
for a bag of chips whereas a white child has to pay 80 cents.  And then 
they go back to school. 
 
Mr. Minister, that little anecdotal made a great impact on me.  And I want 
to pass it on to you in all sincerity, because I think it is your objective 
and my objective, and I think it is everybody's objective in this Assembly, 
that we should be doing what we can do to promote harmonious relations 
between the aboriginal people in our society and the white people in our 
society -- people of all colours and races.  And here we have a tax which 
is building into the system, building right into the system something that 
is going to be very, very hard to overcome, very difficult to overcome. 
 
It's not a very expensive item and of course to you and me 4 cents doesn't 
sound like much.  But to those youngsters who are six years old and seven 
years old and very impressionable, at that age it's going to put something 
into their minds and it puts questions into their minds about the concept 
of fairness. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I would ask that you look into that very, very carefully 
and try to work out a way of dealing around it.  The best way to deal 
around it actually is to pull back the tax on those food items.  That is 
simply the best way and that is what the opposition has been asking.  We're 
asking you to axe the tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to turn now to some of the remarks that I had discussed 
and was planning to discuss last night. 
 
The gist of the remarks are this, and that is that I'm asking this 
government to listen to the people of Saskatchewan as they have spoken and 
are continuing to speak through petition to this legislature, as they are 
speaking on open-line shows, as they are speaking in letters to the editor, 
as they are speaking face to face to their MLAs, as they have already 



 

 

spoken to many members of the government side and members of the opposition 
side -- to listen to the people, to the 80 per cent of the people who 
oppose this PST, and withdraw it. 
 
And I would add to the minister that he should listen more carefully to 
several of his caucus members -- to the majority, I would suggest, of his 
caucus members who advised him against bringing on this tax.  He would do 
well to do so.  He's placing them under a lot of pressure, but that's not 
the big point.  It's the pressure that you're putting on the province of 
Saskatchewan and the economic picture of the province of Saskatchewan, what 
it will do to the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Tax freedom day in Saskatchewan is now around the middle of June.  That 
means, Mr. Speaker, that the average worker in Saskatchewan has to work 
from January to June before any of the money that he earns can be classed 
as his own.  All the other money earned until that day goes to pay for 
taxes.  This PST extends that beyond the middle of June.  This PST has that 
effect because it's going to take $440 million away from the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Yesterday I made the point that their argument that there was going to be 
some type of a positive job economic indicator . . . economic impact in 
terms of jobs is completely false.  The reason it is false, Mr. Speaker, is 
because this tax will be taking a lot of money out of the portion of the 
economy that is characterized by consumption, that is characterized by 
services -- health, education, banking, whatever, in that particular area.  
It will hurt that sector because it takes money away from it. 
 
It may have a minor, minor effect, positive effect on the manufacturing 
sector.  And if you add what you might gain in the positive sector, and I 
used the example yesterday of a slight gain of about 760 jobs, to the 
negative impact on jobs it will have in the other sector, the net loss is 
more likely going to be very close to 7,500 jobs. 
 
And that is the basis of the argument that I place before the government, 
and I've yet to see, I have yet to see an argument that detracts from that, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to spend a few minutes, Mr. Speaker, talking about the previous tax 
record to put this tax into perspective with it.  This tax, I say, 
represents just as badly a broken promise as previous taxes represented 
broken promises of this government. 
 
We might remember that in 1982 this government made promises to cut income 
tax by 10 per cent.  But what did they do?  Instead they increased income 
tax and they gave us the flat tax.  They promised in their campaign 
literature repeatedly that they were going to eliminate the provincial 
sales tax.  Instead of that we saw it increased from 5 per cent to 7 per 
cent.  And now here we see an extension of that broken promise, the tax 
being expanded, its base being expanded to take another $440 million away 
from the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
They promised that they were going to eliminate the gas tax, Mr. Speaker, 



 

 

but that also . . . we found that that promise had been broken because the 
gas tax had been reinstated and in fact increased. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that is why the people of Saskatchewan are asking the 
question: how much taxation can we take?  Is four and a half billion 
dollars of revenue not enough?  Surely the government has got to learn to 
live within its means.  Surely this government does not need to grab 
another $440 million which most of us would have a hard time shelling out 
at this time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while increasing taxes this government has also at this same 
time incurred a deficit.  Now you'd wonder, Mr. Speaker, what their 
relationship is.  I think it was probably best described by a man who's 
been Premier of this province since 1982, when he stated that deficits are 
just a deferred tax that must be paid by future generations.  That was 
stated in 1982. 
 
I think it's educational, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Speaker, to enter into the 
record what the government record is with respect to deficits.  In 1982, I 
have a statement here signed by the hon. Bob Andrew when he was the 
minister of Finance, and when he took over the books from the Blakeney 
government he signed a statement which said that on a combined basis the 
Consolidated and Heritage funds in the province of Saskatchewan were . . . 
amounted to -- and I omit a couple of figures here -- but the end line is 
that they ended up with a combined surplus of 139.3 million.  That was the 
combined surplus of 139.3 million. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, they entered with that positive figure.  And since then 
what has happened?  Well the deficit has increased year by year by year.  
It started right in 1983 with a $227 million deficit, and then another 331 
was added to that in '84.  In '85 it was added.  In '86 there was another 
large sum added.  And in '87, just to top things off -- this was after the 
election -- we found out that the deficit was going to be $1.32 billion, 
another 1.2.  These  
 Dare all added.  We are getting a cumulative sum here, Mr. Speaker.  So 
that by the end of this year, the deficits that have been accumulated by 
this government are up to 5.2 billion. 
 
Deficits are nothing, the Premier said.  Deficits are just a deferred tax 
that must be paid by future generations.  So they've been taxing us all 
along, Mr. Speaker, in a method called the deficit. 
 
Well this cumulative deficit is costing us a pile of money.  At this stage 
the interest on the deficit alone amounts to half a billion dollars a year.  
And fortunately, interest rates are starting to drop off or this would be 
costing us more like 6 or $700 million a year. 
 
One of the difficulties in paying for the deficit and using today's taxes 
to pay for the deficit, is that while this government was mismanaging the 
province, it was noticed by the bond-raters in North America.  And we found 
that for 15 years -- if you look at Saskatchewan's credit rating -- for 15 
years prior to July '85, Saskatchewan did not have any lowering of credit 
ratings.  Prior to 1985 the credit rating kept going up and up in 



 

 

Saskatchewan.  Since '85 Moody's lowered it.  Moody's is one of the bond 
rating companies.  They lowered it in July of '85.  In January of '86 
Standard and Poor's lowered the bond rating.  In August of '86 Moody's 
lowered it again.  And then in January of '87 the Canadian Bond Rating 
Service lowered our bond rating once again, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When we look at all of the statistical evidence and we look at the numbers, 
the staggering numbers of taxes and the staggering numbers of deficits and 
the government still asking the public for another 440 million in tax, it 
makes you scratch your head, Mr. Speaker.  It makes you wonder where did 
all the money go that they have been taking in, and why is it that they 
need this much more money before they look at their own spending, their own 
internal revenue.  Why shouldn't $4.5 billion be enough? 
 
If you look at the tax revenue, Mr. Speaker, that the government has 
received since 1986 . . . and you don't have to look at very many things.  
Right straight from the budget book, you can see that personal income tax 
has increased by $337.9 million.  That's just since 1986.  They've taken in 
in gas tax an increase of $1.71 million.  They've increased the sales tax 
revenue by $298 million. 
 
That's a total of $807.2 million increase in taxes, in revenue to this 
government since 1986.  Now if you add the $440 million that they're going 
to take from this tax that they are proposing, that will reach a total of 
$1.25 billion.  That's $1,250 for every child, for every woman, for every 
man in this province, a year.  That's a phenomenal tax increase, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
That's why the people are fed up with taxes.  That's why tax is the number 
one issue in every corner of the province.  You take any area of the 
province, any town and you ask them, what is the number one issue, the 
majority of people will say that taxes is of their greatest concern at this 
time, the level of taxation.  We are on a virtual tax revolt in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to now turn very briefly, Mr. Speaker, to talking about fairness in 
taxation.  Fairness.  A tax is fair, Mr. Speaker, if it is based on one's 
ability to pay.  That is if my child, when she was seven years old, had to 
pay the same level of taxation as I did when I . . . at the same time that 
I had an income and she did not have an income, it would simply be not 
fair.  It just stands to logic. 
 
Well the same thing happens to me from year to year.  If I have a good 
year, I should be able to pay a little more tax than I can during a year 
when I have a poorer year.  Or if I have a better year than my neighbour, I 
should pay a little more tax that year than my neighbour should be.  That's 
called progressivity of taxation. 
 
(1100) 
 
This tax, Mr. Speaker, is not progressive.  It is not fair in that 
progressive sense.  That is the person who buys goods and services, any 
service according to this tax, pays the same amount of tax regardless of 



 

 

the ability to pay. 
 
There is room for that type of a tax, but there is a limit, Mr. Speaker, to 
that type of a tax.  This tax will take much more money out of the middle 
income and low income group proportionately than it will take out of the 
high income group.  And that's why we say this tax is not fair. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are . . . and I want to contrast that type of a tax with 
the taxes that have been collected from oil revenue in this province.  As 
an example, when this government inherited the revenue from oil royalties, 
tax oil revenue from the oil patch was yielding 34 per cent of the value of 
resource sales at that time.  And it has steadily declined year after year 
after year, with one exception here.  It declined to a level of 12 per 
cent.  At the same time oil sales remained fairly constant.  There were 
some wiggles in some years because of the fluctuating world market.  But as 
a result of that change in structure, the money that would have been 
collected in oil revenues was not collected.  It was foisted on the 
consumers and on the people of Saskatchewan, the ordinary taxpayer, the 
income taxpayer. 
 
And there was an analysis of this done in Sask Trends Monitor of April 
1990.  And I quote from Sask Trends Monitor when they said: 
 

 Even with the declining prices, (they mean in oil) had the royalty and 
taxation levels remained at their earlier levels, the current provincial 
debt of $4 billion would simply not exist. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if they had not changed courses, if they had not changed 
courses, we would not have had that debt.  And certainly we wouldn't have 
had to have this tax imposed, which just leads me to one conclusion. 
 
This government, if they continue on this route, is incapable of changing 
routes.  They're incapable of taking the other path which means the only 
way the other . . . the only salvation people have will be at the polling 
booth.  So what's going to happen, Mr. Speaker, is this tax will have to 
become the number one issue at the polling booth this year when the 
election comes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to close then, close my remarks with one comment about 
the direction that taxation is leading us in this country, in this 
province.  And I want to relate that to what's happening at the federal 
level as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has supported the federal government and its 
implementation of the GST, 7 per cent.  This government has added to it.  
They want to harmonize their own GST, another 7 per cent.  This government 
has supported the process of deregulation of the Mulroney government.  This 
government has supported the free trade policies of the federal government.  
They have said very little about how the federal government has kept the 
value of the dollar up with high interest rates.  We didn't hear very much 
when they closed VIA Rail down.  We didn't hear very much when the post 
office was closed down.  We didn't hear very much when the CBC cuts were 
put into place.  We didn't hear very much when the RCMP . . . when even now 



 

 

when the RCMP's under threat. 
 
Now why am I saying this, Mr. Speaker, and what has it got to do with all 
of this?  Mr. Speaker, if you were looking for a way to undermine the 
Canadian way of life, slowly undermine it so that Canada could no longer 
exist as a nation, you would ruin its economy and you would ruin its 
identity.  And I ask you, what is happening to the country's economy 
through deregulation and free trade and high interest rates and high value 
of the dollar and high taxation and the GST?  And what is happening to the 
identity of the country via VIA Rail and the post office and CBC cuts and 
RCMP at threat? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that this government is going in the wrong 
direction, particularly in its support of the federal government in these 
aspects; and this provincial sales tax of 7 per cent is just more proof of 
them being directly in bed with the federal government.  I intend to 
continue to work against the implementation of this PST.  I urge the 
minister to listen to the people of Saskatchewan, to listen to his own 
back-benchers when they advise him that look, Lorne, you're on the wrong 
track. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am going to vote against this Bill, should it ever get to 
that Bill. And I'm certainly going to work hard that this tax be repealed 
after the next provincial election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muller: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It does give me a great deal of 
pleasure to enter into this debate.  It certainly was obvious this morning 
in question period the way they ducked around Fair Share.  I mean they 
haven't raised that in question period yet.  Even the member from Humboldt 
didn't say anything good or bad about it.  So I thought I'd just . . . They 
like it but they don't want to admit it.  Anyway after the stalling and 
filibustering and the very taxing antics by the members of the opposition, 
it's refreshing to finally re-enter the debate. 
 
The Bill before us today, Mr. Speaker, is very important to this province.  
This Bill, Mr. Speaker, will allow the government to carry out its plan for 
harmonization with the federal GST and all sectors of Saskatchewan economy.  
Small business and agriculture will benefit from this plan.  These people 
over there don't understand that. 
 
You see, I've paid education and hospitalization tax in this province ever 
since I started farming.  These people over there, they like double 
taxation.  They really flourish with double taxation.  As a farmer I paid 
tax as a business man.  As a consumer I paid tax as a consumer. 
 
There was no rebates on my three-ton truck that was used to haul my grain.  
There was no rebate on my fuel truck that I used to haul fuel to the field.  
There was no rebate on the tools that I bought for my shop -- my welder, my 
drills, all these kinds of things that were investments in my business.  I 
had to pay tax on that.  Then I went to town and paid tax as a consumer, 
paid on my car, which is fair.  As a consumer I don't mind paying tax. 



 

 

 
But when it comes to double taxation that small-business people -- men and 
women and farmers -- have paid for years in this province, finally we're 
going to get the harmonization of the tax now, so there will only be a 
single tax.  As a consumer I'll pay the single tax, and that's fair.  I 
like fairness in taxation. 
 
The E&H (education and health tax) will be on the consumers, and I will pay 
as a consumer.  But I won't be double taxed as these people have done to me 
for years.  They've never been in business.  They don't know anything about 
business.  They're opposed to business and opposed to agriculture. 
 
I mean it's not hard to remember how opposed they were to agriculture.  And 
I'll get into that a little later, in my speaking notes, about the high 
interest rates we had in the late '70s and early '80s.  They said they 
couldn't do anything about them because they didn't understand agriculture.  
They don't understand agriculture today.  They've got no plan for 
agriculture, no plan for small business; they've got no plan for 
everything. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muller: -- They think if they sit and bury their head in the sand till 
the election they're going to win anyway.  So they don't want to come out 
with any plan.  They don't want to say anything.  They don't want to say 
anything in case somebody might catch them saying something. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muller: -- When they do say something, they're afraid they don't know 
what they're talking about anyway.  It's an absolute flip-flop.  They don't 
understand small business or agriculture . . . (inaudible interjection) . . 
. That's all right.  The member from Moose Jaw North likes to chirp from 
his seat, but he says I don't know what I'm talking about.  But that's the 
only thing they're saying.  They don't have any plan; they flip-flop on 
everything. 
 
The member from Humboldt and the member from Quill Lakes totally opposed 
the Fair Share, totally opposed the Fair Share until they get out in their 
constituency and are put up on a stage in front of a microphone and they 
know that they're getting some jobs in their constituencies in their towns, 
and what do they do?  Oh, they're all in favour of it out there.  Opposed 
to it in Regina, opposed to it in the union halls in Regina, but in favour 
of it out in their constituencies. 
 
They don't even address it in question period.  They had a perfect 
opportunity today to ask the Premier about Fair Share and agriculture, the 
Minister of Agriculture was sitting here in the House -- I'm not supposed 
to make reference to that, I'm sorry, Mr. Speaker -- but anyway, they had a 
perfect opportunity today to ask questions about . . . from the Minister of 
Agriculture on Fair Share and how agriculture is going to fit into the 
rural fibre of Humboldt.  But they never asked one single question, not one 
single question. 



 

 

 
An Hon. Member: -- He's a little off the subject. 
 
Mr. Muller: -- I'm sorry, I am a little off the subject, but I do get 
carried away from time to time on the positive things that we're doing for 
this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muller: -- I guess I should get back to my written text and address the 
positive side of the PST and what it's doing to . . . going to do for small 
business and agriculture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it's no secret that Saskatchewan's agricultural sector has 
been going through some very tough times.  Low commodity prices, 
international subsidy wars, drought, and high interest rates -- after 10 
years of hardship and uncertainty many of our farmers are facing a very 
difficult situation.  This government has stood by farmers of Saskatchewan 
through the tough times, Mr. Speaker.  And we have stood by farmers through 
the tough times; something that they never did. 
 
When Saskatchewan's agricultural producers and their families asked for 
help to fight the high interest rates, we were there with programs like the 
production loan program, the spring seeding loan program which provided 157 
million in spring seeding loans, and livestock cash advances which provided 
140 million in loans to livestock producers.  They never even recognized 
livestock producers when they were in government.  They said . . . seeded 
the wheat from corner to corner.  Gordon MacMurchy was the guy that said, 
we don't need to worry about diversification in agriculture, we don't need 
to worry about livestock or hogs or anything else.  Just seeded the wheat 
from corner to corner.  Where would we be today if we'd have listened to 
Gordon MacMurchy? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- We'd of had a lot of wheat. 
 
Mr. Muller: -- We'd of had a lot of wheat, that's for sure.  We could of 
had it piled up outside and rotting. 
 
And many other programs like these, Mr. Speaker, that saved Saskatchewan 
farmers more than 388 millions in interest payments alone.  Saskatchewan's 
agriculture producers can now take part in a vendor mortgage protection 
plan, again security, and gain security through The Farm Land Security Act. 
 
These people over there don't understand that.  Not even the lawyers that 
are over there don't understand that. 
 
Agricultural assistance in 1990-91 was $411.3 million, an increase of over 
1,500 per cent in agriculture -- 1,500 per cent increase.  There's been 
more than 115 million paid out through crop and livestock drought 
assistance programs, more than 100 million to farmers through various ad 
hoc programs. 
 
Provincial government assistance to agriculture from 1985 to 1989 totalled 



 

 

$888 million.  Where did the money go?  That's what they say: where did the 
money go?  Well we supported people when they were in trouble, when they 
were in need.  These people turned their back on them in 1981 and 1982 when 
interest rates were 24 per cent, and they said that's not our problem; 
that's the federal government's problem. 
 
(1115) 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muller: -- These people talk to me, like they say from their seats, 
that I'm living in the past.  They want to go back to the future of the 
1960s and '70s. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Full steam ahead. 
 
Mr. Muller: -- Full steam ahead to the past is what they want to do -- back 
to the land bank and high interest rates and seed it to wheat from corner 
to corner.  We don't need diversification in this province.  I'll bet you 
Gordon MacMurchy will be one of their advisors if they ever got to be 
government.  And he'd tell them to seed it to wheat. 
 
Provincial government assistance -- I'll repeat that because I'm sure the 
members over there want to hear this -- provincial government assistance to 
agriculture from 1985 to 1989 totalled 888 millions of dollars.  They would 
have let our agricultural sector go down the tubes.  They would have never 
ever put that kind of money to support our farmers in Saskatchewan because 
they don't understand agriculture or small business. 
 
Now that's a lot of money, money in the hands of farmers and their 
families.  That money was spent by farmers to support small businesses like 
our machine dealers, our oil dealers, our small town.  But of course they 
don't care about small towns.  They don't even want Fair Share. 
 
Back in the 1970s when the member from Riversdale was deputy premier, 
interest rates were high and our farmers were having trouble.  So they went 
to the deputy premier and his government and asked him for help.  And do 
you know what the member for Riversdale and his colleagues said?  They told 
the farmers of Saskatchewan, no.  They told the people of this province 
that they could not help them against high interest rates because that 
would not be appropriate.  Not be appropriate, Mr. Speaker.  How can 
governments helping the people they're elected to serve not be appropriate?  
They thought that they could slip through one more election. 
 
I don't know how many thousands of farmers went bankrupt and went under and 
quit farming from 1971 to 1982.  I think they lost more farmers in those 
years than we have in . . . And that was in the good times.  They lost more 
farmers in those years than we have in the bad years because we went out 
and supported those farmers and  
 Dmade sure that they're there and they're stable, and the programs that 
we're putting into place will certainly stabilize their incomes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 



 

 

 
Mr. Muller: -- That is a direct abdication of their responsibility, Mr. 
Speaker, and is something they will continue to do again and again.  This 
has been proven through their recent despicable behaviour in this House.  
They held the people of Saskatchewan hostage in order to further their own 
political agenda.  In refusing to allow debate on Bill 61, Mr. Speaker, the 
members opposite, each and every one of them, has abandoned their 
constituents, the people that they were elected to serve. 
 
Why do you think that the application forms for NISA (net income 
stabilization account) aren't out?  Why do you think that the province of 
Saskatchewan hasn't signed with the federal government on the NISA program?  
They talked about money for seeding, money for the farmers for seeding . . 
. (inaudible interjection) . . .  Well we are on the leading edge.  We are 
on the leading edge of agriculture. 
 
I can understand the members from Regina Rosemont and the Regina members 
not understanding what the leading edge of agriculture is.  He asks: why 
would we sign?  Well we're on the leading edge of agriculture.  We want to 
put money in the farmers' pockets so they can pay their bills, so they can 
support small businesses in the town -- pay for their fuel and their 
fertilizer and chemical.  And they are holding it up.  They are holding it 
up. 
 
They don't want to support agriculture because they don't understand it.  
They're scared of anything.  They're scared of everything they don't 
understand, and they don't understand very much.  So they're pretty near 
scared of everything.  They're scared of everything. 
 
They said we're scared to go to the NISA Bill.  We're not afraid to go to 
the NISA Bill.  They asked for us to move to the NISA Bill, but we're 
responsible people and we know we have to have the money in place to sign 
the agreement with the federal government, so the federal government can 
open the accounts that the farmers can draw on the next day and go to town 
and pay their bill. 
 
And this is what we have to do.  Sometimes it's not popular to do what you 
have to do, but you have to do it to be responsible.  And we all know that 
they're not responsible.  They're not responsible.  They don't know what 
responsibility means.  Maybe we could have got Bob Rae to send us a little 
money from their deficit in Ontario to pay for the NISA Bill. 
 
But anyway, we are responsible.  We're going to pass this Bill.  We're 
going to sign the NISA agreement and we're going to get that money in the 
farmers' pockets.  We are going to do it.  And I'll tell you, those farmers 
will be happy to see those NISA cheques when they come.  And they are 
needed.  They're certainly needed. 
 
Certainly we're off to a good start this year with lots of rain and lots of 
crops coming in and really nice shape.  I understand there's some people 
who are having a little trouble getting their grain in the ground, but it 
is a beautiful start to a beautiful crop. 
 



 

 

And these people over there of course don't understand that.  They're just 
going to try and hold their head in the sand and hope that nobody catches 
them, because they have no plan.  They don't know what they would do if 
they did get elected.  They don't understand how to handle small business 
or agriculture.  They say if this tax is passed, it will be repealed if 
they form a government. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- What are they going to replace it with? 
 
Mr. Muller: -- Yes.  What are they going to replace it with?  They're going 
to replace it with 23 per cent more income tax . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well I sometimes even have to respond to the member for 
Regina Centre from time to time when he speaks from his seat. 
 
But anyway, in refusing to allow debate, in refusing to allow debate on 
Bill . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  I'm having difficulty hearing the 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Muller: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  In refusing . . . Maybe I should 
start over.  But in refusing to allow debate on Bill 61, Mr. Speaker, the 
members opposite, each and every one of them, have abandoned their 
constituents, the people they were elected to serve. 
 
I can't believe the incredible lack of leadership demonstrated by the 
member from Riversdale.  I mean he should at least understand agriculture; 
he's foreclosed on a few of them.  I'm sure that he understands how to do 
that. 
 
It sickens me to be witness to such a pathetic display of political 
manipulation.  The members opposite, and especially the member from 
Riversdale, have absolutely no regard for the welfare of the people of this 
province.  They are only concerned with obtaining power.  Power for power's 
sake, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Bill 61 will benefit Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  It'll help our business to 
be competitive.  It would allow businesses and farmers to receive a rebate 
on their inputs.  And very importantly, Mr. Speaker, it will allow us to 
honour our commitment to the agricultural safety nets, GRIP (gross revenue 
insurance plan) and NISA. 
 
There was a lot of controversy over GRIP and NISA when it was first put 
forward.  A lot of people didn't understand it.  But now everybody that's 
signed up for it . . . In fact myself, I didn't really understand it all 
that well.  But seeing I've signed up for it, and gone through it with my 
crop insurance salesman, I understand it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muller: -- I understand it really well. 
 
There's probably not one member over there that understands it; that's why 



 

 

they're scared of it.  That's why they're scared of it . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Sure.  They say I have a conflict of interest.  It's 
open to anybody.  If they want to buy a half section of land, they can join 
it too.  I'm sure they wouldn't know what to do with a half section of land 
if they ever bought it. 
 
Anyway, the members opposite, and especially the member from Riversdale, 
have absolutely no regard for the welfare of the people of the province.  
They're only concerned about obtaining power.  I wanted to say that 
statement again. 
 
Bill 61 will benefit Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  It'll help our business to 
be competitive.  It will allow businesses and farmers to receive . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Why is the hon. member from Kelsey-Tisdale on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Mr. Speaker, could I have leave of the Assembly to 
introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure to introduce 
to you and through you to all members of this Legislative Assembly, a group 
of students from a town very close to me: Prairie River.  There's 25 in 
all.  They're grade 6 to 8.  They're accompanied here today by their 
teacher Richard Coburn. They got chaperons, they're Brenda Gorniak, Pat 
Danku, Loraine Waskowic, and their bus driver Jim Wizniak.  Jim Wizniak is 
from Hudson Bay. 
 
These young students are in here today to see the workings of this 
Legislative Assembly, to listen to the debate that's going on on the 
broadening of the E&H tax, and to learn how this Assembly works and the 
functions of it. 
 
And I'm sure all members here will be very cordial inviting our very 
special guests from the great north-east of Saskatchewan to the Legislative 
Assembly, and I would also wish them a safe journey home.  I'll be meeting 
with them for pictures and refreshments afterwards in my office.  I do ask 
all members of the Legislative Assembly to join in welcoming these young 
students from Prairie River, Saskatchewan, to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 61 (continued) 
 
Mr. Muller: -- This member's on his feet because I support Bill 61 . . . 
 



 

 

Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muller: -- For what it'll do, for what it'll do for agriculture and 
small business.  For the first time ever, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan's 
farmers are able to take part in a long-term safety net program.  This 
program was designed by farmers, the provinces, and the federal government.  
GRIP, or gross revenue insurance plan, is a combination of production 
insurance and price insurance.  I should say that again so the members 
opposite understand that.  GRIP, or the gross revenue insurance plan, is a 
combination of production insurance and price insurance. 
 
The key element of this program, Mr. Speaker, is that it is targeted to 
individual farms so producers knew before they started seeding just what 
their guaranteed revenue for each crop will be. 
 
They also know what premiums they'll have to pay.  If I'm guaranteed $150 
an acre for a certain crop, it costs me as a farmer about $15 an acre to 
insure that crop.  It's also contributed to by the federal government and 
the provincial government.  So it's a three-way premium, three-way premium 
guaranteeing me so much money per acre for my crop. 
 
The key element to this program, Mr. Speaker, is that it's targeted to 
individual farms.  I want to reiterate that.  So producers knew before they 
started seeding just what their guaranteed revenue will be for each crop. 
 
And the linkage between Bill 61 and this, is certainly that we have to pass 
this Bill before we can sign the NISA agreement with the federal 
government.  We have to have the dollars.  We have to have the money in 
place to send the cheques out to farmers on the NISA agreement. 
 
NISA allows farmers to set up a separate account, a stabilization account, 
somewhat like an RSP (retirement savings plan).  Because these programs are 
based on individual farms, they address the concerns of leaving the 
management decisions at the farm level and it relieves the insecurity of 
not knowing what the current crop will bring in.  Combined, these programs 
will inject more than 1.3 billion into Saskatchewan farming community in 
the first year of operation. 
 
We have to contribute this money to the program and that's why we're 
putting Bill 61 through, in order to have the money without increasing our 
deficit.  We have to have the money to pay up front to make sure that NISA 
and GRIP can be in place.  And the farmers that are putting all that money 
in themselves need the security of knowing that the government is going to 
open the accounts and the money is going to go in.  And that's why the Bill 
61 debate . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I'd like leave of the Assembly to introduce 
some guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
(1130) 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. Tusa: -- Seated in the Speaker's gallery this morning, I'm pleased 
to welcome from Punnichy Elementary School 32 students in grade 4.  They 
are accompanied by their teachers, Mrs. Gail Yonkman and Miss Fran Perrot.  
Also, along with the students this morning, are Mr. Wilby Bitternose, Mr. 
Gerald Cyr, and their bus driver, Mr. Billy Geddes. 
 
Punnichy is about 30 to 35 miles straight north of where I live.  It's a 
lovely little town.  And I am told, and I can't tell you this with absolute 
certainty but just as a note of interest, at Punnichy . . . there is a hill 
near Punnichy which is a second highest landmark between the Great Lakes 
and the Rockies. 
 
So welcome these students to the Assembly this morning. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 61 (continued) 
 
Mr. Muller: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to go over some of this 
again.  Combined, these programs will inject more than 1.3 billion into the 
Saskatchewan farming community in the first year of operation -- 1.3 
billion for Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
Bill 61 will bring other benefits to our agricultural producers, Mr. 
Speaker.  The decision to harmonize will allow the complete removal of 
sales tax from the farming operation.  This is what I talked about earlier.  
I won't be paying double sales tax, as I have done for years.  I won't be 
paying sales tax on my inputs plus sales tax as a consumer.  I don't mind 
paying sales tax as a consumer.  And the harmonized tax will allow me to 
pay my sales tax as a consumer, but my business will be exempt.  My 
three-ton truck that I had to pay a sales tax on, that hauled my grain to 
the elevator, was taxed before.  And now under this agreement, under the 
harmonization, that tax will be returned to me at a certain time of year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muller: -- So I will be exempt from double taxation.  I was 
double-taxed before and now I'll be exempt from it. 
 
Small-business men that buy scales or tills or whatever for their business, 
that they paid education and hospitalization tax on before, will now get 
rebated that hospitalization tax.  That's what harmonization does for 
farmers and small business -- very, very important for farmers. 
 
There's a lot of the tools and vehicles they buy, they have paid education 
and hospitalization tax on for years, and that was double taxation.  But 
those people don't understand that.  They never did support agriculture, so 
why should they start now. 



 

 

 
A lower tax bill on farm inputs will result in improved cash flows, greater 
financial flexibility, and more economically viable farming operations. 
 
Major farm input purchases will remain tax free -- items such as tractors, 
swathers, combines, discers, cultivators, augers, rock-pickers, 
fertilizers, seed, pesticides, herbicides, and the list goes on and on, Mr. 
Speaker.  I don't know what kind of pesticides we can use to remove the 
socialism from our province, but anyway we'd better not go into that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, without the benefits of harmonization we could not afford GRIP 
and NISA. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  This is obviously a gripping debate, 
because we have a great number of members who wish to enter it.  Let us 
give the Deputy Speaker the right to speak now, and everybody else will 
have their turn. 
 
Mr. Muller: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, without the benefits 
of harmonization, we could not afford GRIP and NISA.  The provincial 
treasury simply could not stretch any more. 
 
Tough times have made for tough decisions.  The decision towards 
harmonization was indeed a tough one, Mr. Speaker.  While we wish it was 
not so, the federal GST is now here, and it's not going to go away.  
Knowing this, we had to find the best possible way to deal with it, the 
best possible way for our farmers, our low income families, our small 
businesses, for everyone in Saskatchewan. 
 
After many weeks of flip-flopping around, jumping from one public opinion 
poll to the next, the member for Riversdale recently announced that he 
would repeal the harmonized tax should he be elected. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muller: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, that's a pretty easy promise to make in 
the months heading into an election -- just one more election promise to 
add to their list of many.  It's very easy to say they would repeal the 
tax.  It doesn't take much courage to make that kind of an announcement. 
 
But I have to ask the member across the floor, how are you going to pay for 
all of your promises?  How are you going to pay for GRIP and NISA?  Or are 
you actually going to keep one of your promises and tear this agreement up, 
forcing our farm families to wait for you to decide what to do next? 
 
I've heard it said that the Leader of the Opposition is going to make some 
changes to GRIP or NISA, such as limiting the amount of acres.  You know 
they've always wanted to control the size of farms.  They've always wanted 
lots of control.  They want to control everybody; everything that ever 
moved, they wanted to control it.  If they couldn't control it they wanted 
to nationalize it. 
 



 

 

But I say, we have a good program put together by farmers and people in the 
industry.  And I can see where they wouldn't understand farmers or people 
involved in the agricultural industry.  They don't know anything about it. 
 
How are you going to pay for GRIP and NISA, or are you actually going to 
keep one of your promises and tear up this agreement, forcing our farm 
families to wait for you to decide what to do next.  It was worth reading 
again because I don't think they understand it.  I don't think one  
 Dof them have ever taken an application form from GRIP and really gone 
through it to see what it actually meant. 
 
I'll bet they haven't sat down with a crop insurance salesman.  I bet they 
haven't sat down with a crop insurance salesman and went through a farm of 
approximately 1,000 acres or 1,200 acres, which is about an average size 
farm in Saskatchewan today.  I'll bet they don't know how much the farmer 
is paying into that program and how much the federal government's paying 
into it and how much the provincial government's contributing to it.  I'll 
bet they've never sat down and went through how many acres of wheat and 
oats and barley and canola and flax seed. 
 
I bet they haven't taken the time.  They always talk about research and 
what they're doing and what they've done.  I'll bet they haven't taken the 
time to even understand the program.  And if they were to get elected, they 
say they're going to change it.  So how do you change it if you don't know 
how it works?  I mean this is how ridiculous those people come across. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the member from Riversdale and his cohorts across the 
floor are in for a big surprise.  The people of Saskatchewan are not going 
to fall for their fly-by-night promises.  The farmers of this province had 
to wait through 10 years of NDP government telling them: no, we won't help 
you.  And they're not going to let this happen again. 
 
Saskatchewan's agricultural industry is facing a crisis situation now, 
today, Mr. Speaker.  The decision cannot be delayed.  Now is the time for 
action.  Now is the time for courage.  And quite frankly it's becoming more 
and more obvious to me and to the people of this province that the member 
from Riversdale does not have the courage it takes to make the necessary 
decisions.  He does not have the courage nor the will to do what is right 
for the people.  He only knows or wants what is best for him. 
 
So the members across the way want to repeal the tax.  Well like I said, 
Mr. Speaker, where are they going to get the money to pay for these vital 
programs?  Are they going to grab it out of thin air?  Are they hiding a 
money tree in their offices?  Where is the money going to come from?  Would 
they borrow even more money, putting this province further into debt like 
the Ontario government did in their budget?  Nine point seven billion, 
Ontario's deficit.  Are they going to destroy the weekly newspaper and 
printing industry in Saskatchewan, as is sure to happen if they cut 80 per 
cent of government advertising? 
 
Everyone in Saskatchewan wants to know what their alternative is, but I 
guess we will be waiting a long time because these people do not have an 
alternative.  They are completely void of any ideas.  The only ideas these 



 

 

people are able to come up with are those they are dusting off from the 
1970s, as I said earlier, back to the future.  They want to go back to the 
future. 
 
I challenge the member from Riversdale to come clean with the people of 
this province and let us know what, if any, his intentions are.  My guess, 
Mr. Speaker, is that we'll be waiting a long, long time. 
 
I have with me, Mr. Speaker, a copy of an article that appeared in the 
Leader-Post on May 25, 1991.  In this article, Bruce Johnstone reviews the 
opposition party's decision to drop harmonization.  And what he has to say 
is very interesting.  I'd like to read an excerpt from this article, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

 . . . the biggest flaw in the NDP study is that it fails to consider the 
effect of the new farm safety net programs and the provincial economy. 

 
 The whole rationale for paying an additional $180 million a year in taxes 

is to trigger the $1.3 billion in program payments from GRIP and NISA.  
But the NDP would have you believe that the $180 million just disappears 
into . . . (thin air). 

 
Mr. Johnstone goes on to say, Mr. Speaker: 
 

 If nothing else, this flawed study raises serious doubts about the NDP's 
promises to balance the budget and eliminate waste and mismanagement in 
government. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, you and I know that the NDP have no intention of keeping 
their promises.  They think they can fool the people of Saskatchewan.  And 
we all know that won't happen.  It won't happen because they don't have 
what it takes to make difficult decisions.  They don't have the intestinal 
fortitude to stand up for the people and do what's right.  The members 
across the floor are incapable of seeing beyond themselves.  All they care 
about is advancing their own interests. 
 
Bill 61 will benefit the province, Mr. Speaker.  It will pay for much 
needed farm programs, provide rebates and substantial savings to people of 
this province. 
 
Just before I take my place, I just want to respond to one of the 
statements that the member from Prince Albert that was on his feet just 
before me, speaking on this Bill . . . and he said that this Bill was not 
even supported by the back-benchers of this side of the House, and I want 
to tell him that he's wrong.  Because he has never supported agriculture or 
small business, and I don't believe he knows anything about the programs 
that we are putting in place. And I think he's just speaking off the top of 
his head. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, with that, I will be supporting this Bill.  And I thank 
you very much. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I know it's traditional in debate 



 

 

in this House that when one rises in one's place in the course of debate to 
follow a member of either the government or the opposition, you may want to 
spend a few moments in the introduction to your remarks dealing with some 
of the points made by the member who has just preceded you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I did pay close attention to the member from Shellbrook-Torch in the 
remarks he brought to this debate.  And frankly, Mr. Speaker, I was a 
little confused.  I wondered if somehow we had wandered into debate on the 
GRIP and NISA Bill.  I wondered if we had left Bill 61 and wandered somehow 
into the GRIP and NISA Bill, because the member across that just spoke 
seemed quite agitated about the matter of the GRIP and NISA Bill. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, I would want to remind that member and all 
members present that a number of days ago in this House, this week, the 
House Leader of the Opposition stood in his place and moved a motion, Mr. 
Speaker -- you'll remember it -- that this House should now move to 
consideration of that Bill which will deal with GRIP and NISA.  We were 
willing, Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House, to give up private 
members' day to deal with the matter of GRIP and NISA in this House. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, who was it -- you'll recall and other members will recall 
-- who was it that said no?  Who was it?  It was the same member who just 
was on his feet.  He said no.  Now this is very peculiar, Mr. Speaker.  On 
Tuesday of this week this House was prepared, more than willing, ready to 
debate and discuss the farm support programs under the legislation -- GRIP 
and NISA.  Members opposite said no. 
 
(1145) 
 
Now today, Mr. Speaker, I heard that member say, well we can't debate GRIP 
and NISA until we've debated Bill 61 because we need the money.  We've got 
to have the money in the bank; we need the money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there's something wrong with the argument here.  Is it not 
true, Mr. Speaker, is it not true that people are already paying the tax?  
Is it not true that the young people of Saskatchewan, every time they buy a 
bag of potato chips, are paying this tax into the coffers of this 
government?  The money is coming in, Mr. Speaker.  This is a completely 
bogus argument that somehow or other this Bill needs to be passed before we 
can deal with GRIP and NISA.  That's a completely bogus argument, Mr. 
Speaker, and I was surprised and I find it very peculiar that the member 
who preceded me would raise those arguments in this House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it will be my intention to deal as nearly as I can with the 
subject at hand, Bill 61.  But I do want to say, Mr. Speaker, before 
addressing the Bill directly, that events yesterday in this House in some 
ways have restored my confidence in the democratic process in Saskatchewan.  
Mr. Speaker, what happened in this House yesterday was a victory for the 
people of Saskatchewan -- a victory for the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

Mr. Calvert: -- Even, Mr. Speaker, the arrogance of this government, a 
government that came to this House, attempted to allow about three hours, 
eight hours of debate in total on this Bill; even the arrogance of this 
government was stopped, not by the opposition, Mr. Speaker, but by the 
people of Saskatchewan who by the tens and thousands . . . over a hundred 
thousand have signed petitions petitioning this government, Mr. Speaker, to 
stop this tax and to call an election, Mr. Speaker.  Even this government 
couldn't withstand the weight of that public opinion. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this government backed off, backed off to permit this 
debate to occur in this House.  This government has committed there will 
not be time allocation on this debate, this most fundamental debate, one of 
the most fundamental debates in the history of our province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to, Mr. Speaker, put this debate in its context.  We are here 
debating in this House the single largest tax increase in this province's 
history.  Since 1905, Mr. Speaker, since this province was formed, no 
government has ever introduced a tax increase of this magnitude in one fell 
swoop.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are dealing here in this Bill with the 
largest single tax grab that any government has ever made in the history of 
the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, do you understand the enormity of what this government wants 
to take from the people of Saskatchewan?  This government wants to take out 
of the pocket-books and the banks accounts of the people of Saskatchewan, 
from the disposable income of Saskatchewan households, some $440 million -- 
$440 million, almost a half a billion dollars tax increase on the people of 
Saskatchewan.  That's what it is, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now if we assume there are something in the neighbourhood of 400,000 
households in Saskatchewan, if we can assume that, Mr. Speaker, then this 
government plans through this piece of legislation to take another thousand 
dollars more from every household in Saskatchewan.  Now, Mr. Speaker, 
that's the enormity of what we're talking about here. 
 
And we're getting this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we're getting this kind of a 
proposal from a government who has literally brought fiscal ruin upon this 
province.  It's proposed by a government that I say, Mr. Speaker, has long 
since run out of mandate to govern.  Mr. Speaker, it's being proposed and 
introduced by a government that's brought fiscal ruin upon our province, by 
a government that's long ran out of its mandate.  And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
it's a tax that is widely recognized will cripple what is left of our 
provincial economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government wants to go to the people of Saskatchewan and 
take another $440 million. Mr. Speaker, they want to take that from a well 
which I say is already dry.  Mr. Speaker, that's the context, that's what 
we're talking about here, a thousand dollars more in tax from every 
household in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  And this government wanted to shut 
debate down on that kind of a Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the course of my remarks to this tax, I, Mr. Speaker, want 
to apply what I think are the four significant tests to any proposal for 



 

 

new taxation.  I want to apply these four tests because I think these are 
the fundamental tests that must be answered by members opposite, and I 
know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that these are the tests being applied to this 
tax by the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the four tests are these.  Number one, is the tax 
necessary?  That's the first test.  If a government wants to introduce a 
new tax, particularly of this magnitude, somebody needs to answer the 
question: is  
 Dthis tax necessary?  Is it necessary, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for the 
provision of services for the people of this province?  Is it necessary?  
Are there other sources of revenue, Mr. Deputy Speaker?  The first 
question: is this tax necessary?  And that's the first test. 
 
The second test, the second question that this government must answer, the 
second question that's being asked by the people of Saskatchewan: is this 
tax fair?  Is this tax borne equally by all segments of the society?  Is 
there fairness in this tax proposal?  That's the second test, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
The third test, and not, Mr. Deputy Speaker, an insignificant issue:  is 
this tax sustainable?  Given the state of our local economy, is this tax 
sustainable?  Mr. Deputy Speaker, if this tax cannot pass the test of 
sustainability in our provincial economy, then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this 
tax should be tossed out.  Is this tax sustainable and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
related to sustainability, is the tax wise?  Does the tax play an important 
role in shaping the kind of society that we want to build? 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the first three tests: is the tax necessary; is the tax 
fair; is the tax sustainable and wise? 
 
And finally, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the fourth test: does the government of 
the day have the mandate, the moral mandate to introduce this kind of a 
major tax increase?  That's the fourth test, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Does the 
government opposite have the mandate to introduce this kind of massive tax 
grab on the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
So it's around those four questions, Mr. Deputy Speaker, over those four 
tests that I'd like to centre my remarks.  Because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 
do believe that those are the questions and those are the tests that are 
being applied to this tax by the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, on the issue then: is this tax necessary?  Well a 
member opposite said, yes.  Have you ever noticed, Mr. Deputy Speaker, how 
it is sometimes at home -- family income -- how it is that the more money 
you have the more money you tend to spend?  It's a human foible of ours in 
some ways that the more money we have, the more money we tend to spend. 
 
Now the member from Assiniboia and his government have taken this human 
foible of ours and made it an art form.  They've made it an economic 
policy.  The more money these people have taken, the more money they spend, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker.  This government has made it a science.  Now you see 
the problem in this province is not that the taxpayer is paying too little.  



 

 

That's not the problem in this province.  The problem in this province is 
that that government has spent way, way too much.  That's the problem. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Now listen, Mr. Deputy Speaker, since these people came to 
office, they have more than doubled the revenues to the government.  They 
have more than doubled the revenues to the government.  They've gone from 
around $2.3 billion budget up to a 4.5 and more billion dollar budget.  
These people have more than doubled the budget of the province of 
Saskatchewan.  From 1905 to 1982, the budgets of Saskatchewan grew to about 
$2.5 billion, 2.3.  In the nine years that these people have been in 
government, this provincial budget has grown from 2.3 to 4.5.  Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, these people have more than doubled the revenues into their 
coffers. 
 
It's an interesting question, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to ask where they've 
taken this money from.  Where has all this new money that they have . . . 
where have they taken it from? 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it's pretty obvious they haven't taken it from 
resources.  It's pretty obvious they haven't taken it from that sector of 
our economy.  It's pretty obvious they haven't introduced a corporate flat 
tax in this province; that's obvious.  So it's not come particularly from 
that sector.  Where has all this new money come from?  Where has the 
doubling of their revenues come from? 
 
I'll tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where it's come from.  It's come 
straight out of the pockets of Saskatchewan households and Saskatchewan 
taxpayers.  That's where it's come from.  It's come from taxes, taxes on 
people.  It's come from increasing the sales tax, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  It's 
come from taxing used-car sales for a while.  It's come from taxing lottery 
tickets for a while.  It's come from increases in our income taxes, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
All this new revenue to the government, where has it come from?  It's come 
from something called the flat tax, something they pioneered right here in 
Saskatchewan.  They started it off with half a per cent; then they raised 
it to 1 per cent, then one and a half.  And now it's 2 per cent, and who 
knows where it'll go if these people are ever given a chance to govern 
again. 
 
All of these new taxes -- liquor taxes, tobacco taxes -- all of the new 
revenues to this government have come from one segment of our society, and 
that's the homes and the families of Saskatchewan.  That's where it's come 
from.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, that's where it's come from. 
 
And the people of our province are fed up.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, no matter 
where I travel in my constituency, whether it's door knocking or on Main 
Street, the shops and businesses of Moose Jaw, and the rinks, ballparks, 
swimming pool; no matter where I am in my constituency and indeed wherever 
I happen to have the opportunity to travel in the province, people are 
saying one thing: enough is enough. 



 

 

 
They simply cannot bear more tax.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, they're taxed out.  
Why?  Because we've had a Conservative government in Ottawa and a 
Conservative government in Regina.  And if the folks opposite ever left the 
confines of this building or the protection of their own offices and talked 
to some people, they would know that Saskatchewan people are taxed out.  
The well of personal taxation is dry.  It's dry. 
 
And so when this government comes along and says we need more money, we 
need more money, we need another $440 million to operate, is it any wonder 
the Saskatchewan people are ready to turf this government at the first 
opportunity?  Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people are saying that this 
government doesn't deserve even another penny of their tax dollars.  
Saskatchewan people are saying it's time for this government, for all 
governments to learn to live within their means. 
 
And as my colleague from Prince Albert said so eloquently in his remarks, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan people are asking, we're asking in the 
year 1991, is it not possible to govern the province of Saskatchewan with 
less than a million people on $4.5 billion?  That's the question.  Is that 
not possible in 1991?  In 1991 is it not possible to govern a province of 
less than a million people . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the 
member from Wilkie or Unity or wherever he's from . . . he chirps away from 
his seat.  I hope he gets on his feet when I sit down, to introduce those 
remarks into this debate. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan people have said enough is enough.  They 
want a government that will begin to set a goal of living within its means. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(1200) 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, they want a government that will view 
the treasury of this province as a trust and not as a trough, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- And I tell members opposite, if they think that they can go 
to the people of Saskatchewan and say, we need more money, then you had 
better clean up your own act first.  You'd better end the patronage, and 
you'd better end the hand-outs, and you'd better end your waste and your 
mismanagement, and you'd better open the books.  You better open the books 
of this province so people can have a look to see what you've done with the 
money, with all of that tax money. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, imagine this, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  If you were a 
shareholder in a business and you hired yourself a management team to 
operate that business on your behalf, and when that management team came on 
stream, they had cash resources in the bank with which to work, and then at 
each succeeding year this same management team keeps coming back to you and 
back to you and saying, we need more and more money to keep this thing 



 

 

going. And meanwhile this same management team is busy selling off your 
assets, and this same management team, meanwhile selling off the assets and 
asking for more and more money, is piling up more and more debt, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, what would you do with that kind of management team? 
 
Well I think at the first opportunity that the contract was up for renewal, 
you would look for a new management team.  Now that's precisely, that's 
precisely what's happened in Saskatchewan.  Governments are entrusted, 
charged with the responsibility of being stewards for the public good and 
the public purse.  Governments are charged and entrusted with the 
responsibility of managing the affairs of the province on behalf of the 
people. 
 
This group of men and women in 1982 were handed an economy in relatively 
good condition, a provincial treasury with money in the bank and assets 
belonging to our people.  In each of its succeeding years in government, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government has asked for more and more money from 
the people of Saskatchewan saying, we need it to operate. 
 
At the same time they were selling off our assets, hundreds and millions, 
billions of dollars of our assets.  At the same time they were running the 
debt higher and higher and higher.  And now in the eighth month of their 
fifth year of a four-year mandate where are they, Mr. Deputy Speaker?  
They're back to the people saying, we need more of your money. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I tell you, when the contract on this management team 
comes up for renewal as it will within weeks, within weeks, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan will turf this team out. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- On the question, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is this tax necessary, 
the people of Saskatchewan say no, it is not necessary.  Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, they say, get rid of this tax.  They say, let us get a government 
that begins to live within its means.  Let us have a government that will 
end the waste and the mismanagement and the patronage and the hand-outs.  
Let us have a government that will bring to bear principles of fair 
taxation so that every segment and every sector of our society pays its 
fair share. 
 
That's what the people of Saskatchewan want.  They don't want this team.  
They want a change in government; they want fair taxation; they want 
government that is as good as the people of this province.  That's what 
they want. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, this tax fails the test of necessity.  
People also ask, and rightly so, is the proposed harmonized provincial GST 
and the current extension of the E&H tax to children's clothes, to 
restaurant meals, to reading materials, to home heating fuels, people of 
our province are asking, is it fair?  Is the PST fair? 
 



 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I report to this House what was reported to me from a 
shop in Moose Jaw that sells bicycles.  A woman came into that shop two 
weeks ago prepared to buy a bicycle for her son whose birthday was coming, 
a bicycle her son had chosen and wanted for his birthday.  This is a single 
parent, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with relatively no income. 
 
She brought the bicycle to the cashier, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and found that 
she had miscalculated in saving for this purchase because she had forgotten 
the federal goods and services tax.  She had forgotten to factor in the 
federal goods and services tax.  And as true as I stand here, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that woman left the store in Moose Jaw without the bicycle for her 
son. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that fair?  I tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 
ask you, is that fair that the corporate entity that is selling the bicycle 
enjoys tax loopholes you could drive a truck through, but the woman who 
wants to buy a bicycle for her son for his birthday can't afford it because 
there's too much consumption tax on it?  Mr. Deputy Speaker, I ask you, is 
that fair? 
 
I tell you, there's something wrong with the taxation system.  There's 
something seriously wrong with the taxation system in this province and in 
this country when it causes the poor to grow poorer and the rich to get 
richer.  There is something wrong with this, Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there's an old poem. It was 
written a century ago but I think it's as true today as it was the day it 
was written.  It goes something like this: 
 

 Taxes are equal, proclaimed the Tory boor; 
 Why they hardly press upon the rich 
 And likewise they press hardly on the poor. 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the tragic reality is that it's true today.  There's 
nothing fair about the taxation system as we know it in Canada, as we know 
it in Saskatchewan.  And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if this Bill passes in this 
House, it will only add to the inequity in that tax system. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have with me today what I think is an extremely 
significant list, extremely significant list related to this debate on 
taxation in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while this government wants children to pay tax when they buy 
a bag of potato chips, when they want seniors to pay tax if they want to go 
out and buy a new dress, when this government is asking Saskatchewan 
families to come up with 440 million more dollars to finance their 
operation, there's a certain degree of unfairness when in this country a 
corporation like Brascade Resources in 1989 had pre-tax profits of $157.5 
million. 
 
How much tax, Mr. Deputy Speaker, do you suppose that Brascade Resources -- 



 

 

that's pre-tax profit -- how much tax do you suppose Brascade Resources 
contributed to the people of Canada?  Mr. Speaker, the answer is zero.  
None at all. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, CP (Canadian Pacific) Hotels . . . we're familiar with 
CP  Hotels.  In 1989 CP Hotels in Canada had pre-tax profits of $46.9 
million.  Now how much do you expect CP hotels contributed to the good and 
welfare of our country through taxation?  I tell you, they didn't pay a red 
cent, Mr. Deputy Speaker, not a dollar.  But beyond that, they received tax 
credits of $2.1 million. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have a list here that goes on page after page after 
page of profitable corporations in this country who have paid no or very, 
very little in income tax. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, here's one you'll be interested in.  WESTBRIDGE 
Computer company, the privatized WESTBRIDGE Computer company in the year 
1989 reported pre-tax profits of $7.2 million.  Now how much tax would you 
say that the WESTBRIDGE Computer Corporation paid to the nation of Canada, 
therefore through to the province of Saskatchewan?  Not a red cent, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, not a red cent. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, well here's Ocelot Industries. I believe they're 
into resources.  Ocelot Industries in 1988 made pre-tax profits of $432.5 
million -- $432 million, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  What did they pay in tax?  
Not a red dime, not a red cent. 
 
Well here's Standard Trust Co.  Standard Trust Co., interesting.  Standard 
Trust Co. 1988 made pre-tax profits of $13.5 million, didn't pay a dime.  I 
believe not too many weeks ago Standard Trust Co. went broke. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Taken over by Laurentian. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Taken over by Laurentian, someone adds. 
 
Well now, Mr. Speaker, I find this particularly interesting. I find this 
particularly interesting.  Here's the Hudson's Bay Company.  The Hudson's 
Bay Company in 1987 had pre-tax profits of $49.7 million, paid no tax, 
received a tax credit -- get this -- received a tax credit of $15.7 
million, the Hudson's Bay Company. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, you tell me what's fair about a situation that if a 
parent in Saskatchewan wants to go into the Hudson's Bay store and buy a 
bicycle or buy running shoes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, blue jeans, a skirt, a 
top, a Ninja t-shirt, what's fair about that parent being forced to pay 14 
per cent tax on that item when the Hudson's Bay Company of Canada with 
pre-tax profits of $49.7 million pays not a red cent?  Now what's fair 
about that, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
 
The member opposite asks me to go on.  Well here's the Kellogg Company of 
Canada.  The Kellogg Company of Canada 1987 in had pre-tax profits of $9.1 
million.  How much tax do you suppose the Kellogg Company paid? 
 



 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Not a dime. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Not a dime.  Not a dime.  The member's got it right; they 
didn't pay a dime. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if a senior citizen living in a high-rise in Moose 
Jaw wants to go out for breakfast to one of the local cafe pés for a bowl 
of Corn Flakes or Rice Krispies, that senior citizen is going to pay 14 per 
cent tax on her bowl of Corn Flakes.  Meanwhile, she'll be paying more than 
the whole Kellogg corporation paid to the Government of Canada in taxes.  
Kellogg made profits of 9 million and more dollars. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the question, is the question fair?  The question is 
the question of fairness of the taxation system in Canada.  I mean what is 
fair, when some segments of our society do not contribute, do not 
contribute their fair share, and yet this government will be telling the 
households of Saskatchewan they've got to cough up another $440 million.  
What's fair about this, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
 
What's fair about a situation where a student who will be going to STI 
(Saskatchewan Technical Institute) in Moose Jaw this fall, or a student 
that will be going to Aldersgate College in Moose Jaw, or a student that 
will be going to the Briercrest Bible School, I mean what's fair about them 
having to pay tax on their books, the books for learning, when we've got 
thousands of corporations in this country who don't pay a red dime, a red 
cent?  Mr. Deputy Speaker, I maintain that's not fair. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, now members opposite will suggest that in their 
proposal for this harmonized GST, harmonized PST with the federal GST, they 
will suggest that the new tax increases that have come on as of April 1, 
well it's fair because you see they're going to help out low income people 
with tax rebates.  And they say that's how you deal with the question of 
fairness.  You help out the low income people in Saskatchewan with tax 
rebates. 
 
Well I ask members opposite and I wish one of them, just one of them would 
get on their feet and tell this House, tell the people of Saskatchewan 
what's fair about a situation that provides no tax rebate for low income 
seniors.  You see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the only tax rebates available are 
the families with children. 
 
(1215) 
 
Now what's fair about this?  What's fair about no tax rebate for low income 
and fixed income seniors?  What's fair about that?  And what's fair about 
no tax rebate for the young couple, the low income couple who have no 
children?  Now what's fair about that?  What's fair about the single people 
who may be on low incomes or fixed incomes?  There's no tax rebate.  What's 
fair about that? 
 
Now the member sits over there and talks about the seniors' heritage 
program.  Do we want to talk about that?  Do we want to talk about what 
this government did to the property improvement grant?  They wiped it out 



 

 

as soon as they came to office.  There was such a hue and cry; the only way 
they could get off of it was to kind of come up with this heritage grant 
for seniors.  There's nothing wrong with the heritage grant for seniors.  
And then they go and tax the seniors, tax them more than they'll ever see 
in the heritage grant. 
 
I ask the member opposite, I ask the member opposite, what's fair about not 
providing tax rebates to low income households where there are no children? 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if this government truly wanted to benefit the low 
income people of the province of Saskatchewan, I'll tell you what they'd 
do.  They'd build an economy where there were jobs for everyone, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker.  They would shape an economy where there were jobs and good jobs 
and decent jobs for everyone.  That's what they could do if they had some 
sincere interest in helping low income people in our province. 
 
And I tell you, if they really wanted to help, they'd drop this tax.  
Forget the millions of dollars they're going to spend in a bureaucracy to 
provide rebates.  Just don't tax people in the first place.  Drop the tax, 
Mr. Speaker.  Drop the tax.  That's what the people of Saskatchewan are 
saying, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are fed up.  
They're fed up with taxes from Conservative governments in Ottawa.  They're 
fed up with taxes from Conservative government in Regina.  They say these 
taxes are not necessary, and they say these taxes are simply not fair. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on the test, is this tax fair, I say this tax 
fails miserably.  On the question of fairness, this tax fails miserably.  
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when this government goes to the polls they too, 
like this tax, will fail miserably. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Is . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . well the member 
from Thunder Creek is saying, let's have an election.  Well we agree.  On 
that we agree.  On that we agree. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- I just remind the member that it will not be many days or 
weeks until electoral boundaries are available in this province.  And, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the day that we have electoral boundaries to run on I want 
the member from Thunder Creek to tell his Premier, you call the election -- 
you call the election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, the question that must be asked about 
any new tax is: is the tax sustainable in the economy of the times?  Will 
the economy of the day sustain this kind of tax?  And that's the question 
we need to ask around this proposal to harmonize the PST with the GST.  
That's the question we need to ask around the tax increases that have been 



 

 

put on April 1.  Can the economy of Saskatchewan stand another $440 million 
taken from the economy?  Can this economy stand it? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we've lived with for some years a disastrous interest 
rate policy from the federal Conservative government in this province.  Mr. 
Speaker, we're involved in international agricultural trade wars.  Mr. 
Speaker, we've had already laid upon us in this province as of January 1, a 
7 per cent goods and services tax.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, we've seen 75,000 
people leave this province in the last few years, most of them young 
people.  We've got a 5 to 6 per cent inflation rate. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I ask you and I ask members opposite, can the economy 
of Saskatchewan in today's realities, can this economy sustain another 7 
per cent consumption tax?  And I tell you, Mr. Speaker, that the answer is 
no.  In my view, our economy . . . I'm not sure if our economy ever could 
stand this kind of a tax hike at one time.  But in my view the economy 
right now simply cannot stand this tax -- simply cannot stand the body-blow 
that this tax presents to our provincial economy. 
 
 DMr. Speaker, I'm not alone on that.  Voices all over the province are 
saying this tax is not sustainable.  It's foolishness.  It's going to kill 
what little bit is happening in our local economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me just review some of the recent press and some recent 
news releases from a variety of groups around this province.  I have here a 
news release from the Saskatchewan Business Coalition to STOP the PST Let 
me just quote some of this, Mr. Speaker. It's important: 
 

 This huge new tax is very detrimental to the Saskatchewan economy (says 
the Saskatchewan Business Coalition), especially at this time, because it 
takes hundreds of millions of dollars of disposable income out of the 
pockets of consumers.  Less disposable income for low and middle income 
families means they will have less to spend at their local businesses.  
Lower sales at local businesses will mean lower profits (and underline 
this, Mr. Speaker) and lost jobs.  The consequences of this huge new tax 
are widespread and severe. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the evidence is already coming in from every corner of the 
province.  This group, this business coalition -- primarily centred I think 
in Saskatoon -- notes that sales in the general retail service sector . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  Why is the hon. member from Weyburn on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- I was wondering if the hon. member would answer the 
question about where they would get the money. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- The hon. member's question of course was off the record, 
however I will ask if the hon. member wishes to take a question.  You may 
share that. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Not only was the Finance minister's question off the 



 

 

record, it was off the wall. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, if the Minister of Finance will . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order, order.  Order, order. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, if the Minister of Finance will just remain in 
his seat for more than two minutes at a time here and listen patiently to 
members on this side of the House, he will be given clear answers to his 
questions.  I guarantee it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was making the point that in my view the economy of 
Saskatchewan at this time -- and perhaps at no time, but certainly at this 
time -- simply cannot stand this kind of a massive tax grab from members 
opposite. 
 
This position is supported by groups from across the province, from all 
walks of life, from every part of our province.  I'm here now quoting some 
materials from the Saskatchewan business coalition, and I'm making the 
point, Mr. Speaker, that in fact the evidence is already in.  This business 
coalition reports that: 
 

 Sales in the general retail service sector (and they underline these 
words) are down sharply . . . As a result people have lost their jobs or 
had their hours of work cut back due to these lower sales.  Some 
businesses have been forced to close their doors, some have gone bankrupt, 
many (underline many) more will face the same demise in the next few 
months -- the P.S.T. being the last straw in an already underperforming 
provincial economy. 

 
Now that's what this tax is going to do to the province of Saskatchewan.  
They go on to say, and I think appropriately so: 
 

 Business people believe the provincial government should look at its own 
spending habits, and cut its own waste and mismanagement, before it starts 
hitting people up for yet another tax increase. 

 
Hear, Hear. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we can just look through some of the recent press. Here's an 
article from May 23, Thursday, May 23, with a headline: Used car dealers 
hurting.  A used car dealer here in Regina reports that our business is 
already down 50 per cent since the introduction of the GST on January 1.  
And he goes on to say: I know of three dealers who will shut down before 
January 1 next year if nothing happens.  Businesses closing.  People being 
thrown out of work. 
 
From the national scene, we know now some of the implications that the 
goods and services tax . . . From The Globe and Mail a headline: GST 
delivers uppercut to the economy; GST taking its toll on the economy; GST 
shock wave rattles our economy. 



 

 

 
Now here's an interesting article, Mr. Deputy Speaker, referring primarily 
to their federal cousins, the Tories in Ottawa.  The headline here is: 
Taxes -- remember the good old days?  Well we might remember the good old 
days, but the articles goes on to describe the seven years of tax increases 
we've had from the federal Tories and from their cousins here in Regina.  
The personal tax grab soars 120 per cent, 120 per cent. 
 
Here's a headline in an article: GST blamed for the economic mess that 
we're in.  The GST on a national level is being blamed for the mess we're 
in, and this government wants to harmonize the provincial E&H tax to this 
GST that is killing the national economy.  They want to kill our local 
economy. 
 
Here's some comment, Mr. Deputy Speaker, from consumers interviewed about 
this tax.  Here's a consumer who says: I know that the country and the 
province are in desperate shape financially but I really think they should 
look at cutting their own spending before taxing us more.  I just feel we 
are taxed too much as it is. 
 
Here's another consumer.  This consumer was looking at buying a book in a 
Coles bookstore.  He says: The provincial government is forcing 
Saskatchewan residents to carry the burden of its financial mismanagement.  
Quote: There aren't a lot of other options but they seem to spend quite 
foolishly.  I don't think we should have to pay for their mistakes. 
 
Here's another consumer who was apparently buying something in a Dairy 
Queen restaurant, probably for his family.  He says: A provincial election 
is what is needed now, not an extra tax on basic items. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the consumers of Saskatchewan, if they have lost this 
significant chunk of their disposable income, it can only have an adverse 
effect on our economy. 
 
Here's a picture of the Finance minister with a big headline above his head 
that says: Consumers are hit hard. 
 
Here's a quote about the tax credits which the members opposite talk about: 
Tax credits said not enough -- with a quote: very poor people will be 
partially compensated but lower and middle income people will be hit really 
hard.  They'll be paying all around.  That's another headline. 
 
Here's an important headline, Mr. Speaker:  More Minot trips likely.  More 
Minot trips likely.  You know what's happening in the southern part of our 
province, Mr. Speaker.  I'm sure you do.  The border crossings have doubled 
in recent weeks and months.  This tax has been the best promotion for the 
cities of Minot and Bismarck than anything they could've ever done.  Mr. 
Speaker, people are voting with their feet on this tax. 
 
Another headline:  Restaurants want the tax delayed.  Retailers 
flabbergasted at the new provincial levy.  Tax increase was a shock.  Sales 
tax might hasten the closure of a city bookstore.  Moose Jaw eateries veto 
tax. 



 

 

 
Here's an important quote from a restaurant operator in Moose Jaw.  He 
says, how long can you let the government push you around?  Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, he sees his business suffering on a daily basis because of the 
arrogance of this government. 
 
Here from The Estevan Mercury, Mr. Speaker, from The Estevan Mercury, 
"Double tax bite takes its toll in the Energy City," with this quote: 
"Eight hundred cars a day going through the border at one customs port.  I 
would think that is telling us something."  What I want to know is why 
isn't it telling the members opposite something? 
 
(1230) 
 
Here's another from The Estevan Mercury: The closure of the Estevan Co-op, 
Kensington Centre.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, this article says: 
 

 Despite megaprojects that are being constructed in this area, such as 
Shand and Rafferty . . . the spinoffs were not accrued in this community 
the way it was expected. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker -- Driving them south -- another editorial: business men 
say taxes are killing the border businesses. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to quote another article, a comment that 
appeared in the Regina Leader-Post.  And this article is entitled, "The 
cost of political stupidity."  Here's how the columnist ends his article: 
 

 With one blunder after the next on the PST bill, it's difficult to believe 
the Tories have any idea what they're doing.  And guess who will 
eventually wind up paying handsomely for this Tory stupidity in both 
principal and interest? 

 
Well who's paying for all the waste and mismanagement?  They're asking the 
households and families of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I argue that our economy simply cannot stand this tax.  I 
argue that our economy simply cannot stand the job loss that's going to 
accrue from this tax.  And, Mr. Speaker, I would argue that this tax is 
threatening some of the positive future that our province can look forward 
to. 
 
And I want to digress just for a moment to my own community, the community 
of Moose Jaw.  We are looking forward . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  Why is the hon. member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg 
on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Mr. Speaker, I ask leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to introduce to you, 
and through you to all members of the Legislative Assembly, 19 grade 8 and 
9 students from Gravelbourg High School in Gravelbourg. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the students are accompanied by Rosemarie Geoffrion Brown, 
their teacher, and driver Leonard Lafreniere from Gravelbourg.  Mr. 
Speaker, I ask all members of the Assembly to welcome these guests. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to join with the member 
from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg in welcoming the students from Gravelbourg.  It 
was my privilege to spend three of the happiest years of my life living in 
the community of Gravelbourg where I had the happy occasion to make the 
acquaintance of your teacher.  I too welcome you to the Assembly.  I hope 
you enjoy your visit here and your visit in Regina, and the comments that 
you will hear in this House today. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 61 (continued) 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate how I believe that this 
PST, this Bill 61, this harmonization proposal, this addition of E&H to 
restaurant meals and so on, not only is it hurting the economy currently, 
but will serve to hurt potential in our economy.  And I refer to my own 
community of Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Moose Jaw has a bright future in our tourism potential.  Mr. 
Speaker, already you well know that Moose Jaw on an annual basis welcomes 
thousands of visitors to our community, to our parks, our Western 
Development Museum, to those exceptional events like the Kinsmen Band 
Festival and the annual air show.  We already are a community that welcomes 
thousands of visitors to our community, and I might say from far beyond the 
borders of the province of Saskatchewan.   But the potential in tourism in 
the community of Moose Jaw, never mind for our province as a total, but 
just for the community of Moose Jaw is great, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This summer there will be nine or ten more major murals painted in the city 
of Moose Jaw to join the three murals that were painted last summer.  
These, Mr. Speaker, I invite you to Moose Jaw to see them.  Two and three 
storeys tall, beautiful works of art.  There will be nine or ten more 
completed by the end of this summer -- an important tourist draw to the 
community of Moose Jaw and to the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have potential in Moose Jaw for a world class geothermal 
spa facility to join the spa facility at Watrous, to become a major tourist 
draw, not only to the city of Moose Jaw . . . (inaudible interjection) . . 



 

 

. If the member from Assiniboia would just listen, would just listen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this potential that exists in Moose Jaw for a geothermal spa 
has the potential to bring visitors from Manitoba, from Alberta, from North 
Dakota, South Dakota, Montana.  It has a great drawing potential. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our Western Development Museum in Moose Jaw just weeks ago 
made an announcement of the formation, and with the co-operation -- I give 
due credit to this government -- with the co-operation of this government, 
made the announcement of a Snowbirds' gallery to be located in Moose Jaw in 
the Western Development Museum.  It will be, Mr. Speaker, I guarantee you, 
a world class exhibit that will draw people from all parts of Canada and 
all parts of the United States. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, there is great potential in the community of 
Moose Jaw to draw the tourist and the traveller and the visitor, just as 
there is great potential in this city, just as there is great potential in 
Rockglen, just as there is great potential in Gravelbourg, Mr. Speaker, 
just as there is great potential in the North. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order, order.  Order, order.  There are a 
good number of members who may wish to enter the debate.  Included in that 
group are those who have already been in the debate as well as those 
waiting.  If they would be patient, they will have their opportunity. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, I have in past, in public, in this House and 
elsewhere, indicated that I thought one of the decent things this 
government has done has been in some of its tourism work.  Now I exclude 
this whole campaign using Maxwell Smart and the KAOS in Saskatchewan ads.  
But excusing those, Mr. Speaker, I have said in past and will say again, 
that one of the more decent things this government has done has been in the 
work of tourism. 
 
Now here we are with all of this potential in the city of Moose Jaw, all of 
this potential in the province of Saskatchewan, with a government that has 
announced in past it is part of their economic agenda.  Mr. Speaker, I 
think with agreement from all that this can be a significant part of our 
economic future in the province.  And now what do we have?  The tax 
proposal . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order, order, order.  The Minister of 
Finance and the member for Regina Elphinstone are conducting a separate 
debate.  I ask them to refrain and give their undivided attention to the 
member from Moose Jaw South. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you.  Thank you.  Mr. Speaker, I must say the 
interruptions from the veterinarian college over there are causing me, Mr. 
Speaker, to . . . 
 



 

 

The Speaker: -- Now I'm going to interrupt again.  I think that we've 
reached a point where truly the hon. members should co-operate.  I think 
we've reached that point.  Just allow the member from Moose Jaw South to 
continue.  Just let him continue without constant interruptions.  Members 
on both sides of the House are guilty, so I'm asking all members to 
co-operate.  The member for Regina Centre I'm sure has heard that. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As I was saying, with all of the 
interruptions from across the way there, I'm . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  Now I also ask the member honestly to not provoke 
further interruptions and simply to get on with his remarks. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- The fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, I am being moved to 
extend the length of my remarks.  That's what's happening here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the point that I have been trying to make is that, one, we 
have set, as at least a part of our economic agenda in the community I 
represent and in this province, the development and encouragement of 
tourism, of visitors to this province and to our communities from outside 
the bounds of this province.  We have, Mr. Speaker, without question, great 
potential to do just that.  We have much to offer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
 DNow what do we have but a government that will introduce a tax Bill and a 
tax regime that will defeat every one of our good efforts to build tourism 
in Saskatchewan.  There's just no question about it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The tourists who will drive into Saskatchewan . . . let's say they're 
coming from Alberta; they want to go into the Cypress Hills Park.  Well 
they may want to stop at Maple Creek and have a restaurant meal.  They'll 
sit there in Maple Creek and they'll find when they come to pay the tab the 
biggest shock they've encountered in a long time -- 14 per cent tax on 
their bill. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I'm very afraid that those same visitors from Alberta 
will get back in their car and head straight south or straight west or put 
it in high gear and head straight east out of our province.  And, Mr. 
Speaker, it's an insidious thing because that same carload will some day 
return home, and they'll be telling their friends and neighbours: avoid 
Saskatchewan; they tax you to death over there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it makes no sense when we are endeavouring to build this 
tourism segment of our economy to be hitting that very same hospitality 
industry with the single largest tax increase in this province's history.  
It just makes no economic sense. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I conclude on this point that this tax is simply not 
sustainable.  We're in an economy that has already lost 75,000 of its 
people.  We're in an economy that suffers from international trade wars in 
agriculture.  We're in an economy that has been hit by inflation, that's 
been hit by a 7 per cent federal goods and services tax.  And now we've got 



 

 

a Conservative government in Regina that wants to hit us with 7 per cent 
more tax.  I say, Mr. Speaker, the economy simply cannot sustain it. 
 
Related to the question of sustainability, Mr. Speaker, is a question of 
wisdom.  Does this tax in some way reshape society, offer tools to our 
society that we would want to see happen?  Now it's not very often, Mr. 
Speaker, that I get a phone call from the Northwest Territories on any 
issue.  But I tell you, Mr. Speaker, that I had a phone call from the 
Northwest Territories on this tax. 
 
A young woman born and raised on a farm up near the Tugaske-Eyebrow-Keeler 
district, who has really devoted her life to young people, worked in church 
camps, studied in the College of Education, and is now living in the 
Northwest Territories teaching school, she follows events in the province.  
She called me to express her shock, her disbelief, that the Government of 
Saskatchewan would now be taxing reading materials.  She simply couldn't 
believe it.  She phoned me to see if this in fact was true.  I reported 
yes, we are now to my knowledge the only jurisdiction in the free world 
that puts a tax on reading materials. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this young woman took the time to express her views through a 
letter to the Minister of Finance.  There's no need for me to table this 
letter today; he has a copy of it.  She provided me a copy, and I want to 
just quote some of this letter: 
 

 I would like to believe (she says to the Minister of Finance) that you act 
in what you believe to be in the best interests of the majority of the 
people in Saskatchewan.  However, (she says) if you think that the 
proposed tax on reading materials is in the interest of the majority, I 
firmly believe you are badly mistaken. 

 
She says, Mr. Finance Minister, the former minister of Education. 
 
(1245) 
 
She says, regarding this tax on reading, she said: 
 

 This can only be detrimental to our society.  I fail to see how this 
inclusion in the proposed tax serves anyone at all.  People seeking 
information or diversion are not served.  Workers and professionals 
seeking to increase their knowledge or expertise in the field are not 
served.  Students reaching for helpful and gainful careers are not served.  
Authors, publishers and book sellers are not served.  But the hardest hit 
are the most vulnerable.  When access to education and enrichment are 
restricted, by any means, it is the learner, whether child or adult, who 
suffers most. 

 
She goes on in her letter to the Minister of Finance.  Well she goes on in 
her letter to the Minister of Finance to talk about literacy and 
illiteracy.  And she concludes, Mr. Speaker, by saying this: 
 

 Illiteracy is one of the great ills, not only of our province, but of our 
country and our world.  It contributes to poverty, misery, unemployment 



 

 

and ignorance.  It correlates suspiciously to racism, delinquency, and 
violence.  There is a cure. 

 
She points out: 
 

 To my knowledge, it has never been the way of this sometimes great country 
to tax health.  As you would not tax a cure for cancer, do not tax one of 
the few known antidotes to poverty. 

 
 Please do not tax literacy. 
 

Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, how can the government opposite claim it is 
wise?  How can they claim it is in the best interest of the society that we 
would want to shape, to tax reading, to tax literacy, to tax education?  
Mr. Speaker, on this test of this tax, on the test of sustainability and 
its wisdom, I believe this tax fails the test and fails it badly, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
On the fourth test, Mr. Speaker, and it's on this point that I will begin 
to conclude my remarks.  On the fourth test, does the government of the day 
enjoy a mandate to impose this kind of tax?  Well, Mr. Speaker, if I could 
observe what I believe to be true, this government with this Bill has 
presented to its own supporters the ultimate betrayal.  Not only have they 
betrayed the people of Saskatchewan, they've betrayed their own supporters. 
 
You remember, Mr. Speaker, I'm sure you remember, Mr. Speaker, 1982 and 
when the government opposite was first elected.  There was a great deal of 
goodwill toward the government.  They had won a large majority and the 
people of Saskatchewan looked forward to good things.  And the people of 
Saskatchewan trusted them. 
 
Well we've come now to what I think is the ultimate betrayal of the trust 
that the people of Saskatchewan put in this government in 1982.  Mr. 
Speaker, when this government was elected, the people of Saskatchewan 
thought they were electing a government that would sustain our social 
programs in health and education.  They thought, they assumed, that the 
government opposite would in fact improve them. That has been betrayed, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
They thought when they elected this government, they were electing a 
business-like government, a government that would operate in a 
business-like fashion and with efficiency.  That's what the people of 
Saskatchewan expected.  They thought that's what they had elected.  Well 
that's been betrayed.  I mean, every year they've been in office they've 
run a deficit government.  They've never come close to balancing a budget, 
profligate waste and mismanagement. 
 
But now, Mr. Speaker, we come to the eighth month of their fifth year and 
the final betrayal.  Because when the people of Saskatchewan elected this 
government in 1982, they thought they were getting a government that would 
be a low-tax government, a government that wouldn't tax the ordinary people 



 

 

of our province.  And it was not surprising, Mr. Speaker, that the people 
of Saskatchewan when they voted this government in, in 1982, believed that 
they were in fact electing . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Now once again there are several members who 
wish to enter the debate. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- We're just wishing each other well for the weekend, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: -- One hon. member says they're wishing each other well, and 
that is a very, very laudable and noble act, and I think that's a good 
idea. However, let's wait till the member from Moose Jaw South has 
concluded his remarks. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I move to the conclusion of my 
remarks, the point I'm making is this: this government has betrayed the 
trust . . . sorry, Mr. Speaker.  This government has betrayed the trust 
that was placed in them in 1982.  When the people of Saskatchewan voted for 
this group of men and women in 1982, they thought they were getting a 
low-tax government. 
 
And is it any wonder they thought they were getting a low-tax government?  
Now here's a picture.  I have in front of me an ad -- a campaign ad that 
comes from 1982 -- and on it I see the picture of the member who spoke just 
prior to my intervention in this debate, the member from Shell-Torch.  Now 
what did the member from Shell-Torch tell his potential constituents before 
1982? 
 
Well he says right here in his literature he's going to phase out the 
provincial sales tax.  He's going to phase it out, going to phase it out.  
And then he goes on to say, then he says: I and the government I'm a part 
of will reduce personal income tax by 10 per cent. 
 
Now here, Mr. Speaker, I see a picture of the member from Saltcoats, the 
current member from Saltcoats.  And when he was asking his constituents to 
vote for him he said to them, well I'll reduce your provincial income tax. 
This is the member from Saltcoats.  Before his election he said to the 
constituents, his potential constituents, I will reduce the provincial 
income tax -- that's what he said -- and by 10 per cent.  And then he also 
said, I will eliminate the sales tax.  That's what he said. 
 
I could go on, Mr. Speaker.  I don't want to take the time of the House 
except to point to this 1982 campaign brochure.  On the face of this 
brochure I see a picture of the current member from Estevan, the current 
Premier of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And it says right above his picture, the big word, commitment.  This was 
the Premier's commitment to the people of Saskatchewan in 1982, in big, 
bold print, I will eliminate the 5 per cent sales tax, it says right here. 
 



 

 

Well they were elected, Mr. Speaker, on that basis.  They were elected on 
the basis of being a low tax government.  And they have consistently since 
their election betrayed the trust. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you have betrayed the trust of those who have elected 
you, I argue, Mr. Speaker, you have no mandate.  You have no mandate left. 
 
If a government wants to impose this kind of major tax increase on the 
people of Saskatchewan, if a government wants to take $440 million out of 
the pocket-books and bank accounts and household incomes of Saskatchewan 
people, they should have a mandate to do so.  And, Mr. Speaker, with the 
thousands of people who have signed petitions and brought them to this 
legislature, I agree they should call an election before they impose this 
tax. 
 
Here we are, Mr. Speaker, here we are in the eighth month of their fifth 
year of a four-year mandate.  The people of Saskatchewan give governments 
in this province four years.  Four years.  That's the tradition here.  
That's the tradition.  That's the tradition and they have violated the 
tradition, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  They're hanging on for the last breath. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, mandates are not only a factor of winning elections.  
Mandates are a factor of trust.  And, Mr. Speaker, this government has lost 
the trust of Saskatchewan people.  That's where they've lost their mandate.  
They have lost the trust of Saskatchewan people.  They have betrayed the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to go on to say that mandate is not only a matter 
of winning elections and it's not only a matter of maintaining and earning 
the trust of people, mandate depends on remaining in touch with people. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what we see here in this House, and it's evidenced like 
it's never been evidenced before by this Bill, we see a government that is 
so completely out of touch with the reality of Saskatchewan people that 
they have no mandate left. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, maybe it's a disease of old governments that 
you can grow so completely out of touch with where people are at.  Maybe 
it's a disease of old governments that you become sort of like an island of 
arrogance here in the marble palace of the legislature so that they sit 
there in this island of arrogance and they won't listen. 
 
People from every part of the province from every walk of life -- from 
rural Saskatchewan, urban Saskatchewan, the business community, the working 
people, young people, seniors -- are saying we can't stand this tax.  It's 
not necessary.  It's not fair.  But they sit in here in this island of 
arrogance, and they won't listen.  They're not hearing. 
 
People are filling the galleries.  They're petitioning the legislature.  
They're phoning the members.  And the government, like an island of 
arrogance, won't listen.  Mr. Speaker, when a government is so out of 



 

 

touch, I say it has lost its mandate. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, finally this point.  It is obvious even to the most 
passing of observers to the political scene in Saskatchewan that this 
government has set out a political agenda, a political agenda which it 
thinks can win at the next election.  That political agenda is a part of 
this tax.  It's a part of the whole decentralization program.  It's a part 
of almost everything they say or do. 
 
And their political agenda, Mr. Speaker, is to divide this province, to 
divide the people of this province.  That's their political agenda because 
they think mistakenly that it's their way back in.  They've chosen a 
political agenda that seeks to set the urban Saskatchewan person against 
rural Saskatchewan people.  They've got a political agenda that attempts to 
set working people against farming people, young people against senior 
people.  Mr. Speaker, in my view, any government that sets out to purposely 
for its own political benefit divide a province, no longer deserves to 
govern in that province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, there's a better way.  There is a better way 
for Saskatchewan.  There is a way that will see a government that deals 
fairly with its people.  There is a way for governments to begin to live 
within their means.  There are ways of fair taxation where every segment of 
our society can pay its fair share.  And there is a way, there is a better 
way, Mr. Speaker, of drawing this province together and not driving us 
apart. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me conclude with an illustration from the front cover of 
the Presbyterian Record, the front cover of that magazine not so long ago.  
On the front of that magazine, Mr. Speaker, appeared a small boat caught in 
a storm at sea, and in that boat a handful of people each with their hands 
on the oars.  And the poster, the picture, the cover of that Presbyterian 
Record was captioned with these words, Mr. Deputy Speaker:  We are all 
afloat on a stormy sea and we owe each other a terrible loyalty. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it's time in Saskatchewan for a government that will build the 
loyalties between urban Saskatchewan and rural Saskatchewan, between 
working people and farming people, between young people and old people.  
It's time for a government that will build this province and not seek to 
divide it for their own political advantage. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, because I believe Bill 61 plays into that 
strategy, if for no other reason, if for no other reason, I will vote 
against Bill 61. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 1 p.m. 
 


