





























































Hansard: April 15, 1991


 

 

April 15/91 
 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I rise 
pursuant to rule 11 to present a petition to the Assembly for more than a 
thousand residents of Saskatchewan.  These petitioners are urging the 
government to reverse its decision to impose the 7 per cent provincial GST 
(goods and services tax) and are specifically expressing concern, Mr. 
Speaker, in opposition to a tax on reading -- a tax on books, magazines, 
and newspapers.  The petitioners point out that with the proposed, and now 
in effect, 7 per cent provincial tax on books and periodicals, that readers 
in Saskatchewan are among the highest taxed readers in the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of more than a thousand Saskatchewan residents, I am 
very pleased to present this petition to the Legislative Assembly.  And I'd 
ask one of the pages to assist me.  Mr. Speaker, these petitions come from 
my home community of Saskatoon, in fact my home constituency, but also from 
other residents from Maidstone, Kelvington, Maple Creek, Moose Jaw, Regina, 
Melville, Evesham, Macklin, Denzil, Primate, Kerrobert, Cut Knife, and 
Unity.  On behalf of all these residents I'm very pleased to present these 
petitions to the Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I too rise in this 
House pursuant to rule 11 to table petitions signed by well over a thousand 
people from various parts of Saskatchewan, people who are very concerned 
about the implications of implementing the 7 per cent sales tax, 
particularly, as my colleague has indicated, on reading materials.  I met 
with a couple of university students earlier today who had indicated that 
they were very concerned about this particular tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these people whose petitions I will table today are from my 
city of Saskatoon -- they are from Kincaid, Ponteix, Burstalls, Findlater, 
Gravelbourg, Shamrock, Radville, Cabri, Lemberg, Leader, Fillmore, 
Creelman, Mossbank, to name only a few of the centres that these 
petitioners come from.  Mr. Speaker, on behalf of these people, I will 
present these petitions to the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to present to the legislature a 
number of petitions with respect to the tax on knowledge and ideas.  I want 
to read a portion of this petition and a portion only, Mr. Speaker. 
 

 We the undersigned support the Saskatchewan Alliance Against Tax On 
Reading in opposition to tax on books, magazines, and newspapers.  We 



 

 

believe that a tax on reading is a tax on knowledge and information, and 
is detrimental to our society.  Traditionally, books, magazines, and 
newspapers in Canada have been exempt from the sales taxes because 
Canadians have recognized . . . 

 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  I've been listening to the presenters 
of the petition this afternoon and I must now interrupt.  The previous two 
were just more or less on the border, but you, sir, seem to have stepped 
over the border, and petitions, when they are presented, must not encourage 
debate. 
 
Now I believe that you're supposed to keep the information that you are 
presenting very, very brief  -- the essence of the argument.  And 
presenting in such a way that it's going to encourage debate is out of 
order. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker, it was my understanding that I could read 
the petition I was presenting.  That's all I was doing. 
 
The Speaker: -- You're allowed, sir, to inform the Assembly why the 
petitioners are presenting the petition, but once again not to present it 
in such a way that it's encouraging debate, and I believe you're doing 
that. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker, I will then end this by pointing out that 
the petition points out correctly that a tax on reading material is a tax 
on ideas and knowledge.  The people who signed this are from various 
communities throughout Saskatchewan:  Caronport, Wishart, Whitewood, Spring 
Valley, Rockglen, Rouleau, Wolseley, North Battleford, Kindersley, 
Rosetown, Weldon, Christopher Lake, Green Lake, and Meadow Lake. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I too, Mr. Speaker, rise pursuant to rule 11 to 
present to the Assembly hundreds of names from people who are opposed to 
the provincial GST on books, magazines, and newspapers.  As well, in part, 
I want to quote from the motion, the petition being put.  "The proposed 
provincial tax on reading will be the only one of its kind in Canada." 
 
Mr. Speaker, for that reason hundreds of people have signed this petition, 
and they are from Grenfell, Willowbrook, Yorkton, Canora, Ogema, Moose Jaw, 
Mazenod, Balgonie, Regina, Pense, Kayville, Torquay, Estevan, and Swift 
Current. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise as well pursuant to 
rule no. 11 to table over a thousand names on petitions, of people who are 
concerned about the proposed 7 per cent, in fact the implemented 7 per cent 
provincial GST on books, journals, and reading material in general. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this 7 per cent provincial tax will make Saskatchewan the 
highest taxed province in Canada by a long margin.  And that is another 



 

 

reason why these people are concerned. 
 
The people who have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from many 
places in Saskatchewan, including The Battlefords, Viscount, Turtleford, 
Glaslyn, Wilkie, Milden, Guernsey, Lanigan, and Kerrobert. I am pleased on 
their behalf to table this petition at this time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I also rise pursuant to rule 11 
to present a petition to the Assembly from more than a thousand residents 
of Saskatchewan.  These petitioners are urging the government to reverse 
its decision to impose a 7 per cent provincial GST on reading material.  
These petitioners are from a number of communities including Raymore, 
Semans, P.A., Saskatoon, Meadow Lake, and Arborfield.  Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, like my colleagues I rise pursuant to rule 11 
to present a petition to the Assembly for more than a thousand residents of 
the province.  These petitioners are urging the government not to impose 
the 7 per cent provincial GST on books, magazines, and other reading 
material.  The people who have signed the petition that I am presenting are 
from Weyburn, Pelly, Yellow Grass, Radville, Coronach, Estevan, Indian 
Head, Yorkton, Climax, Frontier, Val Marie, Davidson, Kipling, and Regina.  
I'd like to table this. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise pursuant to rule 11 to 
present a petition to this Assembly for more than a thousand people who are 
urging the government to not impose a tax on knowledge and information that 
they believe and I think everyone, most thinking people in this province, 
believe is detrimental to our society.  These petitioners come from places 
such as Prince Albert, Paddockwood, Rosthern, Cut Knife, Pelican Narrows, 
Clavet, North Battleford, and Saskatoon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I also rise pursuant to rule 11 to 
present a petition to the Assembly for more than a thousand residents of 
Saskatchewan.  And these petitioners as well are urging the government to 
reverse its decision to impose the 7 per cent provincial GST on ideas and 
information, and on the dissemination of those ideas and information 
through books, periodicals, newspapers, and other written material, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some of the communities that are represented in these petitions, Mr. 
Speaker, are Melville, Meadow Lake, Invermay, Saskatoon, Foam Lake, Sheho, 
Regina Beach, Montmartre, Weyburn, Kendal, Oxbow, Pangman, Ceylon, Estevan, 
and Bienfait.  Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 



 

 

 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I too rise pursuant to 
rule 11 to present a petition to the Assembly of more than two thousand 
residents of the province of Saskatchewan.  These residents are opposed to 
a tax on reading material, as they believe a tax on knowledge and 
information goes against the very fundamental principles of democracy, Mr. 
Speaker.  They also believe that a tax on reading materials goes against 
our belief that we need to have literate people in our society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these petitioners come from several communities across 
Saskatchewan, representing communities like Melfort, Cut Knife, Paynton, 
Drake, Nokomis, Saskatoon, Esterhazy, and Theodore.  Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is my honour, Mr. Speaker, to 
bring to the Assembly a petition signed by over two thousand Saskatchewan 
residents who have chosen this means to express to their government their 
opposition to the proposed goods and services tax, and express their 
opposition specifically, Mr. Speaker, to the reading tax which will be the 
only one of its kind in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, pursuant to rule 11, along with my colleagues, I present these 
from petitioners in communities across the province, communities like 
Yorkton, Bethune, Moosomin, Churchbridge, Canora, Kipling, Regina Beach, 
Earl Grey, Herbert, Shaunavon, Regina, Humboldt, Annaheim, Wynyard, 
Muenster, Davidson, Glenavon, Churchbridge, and Carlyle, and other 
communities as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I also rise and join my 
colleagues today with pride, to engage in this fair democratic right of 
petitioning the Legislative Assembly.  Pursuant to section 11, I present 
some 1,200 petition names of Saskatchewan citizens opposed to the 7 per 
cent tax on reading material, opposed to the tax on information and 
learning, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They urge the Government of Saskatchewan not to proceed with this 7 per 
cent tax on books, magazines, and newspapers.  These 1,200 names, Mr. 
Speaker, are citizens of the communities of Christopher Lake, Tisdale, 
Vanscoy, Hanley, Weyburn, Cut Knife, Outlook, and Manor, Mr. Speaker.  And 
I'm proud to table these 1,200 names on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I too rise pursuant to 
rule 11 to add a great number of signatures to petitions of residents of 
Saskatchewan who are joining the tax revolt against the provincial 
government's goods and services tax on books and periodicals.  These 
residents come from the communities of Saskatoon, Eastend, Eston, Nipawin, 
Spruce Home, Birch Hills, Prince Albert, Marsden, Maymont, Harris, Tessier, 
Rabbit Lake and Mervin. 



 

 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, these petitioners do pray that the government be pleased 
to reverse its decision to impose what they term as an unfair tax.  And I 
would join them in that prayer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I join with my colleagues today 
pursuant to rule 11 in laying yet another 2,000 signatures on the Table, of 
petitioners from across Saskatchewan who see the tax on reading materials, 
knowledge of information, as unfair -- an attack on our very future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these residents whose signatures I present today make their 
homes in the communities of Regina, Pennant, Cabri, Nipawin, Prince Albert, 
Paradise Hill, Porcupine Plain, and many of them in my own community of 
Moose Jaw. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too rise pursuant to rule 11 
to present on behalf of around 1,200 petitioners, the petition rejecting 
the unfortunate and misguided decision, by their words, to introduce a 
provincial goods and services tax on reading materials, books, and 
periodicals. 
 
I would indicate, Mr. Speaker, these people are from Eastend, Ponteix, 
Moose Jaw, Estevan, Montmartre, Glenavon, Kendal, Weyburn, Craven, Lumsden, 
Churchbridge, Consul, and Gainsborough. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Mr. Speaker, I too join my colleagues in rising pursuant to 
rule 11 to present a petition from more than a thousand Saskatchewan 
residents who are opposed to the government's decision to impose a 7 per 
cent goods and services tax on reading material. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the signators of the petition I'm about to table come from 
Raymore, Davidson, Bladworth, Abbey, Herbert, Pense, Carlyle, Nokomis, 
Whitewood, Avonlea.  And in looking at the signatures in this particular 
bundle, it's quite obvious there's a large number of my own constituents 
from Regina North and other parts of Regina as well as my very own next 
door neighbour. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I am proud to present this petition on behalf of those 
people who have signed the petition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too rise pursuant to rule 11 to 
present a petition to the Assembly from more than 2,500 residents of 
Saskatchewan: 
 

 The petition of the undersigned residents of the province of Saskatchewan 



 

 

humbly sheweth: 
 
 That we the undersigned support the Saskatchewan Alliance Against Tax On 

Reading in opposition to tax on books, magazines and newspapers.  We 
believe that a tax on reading is a tax on knowledge and information, and 
is detrimental to our society.  Traditionally, books, magazines and 
newspapers in Canada have been exempt from sales taxes because Canadians 
have recognized the cultural, social, educational values of the written 
word.  The proposed provincial tax on reading will be the only one of its 
kind . . . 

 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order! 
 
Once more I bring to the hon. member's attention that she may read the 
prayer of the petition but not the entire petition because that is 
encouraging and engaging in debate.  So I wish to bring that to your 
attention. 
 
Ms. Smart: -- Mr. Speaker, I thought I could read the wording of the 
petition, but it is certainly praying "that your Honourable Assembly may be 
pleased to urge the Provincial Government to reverse its decision to impose 
this unfair tax." 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: -- Mr. Speaker, these petitions that have come from the city of 
Saskatoon, which I am pleased to represent here, and also from other 
communities, among them Pilot Butte, Rosthern, Leroy, Jansen, Kerrobert, 
Blaine Lake, St. Walburg, Sylvania, Tisdale, Radisson, Tribune, Spy Hill, 
Moosomin, Wapella, Martensville, Waldheim, and Hague. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise also pursuant to rule 11 to 
present a petition to the Assembly for more than a thousand residents of 
Saskatchewan.  These petitioners are urging the government to reverse its 
decision to impose the 7 per cent provincial GST, and these petitioners are 
from a number of communities including Kincaid, Mossbank, Spy Hill, Stony 
Beach, Estevan, Central Butte, Caron, Delisle, Indian Head, Pilot Butte, 
White City, Whitewood, Craik, and Fleming. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Mr. Speaker, I too rise pursuant to rule 11 to present a 
petition on behalf of individuals protesting the provincial government's 
tax on learning.  And I would just say that the overwhelming majority of 
signatures in my particular batch of petitions come from Saskatoon.  And I 
strongly suspect that they were largely gathered at the University of 
Saskatchewan campus, and represent well over a hundred of my own 
constituents of the 1,200 names I'm presenting.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise pursuant to rule 11 to 
present a petition to the Assembly for more than a thousand residents of 
the province of Saskatchewan.  Mr. Speaker, these petitioners are urging 
the government to reverse its decision to impose the unfair 7 per cent 
provincial GST.  They believe that a tax on reading is a tax on knowledge 
and information and is detrimental to our society.  Mr. Speaker, these 
residents are from Blaine Lake, Grandora, Delisle, North Battleford, 
Langham, Weyburn, Dodsland, and from many constituents in Regina North 
West.  Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I rise pursuant to rule 
11, as my colleagues have done these last 20 minutes or so, to present a 
series of petitions totalling something in the order of 13 or 14 thousand 
names of people who are opposed to the provincial government's imposition 
of a 7 per cent GST on reading and on ideas and knowledge. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I take my place, today we have tabled something in the 
order of 45 thousand names of people who have signed this petition by this 
exercise.  This group which I have here in front of me -- and as members 
opposite will know is very considerable, and you do too, Mr. Speaker, note 
the size of it -- represents among others those signators from Balgonie, 
McLean, Rosetown, Ponteix, Aneroid, Saskatoon, Estevan, the Premier's home 
riding; Kerrobert, Beauval, Cole Bay, and many others.  We tabled these in 
support of these petitioners in urging the government to reconsider this 
onerous task. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: -- According to order, I have reviewed the petitions presented on 
Friday last by various hon. members.  All such petitions were found to be 
irregular, pursuant to rule 11(6) and (7), and therefore they are not 
permitted to be read and received. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I give notice 
that I shall on Wednesday next move that an order of the Assembly do issue 
for a return showing: 
 

 For the period showing June 19, 1990 to the date this return was ordered, 
a detailed list of the flights taken by the Government of Saskatchewan's 
executive aircraft, including in each instance the purpose of the flight 
and the minister who authorized it; the date of the flight; all 
destination points of the flight; to which department, agency, or Crown 
corporation the cost of the flight was charged and the amount of the 
charge; the name of each MLA on the flight; the name of each government 
employee on the flight; the number of family members of MLA's on each 
flight; and the total number of persons on each flight. 

 



 

 

Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: -- Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on Wednesday move 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for a return showing: 
 

 For the period May 2, 1990 to the date this return was ordered, a list of 
the executive motor vehicles purchased by the Central Vehicle Agency, 
including in each instance the make, model, and cost of the vehicle; the 
name and location of the dealership from which the vehicle was purchased; 
and the name and position of the individual to whom each vehicle was 
assigned. 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice that I 
shall on Wednesday next move an order of the Assembly do issue for return 
showing: 
 

 The names, titles, and remuneration of all non-clerical staff employed in 
or assigned to the offices of the ministers of the Government of 
Saskatchewan for the period June 19, 1990, to the date this return was 
ordered. 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I have the 
pleasure of introducing to you, sir, and to the members of the Assembly, a 
group of people who are located, I believe, basically in your gallery who 
represent the alliance to stop the tax on reading -- people who have been 
very prominent in the organization, such as Mr. Ken Jensen and Ms. Mary 
Sutherland, and Ms. Bonnie Bernard. 
 
But there are others as well who come from libraries, who come as writers, 
who come as booksellers, who are or not a part of the alliance, but all 
share the general concern respecting the 7 per cent GST tax on books and 
reading -- students from the University of Regina, representatives from the 
Canadian Conference of the Arts, ACTRA (Alliance of Canadian Cinema, 
Television and Radio Artists), and some representatives of the consumers 
and the general public, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure to introduce them to 
you today. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to join with the hon. 
member in welcoming the members of the alliance here from across 
Saskatchewan today on behalf of this side of the House.  I've had occasion 
to meet with many of them over the past few weeks, and I too would just ask 
that the House give them another warm welcome, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

Mr. Rolfes: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I would like to join 
with my colleague, the member from Riversdale, in welcoming two students 
from the University of Regina: James Burton, who is the president of the 
students' union association, and the vice-president, Dwayne Cutler.  
They're in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They are here because they are very concerned about the 7 per cent tax on 
students' books and on other expenditures that the students have to incur 
at the university.  They're very concerned about the harmful effect this 
tax will have on many students, and that's why they're here today, 
hopefully to convince the Minister of Finance to change his mind.  Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Of the distinguished 
people in your gallery, I want to pick one of that number out for special 
introduction.  It's George Bothwell, former member of Regina City Council, 
but more important for today, a long-time worker on behalf of libraries and 
indeed a long-time president of the Saskatchewan Library Trustees' 
Association -- here today as the others are to dramatize their opposition 
to what amounts to a tax on knowledge. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Provincial GST on Reading Materials 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, as you know 
today the official opposition has tabled petitions totalling 45,000 
Saskatchewan people who are, by their signatures on these petitions, 
strongly opposed to the provincial government's 7 per cent provincial GST 
on reading and knowledge.  My question, Mr. Speaker, therefore is to the 
Premier of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Premier, in light of the fact that there is such a large voice of 
concerned people cutting across not only the knowledge industry but right 
across the province of Saskatchewan -- 45,000 in number -- in the light of 
this petition, are you prepared to get up today in the House and tell the 
people of this province that you have now rethought this ill-advised tax?  
And are you prepared to tell the people that you will not proceed with the 
tax on reading and knowledge? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, there's no question, and members of the 
alliance have put the case well, that a decision to tax reading materials 
is a difficult one and one that was difficult for members of this side of 
the House as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
At the time I made the announcement I as well indicated -- as it relates to 
the municipal, university, school and hospital sector of which obviously 



 

 

school libraries and university libraries would be part of it -- that we 
would be entering into discussions with those sectors to evaluate the 
impact of the tax, Mr. Speaker, and we are prepared to do that.  And I've 
already had a number of meetings. 
 
I would just caution everyone from assuming that somehow because there's a 
tax on reading materials that that somehow means that this government is 
against literacy initiatives or reading or libraries, because nothing could 
be further from the truth, Mr. Speaker.  The reality is if you are going to 
harmonize and include all of the same things and have just one tax, if you 
start to make exemptions then you have to ask, where do you draw the line?  
Some would say some forms of reading material; others would say baby 
clothes; maybe others would still say home heating fuel. 
 
The bottom line is if you're going to make it simple for the consumer and 
for the business person alike, then one tax, which the NDP are on record, 
Mr. Speaker, as supporting as well because of its simplicity . . . then you 
can't start chipping away at it even though it certainly can be difficult, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question, and again I direct this 
question to the Premier.  And I do so, Mr. Premier, and Mr. Speaker, 
because clearly we're getting nowhere with the Minister of Finance. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, is this.  The Minister of Finance just a moment 
ago or so said that the government opposite is committed to its battle on 
illiteracy, that it's in support of reading and knowledge.  Yet as we know, 
Ottawa recently announced a $99,000 grant to the Regina Public Library, and 
it's estimated by the chief librarian there that of this $99,000 about 
36,000 is going to go back to Ottawa to pay for the federal GST, and 
presumably about the same amount will go back to Regina, 36,000, to pay for 
the provincial GST, leaving of the $99,000 on the war against illiteracy a 
net situation of only $27,000. 
 
My question therefore, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier is: how can this be said 
to demonstrate a commitment to battle illiteracy; how can this be said to 
demonstrate a commitment in support of reading and knowledge?  Will you not 
agree with this side of the House that this example demonstrates exactly 
how unfair and counter-productive this 7 per cent provincial GST tax really 
is; and won't you admit that you could have found the $7 million that the 
tax proposes to raise by slashing your own government waste? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, just to repeat the reasons for 
harmonization -- it's simplicity.  The issue is to have one tax, which the 
NDP (New Democratic Party) have said that they recognize that that is the 
best way to go.  If you're going to have one tax, then it does include, as 
difficult as the decision may be, things like reading materials. 
 
Having said that, I've already indicated that university libraries and 



 

 

school libraries, as part of the MUSH (municipalities, universities, 
schools and hospitals) sector, obviously that's an aspect that we are 
prepared to examine, Mr. Speaker.  I made that evident in February when I 
made the announcement. 
 
And the third point, as it relates to literacy, I think by any measure of 
those that you would talk to who are working in the field of literacy 
today, they would say to you that Saskatchewan has been out ahead of the 
pack across the country on dealing with fighting illiteracy, Mr. Speaker, 
largely due to the efforts of my colleague, the Minister of Education, who 
sits next to me. 
 
So one ought not to confuse the perception with the facts.  And when it 
comes to literacy, this government, this administration has been first and 
foremost in addressing that area, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question again directed to the 
Premier.  I gather he will not answer this question for the third day in a 
row, but none the less I'll direct it to the Premier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government opposite takes the view that it is in support 
of the proposition that they're battling illiteracy, and by implication -- 
note not by direct words -- that somehow they're opposed to a tax on 
reading.  Yet we know that on February 20 they imposed and announced a tax 
on reading and they're only now considering it because of the public 
pressure and the outrage that the public is expressing against it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- My question therefore, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier is this: 
let the government demonstrate its faith, good faith. 
 
Let the government demonstrate what the Minister of Finance only hints at 
today -- he hints at more meetings.  Let them prove today what they say by 
announcing that the government will not threaten citizens who are 
withholding the payment of this tax -- many of whom are in the Speaker's 
gallery today.  Let the government get up today and announce that it's not 
going to threaten these citizens with fines of up to 10 per cent of the 
uncollected tax, with going to court, as the government has threatened them 
to do.  Let them say today that in the absence of legislation, they are 
withdrawing and they apologize for those kinds of bullying tactics. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- As it relates to the taxation of items that weren't 
previously included and now are in the E&H (education and health) base as 
of April 1, Mr. Speaker, whether it's reading material or snack foods or 
restaurant meals -- I think we went through that debate last week in this 
House. 
 
The process will be the same as it has always been.  Announcements are 



 

 

made, effective certain dates, often effective certain times on certain 
dates, and that at sometime during the course of the legislature those 
Bills are brought forward.  Those tax Bills are brought forward, amended 
and made retroactive to the effective date.  The process will be the same 
again this time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question for the Minister of 
Finance.  And I say, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of Finance has got 
himself here in a contradictory position.  He has told us just a few 
moments ago that there are apparently meetings -- which he is prepared to 
enter into -- with those who are opposed to this tax on reading, to 
reconsider, by implication he says, what the government announced a couple 
of months ago. 
 
All that I'm asking the Minister of Finance to do is to stand up in the 
meantime and say, as a show of good faith, that he apologizes and withdraws 
the suggestion that he's going to bring these people up before the court 
and put a 10 per cent tax on uncollected amounts as he has threatened the 
book sellers and others in this war.  All he has to do is get up and tell 
us that he apologizes and withdraws from that position.  That'll show good 
faith.  Are you prepared to do that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, I just repeat what I have said now I 
think on a couple of occasions.  When I made the announcement in February, 
I said then that the municipal, university, school and hospital sector, 
which would obviously include those libraries, that we would have to 
examine those areas to assess the impact of the sales tax.  That we will be 
doing.  That's part of why we left ourselves a nine-month lead time to 
January -- or a 10-month lead time to January 1992, so that we could have 
harmonization and the implementation of it go smoothly. 
 
When it comes to the issue of GST and contradiction, and education and 
health sales tax basis and harmonization, Mr. Speaker, the only 
contradiction is the opposition.  Because the reality is they have endorsed 
the recommendations of the GST advisory committee that recommended 
harmonization, Mr. Speaker.  They have said, if there must be a GST, and 
the reality is there is, Mr. Speaker, they have said we should have one 
tax. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in the heat of an election they want to posture and sort 
of somehow suggest that this is not their position, Mr. Speaker.  The 
reality is both sides of the House recognize that in the face of the 
reality of a GST it does make sense to harmonize.  We are moving forward 
with that, Mr. Speaker.  And why are we doing it?  To revitalize the rural 
economy, Mr. Speaker, and to deal with the debt and the deficit.  And we 
stand by those objectives, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, a new question for the Minister of Finance, 
which is a simple, straightforward question and it can be answered simply 



 

 

and straightforward. 
 
The Minister of Finance said in this question period today that he's 
prepared to talk to the people on this alliance opposed to the tax on 
reading and ideas.  Yet at the same time he refuses to tell this House that 
he is going to withdraw the club of taking them to court and putting the 10 
per cent levy on uncollected taxes at the same time. 
 
Will the Minister of Finance please stand up and tell us and the people in 
the gallery how in the world is that negotiating in good faith with that 
kind of a club hanging over their heads? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, the changes relative to the taxes will 
be handled in the same manner as they always have, including the 
collection, Mr. Speaker.  Nothing has changed there in terms of process. It 
will be as it has always been. 
 
And I can only remind those who are in the gallery here today, we do 
recognize, yes, that putting it on reading materials is difficult.  We 
ought not confuse, though, the perception with the facts in terms of our 
government's record on reading and literacy. 
 
And I'd just like to remind everyone in the House, everyone in the House, 
Mr. Speaker, the numerous occasions which are recorded in Hansard where the 
opposition have said: if there is going to be a GST, then we support one 
tax.  How is it, Mr. Speaker, we have that position and somehow suggested 
today when we do go to one tax, Mr. Speaker, that somehow it's wrong?  
Hypocrisy at best, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Report of the Provincial Auditor 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier.  Last week, Mr. 
Premier, we indicated to you that the Provincial Auditor had demonstrated 
very clearly that your ship of state had developed many leaks, and that you 
had a choice, that you did not have to implement this massive tax on the 
people. 
 
And I want to draw your attention to a few more leaks that your ship of 
state has developed.  And I want you to turn to page 91 of the Provincial 
Auditor's report where he says that Parks and Renewable Resources paid SPMC 
(Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation) 32,600 in rent for buildings 
that SPMC had sold previously. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Premier, why do you expect the people of 
Saskatchewan to accept the 7 per cent tax on books, on literacy, and on 
knowledge, when you, Mr. Premier, have such kinds of mismanagement and 
waste in your government?  How do you expect the people of Saskatchewan to 
accept that tax? You had a choice, Mr. Premier.  You chose the wrong one. 
 



 

 

Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- If I understand the hon. member, the issue he's 
raising on page 91 relative to authorization of controls and the commercial 
revolving fund.  And I think it's fair to say, Mr. Speaker, that managers 
who work in the departments of government do try to constantly provide the 
most prudent use of the taxpayers' dollars possible.  The hon. member 
however, in raising this point, if I have the right point, failed to read 
the last two sentences under that section.  And maybe I will read those: 
 

 We discussed these errors with management, (the auditor says).  They 
corrected the financial statements for the Fund and took initial steps to 
recover rental paid to SPMC for the buildings sold. 

 
 On further investigation we also found that on June 6, 1990 an agreement 

was signed with SPMC retroactively transferring ownership of these 
buildings to the Department.  The sale proceeds then became the property 
of the Department. 

 
So I think the hon. member would not be doing members of this House a 
service if he were to sort of leave the story only partially told, Mr. 
Speaker, because I think it wouldn't fairly lay out what managers are 
trying to do, in terms of being good stewards of the taxpayers' dollars, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question for the Premier.  Mr. 
Premier, the Provincial Auditor again points out and demonstrates very 
clearly your waste and mismanagement. 
 
Let's turn to page 104 of the Provincial Auditor's report, where he says 
the Beef Stabilization Board lost $462,000 investing in beef futures 
despite the fact the board has no legal authority to do such investing. 
 
Mr. Premier, I ask you, how often do people have to accept this kind of 
mismanagement, this kind of waste?  Mr. Premier, you have taxed the people 
to death.  They are telling you in the galleries. They are telling you by 
the petitions: enough is enough.  When are you going to withdraw that tax, 
Mr. Premier? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, I just want to bring to the House's 
attention a number of matters that relate to the Beef Stabilization Board, 
and that would be that, number one, the auditor is accurate.  We are 
working together with the auditor in dealing with the problem.  We've been 
working with him for the last year. 
 
I want to point out a couple of things that are absolutely essential for 
you to know and for the public of Saskatchewan to know, is that the Beef 
Stabilization Board was set up by your government.  It was set up in 1982 
by your government, and it had a whole lot of leaky holes in it at that 



 

 

time.  And, Mr. Speaker, at that time they had a 50-feeder option that 
pulled more money out of that function than any other program in its 
history.  It just drained all of the money right out of it.  In fact, it 
was 15 to $16 million that we as a government lost through the loopholes 
that you put in there in 1982 before we became government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a new question to the 
Premier.  Mr. Premier, I'd like to direct you to page 119 of the Provincial 
Auditor's report.  And on that page he indicates that the chairman of the 
Liquor Board was paid a salary of 115,000, which you then increased to 
119,600 six months later, despite the fact, Mr. Premier, that an order in 
council stated and stipulated that the salary was to be 60,000.  Again, Mr. 
Premier, you play very loose with the moneys of the people of Saskatchewan 
for your friends. 
 
Mr. Premier, you had a choice.  You did not have to impose this massive 
tax.  That was your choice.  I ask you, Mr. Premier, when are you going to 
answer to the people in the gallery and look out for their interests and 
not for the interests of your friends? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, we have noted the auditor's comments 
relative to that issue.  Once again though, I would caution the hon. member 
from drawing the wrong conclusions from the facts here.  What the auditor 
is saying is that there wasn't legislative authority to make the payment, 
Mr. Speaker.  Order in council wasn't satisfactory.  He didn't say, as the 
hon. member has tried to suggest, that this was somehow imprudent use of 
the dollars and that it was somehow the government's friends getting this 
money, Mr. Speaker. 
 
He was very professional in his commentary.  It was strictly as it relates 
to there not being sufficient authority.  He didn't draw any of these other 
conclusions that the hon. member is trying to impugn in the auditor's 
remarks, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Government Payments to Consulting Groups 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have a question for the 
Premier.  Mr. Premier, when we look at the Public Accounts we see that 
another former member of your political staff, one Sean Quinlan, did pretty 
good.  His firm, Ryer Management, collected $96,000 from your government, 
and who knows how much more, Mr. Speaker, from Crown corporations. 
 
Now while your new tax is driving record numbers of small business 
operators in Saskatchewan to bankruptcy, your friends and political 
operatives seem to be doing quite well.  Would you care to explain this 
double standard?  You had a choice; why the tax? 
 



 

 

Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, while the members opposite will carry on 
with their process of saying, well why would you have spent this money on 
this particular expenditure; why would it be spent on this particular 
expenditure or paid . . . a cheque would be sent to a particular business 
in this city or in this province, all of these kinds of questions. 
 
All I would say to the hon. member, and I would point out to all members of 
the House and to the public, the member is not arguing about whether or not 
-- or we'll see if he's arguing about whether or not -- I don't hear him 
arguing about whether or not those moneys should have been expended.  What 
he's saying is, why are you increasing the tax on one side; and other side 
he's saying why are you spending any money at all? 
 
But frankly, Mr. Speaker, the government operates.  The government will 
obviously enter into contracts with businesses throughout the province to 
carry out the administration of government.  The particular company that 
the member refers to is a company registered in Saskatchewan.  The 
government does business with that company.  He will attach all kinds of 
motives to it and drag the names of individuals who have worked in the 
government at other times and who now work in the private sector, through 
the House and into the public forum if he likes.  Mr. Speaker, I say to him 
that it is not appropriate what he's doing.  And the money that was spent 
in that particular company was appropriately spent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- I have a new question, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, 
we're talking about waste and mismanagement.  Mr. Speaker, we're talking 
about opening the books so that the people of Saskatchewan can get the full 
story on what it is that you've spent their tax dollars on.  That's what 
we're talking about. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Speaking of which, Mr. Minister, I see from the Public 
Accounts that you've paid $597,000 to Nancy McLean's image consulting firm 
in Toronto, and included in that is $87,000 paid by the Premier's office.  
Now that seems like a lot of money to Saskatchewan people to pay to a firm 
to teach cabinet ministers how to dress and how to comb their hair. 
 
Now how do you explain to students who must pay the new provincial GST on 
their school-books that this tax is acceptable while you seem to have the 
money to teach cabinet ministers how to blow-dry their hair.  You had a 
choice.  Why the tax? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, as I say, the hon. member raises a 
question and he raises once again the issue of . . . and you will remember, 
Mr. Speaker, members of the public will remember -- what were they called?  
_- the "open the books" tours that were presented around the province by 



 

 

members opposite, the "open the books" tours that nobody went to, all these 
meetings that nobody showed up at. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there were ads that were run across the province of 
Saskatchewan, which is a matter of course, for people to pick up their 
copies of Public Accounts to be open. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the pile of books that have been opened to the public of 
Saskatchewan is that high.  The hon. member knows it very well.  The 
members opposite know it very well.  The books of the province of 
Saskatchewan are very open, the auditor's report, and this auditor has done 
a very professional job of laying out the concerns that they have as it 
relates to the operation of this very large enterprise which is the 
government of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
That's legitimate concerns that have been raised by the auditor and in 
every case the government ministers and the administration in the 
government have been giving the assurance to the auditor that we'll be 
dealing with the specific issues that he raises. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Government Travel Expenses 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I direct my question to 
the Premier.  Mr. Premier, it's difficult to talk about your government's 
waste and mismanagement without getting around to your cabinet's love of 
travel. 
 
Mr. Premier, you will note that in Public Accounts for 1989-90, you and 
your cabinet ministers, Mr. Premier, spent a total of $501,845 in travel 
that year alone.  You had a choice.  You had a choice. 
 
And what's particularly galling, Mr. Premier, is that a year before that, 
you made the announcement, Mr. Premier, you made the announcement that you 
were going to introduce new guide-lines to cut back on your ministerial 
travel.  In that year you spent $294,000, and after you said you'd 
introduced the guide-lines, your travel went up, not down. 
 
And I ask you, Mr. Premier, you had the choice, you said that you were 
going to introduce those new guide-lines.  You still haven't done that.  
Will you explain to the people of Saskatchewan where the money went?  Will 
you table your guide-lines in this Legislative Assembly today and explain 
to the people of Saskatchewan where their money went and explain your 
choice, Mr. Premier? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, if you listen to the hon. member, his 
suggestion is clear that the government ministers or the government members 
or people administering the government should not be making public 
expenditures on travel.  Frankly, government members and the ministers of 
government from the Premier on down need to make expenditures on travel.  



 

 

We have the . . . We've been very open about it.  We've said so openly.  
The Provincial Auditor, no one bears making any . . . is questioning any of 
that. 
 
The hon. member tries to raise the issue as it relates to his own political 
agenda.  Frankly, Mr. Speaker, you cannot operate within a far-flung 
province like this and present Saskatchewan's position in the world and a 
global economy without having some ministers, for very good reasons, 
travelling wherever it's required to travel to carry on the conduct of the 
people's business in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 
Bill No. 55 -- An Act respecting Programs to Stabilize the Income of 
Agricultural Producers 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to move first reading of a 
Bill respecting Programs to Stabilize the Income of Agricultural Producers. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next 
sitting. 
 

Bill No. 56 -- An Act to amend The Farm Financial Stability Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill to amend 
The Farm Financial Stability Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next 
sitting. 
 

Bill No. 57 -- An Act to amend The Financial Administration Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill to amend 
The Financial Administration Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next 
sitting. 
 

Bill No. 58 -- An Act to amend The Statutes Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill to amend The 
Statutes Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next 
sitting. 
 

Bill No. 59 -- An Act to amend The Interpretation Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill to amend The 
Interpretation Act. 
 



 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next 
sitting. 
 
Bill No. 60 -- An Act respecting Certain Payments to the Meewasin Valley 
Authority, the Wakamow Valley Authority and the Wascana Centre Authority 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill respecting 
Certain Payments to the Meewasin Valley Authority, The Wakamow Valley 
Authority and the Wascana Centre Authority. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next 
sitting. 
 

Bill No. 61 -- An Act to amend The Education and Health Tax Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill to amend 
The Education and Health Tax Act. 
 
The division bells rang from 3 p.m. until 3:25 p.m. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas 
 
 Devine Neudorf t 
 Muller Swenson t 
 Schmidt Britton t 
 Klein Pickering t 
 McLeod Toth t 
 Lane Duncan t 
 Hepworth Gleim t 
 Meiklejohn Smith t 
 Hardy McLaren t 
 Kopelchuk Baker t 
 Petersen Swan t 
 Wolfe Muirhead t 
 Martens Johnson t 
 Hopfner Saxinger t 
 Martin t 
-- 29 R 

Nays 
 
 Romanow Kowalsky t 
 Prebble Atkinson t 
 Rolfes Hagel t 
 Shillington Pringle t 
 Lingenfelter Lyons t 
 Tchorzewski Calvert t 
 Thompson Lautermilch t 
 Brockelbank Trew t 
 Mitchell Smart t 
 Upshall Van Mulligen t 
 Simard Koenker t 



 

 

-- 22 R 
The Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 62 -- An Act to amend The Revenue and Financial Services Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill to amend 
The Revenue and Financial Services Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next 
sitting. 
 

Bill No. 63 -- An Act to amend The Liquor Consumption Tax Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill to amend 
The Liquor Consumption Tax Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next 
sitting. 
 

Bill No. 64 --  An Act to amend The Income Tax Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill to amend 
The Income Tax Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next 
sitting. 
 
(1530) 
 

Bill No. 65 -- An Act to amend The Corporation Capital Tax Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill to amend 
The Corporation Capital Tax Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next 
sitting. 
 

Bill No. 66 -- An Act to amend The Tobacco Tax Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill to amend 
The Tobacco Tax Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next 
sitting. 
 

Bill No. 67 -- An Act to amend The Mortgage Protection Act (No. 2) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill to amend 
The Mortgage Protection Act (No. 2). 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next 
sitting. 
 



 

 

Bill No. 68 -- An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly and Executive 
Council Act 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill to amend The 
Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next 
sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 

Federal Funding for Agriculture 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  At the end of my remarks I 
will be moving a motion that I gave notice of last week, and I'll move the 
motion: 
 

 That this Assembly, strongly noting the commitment of the Government of 
Canada to provide a third line of defence as part of the complete farm 
safety net package recently negotiated by the Premier, and recognizing the 
urgency for farm families that the nature, extent, and timing of this 
third line of defence be known; and pursuant to the commitments made by 
the federal ministers, both in the Saskatchewan media and in the House of 
Commons, call upon the Government of Canada to honour these commitments by 
announcing the details of the third line of defence and urges that 
government to include sufficient funding to provide Saskatchewan farmers 
with the assistance desperately needed for their income stability. 

 
And that motion will be seconded, Mr. Speaker, by the member from Morse. 
 
I want to begin my remarks, Mr. Speaker, with a combination of things that 
briefly describe the importance of the agriculture community and rural 
communities to the Saskatchewan way of life. 
 
Agriculture is the backbone of the Saskatchewan economy.  It certainly is 
significant that 40 per cent of our economy is impacted by agriculture in a 
significant way.  The direct and indirect economic activity for the 
province of Saskatchewan, whether it is rural or urban, Regina, Saskatoon, 
Prince Albert, Morse, Maple Creek, or indeed Southey, Mr. Speaker, is very 
significant. 
 
In a city like Regina, for example, as a rural service centre, 40 per cent 
of the retail sales can come from the southern part of the province.  So 
it's indicative that when our agriculture communities do well, everybody 
does well. 
 
Two out of every five jobs rely on the agricultural industry here in this 
province.  Farmers spend about $3 billion a year to operate their farms and 
ranches -- $3 billion in cash.  The importance of agriculture to our 
economy just cannot be understated.  And anybody who would not appreciate 
the value of $3 billion in expenditures going into a province like 



 

 

Saskatchewan, with a million people, coming from agriculture, which can in 
turn generate billions and billions of dollars of revenue, sadly misses the 
point and the future and even the spirit of the Saskatchewan way of life, 
and certainly the kinds of optimism that we've had here for generations 
despite some really difficult times. 
 
As I speak, Mr. Speaker, you know that there is this annual spiritual and 
economic megaproject taking place here in the province of Saskatchewan.  
Farmers are getting ready for spring seeding.  Some are on the land; some 
are watching the rain and the snow that comes down in the last 24 hours.  
They are about to spend another billion dollars in inputs and 50 million 
acres is going to be attended to by Saskatchewan men and women all across 
this province.  And it amounts to about 46 per cent of all the farm land in 
Canada.  It is something that makes men and women in this province, whether 
they're rural or urban, feel really good about.  It's close to nature, it's 
close to the land, it's close to the people -- very close to Mother Nature.  
And it's the kind of thing, Mr. Speaker, that will drive the very spirit of 
people in the province, and certainly in this legislature. 
 
And to get some sense of the impact of how the mood of the country affects 
the mood of the cities, as you know very well, being a farmer yourself, Mr. 
Speaker, that when the dust starts to blow in certain parts of the province 
and you know that it's blowing up there as high as several thousand feet, 
it's not a very comfortable mood in the country.  But just as sure as it 
isn't in the country, you walk up and down Albert Street or in the mall or 
in Saskatoon or in Estevan or any place else, and they see that dust 
blowing and they feel exactly the same way. 
 
In other words, Mr. Speaker, that annual megaproject, those billions of 
dollars, those tens of thousands of lives that are on the land in 
agriculture and food, drive the very spirit and the hope and the economic 
activity, not only in the country, but all over the province from north to 
south to east to west.  And the whole nation knows that about the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
The importance of agriculture cannot be underestimated.  And, Mr. Speaker, 
we certainly haven't underestimated on this side of the House, and as I 
will point out in a minute, in the next few minutes, we have done as much 
as is physically and financially possible to make sure that farmers get 
through some really difficult times.  And it's important as we go through 
this spring into the beginning of the 1990s and into the 21st century, when 
there's some hope now because of some long-run programs that have been in 
place, that we have the kind of cash necessary to make sure people on the 
farms, in those ranches and in those rural communities, are solid enough. 
 
And secondly, that the people in the towns and the villages know precisely 
why it's important that we be there and back them up, and secondly, that 
they know that the federal government, plus provincial governments and 
municipal governments all work together in a fashion that will make sure 
that there is confidence and stability in rural Saskatchewan.  And if 
there's stability on the farms and the towns and the villages, there will 
be stability and growth and optimism for the future in the major cities as 
well, Mr. Speaker. 



 

 

 
The importance of agriculture to our culture is significant, and the 
life-style . . . And you watch the NHL (National Hockey League) play-offs 
going on, you watch football games and you watch hockey, you watch and 
listen to the musicians; you look at some of our best professionals and you 
know that we are linked very intimately to the rural way of life, to the 
rural attitudes, to the life-styles, to the values, Mr. Speaker, that we 
got and were generated growing up on the land. 
 
And many of us will go back to that land and go back to our parents when 
we're tired or when we need some support and when we want to sort of, some 
would say, you know, get it straight.  You go back to mom and dad on the 
land and say, how should we be doing this?  Where should the province be 
going? How should we be helping ourselves? What should we do about our 
families?  That's a very, very important part of our culture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the land is Saskatchewan.  The land that includes the farming 
and the food, the water, the resources that are all over the land -- the 
oil, the gas, the potash, the water, the forest, the wildlife, all of that 
is Saskatchewan.  When that's in trouble, we're all in trouble.  When that 
is stable, when that is growing, and when that entire life-style and those 
resources and that land base is confident, then there's investment, then 
there's stability and the kind of thing that we're looking forward to in a 
great province like Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this year the realized net farm income in the province 
of Saskatchewan is now forecast to be something like $160 million.  That's 
with all the programs that we can put together.  The $160 million includes 
payments from GRIP (gross revenue insurance plan) and NISA (net income 
stabilization account), and the average income for Saskatchewan is usually 
around 700 million to $750 million. 
 
Well this year without any government program, any help at all, going into 
the market-place and just getting your income in the face of the 
international commodity wars, the income in Saskatchewan farming is not 700 
million, is not 300 million, is not even zero.  It is a negative $181 
million.  That is, the revenue doesn't cover expenditures. 
 
And if you look at our province, it has almost half the farm land in 
Canada, can normally generate $750 million in income, and we're running up 
a situation where it can be actually negative and not cover their costs, 
then the people of Regina, the people of Saskatoon, the people of Rosetown, 
the people of Melfort, Yorkton, and Weyburn  
 Dall know that we've got to be there.  And it's important that we're there 
with cash and long-run safety nets so that in fact everybody in the 
province can be there to defend and help those people who are the very 
backbone of this province. 
 
In 1989, realized net farm income in Saskatchewan was $776 million.  In 
1990, income fell to $226 million.  And in this year we're facing another 
drop of $66 million. 
 
Now I don't know how many people, Mr. Speaker, you would find in society 



 

 

that have their incomes cut in half in one year, and the next year they're 
cut in half again, and in the next year they actually go into a negative 
number.  Not many, Mr. Speaker, and not many that are running billions of 
dollars in an industry. 
 
So your income is cut in half and then it's cut in half again and then it's 
cut down to where it's actually below breaking even.  And that's an average 
for the province.  So you see the pain and the suffering, let alone the 
lack of confidence if in fact our provincial government and this entire 
legislature and the federal government, along with other municipal 
governments and indeed people from all across the country, don't put their 
very back and their shoulder to the wheel to make sure that we defend these 
people and the way of life and our economy. 
 
The $160 million projected for this year is a 40 per cent reduction from 
the income position last year, and it wasn't good last year.  It's down 
another 40 per cent.  This drastic reduction in income is a result of 
successive years of drought, high interest rates, and most of all, low 
prices due to the international trade war.  And we are now looking and 
forecasting -- that is, people in the industry -- at initial prices coming 
out from the Canadian Wheat Board that are going to be closer to 90 to $100 
a tonne than they are $200 a tonne. 
 
Now you get $99 wheat, $99 a tonne, or you get it $2-and-something a 
bushel, you know the impact that that can have on the attitude, let alone 
the income.  That's why it's extremely important at this time when we put 
in the crop, that the federal government and the provincial government be 
as solid as possible in providing as much money in programs to make sure 
that people will plant and they will be confident. 
 
The international price of wheat which is Saskatchewan's largest 
agriculture product has declined by more than $40 a tonne.  The last sale 
to Norway, and people talk about this, that the United States made, the 
price of the wheat was $54 a tonne and the price of the subsidy was 52.  So 
the subsidy almost matched the price of the commodity.  So you're down for 
about a dollar a bushel on both, a little bit over a dollar a bushel on 
subsidy and a little bit over a dollar a bushel for the commodity, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And that's the kind of thing Saskatchewan farmers face.  And that's why 
we're prepared, as we have seen, and we make no apologies for it, to make 
sure the Saskatchewan treasury is there to defend that kind of income, 
those kinds of families, so that we can plant.  And indeed, and I'll point 
out in some detail, provide over a billion dollars in cash to the people of 
Saskatchewan that are in agriculture and food and they'll spend it all over 
the province year after year after year.  And that billion dollars, Mr. 
Speaker, is on top of the grain that's out there, the grains and the 
oilseed. 
 
But you can see if wheat drops $40 a tonne, if the international trade war 
that's going on will subsidize over a dollar a bushel, we're into some very 
serious circumstances, Mr. Speaker, where in fact this House has to 
unanimously call for immediate money, immediate announcements, and the 



 

 

immediate support of the federal government and provincial government.  And 
deep support, deep support from all the members of the legislature here 
that they will say yes, our treasury; yes, the federal treasury; and yes, 
municipal governments; and yes, all people in society realize how important 
defending rural Saskatchewan and managing through this crisis is. 
 
And that's what we're going to be calling for today, Mr. Speaker.  Without 
some agreement at the GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) we look 
forward to these difficult times.  And you know yourself, sir, when we're 
trying to figure out what to grow and you're going to have wheat and it's 
going to be $2-and-something a bushel, it frightens people.  And it'll 
frighten the bankers and it frightens the credit unions and it frightens 
the people who have supply companies, and others.  We must have that 
confidence so that in fact that we can produce. 
 
Saskatchewan farm families have struggled with these cycles for some time.  
Since 1985, Mr. Speaker, realized net farm income has been positive with 
only the help of our programs.  In other words '85 and '86, '87, '88, '89, 
and '90, and again in 1991 there would have been negative cash flow on the 
farm if it wasn't for this administration and this administration's efforts 
to get money from the federal government, that literally amounted to tens 
of millions, hundreds of millions, and as I'll point out, Mr. Speaker, over 
$10 billion into the province of Saskatchewan alone. 
 
(1545) 
 
In 1988, the federal agriculture minister, Don Mazankowski, announced and 
initiated the National Agriculture Food Review.  And what he did, Mr. 
Speaker, was ask the farm groups who wanted an end to ad hoc band-aid 
programs, if they would come up with a plan for a long-run national 
agricultural strategy, so that in fact farmers like you and me and others 
across this province could plan from year to year, in the spring, what 
their income would be and buy some insurance and be able to protect 
themselves so that they could plan with their financial people and their 
others and inputs with some confidence. 
 
Mr. Mazankowski set that committee up with my help and with others, which 
was recommended in Prince Albert when all the agriculture ministers met 
here in the province of Saskatchewan.  I think it's fitting that that kind 
of a national program would be initiated here in the province of 
Saskatchewan, a province that has 50 to 60 million acres, 50 million of 
cultivated and about another 15 million of ranch land and other land, 
grasslands. 
 
But here is where it started.  And it was announced here two years later, 
Mr. Speaker.  And I want to, if you permit me, to commend the 
representation on that committee, because it makes my argument for the 
validity of the request that they've sent to Ottawa and they should bring 
it back here as quickly as possible. 
 
The committee was made up of 19 producers and 6 of those were from 
Saskatchewan.  The Saskatchewan representatives were from the Western 
Canadian Wheat Growers, the canola growers association, the National 



 

 

Farmers Union, United Grain Growers, the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, the 
Canadian Wheat Board Advisory Committee.  Mr. Speaker, after months of 
study and consultation, an agreement for a new program was reached and the 
new program, Mr. Speaker, as you know, is called GRIP on one side and NISA 
on the other.  And it was announced early this year. 
 
GRIP is a combination of crop insurance and revenue insurance.  It's a 
gross revenue insurance program and it will address the variations in 
production and price at the individual farm level, and in this way address 
the fluctuations in revenue at the farm level.  Producers will receive a 
revenue guarantee based on a price guarantee and on the average yield of 
their own farm and the acreage that they have. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we have met with in the neighbourhood of 40,000 farmers.  
Some say it may be closer to 50,000 farmers.  And the cabinet ministers and 
the MLAs (Members of the Legislative Assembly) have met with people all 
across the province, describing the program that was designed by farmers.  
And I want to thank these farm organizations because they went to a lot of 
meetings. 
 
And they said a couple of three things that are very important.  They said 
this should be based on something that we really understand, like crop 
insurance, because it's very popular in the province of Saskatchewan, more 
so than any other jurisdiction.  And if it's based on crop insurance, they 
say that it should be based on my own productivity.  So my production 
really counts and I should be able to insure 100 per cent of my 
productivity. 
 
And if I could take that productivity and I could multiply it by a price 
that included some costs into that price and make it a fair price, a 
15-year moving average price, and put the two together, then I would have 
some idea what I'd get on my farm, because I know I can grow this from crop 
insurance records and I know from 15 years in the past that in fact that 
would be the price of the commodities. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that's exactly what they came up with.  They came up 
with a program that said, here's my production, here are the prices.  They 
put the two together and they have a program that they can insure their 
income.  So if you can grow 25 bushels times $4 a bushel, that's $100 an 
acre, Mr. Speaker.  And for about $10 an acre, you can lock in $100 an acre 
in income. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, some are still signing up, but in my estimation if you 
can lock in over a billion dollars in income, plus you still have the crop 
. . . And that's the case, because you can market that grain through 
livestock, you can store it till the next year, you can do all the 
combinations.  If you have a drought, you still have your money there.  If 
prices collapse, the money is there.  But if you could lock in over $1 
billion in cash that can come into your province in crop year after crop 
year, and its equivalent, for about 10 per cent, Mr. Speaker, then it's 
been well worth waiting for. 
 
It's been difficult.  It's been many meetings.  But for the farmers and the 



 

 

ranchers and the small towns and villages and indeed the entire 
Saskatchewan economy to be able to know that farmers can go out spring 
seeding as we sit here today, and that annual megaproject, knowing that 
they've got at least a billion dollars cash on top of the crop that's out 
there, Mr. Speaker, that's very significant.  And that's not ad hoc.  That 
will be next year and the next year and the next year.  That's not linked 
to anything except it's a long-run program and it is non-partisan. 
 
It was supported, Mr. Speaker, I think it's important to note, by all the 
ministers of Agriculture, the NDP Minister of Agriculture in Ontario, 
Liberal ministers of Agriculture in the Maritimes, Conservative ministers, 
Social Credit ministers -- from coast to coast, Mr. Speaker.  This program 
was recommended by the ministers of Agriculture to the federal minister and 
to everybody else because it was recommended by the farmers. 
 
Now when it was designed by the farmers, put together by farmers, 
recommended by all the ministers of Agriculture, then, Mr. Speaker, I think 
we're on the right track.  I think we're getting closer and closer and 
closer to allow farmers to put more and more commodities in this safety 
net, this insurance program, based on their production, because they know 
what they can do best and that's produce.  Times international prices on an 
average, plus the cost of production in there, and to put them together and 
then they can forecast and plan. 
 
Well the new program, Mr. Speaker, is one that will make a big difference 
to the province of Saskatchewan.  What it will give is predictability.  
They want it to be as resource-neutral as possible.  It fits with the 
livestock sector because you can feed it all; you don't have to market it 
to the elevator or any place else.  It includes 18 different commodities.  
So GRIP and NISA satisfies all of the various characteristics that farmers 
wanted initially. 
 
Now, it's not perfect.  We're designing and we modify it from time to time 
as we do crop insurance.  Crop insurance has been changed year after year, 
particularly in the last few years with us, Mr. Speaker, to make it much 
more productive and careful.  The salvage program and many others are 
sensitive, topping up the areas of drought, the long run . . . the extra 
drought program in crop insurance which was very important, the specialty 
programs.  They're all made to help the farmer. 
 
This program takes all of those changes and combines it with price and 
insurance and puts the two together, and with a great deal of flexibility, 
I might add, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The farmer can take crop insurance, if he likes.  He can take revenue 
insurance if she likes.  They can take revenue and crop insurance together, 
if they like.  They can take a net income savings account and put it aside 
if they like, or they can do one of each if they like.  It's very flexible. 
 
And it includes the livestock sector.  And I would forecast, Mr. Speaker, 
from what I've heard in listening to the farm groups, that as we're able to 
include more and more specialty crops, the forage industry, into things 
like GRIP, I think the livestock sector will move closer and closer into a 



 

 

national income protection plan which will allow us to compete 
internationally.  It will be safe or as green as you'd find before the GATT 
and in fact it would provide the income support that we'd like to have.  
And certainly, Mr. Speaker, if you can do that for Saskatchewan farmers and 
people in the situation that we face where we have, as I said, almost 50 
per cent of the farm land, now you're talking.  That's exactly what the 
farmers wanted to see. 
 
Well, as I mentioned, we've talked to over 40,000 farmers.  I'm advised 
this afternoon in the first week of consultations with crop insurance 
agents, approximately 5,000 producers have signed up; in the second week 
more than 9,000 farmers have signed up and are participating.  So that's 
over 14,000 in the first two weeks, and this represents over 90 per cent of 
the farmers who have been contacted by their agent. 
 
There's interest, Mr. Speaker.  There's interest because they've designed 
it on behalf of themselves and their communities and knowing they have the 
full support not only of this administration, but the administrations 
across Canada and indeed the federal government. 
 
Well the safety nets have spin-offs, Mr. Speaker, and that's why I want to 
talk just briefly about how some people consider the requests for 
provincial governments and federal governments being involved in these 
safety nets. 
 
Let me just read you a couple of quotes that endorse the concept.  Here's 
one and, I quote: 
 

 The money will have a tremendous rippling effect on Saskatchewan.  It will 
help reduce farm debt, go toward upgrading the machinery and buying land, 
cars, trucks, household goods, even groceries.  The safety net program 
will go a long way toward restoring confidence in the rural Saskatchewan 
economy. 

 
And that was published in the Humboldt Journal*, January 18, 1991 of this 
year.  Positive editorials about what a long-run safety net can do for the 
farming community. 
 

 Party politics aside (here's another quote) the national safety net 
program is the best news for Saskatchewan in a long time. 

 
The Humboldt Journal, January 18, 1991. Another quote: 
 

 The program looks even better than its advanced billing.  It's easy to 
criticize programs but GRIP has many advantages.  A farmer knows in the 
spring what he can expect from a gross return from his farm.  That makes 
it a lot easier to plan and to get financing.  Compared to market prices, 
you know, GRIP looks pretty good. 

 
The individual was Kevin Hursh in Crossroads, January 23, 1991.  I think 
Kevin has a farm program on the CTV network, CFQC in Saskatoon. 
 
Here's another one, Mr. Speaker, and I quote: 



 

 

 
 It's the best assistance program we've had.  Explaining his and other farm 

organizations have been working on it for almost a year, it's more or less 
a guaranteed return. 

 
Michael Wanner, a Weyburn resident and Saskatchewan Wheat Pool director, in 
the Weyburn Review, January 16 of this year. 
 
Here's another one: 
 

 Without GRIP his family was going to have to live on equipment 
depreciation, borrowed money, and income from a part-time job. 

 
 In other words, the money that should have been set aside for replacing 

aging equipment or reducing debt, instead would be used to just feed the 
family. 

 
The Leader-Post, March 16, 1991. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker: 
 

 Both GRIP and NISA provide advantages, such as predictability and more 
comprehensive revenue protection, over programs previously in place. 

 
Barry Senft, producer representative on the safety net, Leader-Post, April 
11, 1991.  And Barry is a member of the wheat pool executive, Mr. Speaker. 
 

 The National Farmers Union and some members of the NDP have responded by 
saying that GRIP is no good because it doesn't guarantee farmers their 
cost of production. 

 
And I'm quoting here: 
 

 No it doesn't. (And this members says, nor it shouldn't.) There are a lot 
of prominent New Democrats who know better.  Many others still propagate 
this myth about cost of production. 

 
And the writer goes on to say: 
 

 Come on guys, join the real world.  Get a real policy on agriculture. 
 

Kevin Hursh, The Battlefords News-Optimist, January 27, 1991. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a folder full of editorials from 
agriculture reporters, from country newspapers, from city newspapers, from 
folks, all walks of life.  And what they do, Mr. Speaker, is endorse what 
the farmers have done for all of Saskatchewan in setting up a long-run 
safety net that is actuarially sound.  In other words, it balances out.  In 
some years you'll pay in, in some years you'll take out.  And it's an 
insurance policy where if the people are involved with farmers in making it 
actuarially sound, then the taxpayer knows exactly where they are and so 



 

 

does the farmer. 
 
The first line of defence that the people have talked about is the 
individual farmers and their willingness to commit to good agriculture 
policies.  And that's very important, Mr. Speaker, and there's a lot that 
we can do and continue to do there.  Farmers will now be able to set their 
own course of maximizing their resources. 
 
Governments also have a supporting role in the first line of defence.  
We'll support farmers through research, farm management programs, 
agriculture education, new College of Agriculture, Mr. Speaker -- the new 
building, where just under a hundred million dollars might help in terms of 
management and education -- interest rate protection programs, and others.  
These are important for farmers to make accurate and effective management 
decisions.  That's the first line of defence. 
 
The second line of defence, Mr. Speaker, is GRIP and NISA.  But you know, 
when you look at this, the farmer can manage all he likes, as well as he or 
she likes.  We can provide them some interest rate protection.  We can come 
in with a long-run program that's called GRIP and NISA, which allows them 
to get into some insurance mechanisms, both in terms of immediate insurance 
and some long-run savings with NISA.  But when you're running up against 
the commodity war, you need what is known, Mr. Speaker, as the third line 
of defence. 
 
You need some cash to get you into this program, get you over the hump so 
you can see some light at the end of the day.  And that's what this motion 
is all about.  We endorse the first line.  We endorse the second line.  All 
the ministers of Agriculture across Canada endorse the safety net insurance 
programs called GRIP and NISA. 
 
What we need now, Mr. Speaker, is a commitment immediately by all members 
of the legislature and certainly by all Members of Parliament, that there 
will be cash in the hands of people -- farmers -- so that they can put in 
the crop, or with the confidence that they know that it's going to be 
there, so in fact the financial institutions and others say, we are not 
just leaving you to the whims of the commodity wars; we're not just going 
to leave you just vulnerable because United States or Germany or France is 
subsidizing wheat to the tune of a dollar a bushel these days.  We're going 
to be there to defend you. 
 
So the focus should be on quick action.  We can't handle it alone as 
farmers, Mr. Speaker.  We can't afford it.  Provincial treasury can't 
afford it alone.  Federal treasury is the largest.  At least they get to 
print their own money, Mr. Speaker, and that's one difference that the 
federal government has over the provincial governments. 
 
But the combination of things that the federal government of the United 
States does has to run up against, frankly, what the federal government in 
Canada can do.  And that's why we've asked and have been very successful 
over the last few years in getting money coming from the federal government 
to defend Saskatchewan farmers and other western Canadian farmers. 
 



 

 

(1600) 
 
Let me point out, Mr. Speaker, that . . . If you'd just allow me, I would 
provide the comparisons in programs.  I think it's important that we have 
that kind of information so the people in the public know and are given an 
idea of what we're talking about. 
 
Since 1982, Mr. Speaker, since 1982 we have worked to provide income 
support for farmers -- short-run programs as well as working long-run 
programs, and worked towards a better mechanism.  We've asked the federal 
government to do the same. 
 
Since 1982 we can put together the amount of money that was forwarded by 
the provincial government and in combination, the amount of money that was 
forwarded by the federal government, and then put them together to give the 
average person in Saskatchewan an idea of the kind of support that we think 
is necessary to help farmers. 
 
And if I could, Mr. Speaker, I would just put this together in a fashion 
like this.  In 1982, from the provincial government . . . and this is a 
list of programs that would run about 32 programs, Mr. Speaker, from 
counselling to farm purchase programs, feed grain programs, livestock 
programs, oil royalty programs for farmer fuel rebates, grasshopper, 
irrigation, livestock, grants to individuals for various kinds of expansion 
purposes, home quarter tax rebates, fuel tax rebates, flood control 
mechanisms, Saskatchewan Water Corporation, the Crop Insurance Corporation, 
the Agricultural Credit Corporation, and the agriculture development fund.  
If you go through those, there's 33 items to be exact. 
 
In 1982 people said, you know, I think we should pick up on the agriculture 
support, helping them particularly with respect to the 21, 22 per cent 
interest rates.  And we touched them up, Mr. Speaker, and the costs were 40 
million in '82, 41 million in '83, 52 million in '84, 86 million, 136, 124 
million, 171 million, 137 million again, 67 million, 63 million, for a 
total so far -- it doesn't include this year -- of $1.7 billion from the 
provincial treasury, Mr. Speaker, 1.7 billion. 
 
Assistance for farmers was in the neighbourhood of $29,000 a farmer, Mr. 
Speaker, to show the Saskatchewan farmer and the towns and villages and 
indeed the people of Saskatchewan that we're prepared to shore up and make 
sure that we can stabilize the industry that is most important here in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I rose on this motion because at the same 
time we've wanted and asked the federal government to take its fair share 
of responsibility, and that's extremely important.  And as I pointed out, 
in the province of Saskatchewan in 1982 we put up $40 million.  What we got 
out of the federal government that year, Mr. Speaker, was $107 million.  In 
1983, Mr. Speaker, we came up with another $41 million.  We got about four 
times that from the federal government, 130 million. 
 



 

 

And then, Mr. Speaker, we started to get serious.  We came up with $50 
million more and we got $500 million out of the federal government in 1984; 
$848 million in 1985; $1.315 billion in '86; $1.848 billion, Mr. Speaker, 
in '87; $1.588 billion, Mr. Speaker, in 1988; $1.4 billion in '89; and $1.5 
billion in 1990.  And, Mr. Speaker, we haven't got through, finished yet in 
1991.  But to date, Mr. Speaker, that is in the neighbourhood of $11 
billion -- $11 billion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- And we haven't finished 1991.  Mr. Speaker, when we 
have stood on our feet, Mr. Speaker, and said look, we'll work with you but 
you've got to be an awful lot bigger than we are because it's important 
that the federal government takes on other federal governments, and we've 
said that.  When the federal government can come up with about $10 billion 
to date -- and we haven't included 1991 -- we come up with $1.7 billion.  
That's $11.568 billion, Mr. Speaker.  And we're into this year. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, my point that I want to make to the people of 
Saskatchewan and to the members of this Assembly, and I certainly want them 
to endorse the kind of record that they see here, but to use that as a 
lever to encourage the federal government to be there in third line of 
defence for farmers. 
 
And I will say, Mr. Speaker, be there in terms of an immediate announcement 
as quickly as possible; tell farmers how they can get access to that kind 
of cash; lay it out as quickly as they can so that they know what kind of 
linkages there are between GRIP and NISA and third line of defence. 
 
Encourage farmers to look after themselves, by all means, Mr. Speaker; we 
know that's the case.  But to look at the past record and say, if we can 
put hundreds of millions of dollars into the hands of farmers now, it will 
help them into a long-run stabilization mechanism with GRIP and with NISA 
that will be very, very helpful in the long run, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I will also say, if they could make the commitment that not only do it 
now but be prepared to be there while this commodity war is on, then it 
would act as a very powerful stabilizing force to the family farms that are 
out there today investing in this spring seeding megaproject. 
 
If they knew that not only GRIP and NISA were in place but there was cash 
that was going to be there this year and more cash next year, and granted, 
it may sound ad hoc on top of the long-run safety net, but I believe that 
it's absolutely necessary under this crisis situation, Mr. Speaker.  It's 
necessary because while farmers can get into this long-run safety net, and 
some of them are going to do relatively well as they go through it, there's 
so many of them out there that need to get picked up by their bootstraps 
and set on the right course, have their debt restructured, have some cash 
in their pockets, have some opportunity to make sure that they make the 
right planting decisions, and set the program in place, Mr. Speaker, so 
that in fact the long-run programs will make sure this province is viable 
and stable for generations to come. 
 



 

 

Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- I put these figures before you, Mr. Speaker, so that in 
fact members of the legislature -- all members of the legislature on both 
sides of the House -- will know that by making our commitment to work with 
other provinces, and we encourage them to make the same sort of commitment, 
that we will show that indeed it is a partnership. 
 
The lion's share of it is obviously coming to a province like Saskatchewan 
from the federal government.  And if you take in the neighbourhood of $10 
billion, Mr. Speaker, that we've received since 1982 . . . Ontario may have 
received a billion dollars but Saskatchewan received $10 billion from the 
federal government.  I mean the per capita expenditures here on a per farm 
basis or per capita basis, you know, are tenfold what they've received in 
Ontario and Quebec -- tenfold. 
 
We want that ratio and that relationship to continue, Mr. Speaker.  If we 
can get $10 billion out of the federal government and slap it here into the 
province of Saskatchewan where half the farmers are, then the benefit per 
person here is appropriate.  Because we produce the commodities and we 
export the commodities; we help the balance of trade; we have the 50 
million acre megaproject.  This is where it belongs. 
 
When we balance our trade internationally, much of that balance comes out 
of the province of Saskatchewan.  It comes out of here in grain and 
livestock, as well as oil, gas, and potash, pulp and paper, and many other 
things.  But that food industry is very important. 
 
So the federal government should know, as I'm sure that you can see from 
their record, now $10 billion, that that kind of commitment and that kind 
of stability is necessary on into the future so that in fact, Mr. Speaker, 
the confidence that can be here combined with the provincial government. 
 
So as our Minister of Finance has said, we're committed to GRIP and NISA, 
and he's laid it out there.  And he said we need this money, a 
hundred-and-some million dollars, to lever all of that federal money, to 
put a billion dollars in cash.  Now we put up a hundred million, Mr. 
Speaker, to get a billion.  Year after year after year, if we go with them, 
then we expect them to come on and put that long-run safety net in place.  
Now farmers participate in this too, as they do in crop insurance or as 
they have in the western grain stabilization. 
 
What we're asking for today -- and I'll wrap up with this, Mr. Speaker -- 
is the federal government to maintain that kind of large commitment so that 
it not only funds GRIP and NISA the second line of defence, but is prepared 
to put hundreds of millions of dollars into the pockets of Saskatchewan 
farm families as we prepare to make this annual megaproject and kick us 
into that long-run safety net. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to summarize by saying it is a rural crisis.  We 
have met with farmers across this province in meetings and town halls by 
the dozens.  And I think we've had over a hundred meetings, Mr. Speaker, in 
meeting with something like 50,000 farmers.  And they've all said pretty 



 

 

much the same thing.  We want a long-run stabilization program.  We like 
crop insurance.  We like revenue insurance.  We want to make for sure that 
the premiums are protected.  We want to have the kind of flexibility so 
that we can plan and manage our livestock operations, and we want to know 
that the federal government is there in spades as we've seen in the past. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, today I am moving this motion that the federal 
government indeed honours its commitment that there will be cash in 
support, back-up for those farmers this spring, so that in fact we can kick 
them into gear and get them into the long-run safety nets because it will 
benefit not only the agriculture community, but it'll benefit the towns, 
the villages, the families, the seniors, all across the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  And indeed, if Saskatchewan is doing well, it 
will benefit the entire nation.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to begin my remarks 
today by saying to the Assembly that the past three months have been a time 
of a great deal of education for me as a minister and as a person 
organizing and travelling around the province. 
 
We have a significant industry in this province, and I want to point out to 
the people of this Assembly that because I'm involved in agriculture is a 
part of the reason why I believe this.  But beyond that, the facts and the 
figures provided to us through the years have demonstrated that agriculture 
is the focus of attention in this province and needs to be the focus of 
attention. 
 
We have a significant item as it relates to the impact that agriculture is 
in the provincial economy.  Forty per cent of our economy is impacted one 
way or another by agriculture.  You can just go out into the province today 
and realize the impact that it is in the small towns and villages through 
the medium-size cities and into the large cities of Saskatoon and Regina.  
Agriculture impacts in every one of those areas. 
 
I noted that many of the mayors of large cities like Saskatoon and Regina 
have considered agriculture as a fundamental part of the tradition of this 
province.  Not only that, Mr. Speaker, we have in this province two out of 
every five jobs that is initiated from agriculture.  Very important.  They 
deal in all aspects, from grain handling to buying groceries.  Farmers and 
agriculture are directly involved in these areas. 
 
The province has a little over 60,000 farmers today, and as the Premier 
indicated, we spend a lot of money when it comes to the springtime of the 
year in getting and establishing our production units in the farming side 
as well as the ranching side. 
 
We spend, in the spring, just to put the seed in the ground and to have 
agriculture begin as spring starts to surface -- as the crocuses start to 
come, the grass starts to green -- we spend in this province $1 billion, 
Mr. Speaker.  It's very, very significant to the people in this province 
and to the people in the various communities that are around us. 



 

 

 
(1615) 
 
I want to point out too, Mr. Speaker, that on the average the people, the 
60,000 farmers in this province, spend on the average $15,000 to drive to 
town, to buy groceries, to do the ordinary things that people do in this 
province.  That alone, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is worth $900 million to the 
economy of this province.  So as we spread ourselves over this, this entire 
province, we begin to realize the value that it is to our economy.  If 
agriculture suffers at all, all of the rest of the economy suffers with it. 
 
And that's why we have had . . . in 1984 we had a concern as we addressed 
it from this provincial government on this side.  We addressed a drought 
need; we addressed a grasshopper need.  In 1985 we did the same thing; in 
1988 we did exactly the same thing again.  And through that period of time, 
Mr. Speaker, agriculture community has begun to have a confidence in the 
kinds of things that this government can do. 
 
I went to about 35 of these meetings throughout the province this past 
three months, and in that period of time I met with thousands of farmers 
myself, and it was a unique experience.  Farmers are in a very serious 
financial situation as it relates to income.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is 
significant.  And that is why the farm organizations that we met with last 
October told us that we need to have some change in what we're doing in 
relation to agriculture.  One of those things dealt with income.  We need a 
long-term, secure kind of income to give us the time to go through those 
periods of time when the international trade scene is driving our prices 
down, and so that we can substantially insure ourselves.  So that we don't 
have those times when we bottom out in the agricultural economy, farmers 
lose their farms, their jobs, and then have to go to the other 
market-place, which is non-agriculture, to derive some of their income. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the past 30 years of my life have indicated to me that there 
are things that we have to do in agriculture that are very important.  
Agricultural people, as I've learned in the past three or four months and 
beyond that, are very common sense-oriented people.  They have a way of 
responding to need.  They have a way of responding to stress and pressure, 
and that, Mr. Speaker, is finding out how they can best cope with it.  They 
are creative in alternative planning.  They're creative in planning new and 
innovative ways of realizing income for themselves on the farm.  They're 
innovative in being involved in looking for places to generate income. 
 
And that's why through the years our heritage has been that.  Our parents 
and grandparents came from countries throughout this world and they settled 
here in Saskatchewan, and together we have provided ourselves an 
opportunity to show that we can be number one in not only production, but 
the capacity to draw from ourselves when times are tough.  And that, Mr. 
Speaker, shows itself in the way the people are responding to the very 
serious nature of the international trade wars that have impacted directly 
into Saskatchewan. 
 
Agriculture in Saskatchewan is like its word.  It has to do with a rural 
way of life that has a certain culture of its own.  And that is very 



 

 

important; that is a very important part of how we handle the dimension of 
agriculture in this province. 
 
I want to point out a couple of places where we have dealt very 
specifically with communities, rural people, in their way of life.  We have 
provided for this province an individual telephone line service.  It really 
probably is the only place in North America where you can hook on your farm 
and in your living-room a computer that deals with all the markets in the 
world.  You can do that with individual line service.  You can provide that 
information for yourself to be a better marketer of the kinds of 
commodities that you grow. 
 
We have in this province, in the west side of the province . . . I live in 
that part of Saskatchewan that has energy, oil, gas, and through the years 
we have had an opportunity to see the development.  The past eight years or 
nine years we have seen the development of the natural gas industry.  And 
what has that done for this province?  It has helped us in a number of 
ways.  We've provided natural gas service to a lot of communities and 
individual farms to help them reduce their cost of production -- very, very 
important. 
 
And what does that do to the small towns and villages across this province?  
It provides an infrastructure that is able to maintain itself.  And we, Mr. 
Speaker, need to shore up that at this time.  And the resolution that the 
Premier has indicated it will send to the federal government is a way that 
we can do that.  We need to support the infrastructure that has been 
established within our small towns and villages dealing with the rinks and 
the schools and the hospitals, the long-term care facilities.  All of these 
need to be supported by the rural part of Saskatchewan.  They provide the 
dynamics of support that are needed. 
 
This year, if we took a look at just the farm income, we would be in a 
shortfall of almost $200 million.  That shortfall, Mr. Speaker, is really 
very, very serious. 
 
I want to go back to 1985; 1985 was the beginning of this downturn in 
agriculture economy.  And if you want to point out some very serious 
implications during that period of time, we had a U.S. farm Bill of 1985 
just drastically impacted into the agriculture scene and the international 
trade market. 
 
The 1990 farm Bill that was discussed just prior to Christmas, that in 
itself, Mr. Speaker, represented the second step in the long-term 
commitment that the U.S. government had to the U.S. farmers.  And what did 
that do?  It drove down the commodity prices in the world and then we as a 
province suffer from that kind of an impact. 
 
And that is the reason why the income in Saskatchewan in 1991 is expected 
to be in the neighbourhood of minus $200 million.  If we take and add in 
the various components dealing with the western grain stabilization payment 
and we deal with the component that GRIP and NISA will perhaps pay in, that 
volume of dollars will translate itself into a net plus of roughly $160 
million. 



 

 

 
Mr. Speaker, that $160 million is a far cry from the average of 700 
millions of dollars that we have received through the market-place and 
through the federal government and the provincial government being involved 
in agriculture.  It's a significant drop from that, from that period of 
time.  We need to very seriously consider this resolution as a part of the 
focus of dealing with how to ask the federal government to become involved 
in agriculture in Saskatchewan.  I don't want to belittle the fact that 
they have been involved, because they have been.  They have been there in 
'85, '86, '87, '88, '89, and '90, and what we're doing here today, Mr. 
Speaker, is asking them to become involved with us in 1991. 
 
The reason why we are having serious problems in agriculture today is not 
because farmers don't have large incomes.  As a matter of fact, if you go 
back in history, 1975, farmers had less income than they do today.  But 
what was happening in 1975 is we had a big jump in the price of grain, and 
it drove that price up.  We had large volumes of grain on hand from years 
of '68, '69, '70 when low quotas were there.  Farmers had grain on hand.  
They sold it, and that delivered for them a high net income.  And their 
income after expenses was the highest we ever had in our history. 
 
However, in 1984, '85, and on to 1990, we have had over $4 billion worth of 
income in this province year after year after year.  And what has cost us 
is the interest rates from 1979 and through to 1984.  It's cost a lot of 
money just on the volume of dollars that we have had to pay out in 
interest. 
 
The cost of fuel has driven the production part of the producers into a 
place where they didn't have enough revenue to move and that.  And that's 
why I think that the program that we have as it relates to GRIP is 
extremely important. 
 
For the first time in the history of agriculture . . . and I want to quote 
Ken Rosaasen from the University of Saskatchewan.  He said that this is 
probably the most significant piece of legislation that we are having here 
in the last 50 years.  And the reason is, Mr. Speaker, is that it, for the 
first time and the very first time, it accents one point in its triggering 
mechanism that deals with a cost of production.  The average cost of 
production will trigger into the way that the GRIP program will provide 
itself an entrance into this, and that's why it's important. 
 
I want to point out too that under the international market, the price of 
wheat has fallen, and it continues to fall.  We have had some signs that 
it's strengthening the last month or so; however, I think that probably 
that isn't as significant as what some of the other things that we see in 
the international scene.  Export enhancement has driven down the price of 
grain far more than any other subsidy in the history of international 
trade.  When President Bush introduced his budget in the House of 
Representatives in the Senate in United States, the Bush administration was 
asking for $900 million of export enhancement money.  Congress gave him 
$556 hundred million of that. 
 
 DWhat that means, Mr. Speaker, is that the international market, which is 



 

 

delivering grain to people that we sell grain to, United States has an 
opportunity when they sell that grain to pay the buyer an additional amount 
of money as a rebate to the purchase. 
 
And we had an example for just one.  That in a sale to Norway, the export 
enhancement, what the money was delivered to the Norwegians for the sale 
was $52 a tonne; roughly half the value in the international market of what 
a tonne of wheat is worth.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is very significant. 
 
And I want to point out a couple of other things that I've come across that 
are important.  Japan, Germany, France, and the United States are probably 
the largest contributors to this kind of a market situation -- export 
enhancement  
_- and they are doing it to each other even. 
 
I'll just make a point of two illustrations of that.  I was visiting with 
directors and commissioners of Agriculture from two states in the United 
States, Louisiana for one.  Louisiana grows rice.  Japan grows rice.  The 
Japanese government pays the Japanese farmer six times the world price to 
grow that rice.  What the Japanese then do is they buy all this rice, they 
hold it in one unit, and in that unit they then market it to their 
customers. 
 
Well, the people of Japan can't afford to buy the rice.  So what they do is 
they dump it on the world market because there's a surplus in Japan of 
rice.  They dump it in the world market and from that world market they 
ship it into places throughout the world with an export enhancement.  That, 
Mr. Speaker, the Louisiana rice producers can't even compete in the export 
enhancement in their own country and they are part of the people that are 
involved in the same thing with our wheat growers. 
 
Another example that I was told was, the horse-racing industry in Kentucky 
buy their oats not from the United States, they buy their oats from Europe.  
Europe moves that oats into the United States through an export 
enhancement.  And that, Mr. Speaker, United States moves their wheat into 
Norway with export enhancement; Europe moves their oats into the United 
States with export enhancement; the Japanese move their rice into United 
States with export enhancement, and that's why we have a very serious trade 
problem in this world. 
 
(1630) 
 
The U.S. farm Bill triggered that start of that export enhancement in 1985.  
And from 1985, if you take a look at our net income in Saskatchewan, it 
went from $600 million to minus in 1985 -- from '84 to '85.  That was the 
direct relationship that the U.S. farm Bill had to our agriculture economy.  
That's why the federal government became involved in providing some 
opportunity to spring free some cash so that we could supply to the people 
of Saskatchewan a reasonable kind of an income. 
 
In 1985 the net farm income was only very slightly positive, very slightly.  
In 1986 it was when we began to ask for a long-term safety net.  And if we 
go back to 1986, I want to point out a couple of reasons why GRIP and NISA 



 

 

are a part of what was happening in 1986. 
 
In 1986, the fall of 1986, the farmers in Saskatchewan had produced an 
excellent crop.  What happened was that the month of August nobody 
combined; the month of August ruined what was a good crop and drove the 
grade down until it was . . . most of it became feed. 
 
What happened then, Mr. Speaker, was that the farmers realized that the 
building blocks of crop insurance weren't significant enough to deal with 
all of the problems that related to the cash flow.  So what we did through 
'87 and '88 is we developed a process to have crop insurance have two 
mechanisms to deliver a benefit to producers: one was the yield side and 
the second one was a price side.  In each of these two areas, we then began 
to have experience about what was supposed to be done as it related to the 
responsibility that crop insurance had. 
 
In 1989 Mr. Mazankowski asked farm leaders from across Canada to come to 
Ottawa, and we met there in December 1989.  Mr. Mazankowski set out a green 
paper on agriculture and he dealt with about 11 different components of 
agriculture:  agriculture and the environment; efficiencies of agriculture; 
competitiveness in agriculture; farm safety nets, which we talk about and 
we've had introduced legislation into the House today; supply management 
was on that agenda; transportation was on that agenda -- all of these. 
 
He asked the farm leaders to become involved with . . . he involved them in 
the safety net program.  There were 19 farmers on that from across Canada, 
six from Saskatchewan, and each of these were representative of a farm 
organization.  They put together some principles that they wanted to have, 
that ministers of Agriculture follow from across Canada.  And as we began 
to deal with them, we began to realize more and more the value of what crop 
insurance had done for us earlier. 
 
What they did is they took about seven different stabilization programs 
that were available from across Canada -- and you have to recognize that 
there's a large diversity, there's all kinds of agriculture in Canada.  You 
have grain in Saskatchewan, you have forage in Saskatchewan, you have 
daffodils in British Columbia, you have potatoes in Prince Edward Island, 
and corn in Ontario.  All of these ministers had their own particular 
vested interests in dealing with the way that we would set up a safety net 
program. 
 
This safety net program, as it related to the principles that the committee 
set down for the ministers to go through, dealt with some very basic 
principles.  One was to deal with it from the aspect of the individual to 
be able to manage his own farm.  The second one was to deal with it as a 
safety net process dealing with a stabilization program like we have 
presented in GRIP and NISA.  And the third was the third line of defence, 
the part of the responsibility that dealt with international trade, 
national disasters like drought.  And those are the kinds of things that 
this group sat down and put together.  They were then asked to deal with 
the GRIP and NISA as their basic focus, and I think it's important to note 
that the committee came forward with four basic principles that I think we 
need to talk about a little bit. 



 

 

 
One is that the farm be targeted and the farm be targeted for a number of 
things.  One is the individual's capacity to produce, which was a shortfall 
in the crop insurance side because it dealt in a large part with area 
averages, and the individual then did not have the capacity to increase his 
production.  And because of the way that the program was set up, it allowed 
it to develop itself so that each individual farmer can have the program 
targeted to his individual farm completely. 
 
The second thing that I want to point out is that it was . . . another 
building block, you might say, was the price-setting mechanism.  And that, 
Mr. Speaker, is a very important part of how we put this together.  First 
of all, you have the yield that is targeted to the individual farm.  
Secondly, you have the price-setting mechanism dealing with targeting to 
the cost of production and the relationship that that has to a 15-year 
average of production and the price of grain. 
 
I want to point out that there were some variables that needed to put in 
place as it related to this.  And one of the things that we have come 
across, and I want to point that out to this Assembly, is that, for 
example, Saskatchewan is at 70 per cent -- 70 per cent of the production 
capacity and the yield and the price.  In Ontario, for example, that is 64 
per cent -- not as good as Saskatchewan.  So there, individually, they set 
up different patterns and processes according to what they felt their 
province could afford.  And so Ontario is less than we are, and I wanted to 
make that point today. 
 
The programs needed to have predictability, another point that the 
committee raised.  Predictability to the producer so that he knew what kind 
of premiums he was going to be required to pay -- very important in dealing 
with this.  Predictability on the parts of provincial governments to be 
able to respond in a way that would give the Minister of Finance and the 
people of Saskatchewan, as taxpayers, the opportunity to respond. 
 
And the third group that needed to have predictability is the federal 
government -- needed to have a program that was targeted and predictable.  
I think both of these programs -- NISA and GRIP -- both do that.  They 
wanted the capacity in the program to have resource neutrality.  And I want 
to point out to the Assembly that in the western grain stabilization and 
crop insurance, there were many cases where there wasn't a resource 
neutrality, specifically in western grain stabilization. 
 
There were crops that weren't in western grain stabilization.  There were 
crops that weren't in crop insurance.  So it became the focus of attention 
-- and ministers became sensitive to it, that more and more we needed to 
have resource neutrality.  Very important as it relates to the benefit that 
agriculture can have in Saskatchewan.  Because we, in this resource 
neutrality, have less competition between the livestock sector and the 
grain sector.  And that is very important as it relates to this program.  
This program is anticipated with a normal production, and on grains and 
oilseeds to stay constant the way they are for 1991-92, to pay out in 
excess of $1.3 billion. 
 



 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is a significant benefit to the people of 
Saskatchewan.  And why is it important to note that this is predictable?  
Because each farmer will be able to, on the basis of the information that 
he is provided before he goes to seed . . . what his pay-out could be and 
what his guarantee is. 
 
And that is very important to the people, not only of Saskatchewan, but 
it's also important for the people of Canada who are taxpayers in relation 
to this.  It's important for people who are business men in relation to 
this, so that they can budget for themselves certain volumes of dollars 
that will come into the province of Saskatchewan.  And that's very 
important. 
 
The last three months, as I've indicated earlier, have been a significant 
part of changing and adjusting and shaping how the safety net programs have 
worked.  I want to say that it's been significant because I've had a number 
of very important items raised dealing with individual management capacity, 
individuals able to access the safety net programs, and questions related 
to the third line of defence -- very, very important. 
 
I've had . . . personally have been involved in a lot of these meetings and 
I think if I would add up the numbers, pretty close to 10,000 just myself.  
And it's been significant in meeting these people.  We had crowds of 6 to 
800 people in Humboldt and in Moose Jaw and Assiniboia, and 500 in Unity, 
and 500 in different locations like that all over the province.  We had 
significant people being involved in the discussion -- very, very important 
to keep that in mind. 
 
What they did is they told us some things that we needed to do to adjust 
and to shape the kinds of things that we are going to talk about in the 
safety net program.  They gave us some good ideas about the safety nets and 
how we should move into that, not only in the first line of defence, but 
the second line of defence, and the third line of defence. 
 
I want to point out some of the things that people have said throughout the 
province.  I want to point out a news article from the Humboldt Journal, I 
think it's very important.  This is what they say: 
 

 The money will have a tremendous ripple effect on Saskatchewan.  It will 
reduce farm debt, go toward upgrading machinery, and buy land and cars, 
trucks, household goods, and even groceries. 

 
Just what I've tried to point out here today.  The safety net programs will 
go a long way to restoring confidence in the rural Saskatchewan economy. 
 
Safety nets . . . another one from the Humboldt Journal: 
 

 Party politics aside, the national safety net program is the best news for 
Saskatchewan in a long time. 

 
Illustrates, Mr. Speaker, exactly what Mr. Rosaasen said, that this is 
probably the most significant piece of legislation to come across the 
legislative process in Saskatchewan in 50 years -- very important to keep 



 

 

that in mind. 
 
I want to point out another article that Kevin Hursh wrote in January: 
 

 The program looks even better than its advance billing.  It's easy to 
criticize programs but GRIP has many advantages.  A farmer knows in spring 
what he can expect for gross returns from his farm.  That makes it a lot 
easier to plan and to get financing. 

 
Very important for agriculture.  It stabilizes income, which is one of the 
things that is very important for the people of the province.  And compared 
to the prices that there are today, GRIP looks pretty good. 
 
 iWeyburn Review r pointed out some significant words in their paper: 
 

 It's the best assistance program we've had, he said, explaining that his 
and other farmer organizations have been working on it for almost a year.  
It's more or less a guaranteed return. 

 
 iLeader-Post r, March 16: 
 

 Without GRIP, my family was going to have to live on equipment 
depreciation, borrowed money, and income from a part-time job.   In other 
words, the money that should have been set aside for replacing aging 
equipment, reducing debt, instead would be used just to feed the family. 

 
Very important, Mr. Speaker, to deal with that. 
 
The third line of defence is a part of this discussion, the reason being 
that the committee suggested that the first line of defence needed to be 
the management skills the individual had himself, the capacity that the 
individual had to deal with the kinds of things that he would do on his own 
farm.  That was the first line of defence.  The farmer set his management 
skills against nature and against all of the things that confronted him.  
And that, Mr. Speaker, was what the first line of defence was. 
 
(1645) 
 
The second line of defence I have just described to you deals with crop 
insurance, deals with GRIP, deals with NISA, deals with all of those kinds 
of things.  And I want to point out that those are very, very important 
parts of the overall dynamic of what the committee reported. 
 
The third line of defence has to be brought into the context of these other 
two.  And the reason that I take the time to explain the first two is so 
that you get the picture of the importance of the third line of defence.  
We said that we would be prepared to work together with the federal 
taxpayer, the provincial taxpayer, and the producer, in dealing with a 
second line of defence. 
 
In the third line of defence, it became the responsibility of the people in 
Ottawa to deal with the third line of defence.  It's not the responsibility 
of the taxpayer in Saskatchewan alone, but it goes beyond that.  Because 



 

 

what I wanted to point out too, earlier, is that the trade wars and drought 
as it relates to the province of Saskatchewan and the province of Alberta 
and Ontario and other places, is directly related to something that the 
farmers can't insure against.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is very important. 
 
I want to say to the legislature that on March 1 and 2, we met in Regina 
here with ministers of Agriculture from across Canada.  At that time a 
report was given to us dealing with the third line of defence.  It dealt 
with three basic areas on third line of defence. 
 
The first line of defence had to do with land use and the value that the 
federal government saw as a part of environment, as a part of keeping 
Saskatchewan green or Canada green, and that was the land-use question and 
whether or not the capacity that the governments had in providing benefits 
to certain sectors was directed in the proper fashion and to the right 
location.  And one of those things that was discussed under the land use 
had to do with fertilizing, had to do with seeding forage, had to do with 
the livestock side. 
 
And as a part of the review that the land-use portion of that third line of 
defence committee presented to us, we were given an opportunity to talk 
about whether in fact forage would become a part of a second line of 
defence throughout Canada.  And that, Mr. Speaker, very likely will take 
place next year.  It's a part of an overall strategy.  The western premiers 
were in agreement with forage becoming involved as a second line of 
defence, not only from the perspective of a third line of defence where it 
dealt with land use, but also from a second line. 
 
The second item under the third line of defence committee pointed out to us 
was debt -- how the seriousness of the debt problem in the province of 
Saskatchewan really has expanded itself.  If we take a look at debt and 
debt servicing in the province of Saskatchewan, long-term debt in the last 
five years has only been served very, very slightly.  We have reduced our 
total debt from 6 billion in '85 to 5 billion in 1991.  However, Mr. 
Speaker, a large part of that was debt write-downs by banks and credit 
unions throughout the province.  That was pointed out to us.  Debt 
servicing, the capacity of individual farmers to provide debt servicing was 
greatly reduced because of the cash flow in the income side on producers -- 
very significant. 
 
The third item that the committee presented to us on the third line of 
defence had to do with income.  They dealt with various kinds of aspects.  
They dealt with issues like having a cash advance on the GRIP program, 
dealt with payments to NISA, dealt with payments to the GRIP premium, dealt 
with a whole host of them.  Altogether, Mr. Speaker, we had about 20 
recommendations made by the third line of defence committee. 
 
This third line of defence committee was asked to consider this, and 
they're going to bring forward, probably in July, dealing with some other 
items as it relates to debt and income.  But our view, as a part of what 
the motion presents to this Assembly and to the federal government, is that 
we cannot, as a province, continue to carry the cost of the agriculture 
scene as it relates to international markets and drought.  We need to have 



 

 

the Government of Saskatchewan and the Government of Canada . . . where we 
need to have the Government of Canada realize its responsibility in 
relation to this.  And so it's very important, Mr. Speaker, on our part to 
submit this to the federal government. 
 
We have had, I believe, . . . we have established our responsibility in 
this.  We are going to be paying out $125 million as it relates to this 
program, and we want to deal with that in our GRIP and NISA legislation.  
However that volume of dollars is extremely important in establishing that 
program.  What we are doing as it relates to the federal government on 
third line of defence is asking them to consider all of the alternatives of 
the third line of defence committee and not leave any of them unused. 
 
So therefore, it is a privilege for me to second the motion that this 
Assembly strongly represents itself -- and this government and this 
legislature represents itself to the federal government -- that we ask the 
federal government to seriously consider providing income for the shortfall 
because of trade and trade-related issues in the province of Saskatchewan 
and to provide that as soon as possible because the people of Saskatchewan 
need it.  Farmers need it; business men need it, and as we move it into 
that bottom base of the productivity, then we have an opportunity to 
deliver a better opportunity for the people of Saskatchewan to produce and 
to develop their economy and be competitive with the international scene. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, in the light of the time that we have here -- 
six minutes before 5 -- and in view of the fact that I'll have some 
extensive comments to make, I wonder if I might have your approval and the 
indulgence of the House to call it 5 o'clock. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 


