





























































Hansard: May 23, 1991


 

 

May 23/91 
EVENING SITTING 

 
PRESENTING PETITIONS (continued) 

 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for recognizing me.  Mr. 
Speaker, if I might just digress and say that I'm rising pursuant to rule 
11 to present a petition to the Assembly on behalf of a number of people in 
Saskatchewan.  These petitioners are expressing their opposition to the 
provincial GST (goods and services tax). 
 
The petition I have before me, Mr. Speaker, comes to us from a number of 
people in the Prince Albert area, a number from inside Prince Albert 
itself, some from the rural Prince Albert area, one here from Livelong, 
Saskatchewan, another one from Pine House Lake, Birch Hills, La Ronge, 
Cudworth, Mr. Speaker, Saskatoon, but mostly from Prince Albert -- Stull 
Place, 26th Street East, 25th Street West.  And these petitioners would 
like to have their names added to the many with respect to this matter, 
sir. 
 
This next group of names I have is 20 in total.  These are all from Prince 
Albert with the exception of a couple who are from Spruce Home.  It doesn't 
give the address in this case but their names are clearly printed so it's 
clear who they are and they all say that they're from Prince Albert. 
 
This next group of petitioners, 19 in number, Mr. Speaker, these 
petitioners come from Meath Park, Prince Albert, Christopher Lake, St. 
Louis, another one from Christopher Lake, from Candle Lake, more from 
Christopher Lake, Dunn Drive  
_- in Prince Albert, I assume -- Spruce Home, and again there's one from 
Sherwood Park, Alberta, Mr. Speaker.  I don't know if it invalidates the 
petition but there are still 18 other names from inside Saskatchewan who 
are expressing their concerns through this petition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have here four names.  These people all seem to be from 
Regina.  They're from Broadway Avenue and 17 block Montreal Street.  Those, 
I might say, are in the constituency of Regina Victoria, Mr. Speaker, that 
I represent, and others from Dewdney Avenue and from Castle Road in Regina.  
And I'd like to add their names to the others that I've presented here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another group of names.  There appears to be about 23, 
24, 25 names on this list.  They're mostly from . . . They all seem to be 
from Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker, on Grafton Avenue and Montgomery Street and 
Grandview Street, Spadina Street.  I assume that those are all from Moose 
Jaw, and I want to add their names to the very many other names that have 
been presented to the Legislative Assembly already by people in Moose Jaw 
who have concerns to express to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these petitions come to us in many shapes and forms and . . . 
like someone took a bite out of this one.  But I assure you, I can assure 
you, sir, that the prayer is still there, and it's clear and it's legible 
from these people, most of whom are from Moose Jaw and one from Prince 
Albert.  And I assume the person from Prince Albert was visiting.  I have 



 

 

no idea who turned it in in this fashion, but the names all look to be in 
order and I've signed it to make sure that they're in order, sir.  Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Mr. Speaker, I have another 20 names from . . . again 
mostly from Moose Jaw, one from Regina, a couple of people from Assiniboia, 
community that I am going to be pleased to visit next Monday.  Again I'd 
like to present these names to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Well they're busy people in Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker.  I have another group 
of 20 names.  Most seem to be from Moose Jaw, some from Crane Valley, one 
from Lafleche, but all the rest seem to be . . . yes, I think they are from 
Moose Jaw.  Know that we have had many names of petitioners from Moose Jaw, 
sir. 
 
This next group of names, Mr. Speaker, are from Regina, Qu'Appelle, Indian 
Head.  And there's . . . looks like there's about 10, 12 names of 
petitioners who want to add their voices to the very many that have already 
been tabled here in the Legislative Assembly, Speaker. 
 
This next group of petitioners are all from Regina, from Mayfair Crescent, 
Everett Crescent.  And it looks like somebody might have gone door to door 
to collect names here because of the geographic representation of the 
names, Mr. Speaker, all from in the city of Regina, who want to add their 
voices to the very many. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this next group of names all appear to be from Regina.  There 
are some from my own constituency: Gladmer Park which is in Regina Wascana; 
Quinn Drive which is in the constituency of Regina Wascana; but certainly a 
lot of familiar addresses, Mr. Speaker, from people in the city of Regina 
who are adding their voices to others expressing concerns about the nature 
of the . . . or the topic of the petition before us, Mr. Speaker.  And I 
won't mention that because it might get us into debate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these next petitions are also from Regina: from Fleet Street 
and from Lamont Crescent which I believe is in the Hillsdale area of 
Regina; Fleet Street being in the Regina Glencairn area, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Speaker, these next . . . It's a small petition, Mr. Speaker.  There's four 
names in all, and they're all from the city of Regina.  Their names are 
clearly printed, and I've signed them and I'm satisfied that these are 
legitimate petitioners, sir. 
 
As the case with this next group of 10 petitioners who're all from the city 
of Regina, there's no addresses given but their names are clearly printed, 
and therefore I don't think there's any problem in ascertaining that they 
are too legitimate petitioners, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Speaker, this next group of petitioners are all from the city of Moose Jaw 
with the exception of one person who's from Lucky Lake, Saskatchewan, and 
I'm pleased to present their names to the members of the Legislative 



 

 

Assembly. 
 
This next group of names, Mr. Speaker, are almost all from Moose Jaw.  
There's 20 names in total, but there is one person here from Shamrock and 
one other one from Regina, but in the main the names are from residents of 
Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker.  And it's my pleasure to also present these names 
to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this next group of names that I have all appear to be from the 
city of Moose Jaw, with the exception of a couple that . . . well they seem 
to be from the province of Quebec. I'm not sure what concerns they have.  
But again there's 20 names here and as pointed out that perhaps they're at 
the CFB, Canadian Forces Base Moose Jaw, and therefore their names might be 
in order.  But in any event, there are at least 18 other names of 
petitioners that I am satisfied are in good order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The next groups of names I have, Mr. Speaker, are from Warner Street in 
Moose Jaw and High Street.  And there's also one person here from Mortlach, 
Saskatchewan, which as you know is just to the west of Moose Jaw there on 
the highway.  I'm pleased to present those names. 
 
Here's some neighbours in Regina, Mr. Speaker, on Garner Avenue, a couple 
of households that have all signed, affixed their names to a petition.  
They also want to make clear their concerns in this matter.  And it's my 
pleasure to present their names to the members of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the next group of names I have should hardly be any surprise 
now but most again are from the city of Moose Jaw.  There is also one 
person here from Chamberlain, Saskatchewan, in the constituency of Arm 
River.  But in the main these names are all from Moose Jaw: Stadacona 
Street, Arlington Avenue, Coteau Street West, Queen Crescent, Ominica, 
Duffield Street West, Mr. Speaker.  And it's my pleasure to present this 
petition on their behalf to the members of the Legislative Assembly so that 
their concerns can be conveyed to the government of the day, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another set of names here primarily from Moose Jaw, but 
also I see here one from Riverhurst, one from Tugaske which is the area on 
the highway just north of Moose Jaw.  These people too are concerned about 
this matter and want to express their concerns to the members of the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the next petition I have, all the names are from the city of 
Moose Jaw, I believe.  No there's probably one . . . No, these are from 
Regina: Robinson Street, Garnet Street, 28th Avenue -- all to be from the 
south end of the city in Regina.  I'm pleased to present their names to the 
members of the Legislative Assembly, sir. 
 
The next group of names I have, Mr. Speaker, these ones are . . . I assume 
that . . . Well I don't know; perhaps there's a community of Hillsdale, 
Denare Beach, Regina, Moose Jaw, Cruikshank Street, Regina.  I don't know 
if these names that are marked Hillsdale . . . whether that's a subdivision 
within Regina or if there's another community in Saskatchewan, I'm not 
sure.  But their names are clearly printed so as that they're wanting to 



 

 

make sure that there's no mistake about who they are in presenting their 
names forward to the members of the Legislative Assembly in this matter, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1915) 
 
The next set of names I have, Mr. Speaker, are all from . . . appear to be 
all from the city of Regina: Rodenbush Drive, Marsh Crescent, Rae Street, 
Pasqua Street, Assiniboine Avenue, Thornicroft Bay, Newstead Avenue, Nollet 
Avenue -- Nollet, I believe, is a former member of the Legislative Assembly 
-- McCarthy Boulevard, Massey Road, primarily seem to be names from the 
south end of the city, Mr. Speaker.  There's 21 names in all of residents 
of Saskatchewan who wanted to take advantage of this opportunity to make 
their views known in this way to the members of the Legislative Assembly, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The next set of names I have, Mr. Speaker, are all from the city of Moose 
Jaw, I believe -- Normandy Drive in Moose Jaw, Wellington Drive, Maybery 
Crescent, Iroquois Street, Caribou, Calypso Drive, and Regal Place.  But 
there's 20 names of petitioners from the city of Moose Jaw, people who want 
to make their concerns known in this matter.  And it's my pleasure to 
present this to the members of the Legislative Assembly on their behalf, 
Mr. Speaker, so that their voices can be heard in this very fundamental 
process of democracy that we make available to the public, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the next set of names I have are from Regina.  They all appear 
to be -- well with one exception -- from Thornton Avenue.  I believe that's 
in the Lakeview area of Regina.  These people are all expressing their 
concerns in this matter; many seem to be from one household.  Obviously 
they feel strongly and wanted to commit their names to the members of the 
Legislative Assembly.  And if the page can take this, Mr. Speaker, then 
I'll be satisfied to know that these names are properly tabled with the 
Legislative Assembly.  And I've signed my name to this sheet, Mr. Speaker, 
so that there should be no concern that I am vouching for these names, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the next set of names I have -- and I think that'll be the 
last group that I'll be presenting today, Mr. Speaker -- are all from the 
city of Moose Jaw.  These are . . . yes, they're all from Moose Jaw, Mr. 
Speaker, and they too want to add their voices to the very many names of 
people that signed petitions which are being presented to the Legislative 
Assembly in this matter, taking advantage of the process that the House 
provides for the people of Saskatchewan to express their concerns. 
 
I must say that it has been my pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to present these 
names in this very democratic fashion to the Legislative Assembly so that 
they can bring pressure to bear on the government to change its course of 
action.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It's my privilege and 
responsibility to join with other of my colleagues in presenting petitions 



 

 

to the House this day.  And the petition I present, like others that have 
been presented in the House, are signed by residents of our province, 
praying that this Assembly may be pleased to urge the provincial government 
opposite to stop the provincial goods and services tax until the people of 
the province have had an opportunity to pass judgement on this tax in a 
provincial election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the petitions that I will be presenting in the House tonight 
each come to this House with that same prayer, that same petition.  The 
first, Mr. Speaker, the signatories of this petition, as indicative of 
these petitions which are being presented in the House, come from many 
corners of the province.  In this case, Mr. Speaker, these petitioners make 
their homes in the city of Saskatoon, some in the community of Kenaston, 
again Main Street in Saskatoon, some from the community of Gravelbourg, 
Saskatchewan -- much further south -- some from the community of Watrous, 
others from the community of Humboldt, and again from Saskatoon, Mr. 
Speaker.  It's my privilege to lay this petition on the Table tonight. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, from a variety of communities in Saskatchewan, these 
communities generally to the east of Regina.  Petitioners from the 
communities of Melville, the communities of Yorkton, community of 
Balcarres, Fort Qu'Appelle, again petitioners from Melville.  One 
petitioner, Mr. Speaker, from Goodeve.  Again petitioners from Melville, 
from Grayson, and again from the community of Balcarres.  Mr. Speaker, 
another 20 petitioners on this prayer.  Thanks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this group of signatures takes us from communities around 
Melville and Yorkton, Balcarres, further north to the community of Prince 
Albert.  In fact each of the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, call 
Prince Albert their home and they join the many other citizens of the city 
of Prince Albert who have petitioned this legislature.  Thanks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this set of signatures, the majority of these 20 petitioners 
to the legislature are from the community of Ituna, Saskatchewan.  There 
are two residents of the city of Regina who have also signed this petition 
-- I take it they may have been visiting in Ituna -- and a number of 
residents of the community of Balcarres.  All Saskatchewan residents 
exercising their right to petition their legislature.  Thanks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again I present to this legislature on behalf of the citizens 
of Ituna, another . . . by my count, another 18 residents of the community 
of Ituna, again joined by two residents of the city of Regina, petitioning 
this legislature.  I am honoured and privileged to lay their petition on 
the Table tonight. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we present the petitions it becomes almost like an atlas of 
our province.  This petition has been signed by people who live here in the 
city of Regina, but many from beyond the city of Regina, from the community 
of Carlyle, from the community of Montmartre, from the community of Beechy, 
one signature here from my own city of Moose Jaw, a signature on this 
petition from the community of McLean.  Mr. Speaker, as you well know, 
McLean being east of Regina on the No. 1 Highway. 
 



 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I look at this petition which also . . . from residents of 
our province, again is a list of citizens of the community of Prince 
Albert, Saskatchewan.  Almost to a one from the community of Prince Albert, 
most of whom abbreviate their community as P.A.  There is one signature on 
this petition, Mr. Speaker, like others, who come from the rural area 
surrounding Prince Albert, from Rural Route 5, Prince Albert.  I assume 
their post office box is in Prince Albert but they will live in the area 
surrounding Prince Albert.  So again from the northern part of our 
province, 20 more petitioners. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am particularly pleased to lay on the Table of the 
legislature tonight these next few petitions, given that the majority of 
these signatures come from my own community of Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker, 
joining the thousands of others who have petitioned this legislature 
already.  Some of these petitioners on this particular sheet, Mr. Speaker, 
do come from the rural area surrounding Moose Jaw.  But others on this 
sheet live in my own constituency of Moose Jaw South on Glendale Street, on 
Stadacona West; one signature on this petition from the constituency of 
Moose Jaw North, living on Grafton Avenue.  It is not only my privilege but 
it is my responsibility to carry these petitions to the legislature, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this list of petitioners from the city of Moose Jaw, because 
they come from the community that I call home and am proud to represent 
along with the member from Moose Jaw North, I recognize some of these 
names, Mr. Speaker, and I can tell by the names that this petition has been 
signed by a very wide cross-section of Moose Jaw residents.  I see some 
small-business people here.  I see the signature of individuals who are 
involved in the Canadian Armed Forces at CFB Moose Jaw.  I see the names of 
seniors here.  And, Mr. Speaker, I see names from all political parties.  I 
am proud to lay this on the Table of this legislature on behalf of these 
citizens of Moose Jaw. 
 
In this case, Mr. Speaker, the signatures again are primarily from the city 
of Moose Jaw, from people who live on Stadacona Street East, Vaughan 
Street, and all areas of the city.  But they are joined on this petition by 
the signatures of people who make their home in the communities of Mortlach 
and Belle Plaine, and two signatures from those who live in Saskatoon, who 
I take it were perhaps visiting in the city of Moose Jaw and had the 
opportunity to sign this petition.  And so I present it as well on their 
behalf. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again I present a petition signed primarily by residents of 
the city of Moose Jaw, with one exception . . . no sorry, two exceptions, 
two residents of the city of Regina.  Without the exceptions, all the rest 
make their home in Moose Jaw.  And again, Mr. Speaker, I recognize many of 
the names on this petition.  Many of them . . . well representing very many 
walks of life in the city that I represent, and they too join in the 
thousands of others petitioning this legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the community that I represent and the community of Prince 
Albert have many things in common, and it would appear in common we are in 
communities where this tax is not popular. 



 

 

 
Mr. Speaker, again I lay on the Table tonight a full petition signed 
primarily by residents of Prince Albert.  They are joined in this case by a 
resident of the community of La Ronge and a resident of the community of 
Spruce Home, Saskatchewan.  Mr. Speaker, it's my honour and it's my duty to 
present this petition to the legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a few moments ago I had the privilege of presenting a petition 
on behalf of residents of the community of Ituna.  Again, Mr. Speaker, 
another full petition, another full 20 signatures primarily from the 
community of Ituna, but I note there are some residents here also of the 
town of Balcarres and one signature from the city of Saskatoon.  And I 
would assume that that individual was visiting in and around Ituna or 
Balcarres when he had opportunity to sign the petition. 
 
(1930) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, again from that same corner of our province another full 
petition signed by citizens, residents of the communities of Melville and 
Balcarres and the city of Yorkton.  Mr. Speaker, this to the many hundreds, 
if not thousands of names which have come from those same communities by 
way of petitioning this legislature.  It's my duty and responsibility to 
place this petition on the Table tonight. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this petition again is primarily from my own community of 
Moose Jaw, with one exception, Mr. Speaker.  The signatures of this 
petition live on Gordon Road, Stadacona Street, Main Street, Hall Street, 
Buttercup Crescent, Redland Avenue, Ominica Street in Moose Jaw, Wood Lily 
Drive, Lillooet Street. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you're not entirely familiar with the city of Moose Jaw, 
that indicates this petition is signed by residents who live in every 
portion and every part of the city of Moose Jaw.  And at the top of this 
list is the signature of an individual I know and call a friend, who lives 
and farms in the community of Shamrock.  And I am particularly proud to 
have the opportunity to present his name in petition and the names of these 
other Moose Jaw residents in petition tonight. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, a petition that is primarily from the city of Moose 
Jaw, with the exception in this case of two residents of the community of 
Spring Valley which is south of Moose Jaw.  Again as I look at these names 
I recognize names that I know, friends and neighbours who have joined 
together to petition their legislature, as is their right to petition their 
legislature.  And I, as representative of their community, consider it my 
duty to bring their petition to this House. 
 
Again we go south of Moose Jaw and I see signatures here of a couple from 
Crane Valley, Saskatchewan.  But again with the exception of those 
residents of Crane Valley, the other signatures of this petition are Moose 
Jaw citizens.  And just looking over this list of signatures, Mr. Speaker, 
you would be interested to know that it represents all age groups.  We have 
young people here, working people here, and senior citizens from the 
community of Moose Jaw and from Crane Valley, petitioning as is their right 



 

 

of this legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again I am privileged to lay on the Table tonight further 
signatories of the petition -- the prayer which I read out at the beginning 
-- urging this government to stop the provincial goods and services tax.  
Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  The member's certainly welcome to lay 
petitions on the Table but the Speaker has already ruled on debate. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd be happy to honour your ruling 
and the ruling of Mr. Speaker. 
 
On this petition, as I look down the list of names, with the exception of 
two, again all of these residents of our province make their home in the 
city of Moose Jaw.  From Hochelaga Street to Fairford West, Athabasca West, 
River Street East, Athabasca East, Cree Crescent, Athabasca West, Caribou 
East, Laurier Street, Main Street North, Carleton -- from all corners of 
the city of Moose Jaw. 
 
But in addition to the Moose Jaw residents, I see . . . Well, Mr. Speaker, 
I see a relative of mine on here, Mr. Speaker, and this person makes her 
home in Saskatoon.  And beyond that I see a signature from the community of 
Mortlach, west of Saskatoon as you know, in the constituency of Thunder 
Creek. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again with one or two exceptions, another 20 petitioners of 
the legislature, petitioners who have exercised their democratic right to 
petition their legislature.  Of the 20, 18 of them from the community of 
Moose Jaw living on 4th Avenue North West, Athabasca Street West, 3rd 
Avenue North East, Avens Road, Caribou, Hochelaga Street West, Warner 
Street, Home Street.  Again, Mr. Speaker, from the constituency of Moose 
Jaw North and the constituency of Moose Jaw South. 
 
In addition we have a signature here from the constituency of Thunder Creek 
or Assiniboia-Gravelbourg -- I'm not entirely sure, Mr. Speaker -- from the 
community of Coderre, Saskatchewan, and one signature from the city of 
Saskatoon.  Mr. Speaker, it's my duty to lay this petition on the Table 
tonight with the help of the page. 
 
And here, Mr. Speaker, once more, a number of residents of the city of 
Moose Jaw.  Again a number of names that I recognize as friends and 
neighbours, as business people from the city of Moose Jaw, as seniors in 
the city of Moose Jaw, from all parts of our city.  But in addition to the 
Moose Jaw signatures, a signature of a resident from Cardross, Saskatchewan 
and the signature of a Holdfast, Saskatchewan resident, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to lay one further petition on the Table this 
evening.  And again, Mr. Speaker, this is primarily signed by residents of 
the city of Moose Jaw.  And again as I look at these signatures, I see 
names I recognize, and I know that they live in every part of the city of 
Moose Jaw and come from every walk of life, Mr. Speaker, and I venture to 
say from every political persuasion.  In addition to the Moose Jaw 



 

 

signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, there are two others: one 
signature from the community of Maple Creek, and one  
 Dsignature from the community of Kamsack.  And it's my hope that when they 
were in Moose Jaw to sign this petition that they enjoyed the hospitality 
of our community. 
 
And I lay this petition, along with the others, Mr. Speaker, on the Table 
tonight as is my responsibility on behalf of those who have exercised their 
right to petition the legislature.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I wonder if I 
could have leave to introduce some guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  On behalf of my 
colleague from Regina North West, I would like to introduce in your 
gallery, sir, some 20 Scouts and their leaders and I assume some parents.  
Leaders are parents too, I realize.  They're visiting the legislature this 
evening.  A number of us had a visit with them prior to coming into the 
session and we certainly welcome them to the Assembly. 
 
I know the Scouts provide a lot of learning experiences, and there's a lot 
of mutual respect developed between the young people and their community.  
And I look forward to talking to the group after, on behalf of my 
colleague, and answering any questions you may have and taking a picture on 
the steps. 
 
I would ask all members to join me in welcoming this group of Scouts and 
leaders and parents to the Assembly this evening. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS (continued) 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is my pleasure this evening to rise 
to present a petition on behalf of people of Saskatoon Eastview, the riding 
which I have the pleasure to represent and have a duty to present their 
concerns on this petition with regard to the proposed provincial goods and 
services tax.  And these constituents, many of whom are neighbours, and I 
recognize a number of the names on this petition, they are urging the 
provincial government to reconsider their decision to impose this tax on 
them. 
 
And they're opposed to the tax and they're saying in this petition that the 
government has no mandate at this stage in their term to bring about such a 
tax.  Mr. Speaker, these people are asking me to present this petition on 
their behalf and I'm happy to do so. 
 
At this time, Mr. Speaker, I move that this House now adjourn. 
 



 

 

The division bells rang from 7:40 p.m. until 9:59 p.m. 
 
The Speaker: -- The adjournment hour of 10 o'clock having been reached, 
this House stands adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10 p.m. 
 


