





























































Hansard: May 09, 1991


 

 

May 9/91 
 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: -- The following petition for a private Bill is presented and laid 
on the Table by Mr. Romanow: 
 

 A petition of the Ukrainian Catholic Council for the Ukrainian Catholic 
Eparchy of Saskatoon in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure to introduce 
to you, and through you to the members of the legislature, the Consul 
General of The Netherlands.  Baron Marnix von Aerssen and his wife, Mrs. 
Henriette von Aerssen, are in the Speaker's gallery.  This is their first 
official visit to the province of Saskatchewan.  We're very happy to have 
them here. 
 
While in the province they'll be visiting with the mayor of Saskatoon, the 
mayor of Regina, and several departments and ministers, including the 
Department of Health, Economic Diversification, Agriculture and Food. 
 
It's my pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to welcome the Consul General for his first 
visit to the province of Saskatchewan, and hope they find their visit here 
very pleasurable.  Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I want to join 
with the Premier, on behalf of the members of the opposition, to welcome 
here today the Consul General.  And I wonder if I might say a few words in 
my native tongue, Mr. Speaker, at least give it a try. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Dutch.) 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I will refrain . . 
. stick with the English language for my introduction here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to introduce to the 
members of the Assembly and to you, sir, a group of 32 high school students 
from the town of Rosthern and their bus drivers and teachers -- Doug 
Willard and Phil Broten, past teaching chums of mine as it were.  And I 
certainly hope the students from the Rosthern High School enjoy their visit 



 

 

here.  I will be meeting with them later on for drinks and questions and I 
just hope you have a good, safe trip home.  I'd ask all members to help me 
welcome the students from Rosthern High School. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I rise on somewhat 
of an impromptu introduction.  I want members to join with me in welcoming 
and I think congratulating Ema Pratt who is in your gallery, Mr. Speaker.  
I won't go into the details.  I see Ema Pratt and her daughter, Charlotte 
Pelletier.  I regret I do not know the names of all of the people who are 
with her. 
 
Ema was reunited with her family after a very lengthy separation and it was 
the subject of I think more than one television show last night.  I know 
all members will want to join with me in congratulating Ema and welcoming 
her to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to join with my colleague from 
Regina Centre in welcoming to the Assembly the eight people from the Regina 
Native Community Awareness centre.  I know all members will want to join 
with me in welcoming them here.  They're accompanied by, as my colleague 
mentioned, Charlotte Pelletier and Terri Peterson.  Welcome to the Assembly 
and we'll meet you for a coffee in the Speaker's boardroom at 2:35.  Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, as the Minister of the Family, I too 
would like to welcome them and say how pleased we are that you got together 
after all these years -- something like 38 years or something.  And we all 
know that families are extremely strong when they pull together and work 
together, and I'm very pleased for you, Mrs. Pratt, and for your daughter 
as well.  So I wish to join everybody else here in saying how pleased we 
are that you managed to get together after all these years. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- I want to make one other impromptu introduction.  I met 
some people this morning who are again in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, Ann 
and Mike Koziak, who are accompanied by their daughter Victoria Greensides. 
 
I talked to these people for a few minutes.  It just seemed to me that 
they're representative of the many hundreds of Saskatchewan people who come 
to the seat of government each summer to observe their government in 
action.  And I wanted all members to join with me in welcoming them here 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Obviously the best shall be last. 



 

 

 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: -- Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to 
introduce to you and to the House, 18 grade 10 students seated in the east 
gallery, accompanied by their teachers Mr. Paul Reist, Annette ver der 
Buhs, and the chaperon Sandra Twardy. 
 
I want to extend a great, warm welcome to the students.  I hope that they 
have an enjoyable stay here in Regina.  We'll be meeting with you shortly 
after question period.  I just want to say that you had a wonderful 
graduation which I attended a couple weeks ago.  Have a safe trip back 
home. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm glad to receive the 
accolades from the member from Quill Lakes.  It's my pleasure, sir, to 
introduce to you and the other members of the Assembly today, a gentleman 
in the west gallery.  It's Mr. Maynard Slater from the town of Unity. 
 
Maynard is in Regina as a board member of SEDCO (Saskatchewan Economic 
Development Corporation) and has been on that board for a number of years.  
He's a very diligent, hard-working individual from his community, and I 
think is a good representative of the type of people that have served the 
board of directors of SEDCO over the years under this administration.  So 
I'd ask all members to please welcome Mr. Maynard Slater from Unity. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Mr. Speaker, one of the first people that I ever met 
in Regina when I first moved here was Ema Pratt.  And I wonder if at this 
point I might say that I'm happy to see you here today and that you're 
happy and this is my joy and everyone's inspiration.  Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Potential Nurses' Strike 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to the Minister of 
Health.  Mr. Minister, in a matter of hours most of Saskatchewan's 
hospitals and nursing homes will be without nursing staff for all but 
emergency services. 
 
Yesterday I asked you what steps you were going to take to prevent this 
strike and you said it was too early to get involved.  Hospitals are 
already clearing out patients.  They are on an emergency footing, Mr. 
Minister.  What steps have you taken in the last 24 hours to help avoid 
this strike?  And what steps are you going to take in the next 24 hours? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, as I said yesterday, the collective 



 

 

bargaining process is ongoing and it remains ongoing.  And it's important 
to note that with the help of conciliation -- there is a conciliator 
assisting at that table, a conciliator appointed by my colleague, the 
Minister of Labour -- that process carries on and, as I said yesterday and 
have said publicly for a few days now, it's important I believe not to 
become directly involved in that process at this stage. 
 
We obviously are concerned as are all citizens of this province when a 
circumstance like this arises.  I assure the hon. member and the citizens 
of the province that we will be monitoring this on a daily, and indeed on 
an hourly basis if it does deteriorate to the point where there is in fact 
a strike. 
 
So that's all I can say at this stage, Mr. Speaker, but I will give the 
assurance that this will be monitored very, very closely by myself and the 
Department of Health officials as we continue in communication with the 
hospital administrators and others in the hospitals and the nursing homes 
who must carry out the duties required of them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Minister, we are less than 24 hours away from a strike 
in this province -- less than 24 hours -- and this dispute represents a 
clear and present danger to health care in Saskatchewan.  Patients are 
being put out of hospitals, surgery is being put on hold, some patients are 
being moved out of the province, and their families are upset, Mr. 
Minister.  And you say you're doing nothing to prevent the situation -- 
nothing. 
 
Mr. Minister, why isn't the prevention of this dispute your number one 
priority? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, the circumstances surrounding this dispute 
are my number one priority.  For the hon. member it's easy to say: why 
haven't you prevented this, there is a difficult circumstance -- all of 
which I agree with.  This is not something that anyone would wish to have 
happen.  That's not the case. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all I can say to the hon. member: I believe the actions that I 
am taking, that the Department of Health is taking and that the government 
is taking at the present time are the appropriate actions given the 
collective bargaining process which is under way.  The hon. member . . . 
it's fine to raise the question and it's a legitimate question to raise in 
terms of this problem being of concern to our citizens -- that's true. 
 
But there's also room here for suggestions and I would be very open to 
suggestions from the hon. member, the Health critic, and what she would do 
in my place or what she suggests should be done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Minister, if you agree that a strike is not desirable, 
why did you shut hospital beds and fire nurses on the eve of collective 
bargaining, Mr. Minister?  Have you met with both sides and offered 
whatever services your ministry can supply, Mr. Minister?  Have you been in 
contact with both sides to offer to set up a conciliation board, Mr. 
Minister?  Have you met with both sides to offer assurances about staffing 
levels in our health-care facilities?  Have you given sufficient 
negotiating latitude to your representative at the bargaining table?  Have 
you taken any steps to try to prevent this dispute from happening, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Now we . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  Order, order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Now we have the suggestions from the member from the 
NDP (New Democratic Party) and let's be very clear of what it was.  Their 
negotiations are ongoing with the help of a conciliator.  We've said that 
and everyone in the province knows that that's the case.  So our reports 
are there is some progress being made.  Now but the fact is talks are 
continuing -- talks are continuing. 
 
And the hon. member said, have you injected yourself into the talks at that 
table?  That's what she said.  And I had to say very clearly: no, I have 
not; no, I have not; I will not.  At this stage, we monitor this thing and 
I think it's the responsible thing to do.  I believe that sincerely.  The 
responsible approach is the approach that we are taking, that I am taking, 
as the minister at this stage. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, here's a picture for the people of Saskatchewan 
to remember.  A Minister of Health, the man charged with the safe and 
effective delivery of health-care services, throwing up his hands and 
saying there's nothing to do when we're on the eve of a nurses' strike in 
this province.  We are facing a crisis today, Mr. Minister, and you are 
doing nothing to avert it -- nothing at all.  Why are you sitting on your 
hands, Mr. Minister?  Do you want a strike?  Is that your game? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, as I said before, I believe that the 
actions taken by our department and by myself, as Minister of Health, and 
by the people within the hospitals and special-care home sector who are 
developing their contingency plans and so on, are responsible actions all 
through the system.  The responsible actions are taking place and I believe 
what we are doing as a government is responsible action. 
 
The hon. member made the point yesterday, and has made the point in the 
public and made the point again here today, that somehow there was an 
orchestration of the closing of beds, of some beds in some locations, to 



 

 

occur at the time which coincided with collective bargaining. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said yesterday, the concerns and the issues around health 
care here in Saskatchewan are no different, frankly, than what is going on 
in all jurisdictions across the country. 
 
There is no nurses' strike going on in the province of Ontario today with 
an NDP government.  There is no strike.  And yet as I reported yesterday, 
and The Toronto Star confirms, 2,600 beds closed in the Toronto area alone 
by the government across there, to use her logic.  It's obviously the 
Government of Ontario that's closing those 2,600 beds.  She'll say that 
here but it doesn't apply there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this country has a very complex health-care system.  This 
province has a complex health-care system.  We are dealing with it 
responsibly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Decentralization Costs 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my question 
today is to the Deputy Premier but now in his capacity as the minister in 
charge of decentralization where, unlike health care, apparently the 
government has a lot of money to spend. 
 
Mr. Speaker, according to yesterday's Leader-Post the government plans to 
pay part of real estate losses incurred by employees through relocation as 
a result of the government's decentralization plans. 
 
And according to other documents which we have here, there are apparently 
funds being set aside, including severance package options and payment of 
moving expenses and the like. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, to the minister is:  how much has the government 
budgeted by way of fresh additional charges to the taxpayers of the 
province of Saskatchewan with respect to the proposals of decentralization 
which you've announced over three months ago? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, the issue of the costs of individuals who 
work within the public service, wherever they might live, who are asked to 
move to another location, that issue and the benefits that are available to 
them is one that has been around for a long time.  The changes that we have 
made very recently, one change which deals with covering some portion of 
the difference between the appraised value of a home and the actual selling 
price, is an amendment that was made to the regulations in this province, 
not just for moves related to Fair Share Saskatchewan, but for moves within 
the province by public servants wherever they might be moving from and to 
wherever they're going.  So that's a point that needs to be clarified. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as it relates to -- and I have announced this as well -- when 



 

 

specific announcements are made related to Fair Share Saskatchewan and 
specific announcements will be made in the very near future, when specific 
announcements are made, there will be a cost analysis for each of the moves 
at the time of the announcement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that will be the case.  I've announced it publicly and I say 
that again here today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have a new question to the 
minister and I'm still referring to the Leader-Post story by Mark Wyatt, 
plus the document which I have dated April 5, 1991. 
 
This, Mr. Speaker, the plan that I'm referring to involves up to 2,000 
civil servants to be transferred from government in Regina to decentralized 
locations throughout the province of Saskatchewan.  Now we know that that's 
going to cost money because the story says they're going to pick up real 
estate fees and severance packages and the like. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister is this:  is it not correct that 
you have internal studies -- I wish the minister would pay attention to my 
question -- is it not true that you have internal studies which show that 
there is going to be an additional cost of approximately $50 million of new 
charge on the purse of the province of Saskatchewan as a result of this 
decentralization?  Do you not have that study showing the additional $50 
million?  And how do you justify that in the context of the obvious needs 
for funds in other areas like health care and education? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member I believe said -- and 
there was some noise in the House, I admit -- but the hon. member I believe 
said $50 million.  His seat mate, the deputy leader of the NDP, yelled from 
his seat, $60 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have said that there will be some costs associated with the 
movement.  There will be costs associated.  There will be significant costs 
associated with abandoning rural Saskatchewan communities and all of the 
infrastructure their people have invested in for a long time.  There are 
significant costs in abandoning that infrastructure as well.  They don't 
care about that. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to the specific number, he raises 50 
million; his seat mate says 60 million.  They change 10 million there in 
about a few seconds.  It relates . . . His colleague the other day said 
$2.3 million for painting buses when it was something in the order of 
$190,000.  Mr. Speaker, you cannot take as face value any number that comes 
from the opposition benches in their speculative way. 
 
I have said to the hon. member and I say to the public of Saskatchewan, 
when specific Fair Share moves are announced, there will be costs 
associated with them announced at the same time. 



 

 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the minister, and 
it's a concise question. 
 
Mr. Minister, and Mr. Speaker, I preface my question by saying, look at the 
ludicrous position in which the people of the province of Saskatchewan have 
been placed and the members of this House have been placed.  They will not 
accept the study by the city of Regina that says it's going to be an 
additional cost of $25,000 per worker moved.  They do not accept our 
statement that there's a $50 million approximate cost internally.  They 
deny that.  And yet they refuse to produce the studies. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, is this to the minister: do you have any studies 
at all about the huge additional cost for decentralization or not?  Do you 
have those studies?  If you do, then table them.  Why will you not table 
them?  Or is the truth of the matter that you don't have those studies 
because you know they're going to cost $50 million for decentralization, 
all the while when rural people want good, adequate health care and 
education services to be fulfilled? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member has been against 
decentralization at every turn all the way along.  Melville, Crop 
Insurance; Agriculture Credit Corporation to Swift Current  -- you name it, 
they were against it because they do not believe in a decentralized 
government operation.  That's a fact of life. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member raises that the rural people of 
Saskatchewan want health care and education services.  That's absolutely 
the case.  And the rural people of Saskatchewan have received health care 
and education services from this government in spades, Mr. Speaker.  
They've received those services in spades. 
 
The question for the hon. member is, the question for the hon. member who 
opposes decentralization, who opposes a decentralized administration of 
government, opposes rural Saskatchewan, in essence, the question for him 
is: who is going to use the infrastructure we have in both education and 
health care in rural Saskatchewan, tremendous investment that is needed out 
there, who is going to be there to use it if we don't decentralize and 
stabilize rural Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the minister in 
charge of decentralization.  And, Mr. Speaker, I would preface my question 
by reminding you again, sir, about the position in which this legislature, 
the press gallery, and the public of the province of Saskatchewan have been 
placed by these answers given by this Deputy Premier and the government 
opposite. 
 



 

 

Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- They deny our figures but they refuse to table any figures, 
and presumably not even being pursued by anybody else in the public in 
terms of the press gallery after these figures. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, to the Deputy Premier in this regard is very 
simple.  Isn't it correct to say that the only thing that we can conclude 
as a result of your answers is that you do not have such a study, or that 
if you have such a study, you know that it's going to cost $50 million more 
money which right now should be needed for health care? 
 
Isn't this really, this decentralization after nine long years of waiting, 
a political attempt by you people to desperately shore up some political 
support?  That's the sum and substance of what this is all about.  Isn't 
that the case?  Why don't you fess up to that situation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, I have said to the House and I said 
publicly before, when specific moves are announced -- and they will be in 
short order -- when specific moves are announced, there will be a cost 
analysis of each of those moves associated with the announcement.  Make it 
clear -- there will be cost analysis associated with the announcement in 
each case.  That's clear and that's clear to the public, as clear as I can 
make it. 
 
The hon. members says: it's straight politics.  The hon. member's colleague 
said yesterday that the nurses' strike was straight politics.  Mr. Speaker, 
and this hon. member, the leader, says: stabilizing rural Saskatchewan, 
which is extremely important in these economic times in this rural-based 
province, is very important. 
 
Mr. Speaker, politics isn't associated with stabilizing the rural areas of 
this province and politics is not associated with our approach to the 
nurses' strike. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

New Government Office Space in Regina 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question too is directed to 
the minister in charge of decentralization.  Mr. Minister, two of the major 
owners of an office tower which is being constructed on the 1800 block of 
Scarth Street here in Regina are agencies of this government.  They are the 
Workers' Compensation Board and SaskPen. 
 
If you are truly committed to decentralization as you say and not just for 
the announcement of a cynical political line for the purposes of an 
election, why are you spending millions of dollars for more government 
office space, which is going to cost all that money here in Regina, while 
you already have been spending $34,000 a day on unoccupied office space 
which you have been leasing? 



 

 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member raises a building program 
in the city of Regina.  The Workers' Compensation Board, as I understand 
it, has made an investment in a particular building.  And that's the case, 
and they have the opportunity as well as the jurisdiction to make those 
investments.  They've done that. 
 
I don't know what the hon. member wants them to do, if he wants them to not 
invest in the downtown Regina, the city that he centralized himself to.  He 
was once a member for Watrous and Humboldt and areas of rural Saskatchewan, 
but now he's the centralized member, safe in the arms of Regina, not out in 
a rural part of the province that needs stabilization.  He's against 
stabilizing rural Saskatchewan.  Rural Saskatchewan once abandoned him; 
he's abandoning rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, a new question to the same minister.  Mr. 
Minister, I have here an internal news release from the Workers' 
Compensation Board, and it says the following . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- An internal news release. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Yes, that's what its title says.  That's what your 
title says, Mr. Minister.  And it goes on to say: yes, the rumours are true 
-- by August 1992 we will have a new home. 
 
And it goes on to talk about 11 to 10 floors on this 20-storey building, a 
total of 83,600 square feet of space, which you're not going to need, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
How do you explain this commitment to this vast amount of new government 
office space while at the same time you're saying you're going to move 
thousands of government employees and jobs out of Regina?  There is nothing 
consistent here, Mr. Minister.  How do you explain that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, I say to the members of the press, if you 
receive news releases from the member, they are confidential documents, so 
be careful how you use them.  An internal news release -- I haven't heard 
of that one before. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the hon. member raises the question about investment in 
downtown Regina.  Yes, there is investment in downtown Regina.  The city of 
Regina has raised concerns about decentralization of people from Regina, or 
positions from Regina certainly to other areas of rural Saskatchewan, and 
we've laid out the rationale for those kinds of moves. 
 
There is as well, Mr. Speaker, significant discussion going on with the 
federal government.  And the city of Regina has some involvement in that 



 

 

and certainly supports us, as I understand it, in our attempts . . . in our 
discussions with the federal government, using the same rationale for 
federal government positions to move from the national capital region to 
the regions of Canada, including the city of Regina, because that rationale 
applies to the nation as a whole and the same rationale applies to this 
province, Mr. Speaker.  They cannot have it both ways -- they cannot have 
it both ways. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Another new question to the same minister, Mr. Speaker.  
Mr. Minister, as usual what you say does not add up.  It's . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order, order.  Carry on. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- What you say, Mr. Minister, does not add up.  You're 
working from a policy of total chaos and confusion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- You say on the one hand that you're going to lay off 
600 public servants; you started that.  Then you say you're aiding the 
rural economy by moving civil servants out of Regina to other centres.  And 
then you say  
 Dyou're being responsive to needs by building a new building for the 
workers who are going to . . . theoretically you're going to be moving out 
of Regina and firing, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you clear up which one of these policies you're 
pursuing?  Are you doing decentralization or are you actually building more 
buildings for decentralization?  Are you doing decentralization or are you 
building more office space for the public servants in Regina?  Which one is 
it, Mr. Minister?  Clear up your policy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, we have been . . . this government has 
undertaken a policy of decentralization over a period of six years.  We've 
undertaken that policy and we have moved people from the city of Regina - 
_ jobs and corporations -- from the city of Regina out.  Through that 
process, the city of Regina continued to grow.   And it has continued to 
grow, much of it based on the policies of this government.  Saskoil doubled 
in size, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Against the opposition again.  Doubled in size, a new 
building in downtown Regina.  WESTBRIDGE is a larger corporation now than 
it was, with a new building at the University of Regina.  The North 
Canadian Oils has located in Regina, not because of them, but in spite of 
the opposition of them to the oil and gas field and the oil and gas patch. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Regina continues to grow.  Regina will continue to grow and we 



 

 

will continue to decentralize from Regina in an effort, a concerted and 
sincere effort, to stabilize rural Saskatchewan.  And that's important to 
all citizens of this province, rural and urban. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

SPMC Office Leases 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- A question to the same minister, Mr. Speaker.  I have here 
a copy of Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation's accommodation 
manual.  Section 16 of this manual sets out some fairly heavy penalties for 
government departments that break their leases with the Property Management 
Corporation, Mr. Minister.  And to date we know that there is not one 
notice of someone moving out of a government building to go into Fair Share 
Saskatchewan.  We know that the Property Management Corporation has not 
taken into consideration increased accommodation costs in other places in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister.  Isn't it true what you're doing is committing 
fraud on the people of the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, no it is not true.  The charge of the hon. 
member is certainly not true.  We're committed to stabilizing rural 
Saskatchewan.  We're committed to moving positions and moving the 
administration of government to a larger extent than is now the case out to 
the people of the province.  We're committed to that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the hon. member raises the question of the Property Management 
Corporation and leases in the city of Regina.  Yes, Mr. Speaker, there are 
leases in Regina -- some of them are longer term than others -- that's the 
case.  We have taken a significant look at the length of leases, the length 
of time of individual leases.  All of that is a part of the planning which 
goes into Fair Share Saskatchewan.  That planning is ongoing.  Those 
announcements will be made, Mr. Speaker.  There will be cost analysis with 
each specific announcement.  I don't know how much more specific I can be, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motions for Interim Supply (continued) 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.  I have spoken on interim 
supply before and there were numerous questions that I had been asking.  
And as I went through Hansard, Mr. Chair, I don't believe any of them were 
answered.  Or at the best, I think there was one that a partial answer was 



 

 

given to.  The Minister of Finance simply refused to deal with any of the 
questions we raised and we raised a lot of very important questions that 
are on the minds of Saskatchewan people. 
 
We talked about the fact that hospital beds are being closed in this 
province.  We've had several hundreds of hospital beds being closed and 
they're still being closed.  We talked about the fact that health-care 
professionals have been fired.  There's been some 400 health-care 
professionals, many of whom are nurses, Mr. Chair, who have lost their jobs 
in the last few weeks. 
 
The health-care budget that we are dealing with in part in this interim 
supply Bill, Mr. Minister, is an inadequate amount of money with respect to 
health care.  The Minister of Finance has tried to indicate it's much more 
than what it actually is.  When one takes into consideration all the 
spending from last year, and as well the inflation rate over the last year, 
we see that on an overall basis health care is actually being cut back as 
opposed to increased, which is why of course our hospital institutions and 
our nursing homes are having to lay off nurses.  And this is happening, Mr. 
Chair, this is happening on the eve of a nurses' strike. 
 
And I say that's political, Mr. Chair, on the part of the government, that 
they would invoke policies that result in massive lay-offs to nurses on the 
eve of nurses going into a collective bargaining process with the 
Saskatchewan Health-Care Association.  I don't believe that that's fair to 
the Saskatchewan Health-Care Association nor is it fair to the nurses, but 
then, Mr. Chair, this government has its own agenda. 
 
We have seen and we've noticed in question period here today many questions 
about the issue of decentralization because this interim supply Bill deals 
with the government's responsibility and funding for decentralization, Mr. 
Chair.  The government claims it's going to decentralize a few thousand 
jobs out of Regina, but meanwhile what we have seen are dental workers laid 
off in rural Saskatchewan, highway construction workers laid off, teachers 
laid off, nurses laid off, and we're talking in terms of hundreds and 
hundreds of employees.  Meanwhile they have a policy to decentralize jobs 
out of Regina. 
 
Well let me tell you, people in rural Saskatchewan think this is absolutely 
ridiculous, and I've spoken to a number of them in the last couple weeks, 
Mr. Chair.  They can't understand why the government wouldn't enhance and 
reinforce their health care and education initiatives in rural Saskatchewan 
as opposed to firing these people and trying to relocate Regina people into 
rural Saskatchewan.  It doesn't make any sense; it's ridiculous. 
 
This government has been unable to provide us with the study that they have 
done to show us exactly how they are going to achieve this and what it's 
going to cost.  They have not provided us with this information yet they 
expect us to vote in favour of their interim supply, Mr. Chair, when they 
refuse to come forward with this information.  They absolutely refuse. 
 
This is another example of their political games, Mr. Chair, dividing 
communities, pitting communities against each other; trying to pit urban 



 

 

against rural Saskatchewan; trying to pit farmers against workers; trying 
to pit nurses and teachers against people working in the cities.  Like this 
is desperation politics and it's wrong, Mr. Chair. 
 
And it's destructive to families.  And what I'm surprised is that the 
Minister of the Family hasn't been speaking out about the families in his 
constituency who are going to be divided as a result of his government's 
initiatives, Mr. Chair.  I haven't seen him out there supporting the people 
in his constituency. 
 
We've looked at the budget with respect to health-care services, some of 
which is being dealt with in this interim supply.  We see, Mr. Chair, that 
home-care services are going to receive an increase in fees of some 15 per 
cent -- 15 per cent increase in home-care fees, Mr. Chair.  But this was 
announced outside of the budget, after the budget was released in a private 
press conference, Mr. Chair. 
 
They were not forthcoming on the floor of the Assembly with this 
announcement for increase in home-care fees, which is another indication of 
this government's lack of commitment to the democratic process, Mr. Chair.  
It tried to sneak these increases in through the back door. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- We see chiropody, for example.  The $10 attendance fee at a 
chiropodist's office being an increase that's released in a private press 
conference with the Minister of Health, Mr. Chair.  I was contacted by 
home-care people in this province and by people in the chiropody field who 
were not aware -- seniors and others working in the field -- who were not 
aware that these increases were going to be brought forward. 
 
And that shows that this government is not prepared to consult with the 
people who count.  They are not prepared to engage in a democratic process 
to consult with respect to increases in fees.  And they just go ahead and 
slap these high user fees because that's what it is -- these high user fees 
-- on people, on seniors and sick and elderly people and people on fixed 
income. 
 
And yet this government refused to answer the question: what consultations 
did you have with the groups who are affected by these initiatives?  What 
consultations?  They have been unable to tell us of any consultations and 
yet they are here trying to ram through this interim supply Bill, ram 
through the interim supply Bill, and that Mr. Chair, is because this 
government is not committed to the democratic process. 
 
They release information in private press conference sessions.  They don't 
bring it forward on the floor of the Assembly.  And then they try to invoke 
closure when we stand up and ask the questions that are on the minds of all 
the people in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
(1445) 
 
And out of the other corner of their mouth they try to talk about 



 

 

democratic reform and their commitment to it, and I say that's total 
hypocrisy, Mr. Chair.  It's hypocrisy. 
 
We see a situation in Saskatchewan where there's an indiscriminate building 
of health-care facilities.  We've asked the government: what is your plan 
with respect to building of health-care facilities?  Where is your needs 
assessment study, the one that looks at the need for health-care facilities 
in various areas of the province, the overall provincial strategy?  Where 
is it? 
 
It's not forthcoming.  We see nothing.  They have absolutely no overall 
provincial strategy with respect to the building of health-care facilities. 
 
And then when we ask them for their strategy, they invoke closure because 
they don't want to have to come forward because they don't have the study.  
Or if they have a study, they are doing something other than what the study 
recommends, Mr. Chair. 
 
And that wouldn't be a first because what we've seen in the last two years 
is a Murray Commission study that came forward, was released to the public, 
and this government made a big to-do about the Murray Commission, and yet 
they have taken virtually no action on it -- a few hollow promises, but no 
action on that study. 
 
They say it's the blueprint for health care in Saskatchewan and I'm asking 
them . . . and the Minister of Finance is clapping right now, but they 
still refuse to take the position on the issue of regionalization, which is 
going to see control taken out of our local hospitals and centralized in 
regional boards. 
 
They call it the blueprint for health care in Saskatchewan and they refuse 
to take the position on the major thrust of that study, which is 
regionalization.  And the Minister of Finance came very close to taking a 
position on that at the last session, but then he got his wrists slapped by 
the Minister of Health the next day, who backtracked as much as possible on 
that issue, Mr. Chair. 
 
And here at this interim . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order, order.  I have to interrupt the debate at this time 
and put the question pursuant to the time allocation rule that was passed 
yesterday. 
 
Motion agreed to on division. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman: 
 

 Be it resolved that towards making good the supply granted to Her Majesty 
on account of certain expenses of the public service for the fiscal year 
ending March 31, 1992, the sum of $834,933,100 be granted out of the 
Consolidated Fund. 

 
Motion agreed to. 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman: 
 

 Be it resolved that a sum not exceeding $136,751,500 be granted to Her 
Majesty on account for the 12 months ending March 31, 1992. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman: 
 

 Be it resolved that towards making good the supply granted to Her Majesty 
on account of certain expenses of the public service for the fiscal year 
ending March 31, 1992, the sum of $136,751,500 be granted out of the 
Saskatchewan Heritage Fund. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that the resolutions be now read 
the first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the resolutions read a first and second time. 
 

APPROPRIATION BILL 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Pursuant to the time allocation resolution, I move: 
 

 That Bill No. 79, An Act for Granting to Her Majesty certain sums of Money 
for the Public Service for the Fiscal Year Ending on March 31, 1992, be 
now introduced and read the first time. 

 
Motion agreed to and the Bill read a first time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Pursuant to the time allocation motion, I move the 
Bill be now read a second and third time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second and third time and passed under 
its title. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 61 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth that Bill No. 61 -- An Act to amend The Education and 
Health Tax Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I just happened to 



 

 

come with a bit of preparation.  Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Hold it. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I made a few 
comments the other day when we were discussing the Bill 61.  I want to 
summarize those comments.  I want to summarize those comments now.  We have 
said to the government opposite that we think there are some very serious 
problems with this legislation. 
 
First of all, we think that the level of taxes in this province is too 
high.  The public, Mr. Speaker, are voting with their feet and with their 
wheels, I guess.  The public in this province have said and are saying 
across this country, we're being taxed to death, and we aren't going to pay 
it.  And, Mr. Speaker, they travel across international boundaries.  They 
go shopping south of the border. 
 
The members opposite must come to recognize that one of the penalties -- or 
I suppose benefits, as one might see it -- one of the aspects of free trade 
is that our tax system cannot be terribly different than the tax system of 
competing jurisdictions.  And in the days when travel is as easy as it is, 
Montana, North Dakota, and Alberta are competing jurisdictions for the 
shopping dollar. 
 
When we have the member from Regina South who thinks it worthwhile to 
maintain a membership in the Minot Golf Club, then we clearly have an era 
where we are not an island unto ourselves.  The government and members 
opposite must realize that we cannot set a level of taxation which is 
wildly out of whack with neighbouring jurisdictions.  At least we certainly 
can't with respect to consumption taxes.  We have to recognize that the 
consumers will act in their best interests and so this government must take 
that into consideration.  Moreover we've said and we've said time and time 
again, we don't think that this tax is necessary.  And we certainly don't 
think it's a place to begin. 
 
I doubt that the public would be as outraged with respect to the goods and 
services tax, Mr. Speaker, if it weren't for the inordinate -- perhaps I 
should say obscene waste and mismanagement that has taken place with 
respect to their tax dollar.  They see the government opposite treating 
their tax dollar as if it were air or water or some infinite resource. 
 
They see members opposite doing polling all out of proportion to what is 
needed to run an efficient government.  They see members opposite 
advertising all out of proportion to what is necessary to inform the 
Saskatchewan public about government programs.  It's true, Mr. Speaker, 
that there is a place for government advertising.  There is a place for 
informing the public about the programs we operate. 
 
The Minister of Parks and Renewable Resources may find some modest program 
advertising changes and park schedules, changes in fees, changes in 
facilities worthwhile.  Other ministers may on occasion want to inform the 
public about new programs in the department or perhaps about old programs 
which are not very well understood. 



 

 

 
(1500) 
 
But the level of advertising in this government is completely out of 
control.  It is unconscionable to be closing down schools at the same time 
one advertises . . . one hires the like of Don Adams to do advertising.  I 
made some comments yesterday about what I think to be the inappropriate 
nature of this person's image.  But the cost is a long way beyond being 
inappropriate.  It's an outrage.  It is an outrage that schools in rural 
Saskatchewan are being closed at the same time that these sort of dollars 
are spent on advertising. 
 
Of course the public are outraged.  What do you expect?  Of course the 
public resist paying new taxes.  What does one expect?  The public have 
said: we're not going to pay any more until you make better use of what 
you've got.  And they're right.  They are right. 
 
The government opposite is no different than any other spendthrift, Mr. 
Speaker, who thinks that a little more income would be all that is needed 
to solve the problem.  And we all know, Mr. Speaker, with respect to those 
spendthrifts, that a little more income wouldn't solve a thing because 
they'd blow that, too. 
 
This government needs to get control of its spending.  It's a fact, Mr. 
Speaker, that since this government took office, the spending has gone up.  
Let us begin first of all with inflation. 
 
In the nine years since this government has taken office, inflation has 
gone up by 48 per cent, but revenue, Mr. Speaker, has gone up by 61 per 
cent.  Their revenue has gone up faster than the rate of inflation.  Their 
deficit, Mr. Speaker, did not occur . . . their deficit, Mr. Speaker, did 
not occur because of an agriculture recession; their deficit occurred not 
because inflation had gone up by 46 per cent or the revenue had gone up by 
61 per cent.  Their deficit occurs because their spending has gone up by 85 
per cent -- roughly twice the rate of inflation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The spending in this government is out of control.  And when the minister 
begins by these inordinate tax increases -- the largest tax increase in the 
history of the province -- he is beginning with the wrong end of the 
problem. 
 
The public of Saskatchewan from one end of this province to the other have 
said: use the money we give you more efficiently, run an efficient and 
effective government, and then we want to talk about whether or not we need 
to cut programs or increase expenses.  But we haven't yet, Mr. Speaker, 
reached the point where we cut programs or increase taxes.  We're still 
well back of that. 
 
We are still at a point where the government is using the government 
aircraft and not telling us when and how they're using it.  We're still at 
a point when they're hiring Nancy McLean.  And as the member from Regina 
Victoria said so effectively, spending tens of thousands of dollars to have 
Nancy McLean tell them how to blow dry their hair. 



 

 

 
The public of Saskatchewan resent that cavalier treatment of their tax 
dollar.  They say we're not going to pay it until you run a more efficient 
government, and we say that you're right.  We say there's no place for this 
tax increase unless and until you get control of spending.  So long as you 
waste money in the way you do, there is no place for increased taxes. 
 
Not only does this government waste money, but it goes out of its way to 
avoid any kind of accountability.  One would think that this Assembly was a 
ring for sumo wrestlers.  They believe that this is a place where you avoid 
being tagged.  And that's really the name of the game.  The name of the 
game is not an honest discussion or even a vigorous debate.  Members 
opposite believe that the name of the game is to avoid getting tagged and 
thus you avoid your opponent and you do whatever you have to. 
 
I said, Mr. Speaker, that on an earlier proceeding before this House -- but 
I may add, a related proceeding, the interim supply -- I asked a question 
about the government's impact studies with respect to the goods and 
services tax, because we are concerned about the effect it's having on the 
retail sales business.  We think it's very serious and we note similar 
comments from the CFIB (Canadian Federation of Independent Business), Mr. 
Botting, making comments that the cross-border trading is getting to be a 
very serious problem.  We say, Mr. Speaker, that you should have done some 
studies and you should share them with us, and we should jointly determine 
whether or not this tax is one that we can live with because we don't think 
we can.  We don't think we can. 
 
What was the response to that request for an impact study?  The minister 
didn't stand and say, we have one and I'll produce it as soon as it can be 
prepared.  He did not stand and say we won't have one.  He took almost an 
hour and talked about every other conceivable subject under the sun, but 
never mentioned an impact study. 
 
We say that's essential.  We say it is essential before you bring in taxes 
of this nature that you study their impact.  You produce proper economic 
models which will tell us how it's going to affect us.  We say that is an 
essential preliminary step.  And it is becoming apparent that either you 
haven't done it or that the studies which were done do not support your 
case.  There doesn't appear to be any other conclusion, Mr. Speaker, but 
that.  But if you haven't studied it and if you don't have impact studies 
and you cannot justify your case, then you don't deserve to have the tax 
passed.  It's no more complex than that. 
 
It's obvious, Mr. Speaker, that this government is being driven by one fact 
and one fact only, and that's your election agenda.  It's obvious that this 
government wants this, as they see it, sumo wrestling match over and done 
with and they want out. 
 
We say, Mr. Speaker, that the function of this legislature is to call this 
government to account for its spending, to provide answers to reasonable 
and pertinent questions, and to let us, and through us the public of 
Saskatchewan, know what you're doing with their tax dollar.  That is the 
age-old function of a parliament.  But members opposite want to wish away, 



 

 

I guess, some centuries of parliamentary tradition.  Members opposite 
simply refuse to give us any information. 
 
We say, Mr. Speaker, there is far, far too much money being given to some 
very large business enterprises.  We want to know, Mr. Speaker, and the 
public want to know, what exactly is the nature of our obligation to the 
Cargill Grain Company and the Saferco plant. 
 
On the surface of it, Mr. Speaker, this government hasn't made a very 
convincing case for that particular expenditure of money.  We say, Mr. 
Speaker, Cargill's gross revenues are larger than our gross revenues.  
Thanks to the fine management of this government, their credit rating is a 
great deal better.  Why are we guaranteeing their debt?  If their project 
makes sense, if it is viable, why are we guaranteeing their debt? 
 
We are saying that this is not an intelligent expenditure of money.  If 
indeed, Mr. Speaker, it is, if you can justify what you're doing, then give 
us the background data.  You must have done some impact studies.  Surely 
you must have done some impact studies on this. 
 
The member from Weyburn seems, Mr. Speaker, very anxious to get into the 
debate. 
 
The Speaker: -- I'd ask the hon. member not to refer to the presence of the 
member from Weyburn. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- I beg your indulgence, Mr. Speaker.  The member from 
Weyburn was doing his level best to make his presence felt in this Assembly 
and . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order, order.  There is perhaps from 
time to time . . . that does happen and perhaps even the member from Regina 
Centre sometimes does that.  However that's not the issue.  The issue is 
that we do not refer to the presence or absence of members.  That's the 
issue. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- The members opposite comment and I'll put it no higher 
than that.  But that is being, that is being very, very kind and generous 
to members opposite.  Members opposite comment, what would you do with the 
Saferco plant?  Well I'll tell you one thing we wouldn't do is pick up the 
tab for a company the size, the wealth, and the strength of the Cargill 
Grain Company.  We wouldn't pick up the entire tab, which is what you've 
done.  We wouldn't give them half the plant -- 51 per cent of the plant and 
none of the bill, which is what you've done . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Perhaps, without referring to the presence or absence of any member 
in the House, perhaps it might be said that some people need to take 
advantage of their golf membership at the Minot golf club and relax a bit 
and not get so uptight about subjects which apparently seem to bother some 
members opposite. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  Could I ask the hon. member from Weyburn to not 
interfere with the member from Regina Centre. 
 



 

 

Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Why is the hon. member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: -- The member opposite has referred to a personal part of 
my life very often and I wonder if he'd be prepared to take a question. 
 
The Speaker: -- Would the hon. member take a question? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Sure, I'll take a question. 
 
The Speaker: -- The member said he'd take a question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: -- I would like to know, Mr. Speaker, what my personal life 
and my golf-share membership in Minot -- because everybody that knows me 
and my wife, knows that it's my wife that's the golfer, very competitive 
golfer, enjoys playing many courses, plays in Minot and I'm very proud of 
that fact -- what has that got to do with the Bill that we're talking 
about? 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker, it has everything to do with the Bill 
we're talking about.  The business community in southern Saskatchewan is 
reeling from the effect of cross-border shopping and there are those who 
are making the argument that that is being irresponsible because you take 
advantage of Canadian social programs, but you go south and you don't pay 
the cost of those programs. 
 
We say, Mr. Minister, that you ought to set an example.  You should not sit 
. . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- You want to know what your membership has to do?  It is 
a very bad example, Mr. Minister.  You represent a riding in Regina where a 
lot of business people live, and you ought to set an example by spending 
your money here in this city so that those consumer dollars can go to pay 
for Saskatchewan programs.  That's what's wrong with your membership. 
 
 DThe answer to your next question is: no, I won't take your second 
question because you're wasting the time of this Assembly.  Everybody in 
this city, Mr. Minister, knows what's wrong with your membership in the 
Minot golf club.  It is a very bad example to set.  That's what's wrong 
with your membership in the Minot golf club.  So . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order, order, order.  Order, order.  
I think that in the interests of good debate, that the viewing audience 
wants to watch with interest, that issue perhaps should be set aside and 
carry on. 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- The member asked a question.  I dutifully undertook to 
answer it.  I was doing no more than that. 



 

 

 
Mr. Speaker, members opposite, we think we need to know a great deal more 
than we are being given.  Ah, apparently the subject has been closed.  We 
want to know, Mr. Minister, and members opposite, we want to know what our 
commitment is along these lines. 
 
It's a fact, Mr. Speaker, that we have never been given the agreement for 
the Weyerhaeuser pulp mill.  We never have got that agreement . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . No, you haven't.  No, you haven't.  By 
mistake you gave us part of the agreement.  You gave it to us by mistake.  
You've never given us all the details. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it happened I think six years ago.  We have never got the 
complete agreement for Gainers plant in North Battleford. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  The hon. member has risen on a point 
of order.  What is your point of order? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, in second reading of this Bill I was 
quite precise on what this Bill was accomplishing, broadening the E&H 
(education and health) tax base in the province.  Not once did I refer to 
Weyerhaeuser or those kinds of things, Mr. Speaker.  My remarks were very 
specific.  Probably took no more than five or six minutes, Mr. Speaker.  
And I would ask that you rule that the debate he's engaging in is out of 
order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: -- I have listened to the hon. member's point of order.  The 
issue he raises is a dispute between members; therefore, the point of order 
is not well taken. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- The issue is certainly relevant.  This government has 
spent inordinate sums and committed inordinate sums on industrial 
development.  The last people . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well one 
of the members opposite says it's good.  It's not good in the eyes of 
everyone. 
 
The last time Salomon Brothers in New York . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Now I'm going to interrupt, and I'm warning 
hon. members that I'm going to continue to interrupt.  It's not possible to 
carry on debate with constant interruptions.  It's not a good forum. 
 
Quite frankly, we're getting a very, very poor reputation for doing things 
like that.  I'm going to ask hon. members to keep that in mind, because you 
are elected representatives. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- The amount spent on industrial development isn't good 
in the eyes of everyone.  The last time Salomon Brothers in New York 
lowered the rating of this government, the reason they gave was because of 



 

 

the sums that had been committed to industrial development.  This 
government has spent enormous sums of money and has very little to show for 
it -- very, very little to show for it. 
 
If you had . . . if members opposite had given a fraction of the same 
amount of resources to indigenous Saskatchewan businesses, you'd be a lot 
further ahead.  Instead you have neglected Saskatchewan businesses and you 
have instead provided obscene sums for outsiders.  And that's one of the 
reasons why this government thinks it needs this size of a tax increase. 
 
We say you don't need it.  We say what you need to do is to repriorize your 
spending.  You need to stop the give-aways.  Even businesses themselves are 
calling upon you to stop the give-aways.  We say stop the give-aways.  
Begin to spend in accordance with what the public of Saskatchewan are 
asking for you.  They're asking you to cut the frills, provide the basic 
essential services. 
 
They do not want inordinate sums spent on Cargill or Weyerhaeuser or other 
groups.  What they want, Mr. Speaker, is they want their school in their 
own community.  They do not want their children -- small children of six 
years of age -- bused down the road some tens of miles.  They want a school 
in their community. 
 
And members on this side of the Assembly say they're entitled to that.  
They're entitled to have their children educated within a reasonable 
proximity to their own homes.  And in parts of Saskatchewan, that's not 
happening.  And that is a very warped set of priorities. 
 
When we have some $20 million, by our estimates, for advertising through a 
clown who speaks in his shoe but we have nothing to keep schools open in 
riding of members opposite, we've got a government that's gone very, very 
badly off the rails. 
 
Saskatchewan people are saying, we want hospitals in our community.  We 
recognize the role that Regina and Saskatoon play, but there is a need for 
a health centre in our community.  We want our young treated here, but more 
important I think, we want our aged treated and looked after in our own 
community. 
 
They don't particularly want the Workers' Compensation Board moved to their 
community.  What they want is their hospitals and their schools maintained.  
Current spending and priorities of the government has the schools and 
hospitals closing and new offices going up.  That's insane.  And everybody 
in this province recognizes it's insane. 
 
 DAnd we say, Mr. Minister, if this government were to repriorize its 
spending, cut the nonsense -- and it is nonsense -- cut the nonsense, get 
back to the basics, you've got enough money to do the job. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- The revenue which this government has is adequate to 
provide a reasonable level of basic services for this province.  It is not 



 

 

adequate when you fritter it away on every hare-brained scheme which 
crosses your path.  And this government's track record is that you have 
missed very few hare-brained schemes you've heard about.  If it wasn't 
GigaText, translating English to French -- something a first-year computer 
student could have told you is an impossibility with current technology -- 
if it wasn't GigaText, it was something else.  It was the shopping carts or 
an endless number of other hare-brained schemes which this government's got 
involved on, and it's frittered away large sums of money. 
 
And one of the problems with the tax increases is that we just simply don't 
have the bill yet for all the damages.  We don't entirely know what the 
extent of the damages are.  We think this government has large sums . . . 
has a huge overhang of debt in the Crown corporations which is going to 
fall.  Just as surely as that snow is going to avalanche, so this debt is 
going to fall. 
 
We think, in addition to other things, it is premature now to be talking 
about increased taxes until we know the full extent of the damages, and we 
certainly don't.  We don't know . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well 
the member opposite is lending me assistance again. 
 
I say to members opposite if you think there's nothing untoward, why won't 
you call Crown Corporations so that we can ask these problems, so that we 
can satisfy ourselves as to whether or not there is a huge overhang?  We 
think there's an enormous overhang of debt and we think your attempt to 
deal with these tax Bills are premature. 
 
The first thing we need is an accounting of your stewardship.  And I'll 
tell you members opposite, if you think you're going to be ignored after 
the election when this accounting comes, you are sadly mistaken.  You will 
be called upon to account for your stewardship.  And we believe . . . 
Members opposite have all of a sudden developed a real interest in the . . 
. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- They're starting to practise for opposition. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- No, I think it's not that they're trying to practise 
for opposition.  I think they recognize that the members on this side of 
the House have some real financial acumen.  They know what they're talking 
about.  And they're trying to get a little assistance in dealing with the 
financial problems which so beset them. 
 
So I say to members opposite, this tax Bill is premature.  You need to 
begin by giving us a full accounting and then you need to cut the waste and 
mismanagement.  People need to see their government operating in a 
reasonably efficient fashion.  They're not going to tolerate tax increases 
until they do. 
 
And then and only when that process is complete, then we need to engage in 
a true dialogue with the public of Saskatchewan, not the charade which the 
minister has engaged in over the last few years.  We need to engage in a 
true dialogue with the public of Saskatchewan as to where we should go from 
there. 



 

 

 
Do we cut programs?  Do we increase spending? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- It all starts with changing the government.  There's a 
good first step. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- I have come to the conclusion that that is probably 
true, that this government is not going to be able to get a handle on its 
spending pattern.  It is not going to be able to get a handle on the 
problem at all or quantify it.  And nothing, Mr. Speaker, but a new broom 
is going to clean up the mess.  Nothing but a new broom is going to clean 
up the mess. 
 
I think many of the Saskatchewan public have come to the same conclusion.  
Some, a great many, have their doubts about members opposite.  Some, to be 
honest, have some doubts about members on this side of the House.  But I 
think the Saskatchewan public have come to the conclusion over the last few 
months, and perhaps the last couple of years, that nothing but a new broom 
is going to begin to clean up the mess.  And begin to clean up the mess, we 
must start.  We must begin to do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- When members opposite refuse to answer questions, when 
they used closure on an interim supply Bill none the less, when they treat 
this Assembly as if it were, as I said, a sumo wrestling match, which the 
whole name of the game is to avoid the tag, not to answer the question -- 
when they are so derelict in their duties, then all members opposite are 
doing is reinforcing that by now I think deep-seated public view that 
nothing but a new broom is going to clean up the mess, and that the current 
occupants of office are simply incapable of doing it. 
 
Some believe that members on this side of the House are inherently better 
than members on that side of the House.  Some believe members of that side 
of the House are inherently better.  But I think a very large number have 
come to the conclusion that the mess must be cleaned up and that cannot be 
done by the people who created the mess. 
 
I think therein lies the key to the next election.  And I think that's why 
members opposite may whistle past the graveyard and there may be some show 
of bravado by members opposite.  I, for my part, am going to be pleasantly 
surprised if an election is called within the next month.  I am going to be 
very pleasantly surprised.  Because I think members opposite are going to 
look at the polls and they are going to say, oh my heavens, what have we 
done?  What have we done wrong?  Members opposite are going to look at the 
polls and they're going to flee for a further few weeks. 
 
I can only say with respect to members opposite, you can run, but you can't 
run much longer.  Never mind hiding; you can't run much longer.  The 
difference between an election in the immediate future and an election at 
the very end of their mandate is now only a few weeks.  The difference is 
now only a few weeks. 
 



 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: -- The hon. member has a point of order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, I find the hon. member's comments 
relative to elections straying far away from the debate in principle on 
Bill 61, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: -- I listened to the hon. member's point of order and the hon. 
member has indeed spoken on this issue at some length.  I believe he has to 
directly relate it to the motion itself.  However, I think you will agree 
with me that he has spoken at some length on that issue. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- I am in fact concluding my remarks, Mr. Speaker.  I 
don't expect to go on very much longer. 
 
I simply want to make the point to the members opposite that you've got a 
real big problem.  We say you don't need the money and you need to clean up 
the waste and mismanagement.  The public say, we aren't paying the tax.  
And you say, boloney; we're going to put the tax through anyway and we're 
going to use closure and we're going to ram it through. 
 
I say to members opposite, members opposite have a real big problem.  And 
you'd better start to deal with it, because if you don't, you're going to 
deal with it in the midst of an election.  You will not hear the end of 
this subject - 
_ you will not hear the end of this subject -- until after the election 
unless you begin to deal with your problem. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, it must be evident that I will be voting against 
this Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I rise to take part in 
this debate on Bill 61, one of the largest tax increases in the history of 
our province.  And after nine years of financial mismanagement, 
Saskatchewan just simply can't afford, Mr. Speaker, another four years of 
the high taxation that we're seeing in this province today.  The 
Conservative government has failed to provide fair taxation to control the 
deficit, to control waste and mismanagement, to improve the economic base 
of small towns or to provide sufficient job opportunities for our young 
people. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, that what I have just indicated here, you are 
seeing what has come about because of the high taxation.  The mismanagement 
of the province has just created a terrible situation in this province 
where we face a debt of approximately $5 billion.  And I will just touch on 
what that really means to this province and to the young people who are 
leaving in droves to find opportunities in other parts of this country 
because of the high taxes that we have in our province today. 



 

 

 
What has contributed to this, Mr. Speaker, is the Conservative government 
has given too many favours to big corporations, and I will touch on that 
and how that has created this situation . . . we are now debating Bill 61 
in the House. 
 
The new provincial GST (goods and services tax) is the result of a 
Conservative government's wasteful spending and mismanagement and I want to 
touch on that also, Mr. Speaker.  The government has no right to impose 
this new tax without letting the people vote on an election in this 
province.  And I want to touch on that too, Mr. Speaker, because here we 
are debating today Bill 61, this large increase in taxes and a government 
that's in the fifth year.  And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, and through you 
to the members opposite in all fairness, that their mandate has run out.  
They have no mandate to bring this type of a tax in here for debate today. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, I think in all fairness to the constituencies that are 
not represented here -- some of the constituencies that have not had a 
member and have not had a voice in this legislature for almost two years . 
. . and I think of the citizens up in Kindersley and other areas of this 
province.  There's four constituencies that have no say as to this massive 
increase in taxes.  And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, and to the members 
opposite, that the citizens in those constituencies have every right to be 
represented here when the decision is made to increase such a large tax in 
this province. 
 
The new provincial GST will be a disaster for Saskatchewan economy, will 
reduce consumer spending, and will mean lost jobs and even more business 
bankruptcies.  And I want to touch on that a little later on in my speech, 
Mr. Speaker, as to how this major tax is going to affect the citizens of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I think that one thing we have to take a look at, Mr. Speaker, is why are 
we in here debating this large increase in taxes and revenue that the 
government needs.  And I think that most certainly the only conclusion that 
we can reach here is that it's the type of waste and mismanagement that has 
taken place in this province up to today under a Conservative government. 
 
When you just stop and think, Mr. Speaker, that the citizens of this 
province are paying just interest alone on the debt that has been 
accumulated by the Conservative government of Saskatchewan -- $500 million 
a year -- that's just on the interest of the loan and the debt that they 
have created.  Five hundred million dollars a year. 
 
And you know, if you put that in perspective and you go back to 1982 when 
the Conservative government took over from the NDP we had a surplus of $139 
million.  And the Minister of Finance has indicated that and confirmed that 
that is true as he stood up in the House -- $139 million surplus in this 
province -- and now we see a massive debt of over $5 billion, and the 
citizens of this province picking up the tab for interest on that to the 
tune of well in excess of $1 million dollars a day.  If we had that money 
to create jobs and economic stability in this province things would be a 
lot better.  But this is just a terrible waste of money that we're using. 



 

 

 
And I just want to quote what has been said by the Premier.  And I'm 
quoting, Mr. Speaker, and this is what the Premier of Saskatchewan said in 
1982, the present Premier that we have right now:  deficits are just a 
deferred tax that must be paid by future generations. 
 
And how true that is, Mr. Speaker, how true that is -- the tremendous 
amount of interest that we're paying on the debt of this province -- how 
true that is.  It is a burden on every man, woman, and child in this 
province today.  And it also is a burden on every man, woman, and child for 
generations to come.  Young children who are not even born yet are going to 
suffer from this tremendous mismanagement that we have had by the 
Conservative government in Saskatchewan. 
 
And you can just see, as I indicated, how this debt has grown and I think 
that's a good indication.  In 1982, as I said, we had a surplus of 139 
million -- that's what the Conservative government took over with.  Then 
they have worked that surplus into a massive debt in this province, and I 
just want to indicate how that debt has increased through the Conservative 
government's -- and I will get onto that a little later, Mr. Speaker -- 
what I consider, waste and mismanagement by the Conservative government 
opposite. 
 
In 1983, that's one year after taking office . . . and I remind you that in 
1982 they had a surplus of 139 million, so in their first year they ended 
up with a deficit of $227,l75,000.  Then in 1984 they went to $331 million 
in deficit.  That's only . . . and they just keep working up: '85, 379 
million; 1986, 578 million, and all the time the taxpayers of this 
province, Mr. Speaker, have been paying the interest on that debt -- just 
wasted money, just wasted money. 
 
Deficits, as the present Premier says, is just a deferred tax that must be 
paid by future generations.  And I say to the Minister of Finance, that is 
what has been taking place.  And that is why in Saskatchewan the situation 
is the way it is right today.  That's why I say to the Minister of Finance 
that that's why the polls are showing the New Democrats at 57 per cent and 
the Conservatives at 19 per cent. 
 
It's what I'm trying to explain to this government and that's not wishful 
thinking, and that is a fact.  Just read Hansard tomorrow and you'll have 
it.  But I just want to say, Mr. Speaker, that is why the situation that we 
have in this province is as it is today. 
 
Then in 1987, they finally reached the billion dollar mark, 1987: $1,232 
million debt -- deficit -- and then it continues to go on.  And, you know, 
that was the year that the Minister of Finance was out by $l.2 billion on 
his estimates, and I see the present Minister of Finance hasn't been out 
that much, but I suggest this year that it just may turn out to be as 
severe as it was in 1987, or '86.  That was the election year. 
 
Once again, the minister, he brings in a deficit this year of 365 million, 
and I suggest it's going to be a lot higher than that.  And I suggest that 
the interest rates that we are paying, as I indicated, is about $500 



 

 

million a year and that's what this new tax is in here and being debated 
for today, to pay off that debt. 
 
And here's some of the statements that I want to indicate.  The members 
opposite, they believe in increasing taxes. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order.  Order, order.  I wish to inform the Assembly that 
Her Honour is here for Royal Assent.  When we reconvene and the debate 
continues, the member from Athabasca will continue. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 
At 3:41 p.m. Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the Chamber, took 
her seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent to the following Bill: 
 

Bill No. 79     -- An Act for granting to Her Majesty certain sums of 
Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal Year ending 
on March 31, 1992 

 
Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 3:43 p.m. 
 
(1545) 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 61 (continued) 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  As I was indicating, I 
wanted to give you some quotes from some other Finance ministers who were 
talking about the deficit, and what it really meant to this province.  And 
I say, as I was saying before, I don't really believe that the members 
opposite really realize just how much of an impact that the deficit has in 
this province and as a result, the tremendous tax that we are discussing 
here today -- tax increase. 
 
This is a minimized and manageable deficit; and that was in the budget 
speech of 1982 and that was by Bob Andrew.  He considered that as minimized 
and a manageable deficit.  But as we progress, I'll get onto some of the 
other statements. 
 
Then the Premier, he indicated also in 1983, and he said and I quote the 
present Premier of the province: Saskatchewan has so much going for it that 
you can afford to mismanage it and still break even.  Now that was a 
statement that was made by the present Premier.  He said, and I quote: 
Saskatchewan has so much going for it that you can afford to mismanage it 
and still break even. 
 
Well we can just see what the effects are of that terrible mismanagement, 
and what the effects are of it today.  Because here we are, debating Bill 
61, a Bill that will create the biggest tax grab in the history of this 
province.  And that goes to show you how far he was out when he made that 
statement. 



 

 

 
And here's another one I want to quote, Mr. Speaker, to indicate just how 
serious this is and how the mismanagement has occurred with that government 
opposite: we believe that all governments must work in concert to reduce 
budget deficits.  Failure to accomplish this will force harsh financial 
penalties on our children. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Who said that? 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- That was said by Bob Andrew in 1984: harsh financial 
penalties on our children.  Most certainly we see the effects of that 
today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, more so than we have ever seen in this province.  
As the debt grows and we pay more interest and we have to have more taxes, 
this is why we're in here debating this today.  And this is why we say this 
is a tax that has to be stopped. 
 
It is inevitable that mounting deficits will result in unwanted reductions 
in government services and tax increases; and that was said by Bob Andrew 
in his speech in 1984.  Tax increases, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that's what we 
hear today.  That's what we're discussing in Bill 61, a massive tax 
increase. 
 
Here's another quote by the present Attorney General of the province when 
he was the Finance minister, Mr. Deputy Speaker:  This government is 
confident that a balanced budget can be achieved within the next five 
years.  And he said that in 1986.  And, Mr. Speaker, that most certainly 
indicates just how wrong they were and how they have mismanaged the 
finances of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I just want to make one other quote and then I will continue on into my 
speech: We all want a lower deficit.  We want a lower deficit because 
deficits add to the provincial debt which in turn leads to higher interest 
costs.  In 1991 interest on the public debt will be 493 million.  And 
that's the statement by the present-day Minister of Finance. 
 
And he adds to provincial debt, which it most certainly did, and it leads 
to higher interest costs, which it most certainly has, and now we see us in 
here debating today a Bill to increase the tax grab in this province. 
 
I now want to turn to some other items, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as to how this 
debt has really grown in the nine years.  I have indicated some of the 
reasons why it has, and I want to now turn to how it started off so that we 
got into this terrible mess that we are in the province -- a terrible mess 
that I say to the hon. members on the Conservative side of the House has 
got them into a rut.  And that's why we're not going to the polls, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, because the polls are telling them they're at 19 per cent 
and the New Democrats are at 57.  That's why they're not calling the 
election. 
 
I will touch a little more on that a little later in my speech, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, when I talk about some of the famous nominations that the Premier 
was talking about that were going to happen.  And he indicated three years 
ago in this House about those interesting nominations that would be held 



 

 

that spring, especially in Saskatoon. 
 
I will touch on that a little later, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  But I want to 
talk about how we got into this terrible mess that we are, why we're in 
here debating Bill 61, the largest tax grab in this province.  Well it 
started off, as I indicated, by mismanagement of our economy.  They started 
off very fast.  Early on in their mandate, they sold a drag-line in 
Estevan.  They sold that drag-line and then leased it back from Manalta 
Coal up in Calgary for 30 years.  Well anybody could have done that, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
And one of their friends, Manalta Coal, I believe . . . the former premier 
of Alberta is involved with Manalta Coal.  And then they turned around, 
they turned around, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and they sold the whole coal-mine, 
the whole coal-mine, and leased that back for another 30 years. 
 
Now that's the type of management and business management and ingenuity 
that the Conservatives have on that side of the House.  They always talked 
about being good business individuals, how they could run this province.  
Well we see now how they can run the province.  And they can run it into 
the hole so bad that it could take generations for us to get back out of 
it. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to call quorum. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  The member has called quorum.  Would the 
sergeant secure the doors.  Order.  Order, order.  Member for Regina 
Elphinstone, I ask you to be quiet when the Speaker is on his feet.  I'd 
ask members to return to their seats and rise, and sit down when their name 
is called. 
 
 Deputy Speaker Britton t 
 Hodgins Toth t 
 Meiklejohn Gleim t 
 Petersen Swan t 
 Hopfner Lingenfelter t 
 Neudorf Thompson t 
-- 12 R 
The Assembly adjourned at 3:53 p.m. 
 


