





























































Hansard: May 20, 1991


 

 

May 20/91 
 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I rise pursuant to 
rule 11 to present a petition to the Legislative Assembly.  The undersigned 
residents of the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, are asking the 
provincial government not to impose the major tax increase represented by 
the provincial GST, and are suggesting, Mr. Speaker, that the government 
does not have a mandate from the people of Saskatchewan to impose such a 
major tax increase so late in their term. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these petitioners are from a number of neighbourhoods in my 
constituency, including the neighbourhoods of Greystone, Grosvenor Park, 
Greystone Heights, the University area, and College Park, Mr. Speaker.  And 
on behalf of these residents, I am pleased to present this petition to the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a second petition here with the same 
mandate, so I won't repeat the prayer.  But the petitioners, Mr. Speaker, 
are in this case largely from Moose Jaw and include persons who have signed 
from Coteau Street West, Algoma Avenue, Hastings Street, Duffield Street, 
and a number of other areas in Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker.  And on their behalf 
I am pleased to present this petition to the Assembly as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a third petition.  This petition, sir, is signed 
exclusively by residents of Shellbrook, Saskatchewan.  And once again, Mr. 
Speaker, the prayer is the same, expressing opposition to the provincial 
GST (goods and services tax).  And on behalf of these Shellbrook residents, 
I'm very happy to present this petition. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  Order, sir.  On Friday I indicated to hon. members 
that I will not permit the signing of petitions.  It's a responsibility 
that you must take on to yourself before you come to the House.  So I'm 
just bringing that to the attention of all hon. members. 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I'm happy to abide by 
your ruling, sir. 
 
I have a fourth petition here, signed, Mr. Speaker, by Moose Jaw residents, 
the same mandate again, in opposition to the provincial GST.  This petition 
is signed by people on Montgomery Street, Carlton Street, Marshall 
Crescent, Iroquois Street West, Hoch Street East, and a resident of Ponteix 
who signed this petition.  And I'm pleased on their behalf to present it to 
the Legislative Assembly. 
 



 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, I have a petition, once again with the same 
mandate in opposition to the provincial GST, signed by a number of Prince 
Albert residents.  And I see residents from 9th Street East in Prince 
Albert, from 22nd Street East, from 12th Street East, and from rural areas, 
Mr. Speaker, outside of Prince Albert, immediately surrounding the city of 
Prince Albert, that have signed this petition.  And on behalf of these 
Saskatchewan residents, I'm very happy to present this petition . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order, order.  Order.  We have quite a 
number of hon. members who wish they could present petitions 
simultaneously.  One at a time. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I rise pursuant to 
rule 11 to present a number of petitions on behalf of residents of the 
province of Saskatchewan -- people who are extremely concerned about the 
impact that the provincial PST (provincial sales tax) will have on their 
standard of living. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, these petitioners have indicated to me that they feel 
that the government does not have a mandate to implement this legislation, 
and wish me to express this to the Assembly. 
 
The petitioners, Mr. Speaker, that I have, come from areas such as 
Caronport, Rosetown, and Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker.  And on their behalf I 
wish to present the petition to the legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Speaker, there are also people from other parts of the 
province who are concerned about the provincial GST, and have asked me, and 
requested us on this side of the House, to present their petition to the 
legislature, hoping that the government will reconsider not to implement 
the GST, which is going to have an adverse effect on their lives and on 
their business.  These people, Mr. Speaker, are from towns like Wilcox, 
Saskatchewan; Outlook, Saskatchewan; and again from the city of Moose Jaw. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a petition here from my . . . the city of Saskatoon, 
and mainly from my own riding.  And in my riding, Mr. Speaker, I have found 
just an overwhelming opposition to the provincial GST.  And these people 
over the weekend have asked me to make absolutely certain that I express 
their opposition to the GST, and have signed the petition, and asked me to 
submit the petition on their behalf.  And that is, Mr. Speaker, what I want 
to do at this particular time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also have a petition here from people who are expressing 
again their opposition to the 7 per cent . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order, order.  Two issues.  I once more 
request the hon. members to co-operate and allow the member for Saskatoon 
South to proceed.  And secondly, I'd ask the hon. member from Saskatoon 
South not to repeat the prayer.  That's an agreement we have come to, 
continued reference to the prayer.  Make one reference to the prayer and 
then submit your petitions. 



 

 

 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I certainly respect your ruling on 
that, Mr. Speaker.  I have also petitioners from the . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Now the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, 
I ask you to refrain.  This is the third time I have asked.  I point out 
however that you have not been alone in the other instances, but this time 
I'm asking you specifically -- you specifically. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Speaker, I also have a number of petitioners from the 
other centres of Saskatchewan, areas like Gravelbourg, Mossbank, and 
Regina, who wish me to present their petitions on their behalf opposing the 
GST. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Speaker, I have one further petition and that is from 
Tompkins, Saskatchewan; also from Davidson, and Assiniboia, where the 
people again are expressing their concern and have asked me to present the 
petition on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have one last petition.  This again are people from other 
areas of Saskatchewan, areas such Mossbank; Briercrest, Saskatchewan; Hazel 
Dell, Saskatchewan; and Yorkton, Mr. Speaker, who are expressing their 
concern of the adverse effects of the . . . provincial PST -- it's really 
getting to me too, Mr. Speaker.  On their behalf I wish to present this 
petition.  Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I too rise pursuant 
to rule 11 to present to the legislature a petition.  The petitioners would 
ask that the province of Saskatchewan humbly sheweth that the provincial 
government does not have a mandate from the people of Saskatchewan to 
impose a major tax increase which would result from its proposed provincial 
GST. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these names are from a number of communities: Crooked River, 
Tisdale, Esterhazy, Bjorkdale, Ridgedale, White Fox, and then on the other 
side of the petition -- I think that's proper that they can write on both 
sides -- Kelvington, and Arborfield.  I'd like to present this on behalf of 
the people from these communities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm honoured to rise on behalf 
of a large number of Saskatchewan residents, pursuant to rule 11, to table 
a number of petitions of people who have signed during the weekend in 
opposition to this government's provincial GST, and calling upon the 
government to withdraw this Bill until they've had an opportunity to vote 
on it in a provincial election. 
 
I am pleased to do this on behalf of these people who want to be heard.  



 

 

They come from a large number of communities: from the city of Moose Jaw, 
Mr. Speaker; from the community of Unity; from Saskatoon, as well as other 
communities in Saskatchewan.  On their behalf, I am honoured to present 
this petition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I also rise pursuant to rule 11 
to present a petition to the Assembly on behalf of residents of 
Saskatchewan.  These petitioners are urging the government to reverse its 
decision to impose a 7 per cent provincial GST. 
 
These petitioners are from communities such as Raymore, Christopher Lake, 
Waskesiu, Crooked River, and Tisdale. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise pursuant to rule no. 11 to present 
a petition to the Assembly on behalf of a number of residents of the 
province of Saskatchewan.  These petitioners urge the government to reverse 
its decision to impose a 7 per cent provincial GST.  And they also urge the 
government to withdraw the Bill and consider having a provincial election. 
 
This sheet, which contains a number of names, is some of thousands of names 
from the constituency of Saskatoon Westmount.  These people by and large 
are from the entire area of the city.  I see both sides of the river 
represented here.  I see that St. Ann's Senior Citizens home is also 
represented on this petition. 
 
And it gives me great pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to lay this petition on the 
Table on behalf of these many citizens, this representative sample of many 
citizens from the city of Saskatoon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I rise pursuant to 
rule 11 of the Assembly to present a number of names on a petition.  These 
people have exercised their democratic right to have their voice heard in 
this Assembly by signing a petition that urges the provincial government to 
stop the provincial GST.  These people are saying that the government have 
no mandate and should not continue with the passage of this unprecedented 
tax Bill. 
 
These people are from communities such as Govan, Strasbourg, Raymore, 
Avonlea, and Regina.  In fact, one of these petitioners could be one of the 
waitresses that I had serving me at lunch, who was bemoaning the fact that 
her tips have dried up since this Bill has come in.  So I present this, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too rise pursuant to rule 11 to 
table a petition in this legislature that indicates, from a number of 



 

 

people in Saskatchewan, that the provincial government does not have a 
mandate to pass the provincial goods and services tax, and is in effect 
asking the government to withdraw their proposal, or their proposed 
amendments, which will impose this major tax increase on Saskatchewan 
residents. 
 
This petition has been signed from residents all over Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker.  Some of the places represented on the petition are Prince Albert, 
Smeaton, Shipman, Moose Jaw, Christopher Lake, and Paddockwood, Mr. 
Speaker.  Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: -- According to order, I have reviewed the following petitions that 
were presented on May 16, and under rule 11(7) find them to be in order and 
they are hereby read and received: 
 

 Of certain residents of the Province of Saskatchewan praying that your 
Honourable Assembly may be pleased to urge the Provincial Government to 
stop the provincial GST. 

 
According to order, I have reviewed the petitions that were presented on 
May 17, and under rule 11(7) find them to be in order and they are hereby 
read and received: 
 

 Of certain residents of the Province of Saskatchewan praying that your 
Honourable Assembly may be pleased to refuse to extend the P.S.T. to goods 
and services. 

 
According to order, the following petitions that were presented on May 17 
have been reviewed, and under rule 11(7) I find them to be in order and 
they are hereby read and received: 
 

 Of certain residents of the Province of Saskatchewan praying that your 
Honourable Assembly may be pleased to urge the Provincial Government to 
reverse its decision to tax reading materials. 

 
And according to order, the petitions that were presented on May 17 under 
rule 11(7), I find them to be in order and they are hereby read and 
received: 
 

 Of certain residents of the Province of Saskatchewan praying that your 
Honourable Assembly may be pleased to urge the Provincial Government to 
stop the provincial GST. 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Mr. Speaker, it gives me pleasure to introduce to you 
Mr. Leendert Oorschot, who's a visitor from the Netherlands.  Mr. Oorschot 



 

 

is a retired personnel supervisor and he's visiting Regina and Saskatchewan 
for a number of days.  And I wonder if I might say a few words in my native 
tongue. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Dutch). 
 
I wonder if members could join with me to welcome Leendert Oorschot. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Studies on the Impact of the Provincial GST 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have a question which I 
would like to direct to the Acting Premier.  Mr. Acting Premier, my 
question involves the so-called, in-depth -- as the minister has called it 
-- the in-depth study on the impact of the provincial GST which the 
government released several days ago. 
 
And I ask, Mr. Minister, would you confirm that, rather than have a whole 
new economic study undertaken as it should have been, your government 
simply used the federal model developed for the implementation of the GST 
in Saskatchewan and extrapolated it to the provincial sales tax? 
 
Will you confirm that this report is, as such, a hasty and a sloppy 
response to the heat that you have been receiving from the public because 
you have not been prepared to table your economic analysis.  Will you 
confirm that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, one of the models that was used was 
based on the federal government's model -- the only agency quite frankly 
that can work up that model, Mr. Speaker.  I know the hon. member doesn't 
like the results of this study, because they and other studies conclusively 
prove, Mr. Speaker, that under full harmonization the economic pie in 
Saskatchewan will expand. 
 
There will be new jobs, Mr. Speaker.  There will be more economic wealth.  
There will be lower costs for operations for businesses.  They will be more 
competitive, Mr. Speaker.  If they're more competitive they can expand, 
hire more employees, lower the cost to the consumers, Mr. Speaker, or 
indeed hire . . . or pay better wages to the existing employees, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- A new question to the same minister.  Mr. Speaker, I 
want the minister to know that we don't like the devastating effect that 
the federal GST has had on the Canadian-Saskatchewan economy, which will be 
reinforced by the provincial GST which the minister opposite proposes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Minister, the one thing that can't be found in your 
so-called comprehensive report is the impact on the inflation rate that's 
going to be . . . that's being caused by the provincial GST.  In April the 
inflation rate in Regina was 1.4 per cent; in Saskatoon it was 1.3 per cent 
-- at the same time when the national rate remained unchanged and all other 
provinces saw either a drop in inflation, a zero increase, or a very, very 
modest increase. 
 
Why wasn't an inflationary impact of that nature considered to be 
significant enough to be included in your report and your study, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- No, Mr. Speaker, on the contrary, we have indicated 
that there would be a one-time inflationary impact, modest enough, 
something in the order, under full harmonization, I think of 1.6 or 1.7 per 
cent.  We've never tried to suggest otherwise.  But I would remind you, Mr. 
Speaker, and all the members that it is a one-time impact, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, the question to the minister, a new 
question again.  It was your own bureau of statistics, Mr. Speaker, not 
somebody else, but your own government's bureau of statistics that put 
these inflationary numbers in place and said that they were a result of 
your GST, which started on April 1.  And the largest increases, Mr. 
Minister, that it talked about were increases on the necessities of life -- 
for example, such things as clothing. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister, how in the world can you call a tax which gouges 
more and more money out of low and middle income people to purchase food 
and clothing and other necessities to be a fair tax?  How do you say that, 
Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, we have been very concerned with 
fairness in putting these tax changes together.  I would remind all the 
members again: these are the changes we put in place to ensure fairness for 
families on lower and modest incomes, in that 25 to $30,000 level, Mr. 
Speaker; the family tax credit of up to $200 per child for families, Mr. 
Speaker, as I said, on those lower and more modest incomes. 
 
As well, because we want to maintain progressivity in this system -- that 
is those who are wealthier should pay more, Mr. Speaker -- as well we 
increased the high income surtax from 12 to 15 per cent, and as well 
corporations.  Yes, they will be much more competitive under this system, 
but they too must help deal with the debt and the deficit. 
 
And for that reason, Mr. Speaker, the corporate income tax and corporate 
capital tax surcharge have gone up, Mr. Speaker, in this budget as well. 
 



 

 

Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a question for the Minister of Finance as 
well on the same topic, the province's economic impact study related to the 
provincial GST.  Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, in your province's report you 
paint a glowing picture of the impact of the tax, and I ask you, Mr. 
Minister, how you reconcile that with this April 2 headline in the 
Leader-Post, "GST blamed for economic mess."  "GST blamed for economic 
mess."  Mr. Minister, how do you reconcile that?  How does that wash in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- First of all, Mr. Speaker, the first step, if you 
like, of harmonization occurred on April 1 when we added things like 
restaurant meals, when many other jurisdictions across Canada -- I guess 
with the exception of two -- have been taxing those for some time, Mr. 
Speaker.  Obviously snack foods and restaurant meals have been added as 
part of it.  The hon. member likes to refer to that headline. 
 
I think those professional organizations such as the industrial dealers 
association of Canada, who have looked at our budget documents in some 
detail including a harmonization . . . The headline in the Leader-Post was, 
Saskatchewan gets an A for economic growth, Mr. Speaker.  So I think 
anybody who studies it sees what's behind these changes, Mr. Speaker, that 
we're contemplating in this budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Speaker, new question, same minister.  Mr. Minister, the 
federal GST has not been exactly a hit in this country or this province.  
You want to share some headlines, Mr. Minister, let's share some headlines. 
 
 iStar-Phoenix r of February 23, "GST said behind biggest inflation 
increase ever."; Leader-Post, May 7, "GST 'hurting' hotel business."; Globe 
and Mail, May 3, "GST to cost family extra $570." 
 
And so I ask you, Mr. Minister, in light of those assessments of the 
economic model used for your study, how in the world can you justify the 
rosy projections.  How do you do it, Mr, Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, these changes, this form of taxation, is 
meant to put our businesses in a more competitive position, so that they 
can continue to stabilize and diversify the economy, so that sectors like 
our agriculture sector, our oil and gas sector, our potash sector, our 
uranium sector, Mr. Speaker, can be more competitive and therefore help 
diversify our economy . . . And so our manufacturing sector and our 
processing sector which have seen tremendous diversification, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The projects all across this province, big projects and small projects, 
paper plants, upgraders, Mr. Speaker -- I'll compare our record on 



 

 

diversification, augmented by these changes, any day to what the NDP have 
put forth.  And that's why you get headlines like, NDP's record is shabby 
on diversification, Mr. Speaker,  They have no plan, Mr. Speaker.  I 
challenge them to tell us how they're going to . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Speaker, a new question to the same minister.  Mr. 
Minister, the Saskatchewan business people do want to be competitive, and 
what they're saying: to be competitive, scratch the PST, call an election, 
let's get on with building Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Minister, there would be virtually nobody in this nation 
who would be of the view that the GST information that you based your 
document on was credible information.  And surely you're not claiming that 
a study based on flawed input is a serious study.  Surely you're not 
claiming that, Mr. Minister. 
 
And so I ask you in this Assembly today: will you not admit to this 
Assembly and to the people of Saskatchewan that your report was nothing 
more than a slap-happy, last-minute effort thrown together to try and 
deflect the heat that you are getting from the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- No . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order, order.  Order, order.  Order, order.  
Order.  The previous minister of Finance would like to answer the question, 
however we're going to allow the present one to do it.  Order, order.  
Order, order.  Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, this report is a well-researched 
and well-documented document.  The problem that the NDP (New Democratic 
Party) are having with this document, Mr. Speaker, is it uses big words 
like general equilibrium analysis and input-output analysis, Mr. Speaker.  
That's the problem they're having with it. 
 
And the other problem they're having with it, Mr. Speaker, is it goes 
sector by sector, and it outlines the new jobs because of harmonization: 
1,127 new jobs, Mr. Speaker, in the agriculture and mining and forestry 
sector; 589 new jobs in the construction sector, Mr. Speaker; 350 new jobs 
in the transportation utilities sector; 3,394 new jobs in the services 
sector, for a total of 5,661 jobs detailed sector by sector -- new jobs 
because our businesses will be more competitive, our economy will be more 
diversified and stabilized, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have a plan to diversify the economy; they have no plan.  They are 
bankrupt of ideas, Mr. Speaker.  That is the problem with the NDP, Mr. 



 

 

Speaker.  No plan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of Finance . . 
. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order, order. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to the Minister of 
Finance, and it has to do with the economic employment impact that was 
addressed in his study. 
 
I noticed the minister talked about all of these new jobs, but the one 
category that he skipped over was the food and beverage industry, which 
says, Mr. Minister, that some 91 new jobs will be created in the restaurant 
industry. 
 
Of all your claims, Mr. Minister, that is the most ludicrous.  Haven't you 
been listening to the restaurant industry, Mr. Minister?  Haven't you heard 
them telling you that their tax, the tax that you've put on, is driving 
them out of business and is forcing them to lay off staff?  Mr. Minister, 
where have you been in the last two months? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- The restaurant sector . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order, order.  We are unable to hear the 
words which the hon. member I'm sure wants us to hear, then we can all 
judge what the . . . The Minister of Finance . . . let us allow him to 
address the House. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, first of all, if memory serves me 
correctly, the restaurant businesses come under the services sector which 
show 3,394 new jobs will be created.  Now I recognize that the service 
sector is a very broad sector, encompasses a number of services that are 
provided in the . . . what's called the service economy, Mr. Speaker.  The 
restaurant sector would be one of them. 
 
I have never tried to suggest that somehow because they are faced now with 
collecting two taxes in the space of three or four months, that it's going 
to be easy for them.  I've never suggested that. 
 
However it is worth noting again, Mr. Speaker, that all provinces -- I 
think except Alberta and B.C. -- have charges on restaurant meals.  I think 
some maybe have exemptions of under 2 or 3 or $4.  But all provinces have 
charges with the exception of Alberta and B.C. on restaurant meals. 
 
Secondly, they will be eligible for the input tax credit that they aren't 
eligible for anywhere else except Quebec and P.E.I., Mr. Speaker. 
 
And thirdly, Mr. Speaker, we have tried as well to adjust the commissions 



 

 

to make it a little easier for them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, because the 
government members have refused to answer the questions, and because the 
government members refuse to allow debate, I hereby move that this House 
now adjourn. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Before I indicate, I should like to read this short 
statement to hon. members, which is not related to this ruling at all. 
 
I wish to draw to the attention of all members that there is an error.  If 
I may have leave . . . leave is not given?  Is leave given for a short 
statement?  Okay, thank you. 
 
 DLeave granted. 
 
The Speaker: -- I wish to draw to the attention of all members that there 
is an error in the Votes and Proceedings for Friday, May 17.  The error is 
the omission of the notice for rule 16 motion, which was tabled at 10:12 
o'clock on Friday morning by the member for Wilkie.  The notice is now 
being distributed to all members and will appear on the order paper for 
Tuesday. 
 
I have listened to the hon. member's adjournment motion and have given it 
consideration, and have ruled to accept it, according to rule 4 of the rule 
book. 
 
The division bells began to ring at 2:42 p.m. 
 
The Speaker: -- While the House is waiting for the vote on an adjournment 
motion, I call to attention the fact that hon. members are not to use 
unparliamentary language, and it is important that all members co-operate 
in this matter.  I would just draw that to your attention at this time. 
 
The division bells were interrupted at 4:20 p.m. 
 
The Speaker: -- Would you mind turning the bells off, please.  I wish to 
make this statement to the few members who are present.  It's a copy of a 
letter that I have sent to the Government House Leader and to the 
Opposition House Leader.  It reads as follows. 
 
Gentlemen: Today being a statutory holiday, I propose to take the following 
action to allow some staff to return home for the remainder of the day.  
The bells will be turned off and the Chamber closed until just prior to 10 
p.m.  At that time I will return to the Chamber to conduct the vote or 
adjourn the House.  Should there be agreement between the whips to hold the 
division at an earlier hour, I ask that you give the Clerk's office 
one-half hour's notice prior to the time that the vote is to take place.  I 
will then resume the ringing of the bells at once and recall the necessary 



 

 

staff.  Yours sincerely, Arnold B. Tusa, Speaker of the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker returned to the Chamber at 9:59 p.m. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  It being 10 o'clock the motion to adjourn 
now lapses.  This House stands adjourned until 2 p.m. tomorrow. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10 p.m. 
 


