





























































Hansard: June 10, 1991


 

 

June 10/91 
EVENING SITTING 

 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 
SECOND READINGS 

 
Bill No. 70 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the 
Hon. Mr. Lane that Bill No. 70 -- An Act respecting a right of access to 
documents of the Government of Saskatchewan and a right of privacy with 
respect to personal information held by the Government of Saskatchewan be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on this Bill 70, this freedom of information Bill so called, I 
would like to spend a few minutes talking about the PC (Progressive 
Conservative) government's nine-year record with regard to secretive and 
closed government.  And secondly I'll then talk more specifically and in 
some more detail about the actual Bill. 
 
It's important that I just briefly talk for a few minutes about the 
nine-year record of a secret government because the way this Bill is 
drafted and the flaws in this Bill and the shortcomings are such that 
nothing is really going to change in terms of how the government opposite 
operates.  They're going to continue to operate in a secretive, closed 
manner because, as I will point out, the Bill deals mainly with exemptions 
to information that does not need to be shared rather than new information 
that should be shared. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Premier has often talked, when it's convenient -- it's 
been in throne speeches and budget speeches and what not -- about the need 
to take partisan politics out of this place; the Premier said that many 
times.  Mr. Speaker, he talks about wanting to work more closely with the 
opposition.  We have released two reports on democratic reforms in the 
1990s, both of them dealing with freedom of information.  In fact we've 
gone beyond that; we've even introduced a Bill last June, a freedom of 
information Bill which was on the order paper which also had the support of 
groups such as the federation of independent business, the Saskatchewan 
association of taxpayers, and many other organizations. 
 
And some 6,000 copies of that report have gone out, and that democratic 
reform paper and that Bill, Mr. Speaker, would have continued with the 
successful tradition that the Saskatchewan governments prior to 1982 have 
had in terms of good democratic reforms and good democratic government.  
And, Mr. Speaker, democratic government, open and accountable, an 
accessible government, is in the interests of all Saskatchewan citizens.  
So the Premier could have approached us and he wouldn't have had a Bill 
that was so badly botched as the one that we've got before us today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this record I talk about in terms of this nine-year record of 



 

 

secret and closed government, I think it would be fair to say that the PC 
Government of Saskatchewan has probably over the last nine years been the 
most secretive government ever -- I would certainly say in the history of 
Saskatchewan and maybe in the history of all of the provinces in Canada.  
The only government that comes close might be the current federal 
government in Ottawa.  But this is a very secretive government. 
 
This government is known for a number of other things.  It's known for 
rampant patronage, big corporate friends.  It's known for incredible waste 
and mismanagement which has been pointed out by the auditor on a number of 
occasions, and as well recognized by the business community to the point 
where there are hundreds of millions of dollars of waste by this government 
every year.  And that's not stretching it; that's well-known in the minds 
of the Saskatchewan public. 
 
And I hear tonight on the news that this Premier, after 10 straight deficit 
budgets, is now talking about the possibility of budget deficit 
legislation.  And I find that amazing that this person who is responsible 
for 10 in a row somehow has finally come to the realization that the public 
of Saskatchewan wants their governments to live within their means, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So this government's well-known for its waste and it's well-known for its 
incompetence.  It's just incredible the mismanagement that's occurred in 
this province.  And this is the only province -- again this speaks to the 
secrecy which this Bill is supposedly designed to counteract -- but this is 
the only province that I'm aware of where the auditor has written a special 
report, a special report talking about how his office cannot get access to 
important government information that he has a right to see by law.  
Therefore he's unable to do his job, and he says that the Government of 
Saskatchewan breaks its own laws by not providing information that he 
needs.  And that's the frustration that we in the opposition have had in 
trying to get information and in trying to hold this government 
accountable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, citizens have a right to meaningful information about the 
records, the policies and practices of their government.  That is their 
right.  They also have a right to know about information that their 
government has about them and how that information is being used.  And I 
would suspect that the minister responsible for this Bill would agree that 
citizens have that right.  But the reality is in Saskatchewan, that right 
has been denied.  Over the last nine years, the public of Saskatchewan has 
been denied basic and important information that the public has had a right 
to know, and they've been denied that by this PC government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They've even gone to the point, Mr. Speaker, of, as you know, of last week 
locking the doors to keep people out.  Not only are they not sharing 
information, they're locking doors to keep the public of Saskatchewan out 
of this Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  I would ask the member to keep his comments 



 

 

on the Bill that's before the Assembly.  Order. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Speaker, what I was attempting to say, Mr. Speaker . . 
. perhaps I didn't make myself very clear.  I was attempting to say that 
this government over the last nine years has been so secretive and closed 
that it's been a major concern not . . . to not only the public of 
Saskatchewan but also to the Provincial Auditor.  And then I tried to say 
that not only are they opposed to providing important information to the 
public, they even locked the doors so that the public can't have access . . 
. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- I don't find that . . . I don't find that . . . 
Order.  I don't find that relevant to this debate and I'd ask the member to 
refrain from that. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Speaker, I will certainly respect your ruling; I 
certainly do respect the Chair.  What I am very concerned about, and what 
these citizens of Saskatchewan are very concerned about, Mr. Speaker, is 
that this has been the most intolerant government in the history of the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Citizens have a right to government information and they 
have a right to have access to their MLAs (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) and they have that right to have access to this Legislative 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker, and this building.  This belongs to the people of 
Saskatchewan, and I'm saying that no government, no government, can lock 
people out of this building. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- I've asked the member twice -- this is the third 
time now -- to keep his comments relevant to the Bill.  I will . . . if the 
member persists, I will take the next speaker.  The member for Saskatoon 
Eastview. 
 
Is the member for Saskatoon Nutana challenging the Chair? 
 
Put it on the order paper.  Put it on the record.  Rise and put it on the 
record. 
 
Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, if you're saying that the member . 
. . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Does the member have a point of order?  Order, 
order.  The Speaker's rulings are not challengeable. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Speaker, I'll just quickly summarize and I'll respect 



 

 

your ruling and I'll move on to my next point. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the last nine years, over the last nine years this 
government has run a closed and secretive government, and I will point out 
in what areas I'm referring to when I make that statement. 
 
This government has been characterized by a lack of accountability.  This 
government has not shared important information; they have not involved the 
public in decision making, and there are many examples of that -- the ward 
system being one, but there are many other examples I'll refer to. 
 
This government is intolerant of those who disagree with it.  This 
government is vindictive to . . . they're intolerant to their employees.  
They come here to talk to the Minister of the Family, who also happens to 
be the minister responsible for the Public Service Commission; they can't 
get a meeting with him, Mr. Speaker; that's a matter of public record.  
And, Mr. Speaker, that boils down to a government that is downright 
arrogant, and that was confirmed last week by the poll. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Speaker, five years ago we saw this Premier -- this PC 
Premier and this government -- five years ago saying, look, we're sorry; 
we're listening; we're going to be responding to your concerns. We've 
learned our lesson; we'll be most responsive; we'll be more open. 
 
They promised freedom of information, Mr. Speaker.  They promised freedom 
of information in 1982.  They didn't support our freedom of information 
Bill in 1985 -- the private member's Bill.  They didn't support our private 
member's Bill in 1990 on freedom of information.  They promised a freedom 
of information Bill in 1986 and again in the 1990 throne speech, and they 
didn't deliver. 
 
At the 11th hour of their mandate, we get this watered-down version of a 
freedom of information Bill.  Five years ago this government said, Mr. 
Speaker, just trust us.  Just trust us.  Mr. Speaker, this Bill was brought 
in by the same minister who five years ago said, just trust us.  That was 
the same minister, the Minister of Justice who was then the minister of 
Finance.  And after asking us to just trust him, he was out in his budget 
deficit projection by $800 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now here we have this government back again, saying trust us again because 
we've got freedom of information legislation before you.  We've got 
plebiscite and referendum legislation before you -- despite the fact that 
last week they ignored some 123,000 Saskatchewan residents.  Mr. Speaker, 
the public is not fooled.  The public is not fooled.  The petitions are 
still coming in today, several hundred.  They're not fooled by this latest 
approach of so-called democratic reform, this Premier and his 
johnny-come-lately approach to democratic reform and freedom of information 
and openness. 
 
Mr. Speaker, where are his conflict-of-interest rules that he's promised 
several times?  If he really wants to bring in good, solid legislation, 



 

 

where are his conflict-of-interest rules?  He's promised three times and we 
haven't heard from him.  Mr. Speaker, the only time he talks about conflict 
of interest, which is another democratic reform initiative, is when there's 
some suspicious deal involving one of his cabinet ministers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the voters of Saskatchewan have forgiven the Premier once.  
They trusted him once and they're not prepared to do it again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Speaker, this freedom of information Bill, this 
watered-down Bill, will not fool the public of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  
This is a government that's been the most secretive and closed in all of 
Canada over the last nine years, Mr. Speaker.  Not only are they secretive 
and closed in terms of the information they share, Mr. Speaker, they will 
not even allow members of the public -- their own employees -- into this 
Legislative Assembly.  They locked them out, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(1915) 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The Deputy Speaker has ruled that the 
reference to that one incident is out of order and I support his ruling. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I respect . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  Order.  Order.  I ask my friend, the hon. 
member from Moose Jaw North, not to holler at the Chair.  I don't think 
that's in keeping with decorum, and I ask you to heed that please. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Point of order. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I wonder if you could explain why talking 
about the members of the public who came here to demonstrate being locked 
out of the Legislative Building is not in order.  Why is that not being 
allowed? 
 
The Speaker: -- The incident itself, as it was ascertained by the Deputy 
Speaker, is not related to the Bill itself.  Secondly, the government 
actually didn't lock them out.  That is incorrect.  However, the policy 
itself isn't relevant. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I guess I'm not making myself very clear 
then.  What I'm trying to say is that it's just not acceptable that the 
public of Saskatchewan not have access to important information that they 
have a right to have access to. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  I'm afraid you have competition from the 
member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster and the member from Quill Lakes.  I 
would like to ask the two hon. members to allow the member from Saskatoon 
Eastview to continue. 
 



 

 

Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Speaker, what I'm trying to say is that it's just 
unacceptable for a government to withhold important information from the 
public of Saskatchewan, from citizens.  That is information that citizens 
have a right to know about. 
 
Whether it's the Saferco deal, or any other economic development 
arrangement, or any other sell-off where the public has not had 
information, it's more unacceptable for the public to be locked out of this 
facility, to be locked out of their Assembly.  And that isn't acceptable 
because that isn't openness, and access, and democratic participation.  
People have a right to information and they have a right to access to this 
building.  That was the point I was trying to make, Mr. Speaker . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, well that is related directly 
to the Bill.  I know the member from Rosthern, the Minister of Social 
Services, does not see access to this building as related to access to 
information.  And I would say there's a direct link there, Mr. Speaker, and 
that both are very important.  Both are very important. 
 
And the concern I have about this Bill, the concern we have about this 
Bill, is that there are so many exemptions to sharing important information 
that nothing is going to change, Mr. Speaker.  The power to withhold 
information is still going to be vested with the Premier and his cabinet.  
Nothing is going to change by this Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a very related point to the power of cabinet and the lack of 
proper information is the fact that Bill No. 5 has not been repealed.  Bill 
No. 5, as you recall, allows the government, outside of the legislature, to 
reorganize government departments, Crown corporations, and agencies, 
without the consent, or even the discussion in this Assembly, for that 
major reorganization to occur.  And consequently what has happened since 
1986 -- and this is very much related to information -- is that not only 
the auditor, but the opposition and the community and the public, has not 
been able to track expenditures from one year to the next as governments 
are reorganized on a continual basis. 
 
Economic Development -- I think it's called Economic Development and Trade 
-- has been reorganized at least eight times since 1986 to the point where 
the public doesn't even know the point of entry to access information about 
that department. 
 
So when the government is keeping Bill No. 5 in place and on the books, and 
with a very restrictive freedom of information Bill, you just simply are 
not going to be able to access information.  We have a major 
decentralization going on right now.  We can't get answers to those 
decentralization plans; we can't get answers regarding the objectives, the 
costs.  We don't accept the costs.  There's been no studies tabled.  We 
couldn't get answers to the PST (provincial sales tax) debate, to the PST 
plans, apart from the government's assurances that it was going to improve 
the economy in the face of all the opposition from business and consumer 
groups from across the province. 
 
That's information.  That's important information that the public has the 
right to know and they've been denied access to it.  And I'm saying that 



 

 

given this weak Bill, given that Bill 5 is still on the books, the 
government is still going to be able to withhold important information, or 
at least we're not going to be able to access that information as much as 
we should be. 
 
But there are many other ways in which information is not available in ways 
that it was in the past.  Late filing of annual reports -- a characteristic 
of this government has been late filing of annual reports and financial 
statements.  The second day we were here back in April, I think we had some 
90 annual reports tabled in one day.  Some of those were a year or so 
overdue. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, those late annual reports and watered-down financial 
statements are a way of denying the public of Saskatchewan access to 
important information that it has a right to, so it can determine whether 
or not the Government of Saskatchewan is accountable in spending its 
taxpayers' money wisely, particularly in the face of major public concern 
that this government has not been accountable for the last nine years.  In 
the face of the auditor's concerns, who says that the debt is 2 or $3 
million higher than this government says it is, this government calls that 
an honest dispute. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this is the second Provincial Auditor in a row who's 
saying that this is the debt.  In fact it's more like a half a billion 
dollars.  Then we're talking about 5.6 or $7 billion rather than 5 or 5.2; 
that's a big difference.  The public has a right to know what the debt of 
this province is. 
 
So basic information like that, Mr. Speaker, has not been shared.  In 
Public Accounts, again because of the watered-down financial reports, 
financial statements, the fact that the government is not answering many 
questions . . . there are still many questions outstanding in Public 
Accounts.  Crown corporations . . . I mean holy smokes!  We're in a 
situation where the Crown corporations spend over 50 per cent of government 
expenditures and the Crown Corporations Committee has not met yet this 
session. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I said holy smokes because that's the strongest thing I 
can say and be parliamentary, but that is a major violation in terms of 
access to information.  That is a major, major . . . well it reconfirms my 
view that this has been a closed and secretive government in the extreme.  
There's just no other way to put that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Speaker, that is an undemocratic behaviour.  That is, 
to withhold the scrutinizing of a Crown corporations which spends over 50 
per cent of the public money is undemocratic, blatantly undemocratic; as is 
it undemocratic to not allow people to come into this building; as is it 
undemocratic to have vacant seats, some 45,000 voters in the province with 
no representation in this House at the point that we bring in the biggest 
tax grab in history.  That is undemocratic.  As it is undemocratic, Mr. 
Speaker, at the fourth year and eighth month in a mandate to bring in the 



 

 

largest tax grab in the history of the province and to undergo a major 
decentralization plan which is clearly a last-ditch effort with no mandate. 
 
That is undemocratic, Mr. Speaker, totally undemocratic.  You're ripping 
apart families; you're ripping apart government; the government is 
disintegrating across the province, Mr. Speaker.  We all support 
decentralization.  All of us can make claims.  Any government can make 
claims as to some legacy they've left in terms of decentralization, but not 
11th-hour decentralization that's designed to be a scorched earth policy, 
Mr. Speaker.  That is undemocratic, blatantly undemocratic. 
 
Now this Bill will not force the government to answer to . . . to behave in 
a democratic way in some other areas.  This government is not answering 
questions.  They did not answer questions with regard to the whole GigaText 
fiasco.  They did not answer any questions related to their attempt to 
privatize SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) or SaskEnergy or the 
privatization of the Potash Corporation. 
 
They did not . . . they're not answering questions on decentralization or 
Promavia.  In fact the Minister of Economic Trade and Economic Development 
-- or whatever his title is now -- goes into Saskatoon and reprimands the 
Saskatoon City Council for not in blind faith being willing to commit 
several hundreds of thousands of dollars, yet he won't give them any 
details about why he wants them to commit that money. 
 
Well that's how the provincial government has operated, Mr. Speaker.  But 
that's not how the city of Saskatoon has operated and that's not how local 
governments have operated.  That is not only undemocratic, that is 
blatantly arrogant and insensitive, and shows a disregard for working with 
another level of government. 
 
But they're not answering questions, important questions -- and this Bill 
will not force them to do that -- on information relating to the trade 
offices, Minneapolis and Hong Kong.  I don't know what those two trade 
ministers are doing.  I don't know how much it's costing the public.  I 
don't know whether they've been successful in anything; we have heard no 
announcements since they've been there.  What do they do?  We don't know.  
We still have not had information regarding many of the sell-offs.  The 
Saskatchewan association of taxpayers tell me they're not able to access 
information, that is a listing of what companies are getting what amounts 
of money through SEDCO (Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation). 
 
Now they take the position that those are public funds, and after the deals 
are made -- we're not talking about during the negotiation stage but after 
those deals are made -- that should be public information.  We do not have 
access to that information.  And particularly when so many deals are going 
down the tubes, the public has a much greater need to make sure that that 
money is being spent wisely and want to know where it's going. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on, but I won't.  I've made my point.  
You could pick your own examples.  Any Saskatchewan citizen could pick her 
or his own examples about ways in which this government has not openly 
shared information and made it accessible to the public of Saskatchewan. 



 

 

 
One area that certainly annoys the business people in my riding is the fact 
that most government tendering is not public and it's not open, and that is 
a major concern to business people, Mr. Speaker.  As far as I can tell from 
this Bill here, there's no commitment to open the public tendering or no 
way in which information is going to be made available.  There isn't even a 
record of much of the tendering that's being conducted by this government, 
Mr. Speaker.  I don't even know what the rules are.  I don't even know what 
the rules are, the position of this government is, with regard to 
tendering, and nor do business people.  That's a major problem in this 
province.  This Bill will not improve that situation for people. 
 
(1930) 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said, one could go on and on.  This Bill is seriously 
flawed.  I think the way it's drafted it reinforces that nothing is going 
to change.  It's geared more to me, as a citizen, getting personal 
information about myself -- which is important -- but it's geared more to 
that than it is to me as a citizen getting important information about how 
the government conducts its business. 
 
What the public is concerned about is that they want to know important 
information from this government that this government has not been sharing 
with them.  That's what freedom of information in all the other 
jurisdictions provincially and even in the federal government focuses on.  
It's opening up; it's opening up decision making, and it's opening up 
information of government business about government, public decision 
making.  This Bill focuses too much on getting information about yourself 
as a citizen. 
 
This Bill was rushed through; it reflects that.  I won't say it's poorly 
drafted as much I would say that it's complex.  I've discussed this Bill 
with some legal people and other concerned groups like the association of 
taxpayers, the federation of independent business.  This is a complex Bill 
and again, it's got eight pages of exemptions.  And I suppose more of a 
concern than that, it gives unprecedented power to the Premier and his 
cabinet, relative to other freedom of information legislation in other 
jurisdictions, to make a decision to withhold information if they don't 
think it's in the best interest of government conducting its business.  
And, Mr. Speaker, that is a concern that all Saskatchewan citizens should 
have. 
 
That is a concern that Mr. Avram has from the Saskatchewan association of 
taxpayers, because he knows that once this Bill passes, his association is 
going to be no further ahead in getting access to information from this 
government than it's been in the past.  And we know as a matter of public 
record that they've been very concerned, as have a number of other groups 
about not getting . . . as has been the auditor, about not getting 
important information that the public has a right to know.  So this Bill is 
not going to make any difference there. 
 
The other important flaw in this Bill is the fact that there are many 
sections that it's going to be hard to know how to interpret them, and when 



 

 

we start talking about Bill 71 a little bit later, that's one of the 
concerns that some of the municipalities have.  And I'll talk about that 
later this evening. 
 
But it's hard to know how some of these sections need to be interpreted.  
Here's a Bill with about, I don't know, 40-some pages.  Our freedom of 
information Bill, I think, has five or six pages and it's been approved by 
most groups that I've talked to.  So there's been no reason to complicate 
this Bill or to "muddify" it as Allan Fotheringham would say.  That's 
exactly what has happened in this case, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Muddified? 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- "Fuzzify" or "muddify" or whatever he says, but there's 
been no need to make this Bill that complex, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I guess the other point that's worth making is that as the minister . . . 
or as the government says in its release, talks about the information that 
will be available, Mr. Speaker.  I can't believe that the minister would 
use these examples.  The minister says that this is some progressive 
document that will allow the public to have access to information about the 
salaries of employees of government . . . senior government officials, 
details about personal service contracts. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the public wants to know the salaries of high-paid 
public officials.  They have a right to know those salaries.  The public 
has a right to know about the details of personal service contracts.  
Already though, that information can be provided within the existing 
legislation; in fact the public is demanding that information.  We should 
know the details of those third-party agreements. 
 
But he says that this will allow the public to know the costs of 
individuals travelling at government expense.  That should already be 
provided as a matter of public record.  That used to be provided as a 
matter of public record, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It will allow the public to access to the results of statistical surveys or 
polling surveys, scientific or technical background research, and the 
results of product testing -- whatever that means. 
 
My point is, Mr. Speaker, that nothing is going to change because the power 
is still vested with cabinet and the Premier and the examples they choose 
in their news release to talk about, the new information that would be 
provided to the public, is information that should already be provided.  In 
fact it's because this information isn't being provided that gives this 
government the reputation as being probably the most secretive and closed 
government in the history of Saskatchewan, and maybe even in Canada. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, nothing will change.  This is a window-dressing Bill.  
It's nothing more than a window-dressing Bill.  It is seriously flawed.  
The public will not be fooled.  They can see that this is not . . . anybody 
who's following this can see that this is not a serious attempt to provide 
new information to the public. 



 

 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, what we want to do is we want to open up access to 
information.  We want to open the books.  We want to open up access to this 
building to the public of Saskatchewan.  We want to provide support to 
external organizations in terms of their co-operating with the provincial 
government. 
 
We want, obviously, to protect the privacy rights of citizens, which this 
Bill does, and I'll give this Bill credit for that.  I might add I'll also 
give this Bill credit for establishing the information and privacy office 
and for putting the onus of proof or the onus of burden, if there's a 
dispute, on the government.  I think that's the correct place to put the 
onus of proof. 
 
But when you can still control, as the Premier and the cabinet will be able 
to under this Bill, the kinds of information that the public has access to, 
then putting the onus on the government for that narrow number of areas is 
no big deal.  Small step in the right direction, but they've missed the 
boat in terms of the broader issue of opening up access to information. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I might just make a point as well as to how this Bill was 
introduced or how this Bill was released because I think that says 
something about the fact that nothing is really going to change.  Mr. 
Speaker, this Bill was introduced not in the Legislative Assembly, this 
Bill was introduced . . . several hours before it was introduced here, it 
was introduced to the media.  Granted, it was embargoed until the 
legislature opened, but it was also introduced to invited guests of the 
government. 
 
And for example, I know that representatives of the Saskatchewan 
association of taxpayers were at that meeting, and, Mr. Speaker, that is 
blatantly undemocratic. 
 
Friends of the government -- whoever they might be, and they may be 
different people with different governments -- friends of the government do 
not have the right to be invited to a briefing of a Bill, and the sharing 
of the Bill before members of the Assembly.  That's like the Premier's 
brother-in-law getting preferential treatment on his move to Gravelbourg 
over and above and before other public employees who have a right to get 
that at the same time.  So some people get information and have certain 
rights over other people, and that's not the way it's supposed to be, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I'm concerned about the way the Bill was introduced.  I'm 
also concerned about the comments by the member who introduced it, who a 
week before that Bill was introduced, on a radio line show said, well, yes 
we've kept the opposition out of the legislature for nine and a half months 
but the Legislative Assembly doesn't work anyway, we can be much more 
effective as a government outside of the Legislative Assembly making . . . 
It's a complex world and important decisions have to be made. 
 
Well that's their attitude, Mr. Speaker.  This place doesn't mean very much 
to them.  In fact it's a hindrance; it slows them down because they've got 



 

 

things set up so that cabinet can make all the decisions.  And since 
everybody's in cabinet on that side of the government, they can keep 
harmony among the ranks because everybody's either in cabinet or a 
Legislative Secretary.  But it's not fair to the rest of the public, nor is 
it fair that there be 4 vacant seats for going on 18, 19 months, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would say that it's not fair as well . . . and again 
this relates to information and I assume that this is being dealt with.  
I've got every confidence in your office to deal with the issue of the 
security of this building, but it's certainly not fair -- and I don't 
attribute any of these comments to you -- but that all members of the 
Assembly not know the security arrangements for this building.  It is 
certainly not fair that the Government of Saskatchewan has a security 
division within the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation.  Nobody 
outside a small corps knows what that security division does, who it 
reports to, what their mandate is, and where they're probing in terms of 
people's lives.  That's basic information that this Bill will not help us 
get at. 
 
Nor is it fair that the province of Saskatchewan has a secret deal with 
Ottawa to share information from files about Saskatchewan residents.  We 
don't know what information is being shared, for what purpose it's being 
used, how it is being safeguarded.  And that, Mr. Speaker, that is 
undemocratic.  That's an infringement of people's rights. 
 
This Bill will not allow citizens, as I read it, to get access to know 
whether or not any information about them is being shared.  This Bill will 
not allow us, as the opposition, to know of the arrangements and the 
agreement between the provincial and federal governments regarding that 
sharing of secret information for security purposes, whatever that means. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this is a seriously flawed Bill.  I would say that the 
Premier's saying that, as he did in November and January, that there's new 
realities in Saskatchewan, and the new reality, as the Premier says it, is 
that the public wants open government; they want responsive government; the 
public wants accountable government; and they want to be listened to, Mr. 
Speaker -- that is nothing new.  That is nothing new.  The public wants 
basic information.  They want involvement in decision making.  They want 
their government to be accountable.  They want it to be open.  And I would 
say right at this point in time, Mr. Speaker, now that the boundaries are 
clarified, what the public of Saskatchewan want more than anything else is 
a provincial election.  And they deny that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Speaker, that's the new reality.  And that was made 
clear to the Premier last week, that the new reality is that he's so low in 
the polls he can't go any lower.  And, Mr. Speaker, he's at 19 per cent in 
the polls and he's the second choice of nobody else.  And, Mr. Speaker, for 
him now to hang on and talk about new destruction, that he's going to 
create havoc on the province of Saskatchewan, including budget deficit 
legislation, a policy from last week that'll force shoppers to go outside 



 

 

the province, and hundreds and hundreds of businesses to go under, at this 
stage in his mandate, is undemocratic.  It just isn't right. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the public want real openness; they want access to government 
information; they want honesty; they want to participate in decision 
making.  And, Mr. Speaker, more importantly, they want a government that's 
willing.  I mean, bringing in laws is one thing.  You know, the auditor's 
Act is a law, but there's got to be a will to comply with the Act.  This 
government did not comply with the auditor's Act by sharing information he 
had a right to see. 
 
(1945) 
 
First there's virtually nothing in this Bill that's going to force this 
government to change its ways.  It's going to continue to show disdain and 
lack of regard for the public of Saskatchewan.  And, Mr. Speaker, what I 
would suggest is what we need is a comprehensive approach to democratic 
reforms that does a number of things simultaneously. 
 
I mean, I would urge the minister to shelve this Bill until after the 
election and then we will bring in the democratic reform proposals that 
will make government more open, accountable, accessible, and allow the 
public to have access, and participate in decision making, and we will 
allow them access to this building, Mr. Speaker.  Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise in this debate with respect 
to second reading on Bill No. 70, which is a Bill, Mr. Speaker, which is An 
Act respecting a right of access to documents of the Government of 
Saskatchewan and a right of privacy with respect to personal information 
held by the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill the government puts forward is a sham.  They have . 
. . at least the manner in which they've done it is a sham.  It's a Bill 
which has been promised by the party opposite in 1981, in 1982, and even 
before that, Mr. Speaker.  And after nine years of long, lean, tough 
government, riddled with the debts, riddled with the waste and 
mismanagement, and patronage, and high taxes, they come forward and say, 
we're going to be open with the people.  Mr. Speaker, we have raised in 
this House, time after time, questions that are important, on behalf of the 
people of this province, with respect to accountability and responsibility 
and the finances of this government.  They have been secretive in all of 
their transactions.  They have refused to respond to this House either 
through oral question period or in written question form. 
 
I refer, Mr. Speaker, to a document which I have here, the 1982 PC election 
program.  And in this election program, Mr. Speaker, they say that . . . 
page 11, it's a question under responsible governments.  They say, "Is it 
true that Saskatchewan has no freedom of information legislation?"  And the 
response in the PC manual of 1982 said, and I quote: 
 

 That's correct.  A PC government will be committed to Freedom of 



 

 

Information legislation. 
 

They made that promise.  They said as soon as they got elected they would 
undertake to provide a freedom of information Act so that the people of 
Saskatchewan could have access to documents in this government. 
 
Well we have seen, Mr. Speaker, prior to that, the former member from 
Kindersley, Mr. Andrew, rise in this House on a number of occasions when he 
was in opposition, and calling for a freedom of information Act.  Well, Mr. 
Speaker, he was elected in 1982, re-elected, but in 1981 he had a number of 
comments which he made -- in 1980 as well.  And I have some here I'd just 
like to share with the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have . . . I'm just trying . . . I'm making some reference 
here, Mr. Speaker, to Mr. Andrew.  My colleagues are advising me on some 
additional things which I'd like to say, and I'll get to it in one moment.  
Actually I'm trying to buy some time while I review my notes here.  I can't 
seem to find the quote, but I have it here, Mr. Speaker, and it's dated 
April 28.  Bob Andrew . . . maybe I could have my colleague here find it; 
it's in one of those Hansards. 
 
But the member from Kindersley, when he was in opposition, Mr. Andrew, said 
time after time, Mr. Speaker, that if they became government, if the PC 
Party became government, they would undertake to pass some freedom of 
information legislation.  Well he said this in 1980.  He introduced a 
private members' Bill in this very Assembly, and in the private members' 
Bill he made the commitment and he quoted John Diefenbaker, and he quoted 
John Kennedy, and he quoted Voltaire, and he quoted every sage philosopher 
that ever spoke in the House of Commons or the U.S. Senate or the U.S. 
Congress, about how important it was to have freedom of information Act.  
Well, Mr. Speaker, in 1980 it wasn't only the one occasion that he 
introduced this private members' Bill to obtain that access to information, 
but in 1981 as well, he did the same on two occasions, Mr. Speaker, 
introduce this Bill. 
 
And of course when he became minister of Justice everyone in the province 
assumed that because he made these two commitments by introducing two 
separate private members' Bills calling for freedom of information, that he 
would obviously quickly and efficiently, in his position as one of the top 
three members of the PC government in this province, introduce an Act which 
would provide for freedom of information. 
 
Well we waited for 1982 to pass, Mr. Speaker, and it wasn't forthcoming.  
We waited for 1983, and members in this side of the House said -- well we 
waved the Hansards back and forth -- and we said, the member for Kindersley 
indicated he was going to pass this Bill once he became a cabinet member.  
Well '83 came and '83 went and there was no freedom of information Act. 
 
Well in 1984 we waited and we waited and we waited, and the people of this 
province said, well I'm sure the member from Kindersley, the minister of 
Justice in the Conservative government, would introduce this legislation 
which provides for freedom of information and access to information by the 
opposition, and by the public, of government expenditures and government 



 

 

matters. 
 
Well 1985 came and 1985 went -- still no freedom of information Act.  In 
1986 my colleague from the constituency of Regina Centre went so far as to 
introduce another freedom of information Act, and it was a very good Act.  
And it was -- I might add to compliment Mr. Andrew -- it was similar to one 
of the Bills that he introduced, because it had the same intention, that is 
to provide access to information from a government that was secretive and a 
government that would fail to respond to written questions or fail to 
respond to oral questions. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the member from Kindersley, the minister of Justice, sat 
in this House silently as the member from Regina Centre and one of his 
colleagues from the opposition moved and seconded the Bill.  But he sat in 
this House and refused to respond.  Everybody in this province wanted the 
member from Kindersley to stand up in this House and say, member from 
Regina Centre in the NDP (New Democratic Party) opposition, I support what 
you're doing.  I support what you're doing because I had the same sort of 
Bill introduced in this House twice -- almost identical. 
 
And you know what the member from Kindersley, the minister of Justice did?  
He sat and he sat, and he was so silent you didn't even know he was in the 
House.  You thought maybe he had resigned his seat and taken the 
Minneapolis appointment five years early, but he was still in the House.  
He hadn't resigned his seat, and he was still hanging around here waiting 
to perhaps comment on this Bill.  Well, the member for Regina Centre tells 
me that the member from Kindersley didn't support the Bill. This freedom of 
information Bill that the member for Regina Centre introduced in this 
House, calling for access to information from the government, was not 
supported by the member from Kindersley, who was such a supporter . . . who 
in 1981 wanted to introduce the same Bill. 
 
And I have here, Mr. Speaker, according to Hansard, April 28, page 2614, on 
resolution no. 22 entitled, "Freedom of Information and Privacy 
Legislation."  And what do we have here, Mr. Speaker, but we have the 
minister from Kindersley, the MLA for the PC government, Mr. Bob Andrew, 
and it says: 
 

 Mr. Speaker, I wish to be very brief on this motion.  Last year I brought 
a motion before the Assembly with regard to the concept of freedom of 
information.  This year the motion is calling for an extension of that 
concept to cover the whole question of privacy as well. 

 
And he went on to talk about the experiences that he had.  He talked about 
the Trudeau governments who had introduced a Bill 43 which was presently 
being debated before the federal parliament.  And he talked about 
supporting that kind of a Bill, and as well the Ontario commission on 
freedom of information and privacy had come down with its three-volume 
report.  And he said it was: 
 

 ". . . a very good report.  Hopefully (he said) that will lead to some 
legislation in the province of Ontario." 

 



 

 

And the only concern he had at that time is ". . . that now a majority 
government stands in place in Ontario."  And he was concerned because they 
had a majority; they wouldn't pass that legislation. 
 
Well he talked about some other stuff.  He went on to say -- with respect 
to a quotation from the Ontario commission -- he quoted from a document 
called Privacy and Freedom, by Allan Weston.  And he quoted, and I say the 
following: 
 

 The modern totalitarian state relies on secrecy for the regime, but high 
surveillance and disclosure for all other groups.  The democratic society 
relies on publicity as a control over government and on privacy as a 
shelter for groups and individual life. 

 
He went on to say that: 
 

 I think that is really the stage we are in our western democratic system 
of government.  Canada stands far behind other countries in the world with 
regard to freedom of information legislation. 

 
He talked about the U.S. and he talked about Sweden and he talked about 
Australia and he talked about New Zealand, and he supported all and each of 
these initiatives, Mr. Speaker.  And I think the most significant thing in 
all of his comments was that what he said in his speech applies to the 
governments that we have here in this province of Saskatchewan in the past 
nine years. 
 
We have a totalitarian government that is secretive.  We have a 
totalitarian, arbitrary government that refuses to answer questions.  We 
have a government which has, on every test, been proven to be 
unaccountable.  We have a government which, by every test, has been proven 
to be irresponsible with respect to the financial transactions and the 
finances of the taxpayers of this province.  And in this report, in this 
speech that he made to this House, he said that: 
 

 The modern totalitarian state relies on secrecy for the regime. 
 

And this is exactly what he adopted when he became minister of Justice.  He 
believed that the totalitarian state should have total secrecy, that we 
should not share any information, in particular when it is pertinent to the 
taxpayers of this province who fund the government and fund the costs of 
all of their crazy projects they've undertaken in the last nine years. 
 
The minister from Kindersley went on to talk about . . . And I have another 
quote here I want to read to you. 
 

 I think it is amply clear that the government in the province of 
Saskatchewan is against this type of legislation.  I would like to bring 
to the Assembly two or three situations where I think it would become 
relevant and material. 

 
And he talked about the debate with respect to SGI and he talked about the 
Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker.  And I quote: 



 

 

 
 When you have a Crown agency that is 100 per cent owned by the government, 

and therefore, 100 per cent owned by the people, the people have a right 
to know (what transactions transpire and) what the information is.  It is 
only through that type of disclosure, open disclosure, that we can move in 
this field. 

 
Now this was said by the Conservative member from Kindersley, the minister 
of Justice in this government.  He said this in opposition, as an 
opposition member in the PC Party in 1981.  And you know, a famous baseball 
player used to say -- and I think it was Yogi Berra -- this is de péja vu 
all over again; de péja vu all over again. 
 
When they're in opposition, they cry for information; they cry for 
openness.  And in this particular case, the PC member from Kindersley cried 
for access to information with respect to the Crown Corporations Committee 
and all Crown corporations.  And, Mr. Speaker, we in government and we in 
opposition, be it either one, support that same principle.  Under the Allan 
Blakeney government from 1971 to 1982, the Crown Corporations Committee, 
Mr. Speaker, was called without fail on a regular basis when the 
legislature was sitting.  It was called to deal with the business of the 
legislature, to deal with the business of the Crown corporations, to hold 
accountable over half of the expenditures of the taxpayers' dollars which 
are made in the Crown corporation sector. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, here we are, I think it's day 43 or day 44 in the 
legislative session of this spring, and we are not currently reviewing the 
Crown Corporations Committee.  We have, Mr. Speaker, a very, very sad 
situation in this Assembly.  The government, through Bill No. 70 and Bill 
No. 71, cry for the passage of a freedom of information Act in their last 
days of government.  After nine years of trying to get some commitment from 
this government, some answers, some information, and to hold them 
accountable and responsible to no avail, they now say, well we are, in our 
deathbed repentance, going to provide some information. 
 
Well we're in day 43; the Crown Corporations Committee has not met.  We 
have made the request on numerous occasions -- four times in writing to the 
chairperson of the Crown Corporations Committee, the member from Pelly.  We 
have raised in question period on two occasions why they haven't called the 
committee.  We have asked the member from Pelly, the chairman of the 
committee, and the Premier and the Deputy Premier, to call this committee 
to meet to review the expenditures of the Crown Corporations Committee.  In 
every occasion, the response has been no, or silence. 
 
(2000) 
 
As a matter of fact, they haven't even responded to the last two letters 
that were sent out by myself, who is a co-ordinator for the Crown 
Corporations Committee of the opposition, to the chairman of that 
committee.  The member from Pelly, who is the chair, the Government House 
Leader and the Premier have not had the courtesy to even respond to our 
request to call this committee so that the members of the opposition can 
hold the government accountable for half of the expenditures in the entire 



 

 

province, with respect to the Crown Corporations. 
 
The former Speaker of this Assembly is probably as disgusted with this 
performance as the opposition and the members of the public.  It's 
unbelievable; it's unparalleled; it's incredible to assume that they have 
any sincerity in wanting to move and pass a freedom of information Act when 
after the last eight and a half, nine years, they've frustrated the 
opposition in every attempt to gather information. 
 
And now we see, Mr. Speaker, after seven or eight attempts to have them 
call this Crown Corporations Committee to meet, they refuse to meet.  We 
have to ask the question: what are they hiding?  Why will they not call the 
Crown Corporations Committee to meet? 
 
The former chairman of the Crown Corporations Committee on the government 
side sits there and he agrees.  Why haven't we called the committee to 
meet?  Is there something that my ministers are hiding?  I think he has the 
same inquisitiveness as everybody else in the province of Saskatchewan.  
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think we've got some very, very serious problems with 
this government with respect to freedom of information. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, they're always wanting to be co-operative.  This is 
always their intention but it never, ever seems to materialize.  Mr. 
Speaker, we've had a number of problems with this Crown Corporations 
Committee, even when it was called.  We have seen a deliberate attempt by 
the members opposite in this government to frustrate the opposition in a 
number of ways. 
 
In the first instance, they have had a very deliberate effort, in a 
disorganized fashion, to not organize simple meetings.  This is, I think, 
witnessed and evidenced by the fact they refused to call the first meeting 
of the committee. 
 
We have seen this government to be very reluctant to review major 
corporations on a timely basis when they do hold the committee meetings.  
And we see them organizing some of the minor corporations as a first agenda 
item.  They come on the agenda and they'll allow us to review them, but 
they'll always hold the corporations which they're hiding things in till 
the very end, hoping the committee will expire with the legislative session 
when it adjourns in the summer or the late spring.  Well, Mr. Speaker, 
they've done this time after time with the Potash Corporation and SGI and 
SaskPower and the Saskatchewan Transportation corporation. 
 
And of course, Mr. Speaker, we've seen time after time a deliberate delay, 
a strategic, Conservative delay in tabling simple annual reports and 
government documents.  They have failed in many, many cases to follow the 
regulations set down by this Assembly.  The Provincial Auditor has outlined 
in many instances their failure to meet deadlines. 
 
As a matter of fact, the opposition and the public are still waiting for 
the government to table SaskEnergy's annual report.  But we must give them 
some more time; it's only been, I think, two and a half years.  They must 
be doing this some place in a dark room and having monks reproduce the 



 

 

reports by hand, with all due respect to monks. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we've also had problems from the ministers and from the 
government when it comes to  
 Dresponding to questions on Crown corporation matters during the meetings.  
They always say, well we don't have that information but we'll take it upon 
advisement and we'll respond momentarily with some information in writing 
to committee members. 
 
Well we've waited and we've waited and we've waited.  And we've waited in 
particular with matters that deal with SaskPower, matters that deal with 
the Saskatchewan Transportation Company, and of course, matters to deal 
with SEDCO.  And everyone knows what a wonderful job this government's done 
with SEDCO.  Talk about freedom of information Act, SEDCO has run up tens 
of millions of dollars of debt every year and they don't even respond to 
questions with respect to accountability and responsibility on those funds.  
We ask them questions and they say, well, it's a private,client/manager 
relationship here.  We can't give you information.  Or we ask them 
questions on High R Door or the game farm that was involved with Graham 
Taylor's son. 
 
Now we have the game farm, Mr. Speaker.  We ask questions about how the 
money was approved.  When Mr. Taylor, who was a minister of the government, 
had the amount of money approved, he was chairman of SEDCO at the time, and 
his son happened to be involved in the company and they had a lot of money.  
They got the grant with no feasibility studies -- at least none that they 
would table. 
 
We've seen examples with respect to Canapharm in Wolseley.  Again when the 
minister from Indian Head-Wolseley, Mr. Taylor, who is no longer with us in 
this Assembly, allowed in his constituency Canapharm to continue to operate 
at countless millions of dollars cost to the taxpayers with no 
accountability and no responsibility. 
 
Example after example with SEDCO that we could relate in this House but 
time is limited.  We only have a few more hours so I don't want to get into 
too many details with that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But with respect to accountability, it's unacceptable that this government 
can continue to live this charade of wanting to be open and accessible and 
to provide information in an Act, in their dying days, called Bill 70, when 
over the last nine years they've been the most secretive government in the 
history of governments that I've ever read about or experienced.  It's 
unbelievable and simply lacks credibility from their perspective. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we also have problems with the Crown Corporations 
Committee, when it meets, with regard to privacy and information in getting 
answers to simple questions.  The usual response, Mr. Speaker, has been 
well, it's in the courts; it's a matter before the courts.  We really can't 
answer any questions with respect to that; or well we really can't provide 
you any information with respect to Westank-Willock or any other items 
because well, it's confidential.  We can't really reveal that information 
because the precedent's never been set to provide anybody with information, 



 

 

which is just hog-wash. 
 
We've seen ministers in the Crown Corporations Committee, Mr. Speaker, even 
refuse to answer questions.  They even refuse to answer simple questions 
which in many cases can be, I think, a result of their guilt.  They know 
that they are guilty of something that is not proper and so they won't 
answer the questions that we ask them.  Well, Mr. Speaker, I raise these 
points on the basis of where we see the province going right now.  We have 
seen the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan privatized; we've seen Saskoil 
privatized; we've seen the Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation 
privatized, and SaskCOMP, and Sask Minerals, and the natural gas reserves, 
and the coal mines of SPC (Saskatchewan Power Corporation). 
 
It's hard to believe that all of the major, profitable corporations that 
have been privatized have not resulted in a lower Crown corporation capital 
debt.  In 1982 when this government took over, by the account of their very 
own documents, the PC document, the debt was negligible.  And I think I 
have it right here; I want to share it with you.  In this same document, 
Pocket Politics -- everyone on that side of the House knows what it's all 
about  
_- it says right here, on page 23, "In ten years the NDP government has 
created a debt of over $2.3 BILLION" in the Crown corporations sector, 
which is all liquidating mortgage money -- 2.3 billion. 
 
Now in those days, Mr. Speaker, we had all the corporations I've just 
related that were making money, earning a profit, and paying a dividend.  
And this $2.3 billion was like a mortgage. It was for capital debt.  It was 
being paid off and self liquidated with revenues the corporations earned. 
 
The other element of this $2.3 billion Crown corporation capital debt, Mr. 
Speaker, was that it took 75 years to accumulate.  After 75 years we had 
coal mines, and gas reserves, and telephones, and electrification; and we 
had hospitals, and we had government office buildings, and we had highways.  
And all of those services we provided, all of those services we provided 
only resulted in a very modest amount of $2.3 billion, which was paid for 
on a mortgage basis, on an annual basis, with revenues earned by the 
corporations.  And on top of that we were receiving half of the profits of 
all the corporations as dividends to our treasury to reduce the tax burden 
on the taxpayers of this province on an annual basis. 
 
But now we've got all these profitable Crown corporations privatized.  We 
have not $2.3 billion in debt; we have over $9 billion in debt, at least 
that they will admit to.  And I think it's probably higher than that.  But 
$9 billion, Mr. Speaker, with all of the assets of the people in this 
province have been sold off, the profitable assets.  So now we're stuck 
with corporations that are modest, if at all profitable; and we're also 
stuck with $9 billion in mortgage payments on this debt for a population of 
less than a million people and for a population of less than 300,000 fully 
employed working people, I believe.  What a massive debt. 
 
Young people are now saying -- by the thousands -- we're not going to hang 
around and pay for their incompetence and their mismanagement.  We're 
leaving the province.  We're going to any other province because this is 



 

 

the worst province in terms of debt in all of Canada. 
 
When you add the 4.5 or $5.2 billion, whatever the figure is these days, of 
operating debt, we've got over $14 billion in total debt in this province 
-- $14 billion.  That's $14,000 per man, woman, and child in this province, 
or for a family of four we're looking at $52,000 of provincial debt alone 
-- $52,000, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And this government refuses to open the books; it refuses to provide 
information to our questions, refuses to respond to our questions -- be 
they verbal or written form.  And we see, Mr. Speaker, very simply, a 
desperate move by the government now, after all of this incompetent 
debt-building, after all of this irresponsible and unaccountable sale of 
taxpayers' assets at discount prices to their friends, we see the height of 
arrogance, the height of hypocrisy.  We see a government, Mr. Speaker, that 
says, we are going to introduce a freedom of information Bill. 
 
Well I wonder if they're given any consideration to making it retroactive.  
I wonder if they'd given their consideration to make this Bill retroactive 
so perhaps they'd answer some questions. 
 
I see the member . . . chairman of the SEDCO, the member from Thunder 
Creek, the Minister of Energy and Mines.  He sits there and he's quite 
amused with the remarks I'm making tonight.  He sits there.  He's quite 
amused with the fact that they have totally bankrupted this province.  He 
thinks it's funny that the taxpayers of this province are saddled with 
$52,000 per family of four of debt. 
 
Well the young people in this province, Mr. Speaker, are not going to put 
up with this nonsense.  They're not going to put up with this hypocrisy, 
and they've proven very clearly the actions they've taken with respect to 
this government's incompetence and mismanagement.  They're voting with 
their feet; they're leaving by the thousands, and going everywhere else 
looking for jobs and looking for a future and hope . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well, Mr. Speaker, I think the member from Thunder 
Creek should not be laughing at the former member from Thunder Creek 
because when he was in this House he was actually an honourable gentleman 
when he was in opposition.  At least he didn't sit back and say one thing 
in opposition and do the opposite in government.  Everybody knew in this 
province, the former member of Thunder Creek, when he stood on this side of 
the House, what he was going to do in government.  And he did that.  He 
gave all kinds of breaks to his wealthy friends.  Of course some of the 
members opposite are unhappy with that because he did hire some Liberal 
lawyers.  And they got angry with him and they told the Premier and they 
fired him.  And I thought that was a pretty low blow for the member from 
Thunder Creek. 
 
We have the new member from Thunder Creek here, Mr. Speaker, who is 
laughing at the people of this province.  He's laughing at the fact that 
after nine years of secrecy and stonewalling and failing to provide 
information, they are going to do a mea culpa.  They are going to do a 
de péja pà vu all over again.  They're going to introduce a freedom of 
information Bill, Mr. Speaker, and that'll solve all their problems.  And 



 

 

the people of this province who have been frustrated over the years because 
of lack of information are going to vote for them because of this wonderful 
move on their part. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I don't believe for one minute or one second that the 
introduction of this Bill is serious, that it's sincere.  I don't believe 
for one minute, Mr. Speaker, it'll have any effect on the taxpayers other 
than to confirm what they already believe, that this government is 
hypocritical.  It is unfair.  It is incompetent, and it has no credibility 
with respect to any issue of concern that concerns the people of this 
province. 
 
(2015) 
 
And my colleague, the member from Moose Jaw North, says, in addition to 
that, the members opposite are not very nice.  Well I think the people of 
the province will confirm how nice they've actually been over the last nine 
years, if and when they screw up the courage, Mr. Speaker, to call the next 
election. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we've seen this government stonewall and deflect 
questions.  The Deputy Premier of this province, the member for Meadow 
Lake, the Minister of Health, stands in this House; and rather than respond 
to questions on STC (Saskatchewan Transportation Company) or other Crown 
corporations, he says, well I'm not going to answer this question because 
you've got to refer that to the Crown Corporations Committee.  So we're 
waiting and we're waiting, and there's no Crown Corporations Committee 
meeting.  And I'm wondering if the minister who's putting forward this Bill 
would share with the people of this province and share with the opposition 
his intention with respect to when the Crown Corporations may meet so that 
people might take, for a moment perhaps, seriously their intention to pass 
this Bill 70, the freedom of information Act. 
 
And of course, Mr. Speaker, all of their actions have resulted in a great, 
great standing in the polls.  We've seen the polls in the last couple of 
weeks be released that was done by the Leader-Post and the CK TV, and the 
polls show exactly what the people of Saskatchewan believe to be the truth 
-- that not very many people in this province support their actions for the 
last nine years.  The people of this province do not support their record.  
They do not support the programs that they've undertaken.  They do not 
support anything this government's done.  It's unbelievable, unparalleled 
in the history of polls; this government has no support in any sector out 
there as a result of their record, as a result of the actions they've 
taken.  And, Mr. Speaker, I'm not so sure they are going to, with their mea 
culpa, gain further support with respect to Bill 70. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to end my comments this evening by saying that 
we've seen the Conservatives in the past support freedom of information 
when they're in opposition.  The minister of Justice stood in this House 
year after year in opposition supporting freedom of information.  When he 
became a minister and a highly powerful cabinet minister in the PC 
government, he failed to make his words good.  He flip-flopped.  He did a 
complete flip-flop in a matter of months. 



 

 

 
And when he left this House in disgrace, when he took his political 
appointment, his five-year contract at $97,000 from the taxpayers of this 
province to sit in Minneapolis and watch the Minnesota North Stars play 
hockey and the Minnesota Vikings play football and the Minnesota Twins play 
baseball, we find, Mr. Speaker, that these folks he's left behind in this 
Assembly are no different.  They're prepared to take the patronage 
appointments.  They're prepared to do anything it takes to look after their 
own people, but when it comes to governing the province with fairness, with 
openness, and accountability, they don't understand the meaning of the 
words. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe the former member from Kindersley, Mr. Bob Andrew, 
had it right in the first place.  He said he was going to support it; he 
didn't, by his actions in government.  As a matter of fact he abused his 
position in this House, his position as a member of cabinet, by spending 
taxpayers' money to the tune of millions without answering questions, 
without responding to how those moneys were spent, and without being 
accountable. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I end my remarks by saying the people of Saskatchewan 
won't buy their deathbed repentance with respect to freedom of information.  
The people of this province will not buy their deathbed repentance with 
respect to any issue, be it the disintegration of the civil service, 
freedom of information, or making deficits illegal.  It's a lot of garbage 
on their part, Mr. Speaker.  It's unbelievable.  It's incredible, and the 
people of this province will take the appropriate action come the next 
election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee 
of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 71 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the 
Hon. Mr. Lane that Bill No. 71 -- An Act respecting a right of access to 
documents of local authorities and a right of privacy with respect to 
personal information held by local authorities be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, this Bill, 
The Local Authority Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act, 
it has kind of a funny history too, Mr. Speaker.  Local governments that 
I've talked to -- the municipalities, the local school boards, the library 
boards -- they don't know where this Bill came from; they don't know why.  
It appears as though it came out of Ontario somewhere.  I made some 
comments . . . I guess my major comments, the first time this Bill came up 
and I adjourned it . . . I just wanted to make just a few summary comments 
because I've had the opportunity over the last three weeks or so to discuss 
this Bill with some local government authorities. 
 
This Bill is almost identical to the provincial freedom of information 



 

 

Bill, Mr. Speaker.  And as I said, most local governments don't know the 
origin of this Bill.  They were not consulted; they were not involved in 
any process.  In fact as it turned out, when I called local governments to 
see what they thought of this Bill, most of them had never seen it.  And I 
include by that the cities of Saskatoon and Regina.  They had not seen this 
Bill, this Bill that affects them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I found myself in the position of sending them this Bill.  This 
government Bill they received from the critic; they received from the 
opposition; not from the government.  It's a strange way to do business.  
It seems to me it's a strange way to work co-operatively with local 
governments when you introduce a Bill into the legislature and they know 
nothing about it or where it came from or why it came to be, and have not 
seen it or been consulted.  No prior consultation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that in itself says volumes about the way this government deals with 
local governments, that local governments would not have been involved in 
this decision, in this consultation, in this Bill being presented. 
 
And I guess, Mr. Speaker, it also shows just how out of touch . . . it 
shows how this government operates, that's true, but it also shows just how 
out of touch this government has become, that they would introduce a Bill 
where local governments would be required to provide additional 
information, supposedly, when in fact, Mr. Speaker, what I found out over 
the last three weeks to four weeks, is that most governments already 
provide the information that this Bill would require them to provide, as a 
matter of open local government and as a matter of local policy. 
 
For example, the city of Saskatoon already publishes, as a matter of public 
policy, salaries of any employees over $20,000, whereas this Bill would 
require them to make that information available upon request.  Well they 
already provide that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The city of Regina has had a freedom of information Bill since 1983 and so 
they already provide much more information than this Bill will require them 
to provide.  And I think my colleague, who will speak on this Bill next, in 
fact introduced that Bill at the city of Regina, and so we're very proud of 
that.  We're very proud of him for that. 
 
But my point here being is that local governments are already providing 
more information than they may be required to provide under this Bill.  So 
that's an indication of how out of touch the province is and the Minister 
of Justice or the minister of Municipal Affairs, or whoever is responsible 
for this Bill.  Whoever is responsible certainly didn't communicate with 
the local governments. 
 
The other question mark in the minds of local governments is what this Bill 
really means.  Local governments, school boards, library boards, don't know 
whether they should be concerned or whether they shouldn't be concerned 
about this Bill.  They don't know whether it's good for them or bad for 
them because it's so complex -- it's 40-some pages.  They don't know how to 
interpret some of the sections.  The Department of Municipal Affairs cannot 
tell them how to interpret some of the sections.  I have been advised that 



 

 

they've been told that when we get the regulations we'll sit down with you 
then and work this through and see what it all means.  That's a funny way 
to do business, it seems to me, Mr. Speaker.  It's sort of that Big Brother 
mentality again of this government: we know best, what's best for you, or . 
. . (inaudible interjection) . . . The minister of Municipal Affairs says, 
get it straight.  Well, I'm getting it straight from the people who are 
affected by this Bill that you didn't consult with, sir.  You should have 
consulted with them, so start doing your job.  You're getting $90,000 a 
year; start earning it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister's saying that the local governments are not 
telling the truth.  Well I think I will believe the local governments 
before I'll believe the minister of Municipal Affairs, Mr. Speaker.  It's 
an indication of this government saying, look, trust us; we know what's 
best for you. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I'm telling the minister here, Mr. Speaker, I'm telling 
the minister that local governments tell me that they don't like being 
treated that way.  They don't like being told what's good for them.  They 
don't like not being consulted in legislation that will affect them.  Well 
I think I'll choose to believe the local governments, Mr. Speaker, rather 
than the minister of Municipal Affairs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I talked to some of them today.  Mr. Speaker, the bottom line 
is local governments don't know what this Bill means for them.  Now that's 
absurd.  This is on second reading, and they don't know what it means to 
them.  They can't get answers to how this Bill is going to work.  They 
don't know whether they should like it or be concerned.  They've had legal 
opinions about this Bill, and they are having trouble getting any good 
legal advice as to how this Bill is going to operate.  But there's one 
consistent message I received from the variety of local governments that I 
talked to, and that is that they were not consulted.  That the minister 
cannot dispute.  They were not advised.  They were not consulted. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, so much for this new realities approach by this 
government.  See that's the point; nothing is going to change.  You people 
are so arrogant that you know best.  Nothing is going to change in terms of 
the way you conduct business.  That's why people are demanding an election, 
so they can kick you out and get on with the new way of doing business. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- You people treat local governments as if they don't exist.  
You treat local governments as if you know best.  And this minister is 
probably the most arrogant of the ministers they've had to deal with.  
Local governments are telling me that.  And that was typical of the way I 
saw him behave at the SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) 
convention.  If they were really concerned and interested they would 
respond to reintroducing the ward system which they know local governments 
want, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But again, they know what's best for everybody.  That's how this government 
operates.  If they were really concerned about local governments they 



 

 

wouldn't be shifting the tax burden to them, forcing them to make the tough 
decision at the local level, which is what they're doing, Mr. Speaker -- 
shifting, off-loading, their burdens onto the local governments because the 
Premier doesn't have the courage to take the issue up with Mr. Mulroney, 
and the federal off-loading onto the province.  The province is just simply 
off-loading onto the municipalities. 
 
If they were really concerned about local governments they wouldn't treat 
local governments that way.  Mr. Speaker, if they were really concerned 
about working with local governments, the minister of Trade and Economic 
Development wouldn't go into Saskatoon and chastise the Saskatoon City 
Council for not dancing to his tune, and committing hundreds of thousand 
dollars to a project which he's not willing to give them any information 
on. 
 
Or if they were really concerned about the people of the province, that 
same minister of Economic Development and Trade wouldn't tell the people of 
Saskatchewan that they're 40 years behind the times.  That's offensive, Mr. 
Speaker, but that's the way they deal with the public. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the local governments I talked to told me that when . . . if 
and when you form government -- I say if and when; they say when you form 
government -- but I say if and when.  But what they're saying to us is they 
want you, they want us, they want a new government, to consult with them 
and work with them in the best interests of the province and of local 
governments and local communities. 
 
They don't want Big Brother making decisions because Big Brother thinks Big 
Brother knows best for local governments.  They want to be consulted.  They 
want to be involved in decisions.  They don't want to be locked out from 
the discussions.  They don't want to be locked out from this building.  
They want to be involved in decisions which affect them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they want to work with a government that has an attitude that 
look, we're all responsible for the collective well-being of people across 
all of Saskatchewan.  We want strong, supportive, caring communities.  We 
want a strong, supportive, caring provincial government.  And together, Mr. 
Speaker, we'll solve the problems the Saskatchewan way.  That's what local 
governments want.  They don't want a government that says we'll know best . 
. . we know best.  And they don't want a minister that won't explain to 
them what the implications are for a Bill that affects them.  They want to 
work with their provincial government. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I've got many questions about this Bill and I hope the 
minister of Municipal Affairs is here when those questions are being asked.  
I've got many questions to ask on behalf of -- because it's clear that he's 
been derelict in his duties -- on behalf of local governments.  I will be 
asking those questions and I'll be doing that on third reading. 
 
My colleague has a few comments that he would like to make, and I'll be 
asking important questions on behalf of municipalities and local 
governments when the Bill comes up in committee, Mr. Speaker. 
 



 

 

Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(2030) 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I support the 
intent of the Bill that's before us.  I support the direction that the 
government has taken.  We think that the government is moving in the right 
direction by setting forth legislation which would encourage the rights of 
all people throughout Saskatchewan to be able to obtain access about 
records and information from local authorities.  And we support that.  We 
think that the government is going in the right direction with this Bill. 
 
But there's a big problem here.  We don't know about some of the contents 
of the Bill, whether or not they will work the way it's supposed to work.  
We don't know about the contents of the Bill, whether or not it will in 
fact provide for the kinds of things that the government hopes.  We don't 
know what kinds of problems might be posed for municipalities, as an 
example, by this Bill because we don't understand enough about the Bill.  
And neither do municipalities understand enough about the Bill to be able 
to make a reasoned determination as to whether or not this Bill will do the 
kinds of things that we all hope that it will. 
 
So there's a real problem with this Bill.  And the reason that arises is 
that the government has not consulted with people in the province about the 
details of the Bill.  Normally in a process such as this, given the 
complexities of the situation -- and there are many complexities and I'll 
deal with those in a moment, Mr. Speaker -- but given the complexities of 
the Bill, the government would normally float some white paper on the whole 
question of freedom of information on the part of citizens, to documents 
and the like on local authorities, local government. 
 
You would float a white paper which states out the objectives that you want 
to achieve, generally the type of process that you think should be 
followed, the expectations that you have for local government, the rights 
that people would be able to exercise under this Bill.  You would put those 
kinds of things in a white paper, not the Bill itself, but many other 
things that you hope a Bill would achieve.  You would put it in a white 
paper and you would enter into extensive discussions with urban 
municipalities, rural municipalities, school boards, hospital boards, all 
those that are proposed to be affected by this Bill. 
 
And you do that so that you get some feedback from them, some feedback 
about whether or not they think in their opinion it's going to work the way 
the government thinks it'll work, whether or not the amount of paperwork 
which is proposed by this Bill is in fact in keeping with many 
municipalities.  I don't think that that, for example, is any great concern 
to the city of Regina or Saskatoon or Moose Jaw or P.A., or many of the 
larger towns.  But I tell you, some of the villages that have a population 
of not much over 100 that have a part-time clerk, I mean this additional 
paperwork could be a cause of some concern.  It means an additional burden 
for them that, given these days and given sort of the constraints in their 
budgets, they hardly want to be taking on, you know, some extra work. 
 



 

 

So therefore we're well advised to look at these kinds of things.  The 
process that you would follow is that you would put forward your ideas, 
then you would consult widely with local governments in an attempt to get 
some feedback and thereby gauge whether or not the things that you're going 
to do are in fact the things that should be done. 
 
And it's a process, Mr. Speaker, that's not done in a matter of weeks, as 
was the case of this Bill.  But it is a process that takes some time, and 
it could take a year or longer if you want to get the right Bill.  And I 
guess it goes back to the old principle -- the more you put into the front, 
the better the end product is going to be. 
 
And you know, that's really the concern that we have with this Bill, is 
that it doesn't appear that any work has gone into the drafting of this 
Bill, that there has been any consultation at all with municipalities.  And 
I have a quote here, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to share with you.  And this is 
from April 22, from the Star-Phoenix, and the headline is "City not 
consulted on information bill."  And it states here: 
 

 The city of Saskatoon wasn't consulted about the province's decision to 
introduce new access-to-information legislation. 

 
 A bill covering municipalities, first announced Friday, caught city 

officials by surprise. 
 
 "Usually, the province lets us know in advance about these things.  We 

were not consulted in this case," said City Commissioner Marty Irwin. 
 

And that's the point that I was making, Mr. Speaker.  There wasn't any 
prior consultation about this Bill.  It's my understanding that the legal 
department of the city of Regina, the clerk's office of the city of Regina 
-- those people that are most responsible in terms of the procedure by-law 
at the city of Regina which governs access to information -- weren't 
consulted about this Bill, weren't asked to review a draft copy of this 
Bill, weren't given time to look at this Bill in some detail to see what 
effect it might have on the city of Regina. 
 
It's my understanding that the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association, as an example, wasn't provided with a white paper which 
outlines the principles of the Bill, the objectives that the government 
wanted to achieve, the process as to how it might work, so that they were 
able to consult with their member municipalities, cities, towns, and 
villages, as to whether or not this Bill made any sense.  None of that was 
done.  But if you really want to have a partnership with municipalities and 
if you want legislation that makes sense to all concerned, you undergo that 
kind of process. 
 
One really has to ask, what is the rush here?  Why is it that the 
government, without any prior consultation, puts a Bill forward and says 
that we've got to put this through; we've got to get this through.  Is this 
because it makes sense for the people of Saskatchewan?  Is it because it 
makes sense for municipalities and local governments?  Or does it have more 
to do with the government's own political agenda, an agenda which now 



 

 

suggests that the government should be moving on all kinds of fronts to 
give the appearance of being concerned about accountability? 
 
Because this is a government that's been stung, which has been hurt, 
because of its just abysmal record when it comes to accountability, and a 
government that has through its actions given the appearance of being 
anything but open. It has given the appearance consistently over time, in 
its nine years as a government, that it really doesn't care about openness, 
doesn't want to let the people of Saskatchewan in on what is happening in 
government. 
 
And we've seen a number of Bills to that effect.  Bill 5 in the '86-87 
legislative year is but one good example where the government moved without 
any real debate, without any real opportunity for discussion, moved to make 
government more secret and less accountable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So our concern with this Bill is not the direction that the government has.  
Our concern with this Bill is that we have not seen a substantive 
discussion on the part of people in Saskatchewan and those who are affected 
and the organizations, whether it's urban municipalities, rural 
municipalities, school boards.  We haven't seen those organizations.  We 
haven't seen them have had an opportunity to effectively make comments 
known publicly on this Bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And again if you want respect of local governments, if you want the 
partnerships of local governments to put forward a Bill and to have a Bill 
in Saskatchewan that is supported widely and is supported by all local 
governments, if you want that kind of support and if you want a Bill that 
is easily understood and is a Bill that makes more sense to the people of 
Saskatchewan, then what you would do is you would consult widely and you 
would take the necessary time to do that, Mr. Speaker, as opposed to coming 
here at the last minute in an unseemly rush and trying to force some Bill 
through the Legislative Assembly.  Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I'm afraid the hon. member from Regina 
Victoria, as well as all of us, are hearing two simultaneous speeches; one 
by him, one by the member for Quill Lakes, and a third member trying to get 
into it from Saltcoats.  However let us allow the member for Regina 
Victoria -- let us allow the member for Regina Victoria to continue. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, what I wanted to 
say is that even though the government has not indulged in such a process 
-- that is to say a process of floating a white paper, floating its ideas 
and getting a reaction from municipalities, I want to suggest later on 
another process which at least at this late stage of the game might do some 
of the things that should have been done.  And that is to get the ideas out 
to the public and allow the public a public opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to 
comment on the Bill.  Nothing makes more sense than to have a Bill which 
talks about freedom of information, access to information, the right of the 
public to that information, to give the public a public opportunity to 
participate in discussion on the Bill, Mr. Speaker.  But I'll get to that 
in a minute. 
 



 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's my feeling that if the government had consulted widely on 
this particular Bill we might have a better product before us now.  And I 
want to refer, Mr. Speaker, to a quote which was in the Leader-Post on 
April 29 where it's indicated that the city of Regina has had a freedom of 
information policy by-law for eight years; that the city of Regina has a 
great deal of experience in dealing with the question of access to 
information.  I would point out the city of Regina, for example, all 
committee meetings, with the exception of their executive committee 
meetings, are open to the public; that the public has a right to 
participate in those meetings and to make their comments known.  The public 
has always had a right to ask for documents and records at the city clerk's 
office -- documents and records that pertain to the public good. 
 
And there are exceptions to that of course in terms of land transactions 
and the like that must of necessity, or at least at a certain point, be 
kept confidential.  But the people of Regina have always enjoyed those 
rights pursuant to by-law and not because there is some provincial Bill 
there.  So I guess that what I'm saying is that at City Hall, in Regina at 
least, they've had some eight years of experience in ensuring that the 
public has access to information which is of concern to them and which 
affects them. 
 
Now it seems to me that that eight years of experience could be put to good 
use in the drafting of a Bill which is intended to accomplish exactly the 
same kind of thing.  And because of that, that you might have a better Bill 
because it reflects not only needs and objectives and wishes and desires, 
but also reflects some relevant experience, Mr. Speaker.  And I feel that 
would have been welcome.  I feel that you would have had a better Bill 
today if in fact we had consulted with institutions such as the city of 
Regina about their relevant experience. 
 
As it stands, Mr. Speaker, as it stands, I suspect that . . . I am prepared 
to say that this Bill is a straight lift from legislation in other 
quarters, legislation such as is now in place in Ontario.  That the 
government has told its people, get a Bill, we need a Bill to suit our 
political agenda.  We don't care where you get it from just put one before 
us that we can float publicly and say, see we love freedom of information.  
We've got all kinds of Bills about freedom of information. 
 
(2045) 
 
So what they did is they took the Bill from Ontario and they put 
Saskatchewan on it and said, see here's our Bill.  Well that Bill might 
have been very good for Ontario but we don't know about Saskatchewan.  And 
the municipalities in Ontario may well support the Ontario Bill because of 
their experience with it.  But that's no way to gain the respect and the 
partnership of municipalities in Saskatchewan -- to force down their throat 
something that's taken from another jurisdiction.  That's not the way we do 
things, Mr. Speaker.  That's not the way we've done things in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can recall when I was first elected to City Council in 
Regina.  Shortly after I was elected, I was informed about a process that 
was under way by the provincial government to review provincial legislation 



 

 

affecting urban affairs.  I was told that the Department of Urban Affairs 
was doing a comprehensive look at its legislation and wanted the input of 
municipalities. 
 
I can tell you that I went to a number of meetings, a number of meetings as 
a city councillor as part of a regional group of municipalities to discuss 
the relevant issues which were posed by the changes to The Urban 
Municipality Act at that time.  And I was asked for my input.  I was asked 
for my feelings as to what I thought the government should be doing with 
that legislation.  Then there were a number of suggestions which came 
forward which made a lot of sense and I understand were later incorporated 
into the legislation. 
 
But not only did it mean that you had then better legislation in the final 
analysis, because you had the input of those people who would be affected 
by it and who had a great deal of experience . . . And I might say as an 
aside, you know, cabinet ministers shouldn't just think that because 
they've been promoted to the post that all of a sudden that they're the 
world's experts on these things; that there are people out there who are 
involved in our cities and towns and villages who have a great deal of 
experience, have much to offer and had much to offer at that time. 
 
But not only did it mean that you had a better end-product, more 
importantly I suspect, Mr. Speaker, that another important thing happened.  
And that is that you had the support of cities, towns, and villages.  Not 
for every specific measure, but you had support for what it is that the 
government was doing.  They understood what the government was doing 
because they had been involved every step of the way.  They had been asked 
for their opinion in many different ways.  They were given an opportunity 
to put their views forward and to say: yes I agree; no I don't agree; I 
think you should go to this alternative or whatever.  But at least you 
solicited their input.  You developed a partnership with them, and you 
gained their respect for the end product, Mr. Speaker, contrary to the 
approach that is taking place here. 
 
And there are a number of members on the other side, Mr. Speaker, who have 
backgrounds in local government, who understand what I'm talking about, and 
who agree with me that this kind of process that is taking place here is 
wrong and is not the right way to go. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a number of specific concerns that have already been 
identified by local governments.  There is, for example, the question of a 
final appeal to an Information and Privacy Commissioner on the part of 
citizens who feel wronged about not having access, I suppose, to documents 
at a local level, that that appeal process has to go the provincial 
government as opposed to involving local authorities.  That's one concern. 
 
There's a concern about the release of current salary rates, as opposed to 
detailed, personal pay histories.  That is not clear in the legislation and 
is a matter of some concern. 
 
I would refer you, Mr. Speaker, to a press release which was issued on May 
13 and this was released by the mayors of Saskatchewan cities.  And they 



 

 

indicated that they had reviewed Bill 71, the Bill that we're talking 
about, and the mayors noted that the public accounts now published by the 
cities already make most expenditure information available to the public. 
 
And they say that although they are supportive of public access to city 
hall decision-making, they are suggesting that the intent of Bill 71 be 
clarified to permit the release of current salary rates but not excessively 
detailed personnel pay histories.  This is a concern that's expressed by 
the mayors of the large cities. 
 
I think that it's a concern that needs to be floated publicly.  I think 
they should have a public opportunity to put their case forward.  I think 
that there needs to be a public judgement as to whether or not this Bill, 
which talks about their public's right to information, be publicly judged, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Mr. Speaker, nowhere does this Bill and nowhere has 
the minister of Urban Affairs, or the Minister of Community Services or 
whatever he's called now, nowhere has that minister released any attendant 
paper about the process and how it might work for smaller communities. 
 
And as I indicated at the outset, I don't think that this Bill and the 
process and the paperwork that's involved will be of any great concern to 
the city of Regina or the city of Saskatoon.  I think that they're well 
able to assimilate this additional paperwork within their existing paper 
flow.  I don't think that this is a matter of concern to them. 
 
But I do believe, I do believe, that it will be a matter of concern to 
smaller communities as I indicated; to have small villages with populations 
barely more than a hundred and a Bill that talks about putting forward 
requests in the prescribed form and soliciting the need for any alterations 
to what is put in the prescribed form, to talk about going back with 
written notices pursuant to something that's put . . . put before you in 
the prescribed form, this Bill creates additional paperwork for small/large 
communities. 
 
I don't think that's a concern for the large communities but I tell you, 
it's going to be one big, royal pain in the neck for many small 
communities, Mr. Speaker, and I think there needs to be some public 
discussion about that.  And I think those small communities should be given 
an opportunity to review this Bill and to make their inputs and to be able 
to advise as to how this Bill affects them and how it might be improved, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- And finally and most important, Mr. Speaker, I pose 
the question: that if you give people rights in legislation, if you give 
people rights in legislation, if you pass bills in the legislature and if 
you pass by-laws in the cities, towns and villages, and you say to the 
public you had such and such a right, what effective good is that right if 



 

 

no one knows about it?  If no one knows about it then effectively you 
haven't given the public any rights.  Theoretically, legally, yes the 
public has rights; but effectively, pragmatically, there's nothing there. 
 
This Bill does not talk about how we might educate, inform, or otherwise 
promote this Bill and what it is that the government is trying to do at the 
local level.  There's nothing here that talks about how municipalities must 
make sure that the information gets out to its citizens so that they are 
well advised about this.  Because it's one thing to say that the right is 
there; it's something entirely different to promote that right and to make 
people aware of what their rights are. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that on this issue that there is a great deal 
of ignorance in Saskatchewan.  There is a great deal of ignorance on the 
part of people as to what rights they have with respect to the runnings of 
their local government.  And even though present legislation provides for 
many of the things that this Bill provides for, people are not certain, 
they're not sure, about their rights. 
 
To make this an effective Bill there needs to be an attendant discussions 
about how we will promulgate the Bill, how we will promote the Bill, how we 
will make people aware. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those are some of the concerns I have about this Bill; those 
are some of the concerns which have been expressed to me by people in local 
government; and those are some of the concerns which suggest to me that 
there needs to be now a public discussion of how the Bill will work, and 
there needs to be an opportunity for the public to participate in this 
Bill.  There needs to be an opportunity for the public to be able to react 
to all the specific items of the Bill, that I think that we need to go one 
step further now and that is, as opposed to simply debating it in the House 
and for the Minister to stand up with hardly a word and say, well this is a 
good thing and for the opposition to raise a number of concerns, I don't 
think that that's going to be healthy; or for the opposition to stand up 
here and to ask questions of the minister with his officials.  I don't 
think that's going far enough.  I don't think that's going to work.  I 
think that there needs to be a better process for soliciting the input of 
the people of Saskatchewan on this very important matter, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I'm going to suggest that after second reading 
that we look at a different process, that we look at perhaps of having this 
Bill referred to something such as the Standing Committee on Municipal Law, 
to have that committee consider this matter; to distribute the Bill widely 
through SUMA, which is Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, the 
Saskatchewan school trustees, the hospital boards, to the cities, and 
widely to the public; to let them know, here's the Bill; here are the 
specific provisions of the Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- And to invite -- no, Mr. Speaker, indeed to encourage 
-- the public to make their feelings known about this Bill; to encourage 
those organizations to make their feelings known about this Bill; to share 



 

 

with us their experience in these matters, because they have considerable 
experience in this matter, so that we can take all of that information, so 
that we can take all of that feedback, and we can incorporate it into the 
Bill and make a better Bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And not only a better end-product, but an end-product that is supported by 
them -- an end-product that they can say, we participated in it; we think 
it's a better Bill; we think it's doing the kinds of things that it should 
be doing; and therefore it deserves to be supported. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- At this point, they don't know what they're 
supporting.  At this point, they don't know what the Bill is all about.  
And I just must say again, Mr. Speaker, that in all my years in local 
government and consulting with other colleagues in local government, that 
they just never have seen the likes of this.  They have never seen the 
likes of a government taking a piece of legislation which has major 
implications for local governments, and without any prior consultation, 
without any discussion before the fact, all of a sudden one day come up 
with a Bill and say, here's a Bill that's going to affect you. 
 
And even though the Bill isn't a matter of prime urgency, because after all 
we have gotten along not badly in this whole area up till now, and because 
we do have existing legislation -- I know that in the case of the urban 
municipalities that The Urban Municipality Act says some things about 
access to information; it's not specifically spelled out but it's there, 
and if you ask any lawyer . . . and I know lawyers who've tried to get 
information from municipalities through this process and have largely been 
satisfied.  And that's not to say that it shouldn't be spelled out more in 
a Bill such as this, but it's there.  If you want to take advantage of it, 
there's an opportunity there to get information.  So it's not as if this is 
a matter of great and pressing urgency because there's no right at all and 
concerns have been expressed. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Speaker, where has there been an expression of concern on 
the part of Saskatchewan people about access to information at City Hall?  
How many examples can you list of expressions of concern that have been put 
forward publicly about people not being able to get access to information, 
subject to the existing legislation?  Can you count them on the fingers of 
one hand, sir?  I can't recall one.  Maybe there was one; I think there was 
one in Saskatoon about the details of some pay-out.  I'm not sure whether 
that one would be covered by this legislation, Mr. Speaker.  That's a good 
question.  So maybe there's one expression of concern on the part of the 
public about the necessity for such a Bill. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think that makes the point that I'm making, that there 
needs to be consultation, that we should undertake to discuss this matter 
with the people of Saskatchewan.  So therefore it's my very strong hope 
that subsequent to the adoption of this Bill in second reading . . . and 
we'll support it because we agree with the intent of it.  That's not to say 
that if we find that in committee that this is just a hornet's nest that 
needs to be looked at, it needs to be changed or improved, that we might 



 

 

not change our position on that.  But I tell you, at this point we support 
the intent.  On second reading you're there to express in principle how you 
feel about the Bill, and in principle we agree.  We agree with the intent 
of the Bill. 
 
But I tell you, Mr. Speaker, we have very strong reservations about the 
process that the government has entered into with this Bill, very strong 
reservations and a very strong disagreement with the way that the 
government has moved on this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(2100) 
 
Again, I have never seen the likes of this.  I have consulted with 
colleagues.  They have never seen the likes of this in terms of the 
government proposing to make changes that affect local municipalities, that 
affect local government, and has seen fit to proceed in this fashion.  This 
is a government that supposedly in its dying days is trying to turn around 
this perception that it doesn't care, that it doesn't listen, and only acts 
in its own interests as opposed to the interests of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Well with the way that they've acted on this particular Bill, Mr. Speaker, 
they have done nothing but to reinforce the perception that the people of 
Saskatchewan have that the government doesn't listen, doesn't care, and 
only acts in its own interest, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, again I tell you we will support the principle of this 
Bill, but we're going to be making some suggestions as to how we can move 
on in terms of a better process to obtain the public input, the public 
involvement, that's so necessary to make this Bill not only good in 
principle, but is going to make it good in practice and last us and last us 
well for decades to come.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill read a second time. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, moved by myself 
and seconded by the member for Saskatoon Eastview: 
 

 That Bill No. 71, An Act respecting a right of access to documents of 
local authorities and a right of privacy with respect to personal 
information held by local authorities be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Municipal Law. 

 
The division bells rang from 9:03 p.m. until 10:25 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas 
 
 Shillington Anguish t 
 Tchorzewski Hagel t 



 

 

 Koskie Pringle t 
 Thompson Lyons t 
 Brockelbank Calvert t 
 Upshall Lautermilch t 
 Simard Trew t 
 Solomon Van Mulligen t 
 Atkinson Koenker t 
-- 18 R 

Nays 
 
 Devine Neudorf t 
 Muller Gerich t 
 Schmidt Swenson t 
 Klein Britton t 
 Hodgins Pickering t 
 McLeod Duncan t 
 Hardy Gleim t 
 Kopelchuk McLaren t 
 Wolfe Baker t 
 Martens Swan t 
 Hopfner Johnson t 
 Martin t 
-- 23 R 
The Bill referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:28 p.m. 
 


