





























































Hansard: June 14, 1991


 

 

June 14/91 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I want to introduce 
to you, and through you to the members of the Assembly, 35 students from 
the Holy Rosary community school.  They are accompanied by the teacher Dan 
Labelle, principal Clarence Demchuk, and the community co-ordinator Annette 
O'Keeweehow. I hope I've not butchered that name too badly. 
 
I look forward to meeting these students afterwards and discussing what 
you've seen here.  I ask all members to join with me in welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to introduce to you 
and the other members of the Legislative Assembly, a group of grade 2 
students from Davin School, approximately 20 students.  And they are being 
accompanied by Jan Finlay and chaperon Martha Bailey. 
 
And I should indicate, Mr. Speaker, that Ms. Finlay brings her students 
here on a very regular basis because we've seen her on a number of 
occasions before.  I'd ask you to welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's a pleasure for me to 
introduce to you, and through you to all members of the Legislative 
Assembly, a group of 24 students from the town of Mistatim in the 
north-east part of the province.  They're grade 6, 7 and 8's.  They're here 
on a tour of the Legislative Buildings and a tour of the city.  They're 
accompanied today by the teacher Annette Legare.  Their chaperons are 
Gordon and Joanne Kirkland; also along with them is Garth Lutz, Valerie 
Shekk, and Debbie Simoneau.  I'll be meeting with them later for some 
pictures and some drinks in my office at 204. 
 
But I also want to just make mention that this is a group of students and 
teachers and community that decided that their community was very, very 
important to them, that their school was important.  They got together and 
they proved to the necessary folks that they can succeed by working 
together.  And I was very proud to have them in my constituency and very 
proud to know many of them on a personal basis. 
 
I want to ask all members of the Legislative Assembly to join me in 
welcoming these students and their chaperons and teachers to this 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. Tusa: -- I'm also proud to make an introduction to the Assembly 
this morning.  The introduction I wish to make is five grade 10 students 
from Earl Grey School.  They are accompanied by their teacher Diana Ritter. 
 
This is the second group of students to come in to visit our Legislative 
Assembly from Earl Grey School this year.  So I would like to congratulate 
the teachers and the school itself for encouraging a high degree of 
participation in our democratic system.  Please welcome the students from 
Earl Grey School. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Legislation on Deficit Budgets 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 
the Premier.  Mr. Premier, in what must be a high water mark for hypocrisy 
even for this government, you announced that you were going to introduce 
legislation which would prohibit deficits. 
 
You, Mr. Premier, who took a government that had consistently balanced this 
budget over three decades and through three governments, and reduced it to 
a basket case; you, Mr. Premier, whose government still holds the record 
for the highest per capita deficit of any government ever recorded in North 
America. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question concerns the goals that such legislation might 
seek to achieve.  In 1986 your Finance minister projected a deficit of $360 
million; in fact in 1987 we saw that the deficit was 1.3 billion.  Your 
Finance minister admitted he knew it wasn't accurate when he said, well 
politicians will be politicians. 
 
My question, Mr. Premier, is: how will this legislation ensure that in the 
future, as distinct from the last nine years, ministers of Finance will 
conduct themselves with integrity? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, it's interesting to have the NDP (New 
Democratic Party) opposition ask questions with respect to Finance when 
they've hid on all the issues in terms of how they would balance a budget.  
They hid the deficit -- and when I say that, Mr. Speaker, they don't want 
to listen to the response -- they hid the deficit in 1982.  They had a huge 
deficit they hid in the Crown corporations.  And the Saskatchewan family of 
Crown corporations was so unpopular, Mr. Speaker, they lost every seat but 
eight in the province, and the people knew that.  And they hid pension fund 
deficits, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Then when we come out and we say, we'll harmonize and we'll balance the 
budget, they hide -- they couldn't find them.  And then when the Ontario 
NDP comes in with its plan, $10 billion deficit, Mr. Speaker, in the first 



 

 

six months, they hide; they don't know whether to defend it or not. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member says, well isn't it a fact that it was 
difficult here and you have a deficit.  I'll say to the hon. member, in 
Alberta where they put $10 billion in the Heritage Fund in the 1980s, 
Alberta's run over a billion dollar deficit on their current account 
consecutive years in a row. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I'll say, the same government that put the Heritage Fund 
in there also said, we've got to defend farmers, defend people against high 
interest rates.  Mr. Speaker, we did that and we won in '82; we won in '86.  
People still know we'll defend farmers; we'll defend home owners, and we 
lay out a plan, Mr. Speaker, which is a lot more than the people in Ontario 
have got from the NDP or from the member opposite quite frankly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- What you've not done a very good job of, Mr. Premier, 
is defending the Saskatchewan taxpayer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- A further supplementary, Mr. Premier.  Between 1982 and 
1990 you brought down eight budgets.  You missed by a bit -- '86-87 you 
missed by 216 per cent; 1989-90 you missed by 98 per cent; 73 per cent in 
1988. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question is: will the legislation guarantee that in the 
future ministers of Finance could -- oh we don't want to be too tough here 
-- say pass a grade 2 arithmetic test before they assume office? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, the opposition refuses, as they have done 
on Fair Share and on every other issue on agriculture, Mr. Speaker, they 
refuse to take a position.  They hide and they hide and they hide.  They 
say one thing in the country, one thing in the city. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to point out to you, and I will share with the members 
of the media, this is exactly what got the NDP into trouble in Ontario and 
I want to read to you, Mr. Speaker, just three short sentences to make my 
point.  On June 11, "Allan Pilkey, Ontario's minister of trade and 
technology, told reporters . . . (that they're looking at including) 
harmonization of the provincial sales tax with the federal GST." 
 
That's the first.  Second, on the 12th, Mr. Speaker, "Ontario has no plans 
to collect the federal GST with its provincial sales tax . . ." says the 
Premier -- no plans.  Then on the 12th: "Ontario treasurer Floyd Laughren 
said yesterday the province is considering harmonizing . . ." with the GST 
(goods and services tax), Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we've got ministers saying that they will harmonize.  You've got the 
Premier said that he won't harmonize.  That's exactly what the NDP did 



 

 

prior to the election.  Now the people of Ontario see what they really got. 
 
That's exactly what these people are doing over here -- one thing in the 
country, another thing in the city; I might harmonize, I might not 
harmonize, Mr. Speaker.  They hid all kinds of deficits in the '70s.  
People in 1982 knew it, they knew it in '86, and they know it in 1991. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- One final supplementary, Mr. Premier.  Mr. Premier, my 
question is: how could any legislation curb the stupidity, the 
irresponsibility, and the patent lack of honesty which has been a hallmark 
of your budgetary process over the last nine years? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, the opposition . . . the opposition, Mr. 
Speaker, said to the people in 1982 and again in '86 . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member says that they don't want 
to hear about Ontario.  Yesterday they didn't want to hear about Alberta.  
They wanted to talk about Alberta.  Mr. Speaker, they don't know what they 
want to talk about.  They are all over the map, Mr. Speaker.  What we know 
is if they don't harmonize, Mr. Speaker, it's a 23 per cent increase in 
income tax to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now that takes us right back to where we were in 1982 when they all lost.  
If that's the question, Mr. Speaker, that we have to face, and the public 
has to face, the NDP should come clean right now and say, yes, that's it, 
it's a 23 per cent increase in income tax, no interest rate protection, no 
programs for farmers, none of that, Mr. Speaker.  Finally come clean.  So 
please let us know what you're going to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Meetings of the Crown Corporations Committee 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to the Premier.  
Mr. Premier, speaking of hiding, I want to ask you a question about hiding 
half of your expenditures in the Crown corporations. 
 
If you recall, Mr. Premier, I have sent four letters to your government 
requesting that this committee, which accounts for over half of your 
expenditures, to meet immediately, to reconvene.  The last two letters, I 
might add, Mr. Premier, have gone unanswered. 
 
In addition to that, I've asked on three or four occasions verbally that 
the Crown Corporations Committee meets.  On Monday of this week, your House 
Leader, the member from Melfort, said that he would, in his own words, very 
soon draw to the attention of the member for Pelly that it is time Crown 
Corporations Committee met and we will meet in a very few days. 



 

 

 
Mr. Premier, it's four days later and nothing has happened.  Will you 
finally show some leadership and instruct your caucus to respect the 
democratic principles of this Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, when we have had the members 
opposite ask about Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker, we've said, well let's 
take some of the Crown corporations and let's open them up to the public so 
that they can invest in them and actually be better for everybody in the 
province and we the country, Mr. Speaker.  And they said, Mr. Speaker, 
they're absolutely against it. 
 
And when we privatized Saskoil for example, they voted against it, which 
reduces the size of government, cuts costs, allows people to invest.  And 
in fact Allan Blakeney, the former NDP member, stood there, was against it, 
and we find out, Mr. Speaker, he has shares in Saskoil.  Whoops!  How about 
that. 
 
Now they're really interested in Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker, the old 
NDP Saskatchewan family of Crown corporations that's going to have all its 
advertising budget, all this politics, Mr. Speaker, that's fine for them. 
 
But when we put it in the hands of the public, in share offerings and trade 
with it, they're against it, Mr. Speaker, except when their leader can 
actually have shares. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that's the hypocrisy the people of Saskatchewan voted against 
in '82 and in '86 and they're aware of right now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Premier.  Mr. Premier, 
your government has failed to live up to every commitment you've ever made, 
including the last one the member from Melfort made on Monday with respect 
to calling the Crown Corporations Committee. 
 
Mr. Premier, if you're so proud of your Crown corporations in terms of 
their administration, why won't you call them to meet immediately?  What 
are you trying to hide? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Imagine, imagine now, Mr. Speaker, as a result of us 
opening up the Crown corporations to the public, you know all the share 
values.  You know what it's worth on the market everyday.  People can 
invest, and they're saying that that isn't open.  Mr. Speaker, it's exactly 
the opposite. 
 
What they want to do is nationalize them all, put them into government, 
hold them all here, keep all the information together.  And we're the 
opposite, Mr. Speaker.  In fact even in the Soviet Union today, Mr. 



 

 

Speaker, they've asked to open up.  They said we want investment.  We want 
share offerings.  But not the NDP, Mr. Speaker; they're back in the 
nineteenth century with respect to share offering. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Premier.  I don't know 
how long you think you'll be able to keep the scandalous details of your 
government's mismanagement of the Saskatchewan Transportation Company from 
public scrutiny, Mr. Premier.  After all, at least a portion of the gory 
details will come out in a courtroom in September.  You have a 
responsibility to let the people of this province know how you are spending 
their tax dollars.  When are you going to allow the Crown Corporations 
Committee to open the books on the Crown corporations, Mr.Premier? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a list . . . I've just quickly 
written down, Mr. Speaker, a list just so the opposition really can 
appreciate how much the public has involvement now, finally, in Crown 
corporations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskoil is now totally public, and the people can go to 
shareholders' meetings.  Mr. Speaker, Sask Potash Corporation . . . they 
don't like to hear all this, but let me finish, Mr. Speaker, because these 
are all Crown corporations. 
 
Saskoil is public.  Sask Potash is public.  WESTBRIDGE is public.  Cameco, 
Mr. Speaker, in the uranium business, is going to have a public share 
offering, and they're absolutely against uranium.  They closed all the 
uranium mines.  Prairie Malt, Mr. Speaker, Prairie Malt is now privatized 
into the hands of the public.  All the members of the Saskatchewan Wheat 
Pool and the employees, Mr. Speaker -- now that's more public than anything 
they've ever done in their political life, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They put them all into hiding in government; we've opened them up to the 
people so they can see them every day in the newspaper.  Employees can have 
memberships.  They can hold it, Mr. Speaker.  That makes them 
uncomfortable, but it's absolutely the truth. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  The hon. member had just risen to ask 
a question and I don't think he's even got a word out and the members are 
not allowing him to. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Lease of the Silver Lake Farm 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  If the Finance minister 
would just let me put my question. 
 



 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to direct my question to the Associate Minister of 
Agriculture.  And, Mr. Minister, on June 5, I asked about the status of the 
ownership or the leases of the Silver Lake farm in Green Lake.  You said it 
was up to the courts to decide who the lessees of the land should be.  Mr. 
Minister, is it correct to take from that answer that the ownership of the 
farm remains with the Crown, and that it currently is not leased to anyone? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, what we have done is we have asked the 
Department of Justice to give us a ruling on the validity of who the lease 
should be to, and whether in fact we have the authority to lease to anyone 
until all of the matters arising from the discussion and from the court 
cases have been dealt with. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- New question, Mr. Speaker.  It's quite clear that no one 
has the lease; the lease is in the name of the Crown.  But, Mr. Minister, 
my question to you is: two people are renting land on the Silver Lake farm, 
one who is using it as rental pasture and another who is farming the 
cultivated portion.  And by way of information, Mr. Minister, the people in 
Green Lake were told those two individuals were renting the land from the 
Prince Albert consortium which brought the non-fixed assets of the farm and 
turned around and sold them.  How is it that this Prince Albert group could 
be renting out land which is the Crown, not they have title to? 
 
Mr. Minister, my question for you is: why should these people be collecting 
revenues which should rightly be going to the provincial treasury by your 
own admission? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- There's two issues there, in answer to the member's 
question.  The non-fixed assets on the day that we transferred the assets 
to them, that included the livestock and machinery, we deposited to our 
account on that day the value of that property. 
 
And the second observation that you made is that the lessees are currently 
on the property.  What we have instructed through our department is that 
the individuals who are there from the village of Green Lake are really 
trespassing, that we have instructed the people who were in a bid position 
for the property that they are also trespassing.  And so we have made that 
information available to both of them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Are you indicating that you 
will be laying charges against the trespassers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- No, Mr. Speaker, we're not. 



 

 

 
Mr. Thompson: -- New question, Mr. Speaker, to the same minister.  Mr. 
Minister, there are currently no residents of Green Lake employed at the 
Silver Lake farm today.  And by way of information, when you privatized it, 
the conditions of sale were that the new owners had to maintain employment 
levels, run it as a viable farm, and purchase the land. 
 
I want to quote, Mr. Speaker, by way of information by the minister who is 
in charge of privatization.  And he quoted . . . and I'm quoting from the 
paper of January '89, and he said: proposals must also contain a sound 
business plan that provides assurance of continued economic viability for 
those northern farms plus local employment.  Instead you got owners who 
quickly sold off the cattle, then the machinery, buildings and tools, and 
now apparently rent it out for pasture and share-cropping.  Plus not one 
individual is working on that property. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, to the minister is: how are these people allowed 
to violate the terms of the sale's agreement with your government, and then 
how do they get away with it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, as I indicated earlier, the involvement 
by the individuals who set up an agreement to originally buy the property 
could not receive title clear and free for that land.  And so the issue 
came back to us and said how do we resolve the issue when caveats are on 
the property and we can't transfer the property. 
 
What we have there today is that there are some people from the village of 
Green Lake, I believe, who are living on that property, have moved on and 
have put some cattle on there.  So we have a serious concern about how to 
deal with that problem and also the problem with the residents on that 
property who are not able to buy it because of the caveat that Green Lake 
put on it. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Final supplement, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, are you 
saying that the residents of Green Lake have occupied and are living on the 
land that you sold -- the property of the Silver Lake farm? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- It's our legal opinion that the land was never sold, 
and therefore we have begun to deal with the caveat.  We have begun to deal 
with the residents from Green Lake who are supposedly living on there.  
That's the last that I heard, and then the people who were intending to buy 
it but couldn't get the title free and clear. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Payment of Revenue-Sharing Grants 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I might say that 
the stench emanating from some of the government's privatization deals is 



 

 

getting more powerful as we go along here. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, is to the Minister of Community Services.  Mr. 
Minister, you've changed the schedule for paying out revenue-sharing grants 
from four times a year to eight times a year.  I wonder if you can tell 
this House why you've made that change? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Mr. Speaker, as you're probably aware, over the last 
year and the last few years physical situation of the province has been 
difficult, difficult to manage.  Mr. Speaker, I think it's a responsibility 
of everyone to share in that responsibility.  Local governments have done a 
very good job, Mr. Speaker, in managing their affairs.  Mr. Speaker, I'm 
sure that we'll be able to work with them to manage the challenges that lay 
before us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, a new question  
 Dto the minister who seems to be admitting that he has made this change 
and seems to be offering some lukewarm reasons as to why he's doing that. 
 
Mr. Minister, are you aware of the fact that the city of Regina, for 
example, will lose 50 to $100,000 this year in interest payments?  And were 
you aware of this before you made this change? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Mr. Speaker, as I've said, we across this province 
really do have to work together.  We have to work together to meet the 
many, many challenges that are before us.  And I feel confident that if we 
do work together, Mr. Speaker, we'll be able to meet those challenges. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Urban municipalities must be laughing, Mr. Minister.  
They've done a wonderful job in Saskatchewan of tightening their belts over 
the years.  They've yet to see you do the same thing, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, isn't this just one more example of where you're off-loading 
or dumping your fiscal mess onto the backs of municipalities in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Mr. Speaker, we set our priorities by working with the 
people.  We have a plan, Mr. Speaker.  We have a plan.  We set our 
priorities.  We set our priorities -- health and education funding, Mr. 
Speaker, some help for the farming community.  We set our priorities 
carefully and we did it with consultation with the people of the province, 
Mr. Speaker.  We have some challenges and we will meet those if we work 
together. 



 

 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Hiring of GATT Negotiator 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is for the Minister 
of Economic Diversification and Trade. 
 
It was about a year ago right now, Mr. Minister, that you made the 
brilliant move of hiring Simon Reisman, one of the most expensive 
consultants in Canada, to apparently assist you in the GATT (General 
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) negotiations.  Now we all watched the GATT 
negotiations and the almost zero contribution that this government was able 
to make to that process turning into what was little more than a European 
holiday for the Premier and for Mr. Reisman. 
 
I'd like to know, Mr. Minister, whether Mr. Reisman's contract has been 
terminated and how much the retention of Mr. Reisman as our advisor cost 
the taxpayers of this country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Reisman is the most senior trade 
person in Canada.  He works for us as required on a fee that he is paid as 
he works, depending on how much work he does and how much is required. 
 
It's very interesting that today the members opposite object to trade and 
trade agreements, when GATT and its future is so important to the farmers 
of Saskatchewan.  And today when the Free Trade Agreement with the United 
States and Canada has had its final panel ruling on pork, has ruled in 
favour of the farmers of Canada and Saskatchewan, that's why we have Simon 
Reisman, that's why we have a trade agreement to protect our farmers and 
give them an opportunity to trade.  And they will now not be paying tariffs 
when they're shipping their pork into the United States. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- It's interesting, Mr. Speaker, that the minister makes no 
attempt to say that Mr. Reisman contributed in any way to the GATT 
negotiations.  And from what we say from our vantage point, our 
contribution to that process was an absolute zero. 
 
My question is, Mr. Minister, and it's a plain, direct question: how much 
were we paying Mr. Reisman per day, and how much did he cost us in total by 
the time his contract was terminated? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Speaker, the amount that we pay Mr. Reisman 
depends on how much work he does and is published in the Public Accounts. 
If he was paid last year, it'll be published in the current accounts, and 
if he's paid this year, it will be published next year.  I don't have the 
exact figure in front of me today. 



 

 

 
But I can say that Mr. Reisman's advice has been very, very valuable to the 
people of Saskatchewan, to the pork producers of Saskatchewan. Because this 
very day the agreement that he negotiated, that he advises us on, has ruled 
in favour of the pork producers of Saskatchewan and there's no longer a 
tariff on pork going to the United States. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
Bill No. 85 -- An Act to amend The Superannuation (Supplementary 
Provisions) Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise to move second reading of Bill 
No. 85, An Act to amend The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Act.  
The objective of this Bill, Mr. Speaker, is to provide a restricted 
retirement option to employees who have age and service totalling at least 
75 years.  The restricted retirement option will be generally available to 
individuals whose positions are abolished and generally available to 
individuals who may choose not to be relocated in decentralization 
initiatives. 
 
The Legislative Assembly is familiar with the more general early retirement 
program which was offered to individuals in 1987.  This Bill, Mr. Speaker, 
will provide comparable benefits and unreduced pension to individuals 
participating in the public service superannuation plan, or an increased 
pension to individuals participating in the public employees' 
superannuation plan, and a bridge benefit of $350 per month until age 65, 
and a severance payment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 85, An Act to amend The 
Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Thank you.  Mr. Speaker, we just received a copy of this 
Bill yesterday.  There are several provisions here which I think people 
that are involved should be advised about and should be consulted about -- 
particularly who the restrictions apply to, the retroactivity that's 
referred to in the Bill, the amounts.  We'll want to know a little bit 
about the costing. 
 
So I think we should provide a little time for the people involved to be 
consulted and have their voices heard so that they may be expressed here in 
the legislature. 
 
Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I would move adjournment of debate on this 
motion. 



 

 

 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Bill No. 86 -- An Act to amend The Communications Network Corporation Act 
and certain other Acts 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure to move second 
reading of Bill No. 86, An Act to amend The Communications Network 
Corporation Act and certain other Acts. 
 
If I may, Mr. Speaker, I'll note a couple of the accomplishments of SCN 
(Saskatchewan Communications Network Corporation) near its first year.  As 
we near the end of the academic year, SCN has provided post-secondary 
credit courses to almost 3,000 students throughout the province.  This is 
up from approximately 900 students last year, and next year SCN expects a 
further 35 per cent increase in the courses offered, which will serve 
obviously an even greater number of students. 
 
This remarkable growth, Mr. Speaker, in the demand for SCN services shows 
the strong support throughout Saskatchewan for SCN's initiatives, and 
speaks volumes about the quality of educational services being provided by 
SCN and the commitment of the government in continuing to support 
educational initiatives for the benefit of all the people in the province. 
 
The second notable achievement of SCN in the past year has been the CRTC's 
(Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission) granting a 
broadcast licence to SCN.  On May 6, 1991, SCN went on the air throughout 
the province and is now providing quality educational programming to 
communities like Buffalo Narrows and La Loche, who have never before had 
the benefit of a service like this. 
 
To help provide funds for the production and acquisition of programming 
carried by SCN, The Communications Network Corporation Act introduced the 
distance education development fee.  This Bill will amend some of the 
technical collection procedures associated with this fee, so as to make the 
collection and remission of the fee easier for cable operators.  The 
changes proposed in the Bill will allow cable operators to collect and 
remit the distance education development fee in the same manner that they 
are currently collecting and remitting E&H (education and health) tax. 
 
Finally the Bill also enables the Lieutenant Governor in Council by 
regulation to establish different categories of cable subscribers, and 
allow for variation of the rate of the distance education development fee. 
 
This will allow for example a variation in the fee charged to cable 
subscribers of very large systems from that charged to subscribers of small 
community based cable systems, recognizing the different tiers of cable 
operator licences as authorized by the CRTC. 
 
Both changes will continue to ensure that SCN will have the funds necessary 
to provide the high quality of programming that the people of Saskatchewan 
now already have come to appreciate and benefit from. 
 



 

 

Therefore I move second reading of An Act to amend The Communications 
Network Corporation Act and certain other Acts be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Having received a copy of this Bill 
yesterday, I want to make a few brief remarks before adjourning the debate 
on this Bill. 
 
We on this side have stated very clearly from the outset our support of 
distance education.  It is an area that should be a non-political area, but 
only because of the way the Bill has been introduced and of the way it has 
been -- I'm not referring to this Bill but rather the original Bill -- the 
way the whole distance education system, the SCN network has been put into 
place, it's become a very political thing. 
 
I see in this Bill the ability to establish different fee for different 
categories. And I will be consulting with various people in the industry to 
find out precisely what that means.  I have every reason to suspect it 
means that the major cable companies such as Cable Regina will be paying a 
premium as opposed to what the cable companies of the smaller systems will 
be paying. 
 
Anyway I will be checking on the ramifications of this and, Mr. Speaker, 
with that I move that we adjourn debate on Bill 86. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
 D 

Bill No. 54 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth that Bill No. 54 -- An Act respecting the Tabling of 
Documents be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Speaker, I'll just make a few comments.  Particularly I 
think after this morning where we've seen what I would describe as a 
pathetic display in question period by our Premier and his ministers that I 
think is very much related to this Bill. 
 
Here we're in a situation where the government is presenting this fac pçade 
about democratic reforms and sharing of information and opening up the 
process of government and pretending that they're running an open 
government.  They're going to table documents on time, which would be a 
major switch for this government. 
 
But in the face of all these so-called democratic reform initiatives we see 
a Minister of Economic Development and Trade who's not prepared to share 
information about costs of Simon Reisman charged to the province.  We see 
the government not prepared to answer questions on the game farm. 
 



 

 

We see the government not prepared to call a Crown Corporations Committee 
which spends over 50 per cent of the public's money.  And the government 
does not have the courage because of what they're hiding there, likely in 
terms of advertising costs, polling costs, and so on, to call that 
committee together, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that unwillingness to call the Crown Corporations Committee so that the 
expenditures of Crown corporations can be scrutinized, I mean that's the 
other part of tabling documents, Mr. Speaker.  Government normally has been 
tabling the documents late and then even when they table the documents 
they're not prepared to bring the Crown Corporations Committee together to 
discuss those documents.  And so I don't know what an opposition can do to 
force the government to try and be accountable for expenditures of public 
money. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, with regard to this particular Bill, one of the concerns 
I have and we have on this side of the House is that even where there are 
rules about deadlines and tabling of documents and financial statements, 
they're not complied with.  And this Bill here does not speak to, what if 
the government doesn't meet those deadlines.  And as the Provincial Auditor 
has pointed out, that has been their practice, not meeting the deadlines. 
 
So this Bill in my view places no consequences on the government if they 
refuse, as they have on so many occasions in the past, to actually meet the 
deadlines of their public documents. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the public wants information.  They want information about 
how their government spends their money.  They're concerned about a lack of 
accountability which was reinforced as to why they should be this morning 
when the Premier of the province was not prepared to take responsibility 
for the fact that the Crown Corporations Committee which would allow the 
opposition to scrutinize these annual reports of Crown corporations, was 
not prepared to take responsibility to make sure that this happens. 
 
It's very frustrating, Mr. Speaker, because I don't know what an opposition 
can do.  We've written to the government, I think some . . . (inaudible) . 
. . letters; we've asked in question period; we even went to the Premier 
this morning and he's not prepared to open up the scrutiny of his 
government. 
 
(1045) 
 
And so he can talk about all the democratic reforms he wants, Mr. Speaker, 
but with this government there is not a will to be democratic and open and 
accountable and that's why the public sees all these democratic reform 
initiatives as a fac pçade.  And this Bill is going to be no different.  
This Bill has got no teeth.  That's the major concern I have about the 
Bill.  It simply does not have any teeth and there's no consequences for 
the government that would continue to break the law as this government has 
done, to break its own laws if they refuse and don't table documents on 
time. 
 
So they haven't changed their ways.  They haven't shown that they're 



 

 

willing to openly share information that the public has a right to have 
access to, and I'm not reassured that this Bill is going to change 
anything, Mr. Speaker.  I have a number of questions on some of the 
sections in committee and I will be asking the minister to answer those.  
But for the time being that's all I want to say on this Bill.  Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee 
of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 57 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth that Bill No. 57 -- An Act to amend The Financial 
Administration Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for recognizing me.  Mr. 
Speaker, I want to make a few remarks with respect to this Bill.  In the 
main the Bill before us proposes some housekeeping amendments to The 
Financial Administration Act and are of no real consequence. 
 
But there is one major change in the Bill that I'd like to talk about and 
that is the change with respect to the tabling of the Public Accounts.  Mr. 
Speaker, you will know that The Financial Administration Act states that 
when the Public Accounts are prepared by the Provincial Comptroller, they 
will be laid before the Legislative Assembly as soon as is practicable by 
the Minister of Finance.  It's now proposed that we change that so that the 
Public Accounts will in fact now be completed by a certain date every year.  
This has been rather loose.  It was up to the Provincial Comptroller to 
prepare the Public Accounts.  Generally he was able to have the Public 
Accounts done by the end of the year, that is, the end of a calendar year 
following the fiscal year.  Saskatchewan has a fiscal year that ends March 
30. 
 
The Provincial Comptroller then takes all the information on how the money 
has been spent in that year and puts all that information into the Public 
Accounts.  And of course you can well appreciate that it takes some bit of 
time to get that information; to put that into a proper format, even with 
computers that we have.  To publish that information, to print it and so 
on, it takes some months to do that. 
 
In the past the Provincial Comptroller has mostly been able to do that by 
the end of the year, even though there was no legislation that he had to do 
that.  And then as soon as he had it done he would give it to the Minister 
of Finance, and then the Minister of Finance would then lay it before the 
Legislative Assembly the first opportunity that he had when the Legislative 
Assembly was sitting. 
 
Now the Bill says that the Provincial Comptroller must complete his Public 
Accounts by November 30.  I don't think there's any particular problem with 
that.  It's my understanding from the Department of Finance people that 
November 30 does not create any specific concerns for them in terms of 
being able to get the information from the previous year and to publish 
that information by November 30 of each year.  It doesn't seem to create 



 

 

any problems. 
 
Then the Bill goes on to say that instead of the present process where the 
Minister of Finance is expected to lay the Public Accounts before the 
Legislative Assembly and thereby make them public as soon as is practicable 
- 
_ I think is the term in the present legislation -- it now says that the 
Minister of Finance will lay them before the Assembly on the earliest 
possible day.  So it takes away a little bit of the latitude that the 
Minister of Finance has in terms of laying the Public Accounts before the 
Assembly.  In the past it was as soon as is practicable; now it says at the 
earliest possible day. 
 
And the reason that this is coming before us is that there has been some 
problems in the past in the tabling of the Public Accounts -- and I'll get 
to that in a minute, Mr. Speaker -- but I think that it's important to 
review just what the Public Accounts are.  We talk about these Public 
Accounts, but I think it's important for people to understand just what the 
Public Accounts are. 
 
The Public Accounts provide the only detailed record of the government 
spending, Mr. Speaker.  It shows exactly what the Legislative Assembly 
passed in terms of a budget, and then how the government spent that money 
in the specific year under review.  And the public really doesn't know how 
money has been spent unless it has the Public Accounts. 
 
The Public Accounts also provides the only detailed summary of advertising 
expenses, and the only complete record of political staff salaries, 
benefits, travel expenses, on the part of those people.  And it seems to me 
that the public has a right to know that particular information, and that 
information is contained in the Public Accounts. 
 
The Public Accounts also lets the public know about any contracts that the 
government has entered into.  For example, this morning in question period, 
there was discussion about a contract between the government and one Simon 
Reisman who was hired by the government to advise it on trade matters. 
 
Now in question period, the minister wouldn't give us any answers as to 
what money was spent on Mr. Reisman or what money the taxpayers . . . or 
what taxpayers' dollars had been spent to engage Mr. Reisman.  But the 
Public Accounts for this year, for the year ended March 31, 1992 -- or I 
would expect because the contract was last year it may well be in the 
Public Accounts for the year ended March 31, 1991 -- the Public Accounts 
would show then the amount of money that had in fact been spent on Mr. 
Reisman for this contract that he had with the government to advise it on 
trade matters and to have dinner with the Premier in Brussels and so on. 
 
We really don't know as an opposition, and the public really doesn't know, 
what kind of money has been spent on contracts such as that until we get 
the Public Accounts because the government, of course, always hides that 
information and refuses to provide that information when asked for it.  And 
they always say well, you can get that in the Public Accounts.  So the 
Public Accounts does give us that kind of information. 



 

 

 
The Public Accounts also lets us know whether or not the government 
overspent in significant areas.  In Public Accounts we know, like, how much 
money the government was given by the Legislative Assembly to spend on 
certain items.  But the Public Accounts will show whether or not the 
government overspent in certain areas. 
 
For example, a couple of years ago, the Premier said, well we're going to 
cut back on advertising costs, and we're going to cut back on travel costs.  
But then when we got the Public Accounts for the year, we found out that in 
fact that that hadn't happened and that advertising expenses by the 
government had continued to go up and that travel expenses, including the 
travel expenses by the Premier -- as opposed to being less than it was the 
previous year and being less because the Premier said we wanted to reduce 
it -- the travel expenses were in fact far more than they were in the 
previous year. 
 
But the only way you really find out whether the government spent more than 
they said it would is through the Public Accounts.  And the only real way 
you find out if the government is in fact going to do what it says it will 
do, or that the government will do what the Premier says it will do, is 
through the Public Accounts. 
 
Now that's one case where we found out that, you know, things quite hadn't 
turned out the way the Premier said they were supposed to.  In fact he 
spent a whole lot more on travel than he said he would.  And the only way 
we can really find that out, Mr. Speaker, is through the Public Accounts.  
So the Public Accounts are very important and are an important part of the 
whole legislative process. 
 
I think people have to remember that the government doesn't have money 
unless the Legislative Assembly votes them the money.  The government puts 
a budget before the Legislative Assembly but has to have the money voted by 
the Legislative Assembly before they can vote that.  Now they're allowed to 
spend some money on an interim basis through special warrants and so on.  
But they really have to have the approval of the Legislative Assembly.  
Usually it's before the fact, but there's also some approval that's given 
after the fact for certain kinds of spending. 
 
So it's not the government's money, Mr. Speaker; it's the people's money 
and it's the Legislative Assembly that represents the people that then 
gives the government the money to spend.  And we do that because we want to 
make sure that the people have somewhat of a hold on the government and 
that the government just can't do whatever it wants to do without going 
back to the people, or the representatives of the people, which is the 
members of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Now usually the government gets its way because most of the members of the 
Legislative Assembly are government members and they support the . . . or 
they're members of the same party that the government comes from and they 
generally tend to support the government when the government asks for 
something.  If they don't, then of course the government falls and you have 
to have an election. 



 

 

 
But it's important to remember that -- that that's part of accountability 
in our system of democracy, that the government cannot have money unless 
it's voted by the representatives of the people here in the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
By the same token the government can't just spend money without accounting 
for how that money has been spent.  And we account for that in a number of 
different ways, but the major ways are: one, we have a Provincial Auditor 
who has to examine the government's books.  But also we demand that the 
government publish a Public Accounts which then details how the government 
spent money in the past, so that the taxpayers, through their members of 
the Legislative Assembly, can then see how the government has spent the 
money -- whether they spent it wisely, whether they spent it foolishly, 
whether they spent more than we allowed them, whether they spent money on 
things, on political items, as opposed to strictly government items and the 
like.  So that's the process and that's why Public Accounts are so 
important. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, earlier I alluded to the fact that Public Accounts . . . 
that the change in the legislation that's being proposed is to make sure 
that the Public Accounts will be tabled by the Minister of Finance as early 
as possible when the legislature is sitting, and that the Public Accounts, 
even if the legislature isn't sitting, will in fact be ready by November 
30. 
 
And people might well ask: why is a change being proposed at this 
particular time?  Well the reason that there's a change is that we've had 
some real problems in Saskatchewan.  I think even if the public don't 
remember the reasons or all of the particulars and the details of that, I 
think they certainly remember that, you know, that in the last couple of 
years the PC (Progressive Conservative) government has held up the tabling 
of the Public Accounts and they've set some records in Saskatchewan for 
late tabling of the Public Accounts. 
 
Like, as an example, it's my understanding that . . . well just to review a 
bit of history, that going back to 1945 through 1973 the Public Accounts 
were always tabled in February because the Legislative Assembly happened to 
be sitting then, so that in February you had an idea of the specific 
expenditures of the government from the previous year. 
 
There was even some times in the early '70s where that information was 
provided the same year, Mr. Speaker.  They were provided in December, so 
that for the year ended March 30, 1973, the Legislative Assembly happened 
to be sitting in December and the Public Accounts were tabled here in the 
Legislative Assembly on December 19 of 1973.  So it was a matter of a few 
months when the Public Accounts were tabled. 
 
And this carried on, Mr. Speaker, in the main through the '70s, although 
there were a few times when it was tabled in March.  But there were some 
years where, for example, in the 1980s, where again the Public Accounts, or 
the year ended, the Public Accounts were provided to the Legislative 
Assembly in that same calendar year. 



 

 

 
We saw a major change take place, Mr. Speaker, in 1985 when the government 
for the first time tabled the Public Accounts in April of that year; and 
then in 1987 when the government tabled the Public Accounts in June of that 
year, which set a record in Saskatchewan for late tabling of the Public 
Accounts.  So that you had more than a year following the close of a fiscal 
year before anybody had any idea of how the government had spent money. 
 
And the following year, in 1988, the government tabled the information in 
May of that year.  In fact there was even court challenges which were 
undertaken at that time to try and force the government to table the 
information. 
 
(1100) 
 
So that we've had some significant problems in Saskatchewan with not only 
the government not calling the legislature so that the Public Accounts 
couldn't be tabled on a timely basis, but also ministers taking that clause 
in the Bill to table them as soon as is practicable, to take that clause 
and to misuse it, and to simply hold up the tabling of the Public Accounts 
for no good reason except for political reasons.  That the minister said, 
well we'll be embarrassed by this information so we're just going to hold 
it up; we're not going to table it. 
 
And you know that's rather unfortunate that now we have a change proposed 
in the legislation, a change proposed in the legislation, when before we've 
never needed that because Finance ministers had a great deal of integrity 
and they tabled the Public Accounts as soon as was possible.  Governments 
were regular in terms of meetings of the Legislative Assembly, so that the 
Public Accounts could be tabled on a timely basis. 
 
But here you've had some PC Finance ministers with absolutely no integrity 
at all, holding up the tabling of the Public Accounts for no reason other 
than political reasons -- political reasons to suit their own political 
agenda, and now we have to change the law on account of these ministers not 
having any integrity. 
 
And it's like the . . . you know I remember when I was a child in school 
and sometimes one kid would get out of hand and the teacher would say, well 
now everybody in the class is going to have to stay behind or everybody in 
the class is going to get a punishment on account of what one or two people 
did.  And you know that's what's happening here, is that we're having to 
change legislation on account of one or two rather unscrupulous Finance 
ministers here in Saskatchewan.  So it's unfortunate that we have to have 
that. 
 
Now I tell you that the proposed change poses no problems for the New 
Democratic Party.  The history of the CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth 
Federation) and the New Democratic Party in Saskatchewan is that we would 
always have been within the time frame of this legislation if that 
legislation had been in place.  So it causes us no problems, and I guess in 
the final analysis it's probably good legislation. 
 



 

 

Although I fully expect that the PC government will get defeated in the 
next election and that we're not going to see them for another 50 years in 
Saskatchewan, nevertheless in case there's some future Finance minister who 
is as unscrupulous as some of the PC Finance ministers, then at least there 
will be a law which demands that he lay the Public Accounts before the 
Legislative Assembly earlier rather than later, as was the case with the PC 
Finance ministers, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So there has been a real problem here in Saskatchewan.  And it's important 
that these Public Accounts be tabled before the Legislative Assembly begins 
with the budget of the next year because most people know . . . at least in 
terms of my personal finances at home, or organizations that I've been 
involved in, Mr. Speaker, where I've been treasurer or president and so on, 
I always like to know what we spent the money on the previous years before 
I can undertake to commit myself to expenditures for the next year. 
 
Now I know that hasn't been a problem with the PCs because, looking at 
their record of financial management in Saskatchewan, they don't frankly 
care a lot about asking those kinds of questions.  And they just spend, 
spend, spend without really caring about what the money was spent on in the 
past.  They've been rather reckless that way.  But I tell you from my 
personal viewpoint, and most people, when they're sort of looking at the 
family budget for the next year, they do that with some knowledge of what 
the money has been spent on in the past. 
 
And the same principle holds here.  It's important for members of the 
public and members of the Legislative Assembly to know what money has been 
spent on in the past before you can really make commitments about spending 
in the future. 
 
And that's something that the Provincial Auditor has pointed out to us time 
and time again.  In his reports to the Legislative Assembly, he always 
talks about the timeliness of financial information, points out that it's 
important for the people to know how money has been spent before making any 
commitments. 
 
Now does the Bill solve the problem?  I think that in some ways it does.  
It solves the problem in so far as well maybe it wasn't a problem in terms 
of the Provincial Comptroller preparing the Public Accounts.  It's my sense 
that he's pretty much had them ready by December or November in any event.  
The Bill says that he has to have them ready by November 30 of the fiscal 
year.  In the past he's pretty much had them ready at that time anyway. 
 
So I don't know if the Bill is going to solve any particular problem there.  
It might cause him to speed up his operations a little bit, but then with 
the computers that he has at his disposal now to bring forward records and 
to have them published readily, I don't think that this particular thing is 
going to be any problem for the Provincial Comptroller. 
 
Now the other part of the Bill that causes us some concern is this part 
where it says that the comptroller has got to have the Public Accounts 
ready by November 30.  And then it's got to be laid before the Legislative 
Assembly, if it's sitting, immediately.  But if the Legislative Assembly is 



 

 

not sitting, then it should be laid before the Legislative Assembly as 
early as possible after the first sitting date of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Now if that sounds a bit confusing, maybe I can get a little bit more 
specific about that, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  We haven't had the Legislative 
Assembly sit on November 30 for the . . . well it's never sat on November 
30 except in 1986 after the fall election that year.  But since that time, 
the Legislative Assembly has never sat on November 30 or in December or in 
January or in February.  And it's never really been called back to meet 
again until later in March and April, and in the one case the government 
didn't call the Legislative Assembly until June. 
 
So that even though -- if the future sees the same pattern as we've seen in 
the last few years -- that even though the Public Accounts will be ready by 
November 30, they're not going to be tabled or made public and the public 
will have no way of knowing what's in those Public Accounts.  The members 
of the Legislative Assembly will have no way of knowing what's in those 
Public Accounts until March or April of the next year, or whenever it is 
that the government decides to call the Legislative Assembly. 
 
So it seems to me that it's kind of a silly situation here to say that, 
well the Public Accounts have got to be prepared by November 30, but you're 
not going to make them public or lay them before the people of the province 
until what? -- some four or five months later.  Well that doesn't make a 
whole lot of sense to us, Mr. Speaker, to do that. 
 
It seems to us that if you're going to have the Public Accounts ready and 
they're all going to be printed and so on by November 30, then you need to 
have a more effective way of getting those Public Accounts out to the 
public through the members of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Now I'm not going so far as to say the Legislative Assembly should sit on 
November 30 of every year, but certainly the government should have looked 
at alternatives such as, if the Legislative Assembly wasn't sitting, to 
perhaps have the Public Accounts released  
 Dpublicly and have them referred automatically to something like the 
Public Accounts Committee. 
 
Because what happens, when the Public Accounts are laid before the 
Legislative Assembly, the first thing that happens is that the Public 
Accounts get referred to the Public Accounts Committee for them to look at 
the Public Accounts on behalf of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
So what you're saying now is that the Public Accounts are going to be 
tabled on November 30, the legislature doesn't get called until March or 
April . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, if the Minister of Finance wants to get 
into the debate again, then I certainly encourage him to do that.  The 
thing I guess that disturbs me is that he sits there and yip-yaps from his 
seat and he . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  I'd ask members not to make reference to 
people's absence or presence in the legislature. 
 



 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  The Minister of 
Finance has a problem in this Legislative Assembly of always intervening 
and injecting himself into debates from his seat, yelling and hollering.  
And he doesn't seem much inclined to want to stand up on a lot of occasions 
to defend what he's doing, but he does sit there in his seat and yip and 
holler and yell a lot, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Anyway the rather silly situation that's being posed by this Bill is that 
the Public Accounts are going to get tabled on November 30.  That's clear. 
 
The Legislative Assembly doesn't sit till March or April, so that's when 
the Public Accounts then get made public, even though you've had them 
published some months before -- December, January, February, say, March.  
You've had them sitting on a shelf for four months, then you make them 
public.  Then they're automatically referred to the Public Accounts 
Committee, and then the Public Accounts Committee examines the Public 
Accounts on behalf of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Now it would make a whole lot more sense if you said that November 30 the 
Public Accounts are ready, you're automatically going to go to the Public 
Accounts Committee and they can start to look at the Public Accounts at 
that point -- in the period of December, January, February, and March.  So 
that they might even be able to look at it and then provide some report to 
the Legislative Assembly when the Legislative Assembly sits.  So the 
Legislative Assembly then has some idea of what happened in that particular 
fiscal year and what it is that was in the Public Accounts. 
 
So that even though the Bill gives the appearance here of solving some 
problems that the PC government has created or that their unscrupulous, 
dishonest Finance ministers have created . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  I find that unparliamentary and I'd ask the 
member to apologize. 
 
Order.  The member from Regina Rosemont is interfering with the Chair and 
I'd ask him to refrain from that.  And I'd ask the member for Regina 
Victoria to rise and apologize to this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Was it the word unscrupulous or dishonest? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- The word dishonest, and I'd ask you to apologize. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- I certainly apologize for calling PC Finance ministers 
dishonest. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  You cannot do indirectly what you cannot do 
directly.  I'd ask you to rise and apologize to the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- I apologize for calling him dishonest, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- I've warned the member twice.  I will warn him once 
more.  I would ask him to rise and unequivocally apologize or I will name 



 

 

the member. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- I unequivocally apologize, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But anyway we have the situation of PC Finance ministers that have been, 
well how shall we put it, less than forthcoming, less than straightforward.  
I guess there's any number of adjectives that might apply here, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker.  But the point is that that's what has happened in the past. 
 
The Bill really doesn't solve the problem that has occurred in the past; it 
can still occur.  I mean it would eliminate one of the problems that we had 
where the member for Qu'Appelle-Lumsden who was Finance minister at the 
time, instead of tabling the Public Accounts when he had them when the 
legislature first sat in April of one year, sat on them for no reason at 
all.  Even though they were ready, he refused to table them. 
 
He was playing some kind of political game at that point.  And this is, I 
tell you, this is the reason that this Bill is before us, is because of 
their antics and their abuse of the legislative process.  The people of 
Saskatchewan are or have been upset with the way the government has acted, 
have a sense that this government is not forthcoming or is as honest as it 
should be about things such as the Public Accounts, and that this is a 
government that is for ever trying to hide information from them.  That's 
the sense that people have. 
 
In order to dispel that type of thing, this image that's been created and 
this feeling that's been created . . . I might say for very good reason 
that the people should believe that, because that belief is based on actual 
fact of what's happened here.  But in order to dispel that the government 
is coming in here now, sort of some weeks before a provincial election, and 
saying well look, you know, we're going to change the legislation here to 
table the Public Accounts real early. 
 
And well that change might have . . . you know, I can see it here, would 
have meant that the member for Qu'Appelle-Lumsden who was the Finance 
minister at that time, would have had to lay the Public Accounts before us 
a little bit earlier.  Well now let me take that back. He's a lawyer, and 
he's skilled and he'd probably find some way to get around it, you know, as 
he did that year. 
 
(1115) 
 
But anyway, the whole Bill is just some political exercise to tell the 
public that even though we as a PC government hid all this information in 
the past, wouldn't let you have this information on a timely basis, even 
though we did all these things, here we are a few weeks -- I hope it's a 
few weeks -- before a provincial election, now we're going to change the 
law so that kind of stuff will never happen again. 
 
Well thank you for small mercies.  This is a good step forward, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, but I don't think that anybody in Saskatchewan is fooled by what 
the government is doing.  Obviously the government, the PC government has 
been concerned about the opinions that Saskatchewan people hold, and so 



 

 

there's stewardship of the public purse. And this Bill and some others are 
intended to correct that, correct it I might say, at a very last minute in 
their term. 
 
Again if the government was truly interested in dealing with this problem 
in an effective manner, it would put before the Assembly some amendments to 
this Bill which would see that when the Public Accounts are completed on 
November 30, that the Public Accounts will automatically be referred to the 
Public Accounts Committee for review, where it properly should go in 
conjunction with the Provincial Auditor's report and to have a standing 
provision that that Public Accounts Committee shall meet to consider these 
reports in between sessions. 
 
So as you know in the past, the Public Accounts Committee only meets rarely 
between sessions or at least it has met . . . no, not rarely, it's met a 
couple of times now in the last few years.  And that's because the 
legislature hasn't been sitting, but there's still work to do. 
 
So if it's the intent of the government to not have the legislature 
sitting, then it seems to me that those committees should be sitting to 
consider this work.  And if the government was really interested in full 
accountability, they would think this thing through, and they would be 
putting amendments before us that would accomplish that. 
 
So that when it's completed on November 30, they're also then published and 
made available to the public and to the Legislative Assembly on November 
30, as opposed to this rather curious proposal that we have here that the 
Public Accounts will get published or will get printed and be ready on 
November 30, and they'll sit on a shelf in the Finance minister's office 
until March or April of next year. 
 
And that doesn't make a whole lot of sense.  Why don't you just say then 
that they should be ready by March.  You know it doesn't make any sense.  
So it seems to me that there's a more logical way to proceed here, but no 
one ever said that the government opposite had to be logical. And in fact 
they've given us ample evidence, I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, over the 
past, that they've been anything but logical. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we'll certainly support the Bill.  I mean I think it is a 
step forward.  I don't think that it harms anything by having this.  I 
think that there's some logical further steps which need to be taken.  If 
we're truly concerned about having the Public Accounts being made available 
on a timely basis, then there's some logical further steps which need to be 
taken by the Assembly to give effect to that.  But we'll deal with those 
kinds of questions in committee. And I suspect that future governments may 
well have to deal with that matter as well in legislation. 
 
But having said that, Mr. Speaker, we support the spirit of this Bill, and 
we support it as far as it goes.  We support the intent of the legislation 
and therefore will be supporting it on second reading.  But I would tell 
you, Mr. Speaker, that we'll have some suggestions for improvements to 
make, specific improvements, during the committee stage.  Thank you very 
much. 



 

 

 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee 
of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 83 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the 
Hon. Mr. McLeod that Bill No. 83 -- An Act to amend The Medical Profession 
Act, 1981 be now read a second time. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  The Bill that is before us 
is a Bill that removes the time restrictions for granting temporary permits 
to doctors working particularly in rural Saskatchewan.  It's designed for 
the purposes of dealing at least partially with the problem that we have in 
Saskatchewan, and that is the lack of medical doctors in rural communities.  
And hopefully this legislation will help somewhat in that regard. 
 
It's my understanding that the college initiated . . . the College of 
Physicians and Surgeons initiated this change and the college is supporting 
the change.  We will therefore be supporting this Bill. 
 
However I wish to point out, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the problem with 
respect to getting medical doctors in rural Saskatchewan is a long-standing 
problem.  It's one that this province has faced for many years and there 
have been studies done on it.  We have seen virtually no plan of action 
from the PC government with respect to dealing with that problem.  On the 
contrary, its many policies have increased the difficulty we have in 
getting doctors to rural Saskatchewan. 
 
In fact this particular amendment was initiated by the College of 
Physicians and Surgeons as opposed to the Minister of Health.  So this 
government still has no . . . is showing no leadership and no plan with 
respect to solving the problems of meeting the fundamental principles of 
health care for rural citizens, those fundamentals principles, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, being comprehensiveness, universality, accessibility, public 
administration, and of course portability. 
 
 DThe principles of medicare are that comprehensive health care services -- 
in other words, as comprehensive as reasonably possible, Mr. Deputy Speaker 
-- comprehensive health care services be universally accessible to people 
throughout Saskatchewan.  Those are the fundamental principles of medicare. 
 
But what we see in the province today is a lack of accessibility to 
services in rural Saskatchewan and in northern Saskatchewan in particular.  
In fact the Murray Commission report, or in conversations Dr. Murray had, 
there were references to northern Saskatchewan conducting third-world 
medicine. 
 
And that's the situation we face in Saskatchewan today.  And I say, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, it's a crisis situation with respect to the provision of 
comprehensive, universally accessible health care services to rural 
Saskatchewan and northern Saskatchewan. 
 



 

 

What we've witnessed in Saskatchewan in the last nine a half years under a 
PC government is a complete lack of vision with respect to health care.  
And we've witnessed a government floundering about in the area of health 
care with no plan, no long-term strategic plan, and a total lack of 
policies that enhance the principles of medicare and further the objectives 
of medicare as originally envisioned by the forefathers of medicare. 
 
What we've seen in this government was something like an $18 million cut in 
health care services back in the l987-88 budget.  And this government is 
still reeling from those wrong decisions and trying to play catch-up.  And 
I might say very unsuccessfully because what we witnessed this summer -- or 
this spring rather -- were further cuts and bed closures and lay-off of 
health care professionals throughout the province. 
 
What we witnessed in the nine and a half years of PC government was a 
destruction of the school-based children's dental plan, where in some 333 
communities there were health care workers who were looking after the 
health care of our children, the dental care of our children.  And now from 
333 communities we have a number of dentists who are out there.  And we 
never know for sure whether it's 20 or 25 or 33 because they set up offices 
and some of them shut them down and move out.  And it's very unstable. 
 
But the fact of the matter is the accessibility to dental services in rural 
and northern Saskatchewan is less than what it was five years ago . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . it's less  The members opposite say no it 
isn't.  You will be proven wrong on that.  In fact you have been proven 
wrong. 
 
What we also saw, what we also have seen in the last nine and a half years 
was a reduction in prescription drug plan benefits that caused considerable 
hardship for people throughout Saskatchewan and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, which 
still is causing hardship to individuals in Saskatchewan who have the need 
for large numbers of prescription drugs because they may have three or four 
members in their family who are asthmatic, for example, or some people who 
are on three or four different types of medication. 
 
The cuts that the government levied are still producing hardships to 
Saskatchewan citizens in rural and northern Saskatchewan and in urban . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Mr. Speaker, I ask leave to introduce students. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, I'd like to 
introduce to you, and through you to all members of the Legislative 
Assembly, 19 students who are seated in your gallery.  They're from 
Assiniboia.  They're grade 4 students, and they're accompanied by teacher, 
Janice Erfle; and chaperons, Karen Willis and Joe Salaba; and bus driver, 
Leonard Gieman. 



 

 

 
I ask all members of the Legislative Assembly to welcome these guests. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 83 (continued) 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I was indicating that what 
has taken place in Saskatchewan in the last nine and a half years -- and 
I'll repeat it again for the benefit of the Minister of Health -- is an 
attack on the fundamental principles of health care that have resulted in a 
deterioration of services in rural Saskatchewan and northern Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
We've seen hospital bed closures this spring and on other occasions.  We 
see the Minister of Health standing up and promising all these nursing 
positions and then turning around and putting hospitals in a position where 
they have to lay off nurses and other health care professionals. 
 
We see the government wanting to implement user fees with respect to 
chiropractic services and then backing off because of the outcry.  And I 
might say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they are still looking at ways of cutting 
back on chiropractic services, and we hear about this every day from the 
profession and people who use these services. 
 
We have seen a twinning of health care regions in Saskatchewan that have 
made it very difficult for public health nurses to do what they do best, 
and that is to deal with people on the front lines.  And what we have seen 
is a reduction in the services that public health nurses are able to 
provide to their patients and their clientele, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because 
of the minister's attack on health care. 
 
We see in Saskatchewan a lack of funding for northern Saskatchewan and 
rural Saskatchewan -- a total lack of funding; and a complete lack of 
leadership by the PC government in dealing with the problem we have in 
rural Saskatchewan, which is getting medical doctors out to rural 
Saskatchewan, public health nurses out to rural Saskatchewan, dental 
therapists out to rural Saskatchewan, chiropractors out to rural 
Saskatchewan, physiotherapists, occupational therapists, and speech and 
language pathologists. 
 
It's a crisis in rural Saskatchewan and northern Saskatchewan with respect 
to the provision of these services, and there's been no leadership from the 
Minister of Health and the PC government in this regard.  In fact this 
amendment to the Bill which makes it somewhat easier to get medical doctors 
out there, was initiated by the College of Physicians and Surgeons and not 
by the Minister of Health. 
 
(1130) 



 

 

 
What this government has done is simply betrayed medicare and the basic 
principles of medicare.  It's betrayed medicare through a series of 
heartless cuts, Mr. Deputy Speaker, through politically motivated decisions 
where they spend health care dollars for their own personal aggrandizement 
and political motives as opposed to for the benefit for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We only have to examine the corporate strategy documents that the Minister 
of Health commissioned which spent hundred of thousands of dollars on 
health care promotion for the purposes of improving the Minister of 
Health's image on health care and making him look like he is concerned 
about health as opposed to the minister spending money on things that are 
really of concern to people in the health care area and people who use 
health care services.  Instead this money, in a gross fashion, is being 
spent by the Minister of Health in the Department of Health under the guise 
of being communications and promotion to try and make the minister look 
good and the PC government look good on health care. 
 
But when it comes to the real sort of services that provide health 
promotion services and disease prevention services to the public of 
Saskatchewan, that is your front-line workers like your public health 
nurses.  They are pulled out of rural Saskatchewan.  They're pulled out of 
rural Saskatchewan and their jobs are increased through twinning of public 
health regions in Saskatchewan, and as a result they're more involved in 
administration as opposed to patient work.  These are the people that deal 
with health promotion and disease prevention. 
 
This government would rather spend its money on self-serving advertising 
than dealing with . . . and funding, properly funding health care 
professionals who can work with people in organizations and on a one-to-one 
basis. 
 
That's this government's priority, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  That's this 
government's priority, improving its image as opposed to doing what is 
necessary in the area of health promotion to enhance medicare and the 
quality of life and the quality of health for people in Saskatchewan. 
 
And there have been proposals, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  There have been 
proposals as to how we can increase the efficiency of health care and 
reduce health care costs and still deliver first-quality health care to 
Saskatchewan people.  But the Minister of Health sat on that proposal, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, for a number of years and has still refused to acknowledge 
in this Assembly and to the public that there is merit in that proposal, 
notwithstanding that it is being implemented across this country in other 
provinces who are experiencing that it is meeting with the same sort of 
success that we've experienced here in Saskatchewan with our community 
clinics and our community health centre approach.  But the minister refuses 
to acknowledge that for ideological reasons. 
 
Instead they go out to rural Saskatchewan, the PC Party, and they try to 
frighten people by saying that the NDP are going to put all doctors on 
salary.  And I say that those statements by the PC Party are politically 



 

 

motivated and hurtful to medicare and the enhancement of medicare in this 
province, because they know it's not true.  They know, and we've debated 
that in this House.  And they know it's not true that we're going to put 
all doctors on salary. 
 
But they hope to perpetrate that myth.  They hope to perpetrate that myth 
for the purposes of trying to scare people away from the concept of 
community health centres which are proven across this country to be 
successful with respect to delivering health care services at a reduced 
cost to the taxpayer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- And that's this Minister of Finance and this Minister of 
Health's commitment.  That's their commitment to enhancing the fundamental 
principles of health care.  It's to engage in scare tactics and mistruths 
across the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And we see that there are a number of alternate forms of reimbursement that 
we should be looking at and that people are talking about.  Even the Murray 
Commission has talked about that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But this government is scared to try anything different.  And why is it?  
Because they don't want to preserve the fundamental principles of health 
care.  They don't want to advance into new areas that may enhance medicare 
because underneath all of this is their desire to move away from medicare 
and to move into a more privatized American-style system of health care.  
And that is their bottom line, their motive, their basic motive for many of 
the things that they have done in the last nine and a half years. 
 
First of all, they have no genuine, intelligent plan for rural Saskatchewan 
and northern Saskatchewan.  Nine and half years and no genuine, intelligent 
plan.  Why?  Because they want to see medicare undermined.  That's why, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
And they commissioned a $1.8 million study by Dr. Murray, called the Murray 
Commission report, was the report that was finally brought down.  And this 
report talks  
 Dabout centralizing health care services from rural Saskatchewan into 10 
large regions in rural Saskatchewan, not including the North, but 10 large 
regions in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Now we have no difficulty with co-ordinating and integrating services.  In 
fact I think we should move in that direction and my colleagues agree with 
me.  What we object to is the ownership of all rural hospitals being put in 
a central large board, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  And that's what the Murray 
Commission recommends.  And that's what the Minister of Health supports, 
because he has said that the Murray Commission will form the blueprint for 
the province of Saskatchewan.  And the Minister of Finance has said that it 
will form the blueprint. 
 
And what we're talking about here is the ownership of these small hospitals 
going into a large central board, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and the decisions 



 

 

being made by this board, the decision-making power being taken out of the 
hands of local communities and put in large centralized boards.  And this 
government is doing this on the one hand and on the other hand, is talking 
about the need to decentralize in rural Saskatchewan.  Totally inconsistent 
in their approach, Mr. Deputy Speaker, completely inconsistent. 
 
The other things that the Murray Commission report recommends is that 
funding power be granted to these large boards.  And what we have seen, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, in Saskatchewan over the years is an off-loading of 
responsibility from this government to municipalities.  And this mechanism 
for funding has every potential to be used by that government which wishes 
in the long run to move towards a more Americanized style of medicare. 
 
This mechanism can be used to off-load the funding from the provincial 
government to the large centralized board in the 10 regions in rural 
Saskatchewan, so that these boards determine how much each small hospital 
in the region gets.  It can be used for the purposes of off-loading its 
financial responsibility.  So what we see is the government backing away 
from providing health care services to the people of Saskatchewan.  Because 
if indeed, and I believe they will use that provision to off-load, and I 
believe they will because they've done it in education and in other areas, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker.  And therefore why wouldn't they do it in health if 
they should ever get re-elected. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- We will. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- We will, one very optimistic member across the way says. 
 
The fact of the matter is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the proposals in the Murray 
Commission report that are supported by the PC government -- and in 
particular by the Minister of Health and the Minister of Finance, because 
they've said it publicly -- these proposals detract from services being 
provided in small communities.  It detracts from community involvement and 
community participation because they don't believe in it. 
 
For all the rhetoric that they use, they don't believe in it, and that's 
why it took the College of Physicians and Surgeons to propose this 
amendment.  And that's why the Minister of Health has no long-term 
strategic plan and no vision with respect to health care that he has 
attempted to implement in nine and a half years of government, nine and a 
half long years.  And all we get from the PC government is rhetoric about 
health care costs spiralling out of control.  We can't afford it.  We've 
got to tighten our belt.  We're giving them 10 per cent increase which 
turns out to be about 2 or 3 per cent increase and doesn't even meet with 
inflation. 
 
Rhetoric and more rhetoric.  No commitment, no vision, no plan.  And the 
plan that they did commission and get a report on just enhances what I have 
been saying with respect to their philosophy, and that is that they want to 
centralize health care in 10 large regions and put the control in super 
boards. 
 
And what we have seen in Saskatchewan in this last budget was something 



 

 

like a $40 million shortfall in funding to institutions, to hospitals and 
nursing homes, Mr. Deputy Speaker -- a $40 million shortfall and something 
like a $1.4 million shortfall to the Cancer Foundation in providing those 
services, without a commensurate amount of funding to home care to pick up 
the slack.  Now obviously home care's going to have to step in and do more 
if people are released from institutions earlier. 
 
We do not disagree with the general movement towards more involvement by 
home care.  In fact we've been urging that in this House for the last . . . 
since 1986 and prior to that, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  And certainly since I've 
been opposition Health critic, a year has not gone by where I have said 
there's been a moratorium on home care in this province.  And we have to 
move towards more services being provided by home care because once again 
the statistics show that services can be provided by home care much more 
cheaply than keeping people in institutions. 
 
But if we move in that direction, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and if we are 
genuinely interested in enhancing universality and accessibility of 
medicare, the fundamental principles, then we have to provide sufficient 
funding to home care to be able to pick up the slack.  Otherwise the result 
of your movement, without adequate funding on the other side, is that you 
decrease the services to people and you undermine the fundamental 
principles of health care. 
 
And so while the government says, we're being progressive in this move, 
they aren't.  They are being regressive because they failed to properly 
fund on the other side of the equation -- home care for the purposes of 
maintaining the universality and accessibility and comprehensiveness of 
health care services to Saskatchewan residents. 
 
I want to also state that we have raised on a number of occasions our 
concern about the government wanting to move to a more Americanized system.  
And we arrive at that concern because we hear constant rhetoric from the PC 
government and right wing people across this country that medicare costs 
too much. 
 
And I only have to remind you about the privatization conference that was 
very well attended by the PC government, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  And one of 
the main topics there was the privatization of health care.  So there's no 
question in my mind that they are considering this in considerable detail. 
 
Now I have come to this Assembly on numerous occasions and illustrated how 
much more costly a privatized health care system would be to the ordinary . 
. . to the average person in terms of dollars spent.  And the American 
system, which is in large part privatized, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is much more 
costly to administer than the Canadian system and the Saskatchewan system 
-- much more costly. 
 
(1145) 
 
There is absolutely no merit to the citizens of this province or the 
citizens of Canada to move to a more privatized system, because it will 
cost them more money and there will be many people who will be without 



 

 

services in the same way there's some 36 million Americans who are 
uninsured with respect to health care services, and most of them are 
working people. 
 
So there's no merit in moving in that direction.  We know our system is 
superior here in Saskatchewan, in Canada, and we're proud of our medicare 
tradition. 
 
What we have to do in this province and across Canada, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
what we have to do, is to take a look at our tradition of medicare and look 
at ways in which we can enhance the provision of services and the quality 
of health care and reduce the costs -- but reducing them without detracting 
from them. 
 
Now when there's a $40 million shortfall to institutions and no 
commensurate funding to home care, we are not reducing the costs; we are 
detracting from the quality of health care services to people.  And that's 
their decision and the PC government's choice, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Our decisions in health care, when we look at trying to contain health care 
costs, first of all in the containment, should assure us that the quality 
of health care is maintained.  That has to be the first objective.  The 
second objective is to look at ways of doing it more efficiently, from the 
point of view of taxpayers. 
 
But this government's first objective with respect to health care is cost 
containment.  And if the quality of health care goes by the way in the 
course of this, that's fine by them.  That's fine by them. 
 
Well let me tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the New Democratic Party have 
been watch-dogs on their ideology and their manner of dealing with health 
care issues in this province.  And I know that the people of Saskatchewan 
recognize that they have not served the public properly in the health care 
area. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know that in the next election this recognition 
will be expressed by people voting out that PC government and voting in an 
NDP government, which will preserve and enhance the fundamental principles 
of health care, and which will have a plan for getting doctors into rural 
Saskatchewan and more health care services into the North and rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- We will not sit on our butts on proposals that have been 
there for years; that are good proposals and that have met with success not 
only in Saskatchewan and very isolated cases, notwithstanding that 
government has refused to fund those experiments in an adequate fashion, 
but that have met with success in Saskatchewan and across this country. 
 
We, Mr. Deputy Speaker, will move toward more, not less community 
involvement and community control.  We will work towards getting health 
care professionals into rural Saskatchewan through community and 



 

 

co-operation at a local level, and not through centralization and super 
boards that this government is proposing, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  Order, please. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee 
of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 58 -- An Act to amend The Statutes Act 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- I would ask the Minister of Justice to introduce his 
officials to us please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Introducing again to the 
committee, Susan Amrud, Crown solicitor; Darcy McGovern, Crown solicitor; 
and Brent Prenevost, Crown solicitor. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  This is a Bill which we 
considered and I spoke to on second reading, Mr. Chairman.  And we 
understand the purpose for the amendment and indeed support the amendment.  
So I have no questions to ask the minister or comments to make with respect 
to the Bill. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 59 -- An Act to amend The Interpretation Act 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Again, Mr. Chairman, as I indicated during the second 
reading disposition of this Bill, we understand the purpose for the 
amendment and we're not objecting to the legislation, and so I have no 
questions or comments with respect to it. 
 
 DHon. Mr. Lane: -- Just to expedite the process, I gather the same applies 
to Bill 76, 77, 78, 80 and 81.  Is that correct? 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- That's correct, Mr. Chairman.  We have no objection to any 
of those Bills, nor any amendments to offer to the House, nor any questions 
to ask, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- So with leave, Mr. Chairman, can we do those as a group, 
and I will move that we report all of those Bills? 



 

 

 
Mr. Chairman: -- In an effort to run this committee like a business, we'll 
do what we can.  We have to go through each one individually.  We can ask 
the clauses to be inclusive, but we'll have to do each Bill on an 
individual basis. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 76 -- An Act to amend The Coroners Act 
 
Clauses 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 77 -- An Act to amend The Queen's Bench Act (No. 2) 
 
Clauses 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- I'd like leave to introduce some guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  On behalf of the member for 
Swift Current, it gives me a good deal of pleasure to introduce 62 grade 4 
students from Central School.  And as I read through the list of people who 
are here, I recognize some very familiar names: D. Rezansoff, P. Gatzke, 
Mrs. Lake -- taught some of my kids.  Then there's Gerri Regier -- she 
taught my youngest son for sure, and she wanted to take him home because he 
was such a nice kid, and now I'm beginning to wish I maybe had.  Then 
there's Mrs. Burnett, Mrs. Stolhandske, Constable Glover, Mrs. Redvedt, 
Mrs. Holland, and Mrs. Wallace. 
 
All these people are here to view the procedures in the legislature and 
tour the building here, and I want all members to please join me in 
welcoming these students here to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 78 -- An Act to amend The Surrogate Court Act 
 
Clauses 1 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 



 

 

 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Bill No. 80 -- An Act respecting the Application in Saskatchewan of the 
United Nations Convention on Contracts for the International Sale of Goods 
 
Clauses 1 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Bill No. 81 -- An Act to amend references to the Criminal Code in Certain 
Acts and Regulations and respecting Consequential Amendments to Certain 
Acts and Regulations resulting from the enactment of the Criminal Code, 
R.S.C. 1985, c.C-46 
 
Clauses 1 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 72 -- An Act to amend The Northern Municipalities Act 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- That falls in a different category.  The Bills that the 
minister and I indicated were no problem, we reached the end of that list 
and now we're on to another list. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Did you care to make references then on Bill 72? 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Just give us a moment, Mr. Chairman, and we'll sort 
ourselves out here.  We need the officials and we need the critic. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- What Bill are you calling now? 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order.  Order, please.  On the order paper that I have, 
we've been following from (a) to (h) inclusive so far, (h) being item no. 
72.  It was my understanding that (i) and (j), being Bills 75 and 60, would 
follow there later.  Now if the House leaders have made a different 
arrangement . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Deputy Chairman, I apologize to the members 
opposite.  I was busy here on some other business.  I will forthwith walk 
over and visit with them on the precise order. 
 
(1200) 
 
Bill No. 60 -- An Act respecting Certain Payments to the Meewasin Valley 
Authority, the Wakamow Valley Authority and the Wascana Centre Authority 
(No. 2) 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- I'd ask the minister to introduce his officials, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I'd like to introduce to you, 



 

 

on my left, Keith Schneider who's the associate deputy minister; seated 
behind me is Ron Davis, executive director, and on my right is John 
Edwards, assistant director. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Chairman, my question to the minister: Mr. Minister, who 
are the ministers responsible for each of the authorities that are under 
review for the Bill before us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Mr. Chairman, those ministers are the member from 
Wascana, the member from Mayfair, and the member from Thunder Creek. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Minister, I see the member . . . the minister from 
Mayfair here.  I don't see the member from Wascana, and I do not see the 
member from Thunder Creek here. 
 
I bring that to your attention, Mr. Minister, because as you know from my 
remarks just the other day when we were debating this in second reading, I 
asked very specifically that the minister responsible for the Wakamow 
Valley Authority be present in the Legislative Assembly when we're 
considering this Bill for which he is responsible. 
 
And I ask, Mr. Minister, why it is that he's not here when we're 
considering it in Committee of the Whole so that questions can be addressed 
to him and hopefully responded by the government minister responsible. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, as the member from Moose Jaw is 
aware, the funding for the parks comes from my budget, and that's the 
reason that I'm responsible for the legislation that's before us. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Minister, if you're the minister responsible for the 
funding, then why do we have other ministers who are responsible for the 
parks, and why are they not here when we're considering the funding for 
those parks for which they're responsible? 
 
I hear your explanation, and I stated very clearly my position on the 
illogicality of your government's handling of who in the world is on first 
and in charge of funding for these urban parks in debate the other day. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Mr. Chairman, as the member is probably aware, the 
member from Wascana, the member from Mayfair, and the member from Thunder 
Creek, all very, very fine representatives from their respective areas and 
for the province, sit in cabinet, and funding is approved by cabinet, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Minister, you still haven't answered my question.  Why 
are they not here so that the questions can be addressed to them when we're 
considering this Bill for funding of the authorities for which they're 
responsible in Committee of the Whole? 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order please.  The member has made reference on more than 
one occasion to the member's presence or absence in the House.  I think 
it's the government prerogative to have any minister they wish carry the 
Bill, answer the questions.  The opposition member or members are more than 



 

 

welcome to ask questions of the government, but to keep on making 
references to other members absence or presence is not acceptable.  Thank 
you. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- . . . Mr. Chairman.  I agree that it's up to the 
government to have any minister here that they want, but wouldn't it make 
sense to have ministers here that can answer the questions? 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Whether a member's opinion it does or does not make sense 
is not the issue.  The issue is that you cannot make reference to the 
member's absence or presence in the House.  So if you care to ask questions 
of the minister, they will be answered for you. 
 
I think there was a question on the floor.  Do you want the minister's 
response or do you want to ask a new question? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Well in response to the member from Regina, we'd like to 
have a question.  I mean he'd like the question answered; we'd like to have 
a question first. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Question: why is the minister responsible for Wakamow Valley 
Authority not here? 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- The Chair will rule the question out of order because 
again you're making reference to a member's presence or absence in the 
House. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- I just want to speak to the problem briefly.  It's not 
unknown for ministers to handle other minister's Bills.  It's not generally 
done over the objection of the opposition, where opposition members think 
they may have detailed questions which the ministers . . . would require 
the minister responsible.  It is most unusual to have ministers handling 
Bills which aren't their own over the opposition of the opposition.  It's 
normally been done only with the consent of the opposition, Mr. Chairman. 
So the member's points I think have some merit. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order.  Order, please.  I'm informed that it is not 
necessarily so that the opposition has to give their approval for a 
minister to stand in or sit in for another minister to ask questions.  With 
that, I would ask the member if he has a specific question he would like to 
ask.  The minister that is carrying the Bill has officials with him, and I 
would ask him to put his questions to the minister with regard to the Bill. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I'll choose not to listen to the insults 
being shouted from the other side of the House.  And I remind the minister 
very clearly that in debate on second reading on this Bill, that I 
recognized at that time the minister responsible for the Wakamow Valley 
Authority chose not to be present in the Assembly.  And I said at that time 
. . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order, order.  I would ask the member from Moose Jaw North 
to please just ask his questions of the minister and wait for the response.  
But he insists on making references to when he's requested ministers to be 



 

 

here or not to be here, and whether their presence is in fact here in the 
House today. 
 
So I'd ask him just to continue with the questions please. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Minister, then, as I reviewed in second reading debate, 
the statements of previous ministers who had handled this Bill last year 
and the year before, that the funding for the Wakamow Valley Authority and 
others was under review last fall.  And that in fact the review was going 
to be completed by last fall well in advance of this budget year. 
 
And so I ask you then, Mr. Minister, what did the member for Thunder Creek 
-- the minister responsible for Wakamow Valley Authority -- what did he 
have to say in these negotiations, to whom did he say them and what was his 
argument that he put forward, Mr. Minister, in defence of funding for 
Wakamow Valley Authority, respecting the intentions, Mr. Minister, for the 
funding of Wakamow Valley Authority, moving to the two mills of funding 
which was the original funding and eventually to the equivalent of five 
mills of funding for Wakamow Valley Authority. 
 
Can you tell me, Mr. Minister, what was the member for Thunder Creek's 
input into these negotiations?  How did they take place?  Who did he talk 
to?  What was his defence in respect to the funding for Wakamow Valley 
Authority?  Would you answer those questions for him, Mr. Minister? 
 
(1215) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Mr. Chairman, as you're probably aware, the development 
of this budget was part of a strategy and part of a comprehensive 
discussion with the public.  It followed on the heels of Consensus 
Saskatchewan and it followed a tour made by the Finance minister. 
 
There was an awful lot of public input, Mr. Chairman.  The public told us 
very clearly, they told us very clearly to be careful, to set our 
priorities very carefully.  They said to fund health and education.  They 
said try to help the farmers, Mr. Chairman.  They said deal with the debt 
and the deficit.  All funding, Mr. Chairman, and expenditures, were 
carefully reviewed. 
 
The members that the member opposite has referred to, fine representatives 
from Moose Jaw and Saskatoon and Regina, were part of that discussion.  The 
representation was made at cabinet, Mr. Chairman, and as you're probably 
aware the process and tradition as it relates to cabinet.  And I think that 
those deliberations are as they have been in the past, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Minister, can you tell me, regarding the member for 
Thunder Creek, what was the public input related to funding for Wakamow 
Valley Authority made to the member for Thunder Creek, the minister 
responsible; and what was his assessment of the validity of that input, Mr. 
Minister; and why did he then not conclude that it is appropriate to 
increase the funding for Wakamow Valley Authority this year, as implied by 
the ministers in two previous years in this Chamber?  Can you advise the 
Assembly of that, Mr. Minister? 



 

 

 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, as you're aware and I'm sure the 
members opposite are very much aware, there's been some tremendous fiscal 
pressures on the province that have affected each and every one of us and 
the public at large -- tremendous pressures because of an international 
grain trade war. 
 
We had to make some difficult decisions, Mr. Chairman.  We went through a 
public consultation.  We were very careful in setting our priorities.  
People told us very, very clearly to try to help the farmers, to go ahead 
and fund health and education -- to do those sorts of things, Mr. Chairman.  
We were very careful to visit each and every request, and in that process 
we had to make some difficult decisions, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- I guess we're going to have to break this down, Mr. Minister.  
What public input was made to the member for Thunder Creek, the minister 
responsible for Wakamow Valley Authority, regarding funding for Wakamow 
Valley Authority? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Mr. Chairman, I referred to the public process as it was 
laid out there, laid out there last fall and this spring. 
 
The Minister of Finance went on a tour around the province and asked for 
public input, and the public told us loud and clear, Mr. Chairman.  They 
said to set our priorities carefully.  They said to get our financial house 
in order.  They said to deal with the debt and the deficit.  They said to 
fund health and education, Mr. Chairman.  And they said to help the 
farmers.  And, Mr. Chairman, that's what we've done. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Minister, maybe the question could be answered if the 
minister responsible was here, but as he isn't, let me ask you again the 
very specific question -- this is as referred to by the former minister 
responsible for funding who brought it to the Bill last year, the minister 
for Parks, that this was under review, the review's going to take place by 
this fall, the minister from Thunder Creek is the minister responsible. 
 
I repeat my question.  Would you please answer my question.  We're dealing 
with a very specific Bill.  The Bill has to do with funding for the urban 
authorities.  I'm asking specifically about funding for the Wakamow Valley 
Authority.  What was the presentation made by the public that you referred 
to, to the member from Thunder Creek, the minister responsible for Wakamow 
Valley Authority, what was the presentation made to him?  There's obviously 
a number of questions we want to get to but maybe we can just deal with 
this a step at a time.  Would you please tell me what was the presentation 
made to the member from Thunder Creek, the minister responsible for Wakamow 
Valley Authority? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Mr.  Chairman, I've already stated a number of times 
that the public had a lot of opportunity for input into the budget that was 
presented before us.  The public said very, very loud and clear, Mr. 
Chairman, they said to set our priorities carefully. They said fund health 
and education. They said help the farmers, fund agriculture. They said deal 
with the debt and the deficit.  They made that concern very, very obvious 



 

 

to us and they were given lots of opportunity for input in the process of 
Consensus Saskatchewan and also in the round of public hearings held by the 
Minister of Finance. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Minister, does the member for Thunder Creek, the minister 
responsible for Wakamow Valley Authority, approve of this Bill that you're 
bringing to this House today?  Does it have his personal endorsation to 
limit the funding for Wakamow Valley Authority to the level instituted in 
1983 when it was cut back by your government from the equivalent of 2 mills 
to 1.6 mills?  Does the minister responsible for Wakamow Valley Authority 
endorse that position which you're bringing to the House today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I've said it a number of times and 
repeated it.  The public was given a lot of opportunity for input into the 
budget process this year, probably as much or more than they ever have in 
the past.  Mr. Chairman, we had to make some difficult decisions and that 
was part of the budget process.  The decisions were cabinet decisions.  And 
there's fine representation, and I repeat, very fine representation from 
Moose Jaw, Regina, and Saskatoon.  There was an opportunity for input. We 
still had to make some difficult decisions, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Minister, does the member for Thunder Creek, the minister 
responsible for Wakamow Valley Authority, endorse this Bill which you bring 
before this House today? 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order.  So far today the proceedings of the Assembly have 
gone relatively smoothly and I wonder if we could finish off the morning 
with that.  I wonder . . . Order. Order, please.  I wonder . . . Order.  
I'd ask the minister from Regina Centre to not interfere with the Chair.  
And I would ask the Minister of Finance to kindly let the proceedings 
continue. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- If I need to repeat the question, I shall, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. 
Minister, does the minister responsible for the Wakamow Valley Authority, 
the member for Thunder Creek, endorse this Bill which you are bringing 
before the House on his behalf?  You're saying you're the minister 
responsible for the funding, but he's the minister responsible for Wakamow 
Valley Authority.  Does the minister for Wakamow Valley Authority endorse 
the content of this Bill which you're bringing to this House? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Mr. Chairman, I've said a number of times that the 
public was given an awful lot of opportunity for input.  They told us to 
set our priorities very carefully, and we've done that.  We've funded 
health and education with increases of some three and a half per cent.  
We've funded agriculture.  And we've come up with GRIP (gross revenue 
insurance plan) and NISA (net income stabilization account) funding. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we had to make some difficult decisions.  That's part of the 
budget process.  The members from Moose Jaw, or the member from Moose Jaw, 
Thunder Creek, the member from Wascana, and the member from Mayfair in 
Saskatoon are in cabinet, and there's an opportunity to participate in the 
budget-making process. 
 



 

 

Mr. Chairman, that still doesn't mean that difficult decisions didn't have 
to be made.  They've had to be made.  And I guess the question that I have 
for the member opposite, is this the opposition's highest priority?  Is it 
a higher priority than health and education funding? Is it a higher 
priority than helping the farmers?  And if that's the case, then I ask the 
member opposite to say that directly; lay out their plan. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Minister, I would say this is substantially higher 
priority to the opposition than funding for Bob Andrew in Minneapolis or 
Graham Taylor in Hong Kong.  But it happens to be, Mr. Minister, that we're 
dealing with funding.  We have before us a Bill dealing with the funding 
for urban parks, and that happens to be the highest priority issue of 
concern before the House at this very minute.  I wish you would address 
that question. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I find it curious why it is that you refuse to answer my 
question as to what the minister responsible for Wakamow Valley Authority, 
what position he takes on this Bill.  I find that curious.  That is 
unbelievable to me.  I can only assume then by your answer, Mr. Minister, 
that obviously he does endorse it or you would have said he doesn't. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, as we were given notice in this legislature by the 
Minister of Parks last year, this review of funding formula including the 
inequity, the inequity funding for Wakamow Valley Authority as compared to 
the other urban authorities, can you tell this House, Mr. Minister, why the 
member for Thunder Creek recommended to cabinet that there should not be 
any change in the funding for Wakamow Valley Authority?  Why did he make 
that decision, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the member opposite is very, very 
good at trying -- and I repeat by saying, trying -- trying to put words 
into other people's mouths. 
 
I've said and I've said very clearly here, Mr. Chairman, that the public 
were part of the process.  The public told us very clearly to set our 
priorities very carefully.  They told us to get our financial house in 
order.  They said to fund health and education.  They said to help the 
farmers. 
 
Mr. Chairman, in that process we had to make some difficult decisions.  And 
my question is, as it was before, what's your plan?  Is urban parks a 
higher priority than health funding?  Is it a higher priority than 
education?  Is it a higher priority than helping the farmers?  And I think 
that's the question that the public has for the member opposite. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Minister, three previous ministers of your government -- 
the member for Regina South, former minister . . . as the minister of Urban 
Affairs; the former member for Turtleford, Colin Maxwell, as minister for 
Parks; the current minister for Canora as minister for Parks -- all 
recognized in this Assembly on the record that there is inequity funding 
for Wakamow Valley Authority as compared to the other urban parks. 
 
For two years in a row the ministers have stood in this House and said, the 



 

 

funding form is under review.  Last  
 Dyear we were told it would be done by the fall of 1990.  You say the 
minister responsible for Wakamow Valley Authority, the member from Thunder 
Creek, is the minister responsible. 
 
I ask you a very simple question, a very simple question.  This is 
certainly a question that I would think, in light of the last three years 
of discussion on this very specific topic in this House, one that should 
not be difficult to answer.  We can only conclude by the Bill that you 
bring forward that it has the endorsation of the member for Thunder Creek.  
It locks the funding formula for Wakamow Valley Authority into the formula 
introduced in 1983 by your government, a reduction from the equivalent of 2 
mills to 1.6 mills. 
 
And so I ask you: what rationale, what reasoning did the member for Thunder 
Creek use in rejecting the proposal, endorsed in principle, I would 
suggest, by three previous PC cabinet ministers, the proposal that there 
should be some adjustment considered for the funding of the Wakamow Valley 
Authority? 
 
On what grounds did the member for Thunder Creek reject the proposal that 
there should be increased funding, a change in the formula?  Surely, Mr. 
Minister, you're not going to stand in your place and attempt to avoid that 
very specific question asked three previous years, with implications given 
by the ministers responsible that it was going to be considered and 
reviewed.  Surely, Mr. Minister, you'll give us a straight answer in this 
question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Mr. Chairman, I've tried to answer the member opposite's 
concerns.  And I've said the public were a part of the process.  There was 
a lot of opportunity given to the public across this province to help set 
the priorities in setting a budget.  They told us very clearly to set those 
priorities very carefully.  They said, fund health and education and help 
the farmers.  They also said, deal with the debt and the deficit. 
 
We'd like to have a lot of extra money.  We'd like to have a lot of extra 
money for a lot of things.  The reality is we had to make some difficult 
decisions, Mr. Chairman, and we made those difficult decisions.  I believe 
that's in line with what the public requested.  And I really think that the 
public had ample opportunity for input.  And we've tried to do our best 
considering the circumstances of the day. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, now that you are 
the minister or seem to be the minister responsible for the matter of 
providing the dollars in funding to Wakamow, Meewasin, and Wascana, I'm 
sure you've taken some opportunity to review the history of funding since 
your government was elected, Mr. Minister. 
 
I want to begin with this question: Mr. Minister, why is it in the 
priorities of your government that you cut funding to the urban park 
authorities almost as soon as you got yourselves elected?  Why in 1983 did 
your government cut by 20 per cent the funding to the urban park 
authorities? 



 

 

 
And I remind you, Mr. Minister, those were in the halcyon days before you'd 
run up this huge deficit we now live with.  Mr. Minister, why did you folks 
cut the urban park authorities 20 per cent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Mr. Chairman, I've said a number of times that we had to 
make some difficult decisions.  We set our priorities very carefully and we 
set those priorities based on public input.  The public told us to fund 
health and education.  The public told us to fund health and education, Mr. 
Chairman.  They also told us to help the farmers. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I'd just like to share with the members of the House as I 
understand it, the inequity as I understand it was one that was actually 
established by the previous government. 
 
(1230) 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Minister, I'm going to go back.  There's something 
seriously wrong in the House here today.  Either you're not listening or 
you refuse to hear, or you simply refuse to answer the question. 
 
Mr. Minister, I'm going to put the question I did.  And then we're going to 
talk about this inequity.  But I'm going to put the question again which I 
just put to you, sir. 
 
I'm asking why, given that you're the minister now responsible I assume, 
even though you weren't in this House at the time I assume you will have 
done some research.  Mr. Minister, why is it that in 1983, long before 
you've had a chance to run up your 5 and $6 billion deficit, why is it in 
1983 it was the priority of the Progressive Conservative Party government, 
newly elected, to cut the funding to the urban park authorities by 20 per 
cent.  Why was that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the other member from Moose Jaw was 
referring to the inequity in funding to urban parks.  And it's my 
understanding that that inequity, the difference in the formula, was 
actually one that was established by the previous government and not ours. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Minister, why would . . . If the minister will listen I 
will ask the question.  Mr. Minister, why is that you will not answer the 
questions put to you, sir?  The question is this: why was it the priority 
of your government to cut funding by 20 per cent to the urban park 
authorities in 1983? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm not sure of the exact discussions that 
went on in 1983.  All I know is that difficult decisions have to be made 
from time to time, and I would imagine that it was a difficult decision at 
that time.  And it probably was part of the budget process.  It was 
probably part of that budget process that was no different than this year.  
It was one of setting priorities.  And I don't know what the numbers were 
at that time as it related to other areas where funding was necessary, but 
I'm sure it was part of that process. 
 



 

 

I know that the government of that day may have set different priorities 
than the previous government, and that's possibly why it's this government 
that was elected, and possibly it's a reflection of public request, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
And I would just caution the members opposite, I just caution them that if 
this is their highest priority, then I would encourage them to make it be 
known.  We really would like to hear what their plan is. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Minister, our priorities don't include the kind of 
patronage appointments that you people have undertaken, including Bob 
Andrew and Graham Taylor and Paul Rousseau and Eric Berntson, and on and on 
the list it goes.  Our priorities don't include the kind of expenditure on 
public funds and advertising and printing and political propaganda that's 
being promoted in this province these days.  Our priorities are not there.  
Our priorities are people priorities, Mr. Minister. 
 
And I tell you why you cut the funding to urban parks in 1983, since you 
won't answer the question.  Because it's not in your priority.  Parks for 
people have never been a priority of your government, sir.  You cut the 
funding by 20 per cent in 1983, and you have frozen that cut ever since, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
Now will you, sir, describe in your own words the inequity that currently 
exists between the funding for the Wakamow Valley Authority and the other 
urban authorities in the province?  Will you describe for the House, as you 
understand it, the inequity that currently exists. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Mr. Chairman, I think the important question is, and I 
think the important question should possibly be asked to some of the 
members opposite.  I think that if the members from Moose Jaw revisit who 
was part of cabinet, who was part of cabinet prior to 1983, prior to 1982, 
I mean who established the inequity that the members from Moose Jaw refer 
to?  How did that process occur?  Those members over there would probably 
be best to answer that question, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, in my short experience in this legislature, I 
have never encountered a situation like this where the minister refuses, 
simply refuses to answer questions but in fact stands on his feet and asks 
questions. 
 
Well then let us deal with the matter of funding in 1982 and prior to 1982, 
as you well know or should know.  Apparently you do not know.  It would be 
helpful if we had ministers who did know, Mr. Minister, when the Wakamow 
Valley Authority was established.  It was established at a level of 2 mills 
of funding for those early developmental years.  Once the Valley Authority 
had been established, it was intentional that the funding would be 
readjusted to a more equitable basis with the more established parks. 
 
The minister from Regina South who used to be the minister for this, sits 
in his seat and chirps away.  Perhaps I should ask the questions to him.  
At least we'd get something towards the question rather than what we're 
getting from the man from Assiniboia-Rockglen. 



 

 

 
Mr. Minister, I want you to describe in your words to this House and to the 
people of Saskatchewan, the inequity that exists for the Wakamow Valley 
Authority as compared to the other urban park authorities.  Will you answer 
the question? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Mr. Chairman, I think, and I've encouraged the members 
opposite, the members from Moose Jaw to ask their own members.  I mean ask 
the members of cabinet that day why they set it up the way that they did.  
Why was it done?  And if it's such a concern, and the inequity is such a 
concern, why don't they ask those members?  Why don't they ask their leader 
why that decision was made, why Moose Jaw was treated in a different 
fashion?  Why did that occur?  And I'd encourage them to do that. 
 
I'd also encourage the members opposite to stand up and tell this House, to 
tell the public of this province that if their highest priority for the 
city of Moose Jaw is extra funding for urban parks, then let that be known.  
Let us know, let us know loud and clear.  And I ask those members, I ask 
those two members, where was their part in the budget process?  Did they 
write a letter?  Did they ask for extra funding, Mr. Chairman?  I ask them, 
did they do their part if this is such a high priority for them and their 
city? 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, this is frankly unbelievable.  The minister 
responsible who's being paid I don't know how much money to be the minister 
. . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Eighty thousand bucks a year. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- . . . eighty thousand bucks a year somebody tells me, comes 
into this House today, the first time to review the estimates for the 
committee for this Bill and he simply refuses to answer questions.  This is 
unbelievable, Mr. Chairman. 
 
All right, Mr. Minister, perhaps you'll answer this question.  In your 
view, is this inequity fair?  In your view, the inequity that exists today, 
is it fair? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Mr. Chairman, I ask the members opposite, the two 
members from Moose Jaw, I ask them to say very clear to this House and to 
the public of the province, what their priorities are. I also ask them, and 
I ask them at this time, is this an inequity? 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Minister, you do not deserve to be a minister of the 
Crown.  You come into this House on a Bill which is your government's Bill 
and refuse to answer the questions of the opposition on behalf of their 
constituents and the people of Saskatchewan.  You, sir, do not deserve to 
be a minister of the Crown. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Minister, I have one further question.  I have one 
further question.  Our position is very clear.  It's been stated on the 



 

 

record in this House many times.  We have fought this inequity since we 
were elected, both the member for Moose Jaw North and myself, Mr. Minister.  
Our position is very clear. 
 
Mr. Minister, the inequity exists.  You people have been in government nine 
and a half long years.  Mr. Minister, why  
 Dhave you not done anything to address the inequity in your nine and a 
half long years of government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Mr. Chairman, as I've laid out before the committee, we 
had to make some difficult decisions and we made some difficult decisions.  
But I want to ask the members for Moose Jaw, I want to ask the members for 
Moose Jaw, if there is an inequity -- and I ask the members for Moose Jaw 
to ask their members, some of the previous cabinet those very same 
questions -- I mean why did they do this in the first place? 
 
The other question that I ask the members opposite is if they would like 
the inequality that they've talked about addressed or the inequity 
addressed, then is their suggestion cuts to Regina and Saskatoon so that 
it's the same for Regina and Saskatoon and Moose Jaw? 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Minister, our positions are very clear.  They're on the 
record in this House several times . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Disgraceful. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Yes, they are.  And if you had any decency, if you took any 
responsibility for bringing this Bill to the House, you would know that.  
You wouldn't be standing on your feet and demonstrating your ignorance to 
the Legislative Assembly. 
 
So the minister sits there and laughs, refuses to bring in the ministers 
responsible who should know something about the specifics for the funding 
for Wakamow Valley Authority.  Obviously, Mr. Minister, either you don't 
know or you don't care.  You don't know or you don't care about the funding 
inequities for Wakamow Valley Authority. 
 
Three of your predecessors -- the member for Regina South, the former 
member for Turtleford, and the current member for Canora -- three of your 
predecessors in this House recognized the inequity in funding for Wakamow 
Valley Authority.  They recognized that on the floor, on the record, and 
had said that there would be a review under way. 
 
Your predecessor in this House said it would be completed by last fall.  
You have come into this Assembly today in your ignorance about the issue.  
You have your officials here.  You have not bothered to consult with them.  
You stood to your feet each time we've asked you a very specific question 
and babble on your inanities and your rhetoric that you guys are inclined 
to spout every time you get a question.  It doesn't matter what the 
question is these days. 
 
And so let me repeat the question from the member from Moose Jaw South.  Do 
you even understand, let alone care.  Obviously you don't care or you'd be 



 

 

giving more careful consideration to the questions being put to you.  You'd 
at least bother to consult with your officials. 
 
Do you understand the inequity currently being experienced by the Wakamow 
Valley Authority which has been recognized by three of your predecessors, 
cabinet predecessors in this House?  Do you understand it, and if you do, 
would you explain your understanding of that inequity to this House, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Mr. Chairman, I think I've answered the question a few 
times.  I do understand and I do recognize what the member opposite refers 
to.  I also understand who created the inequity.  I understand that. 
 
And what I don't understand, what I don't understand is why those two 
members from Moose Jaw won't ask those specific questions to their members, 
to the members who were part of cabinet who created the problem in the 
first place.  That's what I don't understand. 
 
The other thing I don't understand is I don't understand why those members 
won't stand up and say extra funding, and extra funding for urban parks is 
the highest priority for the city of Moose Jaw.  And if it is, then have 
them state that very clearly.  I'd like to know if that's a higher priority 
for them than all the other concerns expressed by the city of Moose Jaw or 
by the people of this province, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Is health and education more important?  Is agriculture to be funded?  Is 
the debt and deficit to be dealt with?  We had to make some difficult 
decisions, Mr. Chairman.  We made those. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Minister, clearly, let me state it very clearly, and I'll 
speak slowly.  Will you listen and try to understand. 
 
When Wakamow Valley Authority was established in 1981, 10 years ago this 
year, the funding committed by the province of Saskatchewan under a New 
Democratic government was the equivalent of 2 mills.  Clearly stated to 
those who were involved at that time, that that was in recognition of the 
fact that the costs were . . . the start-up costs in the beginning were 
going to be lower. Then over a period of time the provincial funding would 
expand to the equivalent of 5 mills. 
 
Mr. Minister, that took place for a year and then the government changed.  
That's the position of the New Democrat government in the province of 
Saskatchewan as regards the Wakamow Valley Authority.  In the first budget 
brought by your government in 1983, you reduced that funding from 2 mills 
to 1.6 -- a 20 per cent cut.  That's the history.  That's the position of 
the New Democratic Party government prior to your government's coming into 
power. 
 
(1245) 
 
The member from Moose Jaw South and I have very clearly put our concerns on 
the record repeatedly in this House over the years, and a concern for the 
inequity in funding which has been recognized by three of your predecessors 



 

 

and which finally we were told last year was going to be reviewed and 
completed last fall, and were led to believe that there was some 
expectation that this year's budget there would be a change in the funding 
formula or at the very least, at the very least, an attempt to explain why 
that adjustment has not been made. 
 
And I find it absolutely repulsive that as minister for the Crown you would 
come to this Legislative Assembly today and try to give, in response to our 
specific questions, the kind of avoidances, rhetoric, PC babble, that you 
have presented in this House. 
 
And having said that, Mr. Chairman, having said that, Mr. Chairman, out of 
pure frustration, I will not ask any more questions about this because it's 
obviously pointless.  It's obviously pointless.  You refuse to bring into 
this House the minister responsible for the Wakamow Valley Authority and 
then you refuse to answer questions.  What's the point?  What's the point 
of having review of Bills before the House if that's your attitude to the 
way that they are dealt with here? 
 
You have officials . . . you have three officials sitting around you in the 
House who understand, I suspect, far, far more clearly than you, sir, what 
the history is and the facts of the matter are, who I suspect do have, at 
least in part, the answers to the questions as to what happened in the 
review.  They may not be able to explain what was in the mind of the member 
for Thunder Creek when he recommended to cabinet no change should be made.  
Only the member for Thunder Creek can answer that question. 
 
And so, Mr. Minister, in response, I guess out of frustration, you simply 
quit asking questions if it becomes so apparently obvious that the 
disrespect for this place has reached the point that you have brought it to 
here on a very specific item and in response to some very specific 
questions today, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, just in response.  As you're 
probably aware, there's lots of requests for extra money -- lots of 
requests for extra money in government, across government, and in a lot of 
the areas of public concern.  We had to make some difficult choices.  We 
set our priorities after careful public consultation.  We set our 
priorities in health and education and some money for agriculture.  We also 
set a priority of trying to deal with the debt and the deficit. 
 
If it was, as the member from Moose Jaw suggested, a priority for the 
opposition, if it was a priority, then I ask the members opposite why they 
didn't make specific reference to it before the budget came down, and why 
they didn't speak up; why they didn't speak up in the context of the 
current difficult fiscal challenge that's facing the province. 
 
And I also ask the member from Moose Jaw -- actually both members from 
Moose Jaw -- if it was the plan, if it was the plan of the previous 
administration to increase funding, as they have suggested today, then why 
wasn't it put in legislation? 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Well I tell you, Mr. Chairman, that we're ready and 



 

 

willing and anxious and able that as soon as he calls the election, to form 
the government and to deal with this stuff. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- But I tell you, continuing inequities between 
Saskatchewan cities, or creating inequities in terms of the Saskatchewan 
fabric, is nothing new for that government over there. 
 
I just want to ask a couple of questions about the Wascana Centre.  Some of 
the money for this Bill that we're talking about is going to go to pay for 
the Wascana Centre.  And I want to ask the minister if any of the money in 
this Bill will go to pay for the repair of the roads to the east of the 
Legislative Building here on Lakeshore Drive. 
 
I know that probably in 1981 and '82 the NDP government should have done 
some more work on the road to make it last for another 10 years, but we 
just weren't able to do that.  And recognizing that the road is in terrible 
repair, is any of the money going to go to fix that road? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Mr. Chairman, it's sort of encouraging to finally hear 
from the opposition what their highest priority is.  It may be 
disappointing to a lot of the public that it may be urban parks as 
suggested from the member from Regina. 
 
And I'd ask that member from Regina if his solution, Mr. Chairman, is 
reduced funding for Regina and Saskatoon, and if reduced funding for Regina 
and Saskatoon could provide a little extra money for Moose Jaw.  And if 
that's his solution, I'd like him to stand up and say that, if he really 
wants to address the inequity, and say also that they're going to deal with 
the debt and the deficit and all those other priorities that they suggest 
from time to time. 
 
I'd also remind the member, in case he may not have been listening, that 
the inequity as I understand it was created by the previous government.  
And had they chose to set it as a priority, and had they suggested or felt 
that it was a priority for them, then maybe they would have laid out in 
legislation those incremental increases that the members from Moose Jaw 
have stated. 
 
As it relates to the Wascana Centre Authority and the funding, it's my 
understanding that the funding is supplied to Wascana Centre Authority.  
There's representation there from the city, from the province, and the 
university.  And it's that Authority and that board that sets priorities as 
it relates to expenditures for the Authority. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- So can you tell me if you're going to fix that road or 
not? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd encourage the member opposite . . .  
And the two members from Moose Jaw are laughing in their seats, laughing 



 

 

about Regina, laughing about the roads in the Authority, laughing about the 
inequity after they raise such serious concerns, laughing about the 
priorities set by the member from Regina.  And I'd encourage them to 
listen. 
 
As I said before, the Wascana Centre Authority has representation from the 
city, from the province, and from the university, and they'll set their 
priorities with funds that are available to them. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Well I know that, and I've known that for a long time.  
I knew that when I was a member of city council and we appointed 
representatives to the Wascana Centre Authority, and I've known that as a 
member of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
But I also know that when I was on city council and I had some question 
about what the Wascana Centre might be doing, we could ask our 
representative on the council and they would tell us, this is what the 
Wascana Centre is going to do. 
 
But now we're asking the minister . . . or the minister's asking us for 
money for the province's share, and he won't answer.  So I want to ask him 
again: are you going to fix the road or aren't you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd encourage the member from Regina to 
contact the Authority and ask them if they're going to fix the road.  The 
funding that's available to them, as I understand it, is not conditional 
funding. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Well you want us to give you money here.  That's what 
this Bill is all about.  You want us to give you money.  You want us, 
members of the Legislative Assembly, to give you money.  You appoint people 
to run this Wascana Centre but you won't answer any of the questions as to 
what this money is going to go for. 
 
I'm not making any suggestions here as to how they should run their 
business.  I've simply got a question about some of their plans.  And one 
of my questions is about their plans for the year -- are they going to fix 
that road? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Mr. Chairman, the member from Regina knows and 
understands the process.  I ask the member opposite if he would also liken 
this to funding for health and education.  And if a third party such as 
hospital board was given so many dollars in a given year, if they were 
given so many dollars in a year that was unconditional, if that member 
opposite would ask how that money is to be spent. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Well maybe . . . I guess the best way to put this, Mr. 
Chairman, that it's a matter of simple courtesy. 
 
I remember when I was on city council, city council every year would be 
asked to put aside X number of dollars for the Wascana Centre because it's 
a partner in the Wascana Centre.  And whenever we were asked to do that we 
might have some questions for the city's representatives to the Wascana 



 

 

Centre Authority. 
 
And we would ask them from time to time: what are you going to use this 
money for?  What are your plans for the year?  And I have a specific 
question here about, would the money be used for this or would it be used 
for that.  And a member of council would tell us that yes it will or no it 
won't and the money is going to be used for this or it's going to be used 
for that.  And as a matter of courtesy, as a matter of courtesy, common 
decent courtesy, would tell us what the money would be used for. 
 
And that's not to say that the council then attached conditions to the 
money, saying to the Wascana Centre, you've got to use the money for this 
as opposed to that.  We didn't do that, because we recognize the Wascana 
Centre as an independent Authority.  But the council members would let us 
know, as a matter of common decency and courtesy, what they were going to 
use the money for.  In fact the Wascana Centre staff would get together 
with the city on an annual basis to also let us know what the money was 
going to be used for. 
 
So I want to ask the minister here.  You want the money.  Out of courtesy, 
can you tell us what the money is going to be used for?  Will it be used to 
fix this road? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Mr. Chairman, out of courtesy and out of respect to the 
members opposite, and out of respect for the process as it relates to 
funding and the budget for Wascana Centre Authority, I would entertain -- 
if the member so chooses -- I would entertain writing a letter to the 
Authority and asking them for a copy of their budget and gladly forward it 
on to the members opposite, if that's their request. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- As a matter of courtesy, as a matter of courtesy, Mr. 
Chairman, as a matter of courtesy, we're prepared to vote off this thing 
and to give you the money and get on your way today. 
 
But if you're going to extend it . . . if you're going to extend the 
courtesy of letter-writing and so on, I've got another suggestion.  Why 
don't you extend your courtesy one step further.  Bring the information 
back here on Monday, and then out of a matter of courtesy, we will then 
approve the expenditures that day.  How does that meet with your . . . does 
that meet with your approval, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Mr. Chairman, I've said that I would do what the members 
requested.  If the members would like me to get the budget for Wascana 
Centre Authority, I would request that of them.  And I'd gladly convey that 
to the members opposite.  So I would do my utmost to get as much 
information as they desire if that's their wish.  I'd gladly do that. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Let me just say it's the road on the east side of the 
building.  We want to know if any of the money is going to go to pay to fix 
up this road, which is in terrible shape. 
 
I believe the member from Moose Jaw also has a question, Mr. Chairman. 
 



 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Minister, when you bring this back on Monday for 
consideration of Committee of the Whole, will you ensure that the member 
for Thunder Creek, the minister responsible for Wakamow Valley Authority, 
will be here and available to answer questions put to him? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Mr. Chairman, just for the benefit of the committee, 
I've said that what I would do is try to obtain a copy of the budget for 
Wascana Centre Authority. And I would do my best to obtain a copy of that 
requested from the Authority and provide that to the members opposite. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Minister, my question was, when you come back on Monday, 
or whenever you come back for Committee of the Whole, my question is, will 
you ensure that the member for Thunder Creek will be present in the 
chambers and available for questions, specific questions . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order.  The member from Moose Jaw North has been cautioned 
several times as to making reference . . . Order, order. 
 
The question has been ruled out of order on previous occasions, that he's 
asking whether the absence or presence of a member will or will not be 
entertained down the road, and I rule the question out of order. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Without being very specific, could we have the 
minister's assurance that come Monday, someone will know something about 
the subject, will be present to answer the questions on behalf of the 
government. 
 
(1300) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Mr. Chairman, the member from Regina, the member from 
Regina, knows very well how the formula was established.  The member 
opposite was part of the previous government and I'd encourage him, I'd 
encourage that member, to talk to his members from Moose Jaw and explain 
why the inequity exists.  I think he should be able to do that because he 
is part of that budget-making process, part of that decision, and he should 
be able to answer that question as well as anyone. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 58 -- An Act to amend The Statutes Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that the Bill now be read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 59 -- An Act to amend The Interpretation Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that the Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 



 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 76 -- An Act to amend The Coroners Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that the Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 77 -- An Act to amend The Queen's Bench Act (No. 2) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that the Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 78 -- An Act to amend The Surrogate Court Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that the Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Bill No. 80 -- An Act respecting the Application in Saskatchewan of the 
United Nations Convention on Contracts for the International Sale of Goods 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that the Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Bill No. 81 -- An Act to amend references to the Criminal Code in Certain 
Acts and Regulations and respecting Consequential Amendments to Certain 
Acts and Regulations resulting from the enactment of the Criminal Code, 
R.S.C. 1985, c.C-46 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that the Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: -- It being past 1 o'clock the House stands adjourned until 
Monday at 2 p.m.  Have a pleasant weekend. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 1:07 p.m. 
 


