





























































Hansard: May 06, 1991


 

 

May 6/91 
EVENING SITTING 

 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 
Motions for Interim Supply (continued) 

 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 
want to take a few moments to go over the position of the province in terms 
of the debt that exists in the Consolidated Fund as well as in the Crown 
sector.  And I realize that most people in the province are well aware that 
the accumulated debt in the Consolidated Fund is somewhere around five 
billion, or will be once this budget comes into being or this year is 
completed.  And I think they're also aware that in the Crown side there's 
probably nine or nine and a half billion dollars in debt. 
 
But I think many . . . fewer people are aware of how the debt has come 
about.  In fact one of the main questions that I hear when I go around the 
province, whether it's in Regina Elphinstone or whether it's in a rural 
constituency, is many people are asking, where has all the money gone?  And 
they say very clearly that they just can't conceive of, or believe, that 
the $14 billion in debt has been spent legitimately.  Because they say, 
we've paid more taxes, we've sold off assets; how could it possibly be that 
the debt has gone up to such a tremendous level? 
 
They're saying . . . the farmers are saying, it certainly isn't because 
we're living better, that we're getting more out of this government -- in 
fact quite the opposite.  When you look at social programs, there's less 
money being spent on dental care for children.  For many of the programs 
that they had become used to, the property improvement grant -- many of 
those things have been cut.  At the same time taxes have gone up 
phenomenally.  And in fact the income to the government -- the revenues to 
the government -- have increased substantially, and I say, substantially 
more than the inflation rate. 
 
And I want to ask you a few questions about the income of government in 
comparison to the inflation rate.  And I just ask your staff to maybe to do 
a little quick numbers on . . . in terms of what the income to government 
has been since 1982 as compared to the rate of inflation to see whether or 
not in fact the rate of inflation is higher or lower than the income to 
government.  Because my impression is, is that the government take from the 
public has gone up much faster than what has the rate of inflation. 
 
Many business people are saying how can this be.  Our families are saying 
how can it be that the government is spending way more or faster than . . . 
and in fact taking more money from us at a much higher rate than what the 
rate of inflation.  What can be the possible reason for that? 
 
Some of them, and I think accurately, come to the conclusion that it's in 
part or in total as a result of the mismanagement of this government, 
whether it's GigaText, or Supercart, Joytec, any of these . . . High R 
Door.  My colleague reminds me that this is the reason that we have the 
very, very high debt that we presently have. 



 

 

 
But, Mr. Minister, I want to ask you a question.  Can you tell me when your 
government took over in 1982, what was the debt position of the province of 
Saskatchewan in the Consolidated Fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, I am here to help provide details on 
interim supply for the '91-92 budget year. That question is beyond the 
scope of the Bill, the motion, the resolution before the committee, and, 
number one, I would argue it's out of order. 
 
But having said that we can endeavour to supply that information. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well, I appreciate the minister endeavouring to find 
out, but I wonder if he couldn't ask his staff whether or not it's accurate 
that in the first financial statement done by your government there was a 
surplus of $139 million in the Consolidated Fund when you took over the 
economy of the province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- I can't confirm the precise number, but there was a 
surplus in the Consolidated Fund, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I believe, and what I'd like 
confirmed, is that the surplus was $139.2 million.  And I guess what I find 
hard to believe is that with your staff sitting next to you that you can't 
get those kind of numbers. 
 
And this is why we're taking so long on interim supply.  We ask questions.  
You have the expertise sitting next to you and I believe that they know the 
exact numbers because they're very, very professional people. 
 
The problem here is, and the reason this is taking so long, is not because 
you don't have good staff, qualified staff, but you refuse to give the 
information. And at a time when we're talking about open government and all 
of the things that you people won't do to have open government, it's 
inconceivable that we spend all of these hours asking questions, Mr. 
Chairman, and get no answers. 
 
We sit here, we ask what was in the Consolidated Fund when these people 
took office and the minister says, I don't know and I can't find out but 
I'll take notice of it and I'll get back to you.  Well we know what that 
means, Mr. Chairman, and the public know what it means.  It means that the 
minister expects to skate around this issue and not bring an answer back.  
That's exactly what it means and this is part of the frustration that the 
opposition -- but more importantly the public -- has with this government 
and the secretive nature.  And the minister swings some brooch or something 
. . . a necklace that he has in his hand back and forth as some sort of a 
joke here in this committee, but I say to you this is no joke. 
 
The simple fact is that in 1982 the surplus was 139 million.  I ask you, 
Mr. Minister, what is the position of the province as of today in terms of 
the debt in the Consolidated Fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well I would just recommend the hon. member take the 



 

 

budget documents entitled CHOICES, turn to the very last page and what he 
will find is the gross debt of the province is thirteen point one six seven 
point nine billion dollars and that will be estimated as at March 31, '92.  
That's made up of Government of Saskatchewan, five point one nine four 
point one billion, or approximately 40 per cent of which is 
non-reimbursable debt -- that is to say Government of Saskatchewan debt -- 
and the remainder is what is known as reimbursable debt for Crown 
corporations and others, and that is the other 60 per cent roughly, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I would like the minister who continues to yell from 
his seat . . . He gives his answer, then he sits down and hollers and 
yells, Mr. Chairman.  I wonder if we couldn't bring the minister to order. 
 
But the simple fact is, is that you've taken this province, by your own 
admission, from a debt . . . or from a surplus of 139 million to a debt of 
around $5.2 billion.  I wonder, Mr. Minister, in light of the fact that in 
1982 you talked a great deal about fiscal responsibility and how things 
could be better than even a $139 million surplus, and then in 1986 you made 
a solemn commitment that you would balance the books by the next election 
-- that's now, 1990-1991 -- can you tell me how you feel your government 
has made out in terms of the debt of this province? 
 
Now the public is shocked by this, by the fact that we have a $5.2 billion 
debt.  But can you tell me your own personal feeling and the feeling of 
your government towards this debt?  Are you pleased with your record, 
building it to 5.2, or have you got problems with it?  And if in fact the 
$5.2 billion in debt . . . do you see this as creating a major problem -- 
not for future governments but for future generations in this province in 
attempting to pay that off?  Do you feel proud of the fact that you've got 
a $5.2. billion . . . or what is the mood of the government towards this 
debt? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I think it's fair to say -- and 
I've said it many times in this legislature before -- that the goal 
obviously would be to have balanced books on an annual basis.  Then you can 
move to dealing with the accumulated debt over the years. 
 
Why do we have the accumulated debt to the degree that we have?  And that's 
because we've been making infrastructure investments; making, in 
partnership with business and co-operatives, diversification initiatives, 
putting wealth-creation tools in place, as well as backing up and 
stabilizing and revitalizing the farm economy and hence the entire economy 
of the province. 
 
Yes it is true.  We have had nine deficits in a row.  But I believe with 
this six-point financial plan it clearly shows that we have turned a 
corner.  We have a plan to balance the books by '93-94. 
 
We've detailed the elements of how we will balance the books in that time 
period.  The decisions have been difficult enough, but I clearly feel that 
we've got very solid and substantial underpinnings, in a fiscal sense, in 
place now that will enable us to balance the budget in that time frame, Mr. 



 

 

Chairman. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well, Mr. Minister, it seems clear to most business 
people in the province that the price of wheat between 1982 and now has 
gone down considerably; that the price of oil has gone down considerably; 
that the infrastructure that you talk about is not stronger now in 1991 
than it was in 1982. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, you weren't able or capable of balancing the books in 
1982.  And it really behoves the business people of the province to believe 
that you, Mr. Minister, the member from Weyburn, have the ability to 
balance the books in 1991 with a $5 billion debt in the Consolidated Fund, 
when you couldn't do it in 1982 when there was no debt, when the surplus 
was 139 million. 
 
Can you explain to the people of Saskatchewan, the business people of 
Saskatchewan, why that will be easier today -- with a $5 billion debt -- 
than it would have been in 1982. 
 
You make the statement that it's been nine consecutive debts.  I think this 
is the 10th budget that has had a massive deficit in it.  What makes it 
easier today, with an accumulated debt -- all of it at your hands I might 
remind you  
_- of $5 billion, $5.2 billion? 
 
Why would anyone be expected to believe that you're the management team 
that should take us out of this?  What would make anyone now believe that 
after 10 years, an accumulated debt of $5.2 billion, and the same 
management team in place -- why would anyone believe that you're the people 
to take us out of this mess that you put us in. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- I think . . . I mean the hon. member isn't posing the 
question quite this way but I'll rephrase it.  I think it would be a 
legitimate question, and others are asking.  We've had 5-year plans before.  
Some have talked about a 15-year plan in the opposition benches.  So some 
out there, certainly, some taxpayers are wondering what's different about 
this plan?  Why would I expect this plan to work when some others obviously 
did not?  And the difference is, we spelled out in great detail just 
exactly how we will do it. 
 
You see, Mr. Chairman, anybody can say, we'll have a 5-year plan or a 
10-year plan or a 15-year plan, and that is the easy part, just to say it.  
But you've got to spell out how you're going to do it.  And we've spelled 
out how we're going to do it in terms of the tax side, the revenue side, as 
well as on the expenditure side -- wage guide-lines, modest increases for 
our important spending areas of health and education.  And if I might say, 
one of the keys to having this balanced budget plan stay on track is the 
fact that we have the new generation of farm programs because that's 
largely what took the train off the tracks before.  And that's a seventh 
reason, if you like, over and above the six points of the financial plan, 
why I believe that absolutely this will lead to balanced budgets this time, 
Mr. Chairman. 
 



 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well if that's the detailed strategy of how you're 
going to get out of the $5 billion mess, it's no wonder that the people of 
Saskatchewan have no confidence in you.  Because the simple fact is, Mr. 
Minister, is that you and your Premier, you and your Premier are 
incompetent -- not only of taking us out of debt, not only of taking us out 
of debt but many people will believe that you are not telling the truth 
when it comes to what the debt is going to be this year.  And the reason 
that they don't believe you is because of the history of this government, 
and what happened in 1986. 
 
In 1986, at the same point before that election, your desk-mate, the member 
from Qu'Appelle-Lumsden, the then minister of Finance, indicated that the 
debt was going to be about the same as what you're predicting now -- about 
the same.  And what happened, Mr. Chairman, right after the election?  The 
then minister of Finance, the member from Qu'Appelle-Lumsden, announced 
that it wasn't in the area of $300 million.  What was it?  One point two 
billion dollars for that fiscal year. 
 
Now you have to excuse the public, Mr. Minister, if they are cynical about 
you and your government, the Premier, when it comes to telling the truth 
about the debt in this province.  They're putting it much stronger outside 
of the House but I can't use those words that my neighbours and friends are 
saying about this government when it comes to debt management.  They are 
saying this government simply doesn't know how to be honest with the people 
of the province when it comes to telling them what the debt is going to be. 
 
(1915) 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, you have admitted here that the position of the 
province was a surplus of $139 million when you took over in 1982, and that 
you've now driven the debt -- created the debt to start with -- and then 
driven it up to $5.2 billion in the Consolidated Fund. 
 
But I want to ask you another question and that is on the Crown side and 
you referred briefly to it a moment ago.  But can you tell us what the debt 
in the Crown side of government was in 1982? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- On a point of order, Mr. Chairman, I think the hon. 
member's questions are far beyond the scope of the resolution as it relates 
to interim supply.  I know it's been a practice to allow a fair amount of 
latitude here.  I myself have tried to answer questions and respect that 
kind of approach that we've taken in this legislature.  But the Crown 
corporation debt in 1981 or '82: (a) I don't have those details, and; (b) I 
would suggest to you is beyond the scope of this resolution, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- The point of order is well taken.  I'd ask the member to 
confine his questions to the resolution that's before the committee. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, I'll try to direct my questions in a way 
that will make them apply much more directly to the interim supply Bill 
before us, and that may take me a moment to tell the background as to why I 
want to know about the debt in the Consolidated Fund, because it does apply 
directly to the moneys that we're being asked to appropriate to this 



 

 

government to spend. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you know full well what the debt in the Crowns was in 
1982.  Mr. Chairman, you will be aware, having been involved in this 
government, that the debt in the Crown side was about $3 billion -- $3.2 
billion, in that area, in 1982. 
 
Now you've already admitted here tonight, Mr. Minister, that the debt in 
the Crowns is between 8 and $9 billion.  Now you may explain that in the 
Consolidated Fund you've had a $5 billion debt because of programs for 
farmers or because of this or because of that.  No one believes you but you 
have your explanation. 
 
But in the Crown side, the story is quite different.  There is no 
explanation why the debt has gone from 3 billion to 8 or 9 billion.  Mr. 
Minister, you know full well that you have sold off assets in the Crown 
side to the tune of 1.5 to $2 billion.  Now the question is, if the debt 
was 3.2 billion, and you've sold off between one and a half and 2 billion, 
how is it possible that the debt has gone from 3 billion to 9 billion? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well on the one hand, Mr. Chairman, we have sold some 
assets off.  For example, Saskoil, as a newly privatized corporation, is 
now one of the largest oil companies in Canada.  They've seen their 
employee . . . their number of employees now is something in the order of 
600, about 400 of those . . . 350 to 400 of those right here in Regina.  
And what we did, whether it was that one or the potash or Ipsco, whatever 
the issue was, that money was applied against the debt. 
 
But on the other hand, one could legitimately ask, well if that was applied 
against the debt, why is it the Crown corporation debt either hasn't gone 
down or has stayed level or maybe increased a little bit.  And the answer 
there is, Mr. Chairman, is that while we were applying that proceeds 
against the debt, we were also making other borrowings to . . . for other 
economic diversification issues like Millar Western, Mr. Chairman, like 
upgraders, Mr. Chairman, economic diversification projects to help 
stabilize the economic base of the province.  If we hadn't been making 
these additional investments, then the debt would have come down, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, it seems obvious that the minister 
is having a great deal of trouble with the Crown corporation side.  First 
of all he says that the debt -- and he admits it -- was about $3.2 billion.  
Then he agrees that they've sold off assets.  He didn't confirm the number, 
but let's take a conservative number of 1.5 billion.  That would have 
reduced the debt to 1.7 billion.  Now we're talking about a change in debt 
from 1.7 billion to 9 billion.  That's a difference in excess of 7 billion.  
Can you give me the list, Mr. Minister, of what you invested that $7 
billion in? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, I can.  Agricultural Credit 
Corporation of Saskatchewan -- and I'll round this off in rough numbers -- 
717 million; Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan, 2.6 billion; 
Municipal Financing Corporation, about 120 million, Mr. Chairman; 



 

 

Saskatchewan Crop Insurance, about 202 million; Saskatchewan Economic 
Development Corporation, about 175 million; Saskatchewan Housing 
Corporation, about 317 million; Saskatchewan Power Corporation, about 1.9 
billion; Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation, about 750 million; 
Saskatchewan Telecommunications, SaskTel in otherwords, about 775 million; 
Saskatchewan Water Corporation, about 198 million. 
 
Others would include federal-municipal.  That would represent moneys loaned 
to the province by the federal government with the understanding that 
moneys would be reloaned to the Saskatchewan municipalities under identical 
conditions, about 4.495 million, and University of Saskatchewan, about 2.2 
million.  And then investment in agricultural land, I think, which mostly 
represents an investment made under the NDP (New Democratic Party) to buy, 
set up land bank, that's about 185 million, for a total of reimbursable 
debt of 7.973 billion, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, the minister is quoting from a document.  
I wonder if you wouldn't mind tabling that for the committee. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Now let's be clear, Mr. Chairman, on what the hon. 
member has just asked for.  Let's be clear on what he has just asked me to 
table because this makes the point very clearly as to the kind of 
irresponsible exercise the opposition are going through because the 
document I was reading through was the Estimates, Mr. Chairman, page number 
132. 
 
You're darn right I'll table it again because it's a very solid document.  
And the biggest problem that the taxpayers of this province have and that 
this legislature has as it relates to that caucus is their failure to read 
the documents that are placed in front of them, Mr. Chairman.  This is an 
abuse of the legislature that they take their job so lightly and so 
irresponsibly, Mr. Chairman, that they don't even look in the documents 
that are here and then they say, send over the documents; let's see the 
documents. 
 
Well it's in the budget documents, Mr. Chairman.  We have either a big 
problem with the illiteracy over there or these guys wouldn't know 
financial management and balance sheet if they saw them, literally -- if 
they saw them, Mr. Chairman. 
 
It's a travesty of responsible government when I see what this opposition 
is doing in this legislature, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, it becomes more and more obvious, it 
becomes more and more obvious that the minister is attempting not only to . 
. . I won't use the words mislead, but to misrepresent what he is saying 
here tonight and unwilling to share with us the detail of where the 
spending has gone.  This is what's obvious. 
 
And I tell you, Mr. Chairman, this is the reason why we have a $14 billion 
debt in this province.  This is the reason: this secretive nature of this 



 

 

government, when it comes, for example, to the spending of $2.6 billion to 
CIC.  That's the Crown Investments Corporation; that's the corporation that 
was supposed to be giving money over to the Consolidated Fund.  That's 
where we were supposed to be getting tonnes of money from.  He's now saying 
Crown Investment doesn't get money to the Consolidated Fund, but has burnt 
up $2.6 billion.  That's how he's attempting to play jiggery-pokery with 
the numbers and that's why we have a debt of $14 billion. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, could you give me the breakdown of how you explain that 
we've increased the debt in CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) of $2.6 billion.  What is the detailed list of where that 
money has gone? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well those details are available in Crown Management 
Board's annual reports, but they would include things like NewGrade, 
Lloydminster upgrader, Millar Western, Mr. Chairman.  There's probably 
still the debt against Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan.  Those would be 
some of the examples that that $2.6 billion represents, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Minister, I want to make it clear to the Assembly 
and to the people of Saskatchewan that your record in debt management has 
been a dismal failure, that at a time when we have had other people in the 
province being asked to balance their books -- RM (rural municipality) 
councils, farmers are being told that they have to tighten their belts, 
working people -- that you, Mr. Minister, have driven this province from a 
total accumulated debt in the Crown and Consolidated Fund of 3.2 billion 
to, by your own admission, accumulated debt of over $13.1 billion. 
 
Now you may be proud of that, and the members opposite may be proud of it, 
but I'll tell you it's going to be the albatross that drags you down to 
defeat at the next election -- is going to be the dismal record of 
management here in the province of Saskatchewan.  And you can explain all 
you want about how you've managed the province and how you're proud of your 
record and how you're going to balance the books if you were elected in the 
next three years.  But your problem, Mr. Minister, is this:  credibility.  
Nobody for a moment is believing you and your Premier that you're the 
management team not only to solve the debt problem, but to take care of the 
management and the fiscal management of this province. 
 
You have at every turn increased the debt.  At the same time you have cut 
programs and you have increased taxes.  Now everyone knows that if you're 
running a corporation or you're running a company or you're running a 
family, that the issue is that if you increase your spending, you have to 
watch on the other side where the income is coming from.  And what you have 
done here is increase the debt by $11 billion in the province of 
Saskatchewan in a matter of about nine years.  That's over $1 billion being 
spent more each year than you take in in revenue. 
 
Now can you tell me, Mr. Minister, how can you honestly say that in the 
next term if you were elected, that this mismanagement and waste and 
spending like a drunken sailor by you and your Premier, of more than a 
billion dollars a year  
_- more than what you're taking in -- how you'll be able to turn that 



 

 

around.  How do you expect the public to believe you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well I went through the details of our plan several 
times, the six-point plan, plus the new generation of farm programs that 
will help ensure that those plans do stay on track, Mr. Chairman. 
 
You know it's interesting in this interim supply debate, that we see the 
opposition and their stalling tactics, their fatuous questioning.  When I 
read from the Estimates they somehow pretend that it's a . . . they think 
I'm reading from some kind of internal secret document and that they're 
going to trap me by having me table it, when in fact, Mr. Chairman, what it 
is is the Estimates book that this interim supply Bill is based on.  And 
they don't have the wherewithal to even read the documents that have been 
given to them with the answers in them, because they're not interested in 
the answers, Mr. Chairman.  They're interested in dragging out and 
prolonging this debate. 
 
They're interested in putting their own political interests ahead of the 
larger public interest.  They're interested in putting their own political 
agenda and their own political interest ahead of welfare clients and school 
boards and hospital boards -- and the list goes on and on, Mr. Chairman -- 
for nothing more than their own very partisan, politically motivated, 
election-driven agenda.  That's all they're interested in, Mr. Chairman -- 
nothing more; nothing less. 
 
We have clearly articulated our six-point plan.  I have yet to hear . . . 
and I ask members here have they heard?  If we go through that six-point 
plan point by point . . . and you say, okay, you don't agree with our plan; 
you say it's not a real plan.  Okay, let's go through it element by 
element. 
 
We have said fair and reasonable wage guide-lines for the next three years 
-- 4 per cent this year, 2 per cent next year, and 2 per cent the year 
after.  Now I say to the hon. member, if that's not fair and reasonable 
then you tell us what's wrong with it and tell us what your plan is.  Is 
four too low or is it too high?  Is two too low or too high?  What is their 
plan?  The silence has been deafening on that.  You see, they have never 
once raised the issue of wage guide-lines.  They haven't once asked me . . 
. In fact I challenge the hon. member tonight to ask me about those 
guide-lines and what its impact is on this budget -- ask me about them and 
give us their view of those wage guide-lines. 
 
Let's look at another element.  Let's look at another element.  Three and a 
half per cent increases for operating grants to schools and hospitals.  
This year 3 per cent, and the next two years.  Have you heard the 
opposition say what their position is?  Now we heard the Health critic up 
today saying, it's not enough -- cut-backs, cut-backs, cut-backs -- saying, 
in effect, spend more.  Well let's hear it from the opposition Finance 
critic and the Deputy House Leader or the House Leader, or whatever he is 
over there, and tell us.  If 3 per cent isn't high enough, what is the 
right number, because there'll be a corresponding increase in the deficit? 
 
Now I want to pick up, Mr. Chairman . . . you see, because you have to keep 



 

 

on top of the erroneous information that the opposition try to bring before 
this House.  Now they will say sometimes it's a speck of dirt that gets in 
their glasses or the devil made me do it or I didn't mean to do it.  And 
what I'm meaning is last Friday, or Thursday I guess it was, we had an 
example in this House where the opposition were out 1,000 per cent in one 
of their numbers -- 1,000 per cent in their numbers, Mr. Chairman.  This 
isn't the first time it's happened. 
 
(1930) 
 
The hon. member, our Finance critic, said Sask Property Management was 
charging departments 75 cents to copy documents, when in fact the real 
answer was seven and a half cents -- out by 1,000 per cent, Mr. Chairman.  
Well now tonight the hon. member suggests that somehow under the NDP 
administration, through the decade of the '70s and into the very early 
'80s, that somehow they were such good stewards of the public purse.  Quite 
frankly, if you check the record of those days, there was spending 
increases the likes of which we probably have never seen in this province's 
history. 
 
We're not just talking double digit increases, we're talking in the '20s, 
maybe even in the '30s, was a norm for the very, very exaggerated spending 
curve that they went through in the '70s, practising what I would observe 
is Keynesian economics, when in fact probably . . . when we didn't need the 
economy to be stimulated, Mr. Chairman. 
 
And then he suggests somehow that there was a surplus, you see.  But you've 
got to compare apples to apples and oranges to oranges.  And so while we 
were sitting here I had my officials go into the library and get the 
documents back from 10 years ago. 
 
Well what do they show?  Now the hon. member, when I talked about the debt 
numbers and I gave the debt numbers for the Crown corporations -- that's to 
say the reimbursable debt versus the non-reimbursable debt -- the hon. 
member suggested that that $5.194 billion of debt that we have today, 
what's known as non-reimbursable debt, that somehow back when they were in 
government there was no non-reimbursable or Government of Saskatchewan 
debt. 
 
Well guess what? The NDP . . . Must be a speck on their glasses again, Mr. 
Chairman, another mistake -- another factual error by the NDP. 
 
Now I don't know, Mr. Chairman, what you think.  Now either this is a 
deliberate attempt to mislead the legislature again, or . . . I'm sorry, I 
had a speck on my glasses.  Or they don't know how to read a balance sheet.  
I don't know.  Which is it? I guess maybe the hon. member can tell us. 
 
Well what is the reality, Mr. Chairman?  Was there somehow no debt, no 
non-reimbursable debt back in '80-81? 
 
The answer is no.  There was nearly a quarter of a billion dollars worth, 
Mr. Chairman.  And guess what?  In '81-82 there was over a quarter of a 
billion dollars worth, Mr. Chairman.  And in the Crown corporation side of 



 

 

the reimbursable debt, Crown corporations, over $3 billion in '81-82. 
 
So you see, Mr. Chairman, first of all they don't have their facts right; 
secondly, they don't read the facts that we give them in the estimates; and 
thirdly, Mr. Chairman, I don't think they understand balance sheets; and 
fourthly, Mr. Chairman, we've seen clearly how the NDP operate once in 
power.  Anybody that ever carried a picket or a placard got a 20 per cent 
increase, Mr. Chairman, in Ontario.  That's NDP-style -- big spenders, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the minister is very, very much 
confused.  He gets up and he says the member opposite indicated that there 
was no debt when the previous government was in power, and then he adds up 
two numbers, a quarter of a billion or 250 million in one area and 3 
billion in another.  Well that's exactly what I said the debt was when we 
left office -- $3.2 billion.  I mean the minister clearly is attempting or 
trying to mislead by using numbers that aren't accurate. 
 
But I say to you, Mr. Minister, that that debt has gone from 3.2 billion 
that both of us agree with -- there's no attempt by us to say that there 
was no debt; there was a total of 3.2 billion -- has gone from 3.2 billion 
to 14 billion.  That's a difference of about 11 billion in 10 years, or in 
nine years, increase in the debt. 
 
And I might add to you that the 3.2 billion was built up in the Crowns over 
a period from 1905 to 1982 by Conservative governments, by Liberal 
governments, by CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) governments, and 
NDP governments.  That was the total accumulated debt -- 3.2 billion 
between 1905 and 1982.  That built all the power projects, all of the 
telephone lines, all of the coal mines, all of the oil wells that Saskoil 
had, all the potash mines.  The total debt, Mr. Chairman, was $3.2 billion.  
On that we agree. 
 
We also agree that the debt today is in the area of between 13 and 14 
billion.  Now the question is, that the people are asking, is where has all 
that money gone, the 11 billion increase in the debt?  Who got the money?  
Because, Mr. Chairman, very clearly your children and your grandchildren 
are going to have to pay that $14 billion, plus interest, off.  This is the 
unfortunate side of what is happening here with this government. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, I have given up on my attempt to get answers out of this 
government or this minister as to where the $11 billion has gone.  But I'll 
tell you, during the next election campaign one of the main questions is 
going to be, as we criss-cross the province, where has the $11 billion of 
new debt gone, because what I can guarantee you is that the people of 
Saskatchewan, the taxpayers, have not been sharing in the creation of that 
debt. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Trew: -- I would like to ask leave to introduce some guests. 
 
Leave granted. 



 

 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and colleagues.  Mr. Chairman, it's 
my pleasure to introduce to you 10 Cubs.  They're the 87th Cubs based out 
of W.H. Ford here in Regina.  These are Cubs in my colleague . . . the 
member for Regina North West's constituency.  I am filling in for that 
member this evening. 
 
The Akela is Dale Carter.  The assistant leaders are Dennis Wilson, Ray 
Strasser, and Ken Wiemer.  I ask all members to join me in welcoming these 
Cubs to our legislature, and I look forward to meeting them in the members' 
dining room very shortly. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motions for Interim Supply (continued) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- There's a number of infrastructure investments that 
have been made over the years, a number of new diversification initiatives 
that have been put in place over the years, and I can tell you what we have 
invested in on behalf of the taxpayers. 
 
I can tell you one item that you don't pick up when you read the gross debt 
by allocation, the Estimates.  I'll tell you one thing you don't see in 
here that you'd have seen in here 10 years ago in the Estimates, Mr. 
Chairman . . . is you don't see a line that says Saskatchewan Land Bank 
Commission.  You don't see a line that says we've borrowed, as they did, an 
total on behalf of the taxpayers, $175 million in the fiscal year back in 
'81-82, Mr. Chairman. 
 
You don't see us going out and buying potash mines that were already in the 
ground, that didn't create one new job when the government nationalized 
them, took them over.  You see us making investments in wealth creation on 
the economic development side and a new infrastructure. 
 
You won't see any reference in here to the land bank, Mr. Chairman . . . 
$175 million under the NDP to take over farms that nobody wanted them to do 
in this province, Mr. Chairman.  What they wanted was legitimate assistance 
with high interest rates, not for them to take over the farm. 
 
So I'll tell you, when I read you the allocation by category of the debt, 
there is no reference to land bank corp.  Mind you, we're still paying for 
it -- investment agriculture land.  That legacy of debt still hangs around 
the taxpayer's neck.  It's mostly this investment agriculture land at a 
hundred and eighty-four and a half million dollars, Mr. Chairman.  That's 
what we have, $184 million.  That's the legacy left by the NDP.  That's 
where some of that debt still is, Mr. Chairman.  And is that what the 
farmers wanted?  Is that the farmer's idea back in the difficult decades of 
spiralling land price . . .  or the years of spiralling land prices and 
high interest rates?  Is that what the farmers wanted  



 

 

_- was the socialists, the NDP coming in and taking over the family farm? 
 
No, they didn't want that, Mr. Chairman, and they soundly routed them out 
of office.  They wanted things like our Premier has put in place here with 
the new generation of farm programs to stabilize and revitalize our rural 
economy, and so doing, our entire economy, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, I'm very 
pleased again to be able to ask a few questions of the minister regarding 
the expenditures out of this budget in interim supply.  I want to preface 
my comments by saying a little bit in response to the minister's last 
comments, that there are a great many things that we didn't see in the 
financial books of the province prior to 1981. 
 
We didn't see, for example, Mr. Minister, a ordinary expenditure by the 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation of $22.8 million -- $22.8 
million which taken out of the . . . assets taken out of the expenditures 
of all government departments to pay for heaven knows what in terms of 
money that's going to build up, some would say . . . some have said that 
it's going to build up the re-election slush fund to the Conservative 
Party. 
 
I don't believe that all 22.8 million is intended for that purpose.  I do 
believe, however, that those who say that there are shenanigans going on 
there and that the necessity for a public inquiry, for an independent audit 
of that particular aspect of the government's operation is long over due . 
. . In fact given the confidence of the voters in the next election that 
that independent audit will be put in place. 
 
That's one thing that we didn't see prior to 1981-1982.  Another thing that 
we didn't see, Mr. Chairman, in regards to the expenditure of public money 
was the perception in the public, the talk among the general population of 
Saskatchewan that there is something wrong in the state of Denmark, that 
the moneys that are raised through taxation are going to purposes not 
intended -- not intended -- for the good governance of the problem but are 
being used to stuff up some pockets and some bank accounts of Conservative 
political hacks, appointments, and friends.  That was one thing that we 
didn't see in this province prior to 1982.  We didn't see the kind of 
outright cynicism that the population has as to the level -- as to the 
absolute level -- of perceived corruption in this province by the 
government. 
 
Another thing that we didn't see, Mr. Chairman . . . and it relates 
directly to the question of cash flows coming to the government.  In the 
last six years of the New Democratic Party administration in this province, 
prior to 1982, we did see $986 million in royalties from the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan accruing to the Heritage Fund of the province.  
And that is coming into the revenues of the province of Saskatchewan, 986 
million.  Nine hundred and eighty-six million dollars accrued to the people 
of Saskatchewan through the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan in the last 
six years of the NDP administration. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- That includes other companies as well. 



 

 

 
Mr. Lyons: -- Right.  That's $986 million coming into the Heritage Fund.  
What did we see in the first six years of the Conservative administration?  
A total of $274 million -- $274 million.  The first six years of the 
Progressive Conservative administration: 274 million versus 986 million in 
the last six years of the NDP.  That's a net difference, a net difference 
accruing to the people of Saskatchewan of $712 million, Mr. Chairman, $712 
million.  That's a drop in revenue. 
 
And I suppose, Mr. Minister, that one could argue, one could very well 
argue that when you look at the differences in amounts raised through Crown 
corporations in the last six years of the NDP versus the first six years of 
the Conservative administration that something fundamentally has gone 
wrong. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I want to ask you: why is it that because of your 
privatization initiatives -- or should I pose the question this way -- is 
it because of your privatization initiatives that the people of 
Saskatchewan have been short-changed many hundreds of millions of dollars 
in lost revenue from the Crown sector?  Is that the reason why the debt has 
risen $11 billion -- $11 billion -- since you people took office? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, I always find it interesting when the 
NDP get into potash fertilizer or a debate on fertilizer and whether the 
taxpayers are getting their full economic rent.  Because you see . . . why 
I say that, Mr. Chairman, is that we have today part ownership in two 
fertilizer companies.  We have part ownership in potash fertilizer and we 
have a part interest in nitrogen fertilizer, Mr. Chairman. 
 
(1945) 
 
Now the NDP, you see, had no problem with taking over and buying existing 
mines -- not creating new mines -- buying and taking over existing mines, 
in fact even having a 100 per cent ownership in them.  They had no 
difficulty with that theory.  That was consistent with bigger government is 
better government; a 100 per cent ownership is better than 90 per cent 
ownership. 
 
But somehow, you see, when you have less of a percentage ownership, say 
below 50, somehow that's bad.  Well I would argue that it's been very 
useful to attract private capital to defray the costs of developing that 
natural resource . . . or that resource and natural gas, Mr. Chairman, and 
create new jobs and a new kind of fertilizer that pays dividends both in 
natural gas royalty and in jobs and all the economic spin-offs. 
 
Now you see, the hon. member talks about the years . . . and I think he was 
probably referring to all royalties from potash.  I don't know; I mean he 
talked about the Potash Corporation, but I'm assuming that he wasn't trying 
to deliberately mislead this House.  It's just another case of, whoops, I 
had a speck in my glasses, or I made a mistake -- probably one of those 
two, Mr. Chairman, because I've got to think that what he's really talking 
about is in '80 and '81, when the royalties were large, well guess what?  
What was the price of potash doing then, Mr. Chairman?  Was it high or was 



 

 

it low?  Because the royalties are based on, at least in part, on the value 
of the resource.  Well wouldn't you know it; wouldn't you know it, Mr. 
Chairman. In '80 and '81 the value of potash sales -- over a billion 
dollars in 1980, nearly a billion in 1981.  Contrast that with '86, '87, 
'88 at somewhere between 550 and less than $900 million -- five fifty, six 
seventy-one. 
 
Now you see, Mr. Chairman, it would be quite normal, especially if we 
haven't changed the agreements, which I don't believe we have, Mr. 
Chairman.  So the formula for extracting our rent, I think probably -- and 
I'd have to check that -- remained unchanged, maybe even as unchanged to 
this day, quite frankly. 
 
And so if the hon. member is going to argue that somehow we're doing a 
lousy job of collecting our economic rent, what those financial wizards 
over there have got to stand up and argue is the formula we put in place 
was a very bad formula, and the agreements that were put in place were very 
bad agreements, that the NDP did a lousy job of negotiating.  That's what 
you've got to conclude, Mr. Chairman.  That's what you've got to conclude. 
 
Now we wanted to make sure we got our share of economic rent so we put some 
corporate . . . some special, if you like, corporate taxes in place, a 
corporate capital surcharge to make sure -- never mind what the federal 
rules are on taxation -- so that we would get our share of the economic 
rent owing on behalf of all the people of Saskatchewan, for all of the 
people's resource, potash. 
 
But there's one other point I want to make here, Mr. Chairman, and this is 
a key one.  This is a key one whether you're discussing potash fertilizer 
or nitrogen fertilizer, because I've already talked about how the potash, 
the value of potash in the late '70s and early '80s was sky-high.  
Obviously that's a reflection of price and sales; and I talked about 
through the mid-'60s, '86, '87, '88, how those same numbers were lower, 
much lower, 50 per cent lower in some instances. 
 
Now you see, if you have no understanding of agriculture you won't 
understand what I'm about to say, Mr. Chairman.  Unfortunately this is the 
position the NDP probably find themselves in because you have to ask 
yourself, well what makes potash or nitrogen fertilizer prices go up or 
down?  Well who uses fertilizer?  Well farmers.  So in good times, Mr. 
Chairman, when they want to maximize their yields and hence their returns, 
they buy fertilizer.  They buy it all the time.  But in good times people 
obviously buy more, when the price of grains are high; corns, soy beans.  
They want to maximize yields.  When agriculture prices are lower they don't 
probably buy as much fertilizer.  Sales go down, price goes down. 
 
Now you've got to understand that, Mr. Chairman.  You've got to understand 
farming to make those connections.  Now unfortunately for the NDP they 
don't understand that.  You see, they get caught up in the potash debate 
but they forget, what do you use fertilizers for?  Farmers use fertilizers.  
And farmers here don't use any potash at all, or very, very rarely, maybe 
the odd soil -- very rarely because our soils are rich in potash.  But we 
do use a lot of nitrogen fertilizer, and that's the one that we're going to 



 

 

be joint venturing with in a company to manufacture, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm quite sure that the minister understands a 
lot about fertilizer because we've just heard a lot of fertilizer, to be 
polite, in his response.  Perhaps I can refresh the minister's memory. 
 
In the last six years of the New Democratic Party administration potash 
prices over time, over those six years, averaged $109 a tonne -- $109 a 
tonne.  Now over the first six years of the Conservative administration 
potash prices averaged, guess what?  Were they really low in comparison to 
that $109 a tonne?  Were they outrageously . . . half of the price so that 
we saw two-thirds of a drop in income?  No, not at all.  Over the first six 
years of the PC (Progressive Conservative) administration potash prices 
averaged $106 per tonne.  In other words a difference of $3 per tonne. 
 
Now was there a tremendous drop in sales to explain this tremendous drop in 
revenue to the province?  Mr. Chairman, I ask the minister: was there a 
tremendous drop in sales?  No.  In the last six years of the New Democratic 
Party administration sales averaged 32 million tonnes per year.  In the 
first six years of the Conservative administration sales averaged 31 
million tonnes per year.  So the minister's explanation as to a drop in the 
price of potash during his first six years, or a drop in sales, does not 
hold true. 
 
So what's the difference?  If there was no great variance in price and no 
great variance in the amount of sales, what was the difference?  And I 
would suggest to the minister that it's very simply this, that they 
shifted, they shifted the sales quotients from the public enterprise sector 
to his friends over there in the big, vertically integrated, multinational 
fertilizer corporations to which this minister seems to have an undying 
attachment. 
 
I would suggest that the . . . in fact . . . and I think if the minister 
was honest, I think if the minister would honestly say . . . he would look 
at the percentage of sales through the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 
in the last six years of the New Democratic Party administration versus the 
percentage of sales through PCS (Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan Inc.) 
in the first six years of the minister's administration. 
 
And what do we see?  We see a slippage in the per cent sales accruing to 
the private sector.  And what did that mean?  What did that mean?  That 
meant that in terms of total potash royalties accruing to the province of 
Saskatchewan, an incredible decrease in the amount of money available, 
something to the tune of $712 million. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, a question to the minister -- because he absolutely 
refused to answer this question; he didn't even come remotely close is -- 
given your great economic theories, Mr. Minister, given this great theory 
that you have of privatizing the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, given 
your reliance totally on the private sector to provide the engine for 
economic growth, how can you explain to the people of Saskatchewan in a 
truthful manner when prices remain the same, within $3 per tonne of each 
other; when sales remain the same, within a million tonnes per year of each 



 

 

other, how can the minister explain this incredible drop in revenue from 
nine hundred and seventy-some million down to two hundred-and-some million 
-- $712 million difference?  How can the minister explain that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well once again, Mr. Chairman, the hon. member's 
logic is wanting.  You see the royalties that we receive are based on a 
formula.  Has that formula substantially changed under the Progressive 
Conservative administration?  Let's ask ourselves that.  Because that's 
independent of anything else.  It stands alone, so to speak. 
 
Yes, production and sales may vary and the price may vary, but whether 
you're getting a good deal or a bad deal is based on the formula to 
determine what economic rent we get.  And the reality is, Mr. Chairman, 
that formula, for the most part, is unchanged, and that formula was put in 
place by the NDP.  So is the hon. member saying that their formula was 
flawed?  Is that what he's saying?  One can only come to that conclusion, 
because essentially . . . I'm not saying that there hasn't been some 
changes, but essentially the formula is the same, Mr. Chairman.  And it's a 
geometric kind of formula.  It starts to pay out big after . . . when they 
start to make major money as the price goes up. 
 
So the first thing you have to ask yourself -- is this a bunch of political 
rhetoric or is it based on some facts?  And the facts are that the formula 
for determining the royalties is largely unchanged.  In fact I can make the 
point, hon. members, that not only is the formula for the most part the 
same but we actually get more out of these big corporations because we put 
these other special taxes in place like the corporate capital surcharge, 
Mr. Chairman. 
 
Then he goes on to say, no, you see the price of wheat and the price of 
corn and the price of soya beans hasn't really changed that much.  Farmer 
Bob here says, no, the price is basically the same, except we were getting 
a bunch more money when the price was the same than you are.  Well of 
course the formula hasn't changed, and he says the price is the same.  Well 
once again he's probably, over a 20-year period, very selectively using his 
numbers -- '80, '81, '82, average price, Canadian dollars per K D22O tonne, 
141.61, 156.55, 126.37.  What about '89 -- 140, 126, 137.  Did I read any 
156.55's in there, Mr. Chairman?  No. 
 
What about production -- 7.302 tonnes K D22O . . . million, Mr. Chairman; 
7.189 million tonnes K D22O.  That's '80 and '81.  In '88 . . . '89 rather, 
sixty-five hundred and nine, and six thousand and fifteen are the 
comparable numbers for '89 and '90. 
 
So once again, Mr. Chairman, if you cut away the political rhetoric, the 
opposition are trying to make some kind of point.  There's been no 
substantial change in the agreements, okay?  So either the formula was a 
good one under their government, as it is under ours with some minor 
changes.  And the reality is production, usage, and price are tied to the 
agricultural economy. 
 
Now if they understood something about farming, they could understand those 
statements, Mr. Chairman.  But you see, farmer Bob really doesn't 



 

 

understand what it is that drives a farmer's desire to buy more potash or 
more nitrogen fertilizer.  That's the problem, Mr. Chairman.  In fact I 
could make the point that with the changes to our corporate capital 
surcharge, we're actually getting more money out of these 
vertically-integrated, multinational corporations that are so bad, Mr. 
Chairman, that are so bad, Mr. Chairman. 
 
So his arguments once again are false and fatuous, ill-founded, not based 
on the right kinds . . . not based on facts, quite frankly, Mr. Chairman. 
 
(2000) 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the minister certainly knows a lot about 
political rhetoric because fertilizer Lorne over there has just given us 
precisely the incredible flaws in his own logic. 
 
Let's take, Mr. Minister, let's take it that since you've been spreading it 
deep and thick for the people of this province, let's accept for a moment 
that for all intents and purposes the formula hasn't changed.  Let's just 
take that for now.  We know that in fact it has changed and it's had 
certain impacts, but for the sake of argument we'll say that it hasn't 
changed. 
 
You still have got to tell us why it is that we are now faced with a tax 
Bill that you've put in.  We are now faced with a government which is . . . 
had an increase of $11 billion in debt in the Crown sector.  And we've also 
. . . you have got to explain to the people of this province, given that 
the prices were within $3 a tonne each other over the six-year average, and 
that the production was within a million tonnes or so over the six-year 
average, you have still got to explain to us how was it, how it is that you 
and your government has lost $712 million worth of revenue into the 
Heritage Fund of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I would suggest, Mr. Minister, that the answer that the people of 
Saskatchewan will give you and the rest of your caucus, come the next 
election, is that it is because of your privatization initiatives in which 
you've turned over the wealth of the province into the hands of those large 
multinational, vertically-integrated corporations that you talk so much 
about. 
 
I believe that everybody in this province understands that the rich have 
gotten richer in this province, the super-rich have gotten super-richer.  
Your friends in the potash corporation, leaving aside Chuck Childers and 
his three-quarters of a million dollar a year salary, let's just . . . 
because when it comes to big bucks, when it comes to the who's really won 
in the potash game, I'm quite sure that some of the potash corporations, 
when they contribute to your election fund we will see precisely the extent 
of who the winners are in that particular operation. 
 
Because you have failed, because once again you've had a nine-year record 
of putting in place your economic development strategy for Saskatchewan.  
You've put it in place nine years, right?  I mean, you can go back all you 
want and blame the NDP from 1981, beyond that.  But for all intents and . . 



 

 

. and every reasonable person in this province will say you've had an 
opportunity to develop an economic strategy of your own -- this 
open-for-business economic strategy; the partnership for progress economic 
strategy; whatever happens to be the current buzz phrase of the day 
economic strategy.  But the point is, you've had your nine years to see if 
it would work. 
 
And the facts of the matter is -- and this budget and this Bill prove in 
fact that it hasn't worked -- that each and every day, each and every hour, 
each and every minute that goes by, this province goes a little bit deeper 
in debt, a little bit deeper in debt.  Reminds me of that old song about 16 
tons and what do you get, another day older and deeper in debt.  That 
sounds to me, Mr. Speaker, that sounds like the theme song, that sounds 
like the theme song of your government. 
 
However I'm going to leave the potash . . . we're not going to agree on 
potash.  The people of Saskatchewan will not accept your non-explanation 
for losing $712 million over that six-year period. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, yes . . . Now, Mr. Chairman, once again there goes 
fertilizer Lorne.  He's talking about us doing a lousy job in negotiating.  
What I would have to ask the minister: if in fact we did a lousy job in 
negotiating prior to 1981, why haven't you changed that formula in a 
substantive manner?  Why haven't you changed that formula in a substantive 
manner to make up that . . . those lost revenues?  Are you saying that you 
haven't done it because it was a lousy formula?  Or are you saying that you 
didn't have the political courage to take on the potash corporations to get 
a fair share of Saskatchewan wealth?  You've got to answer that question, 
not me, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- No the reason that the formula hasn't been 
substantially changed is that because it is based on price and volume and 
margins, and when prices are high and the companies are doing well, then 
it's reasonable and fair that the public should do well by way of royalty 
payments.  So in that . . . for that reason they haven't had substantive 
changes. 
 
But I did say, and I would repeat that also we did put in a special 
corporate tax, the corporate capital surcharge, Mr. Chairman, because we 
did want to ensure that these big companies do pay their fair share and 
that was especially because we don't control the rules.  Those are federal 
rules as to what defines a big business, if you like.  And so by making 
that change we were able to ensure that everybody was fairly paid, Mr. 
Chairman.  At least the taxpayers got their fair rent, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order, please.  Before we continue, I would just like to 
say that the Chair has been, I think, extremely lenient this evening in 
letting the debate be relatively wide-ranging.  I've been listening very 
carefully for the last 20 or 25 minutes and I think the debate has hinged 
around the six years prior to 1982 and the six years after 1982, and I fail 
to see what that has to do with the interim supply Bill before the 
committee this evening.  So with that I would just remind the member of 
that observation and ask him to continue with his remarks and confine them 



 

 

more to the question that is before the House. 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Well thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Apropos of your 
ruling, I intend to not dwell on the past on that.  I know the minister 
certainly likes to talk about everything prior to 1981, so using the 
minister's own comments, we use a six-year average.  However, I'm not going 
to dwell on that because of the . . . because, by the way, that is not the 
major purpose of dealing with some of the issues that I do want to raise . 
. . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Chairman, it's interesting to listen 
to the minister speaking from his seat and we all enjoy the ramble.  You 
know, the minister is certainly a good story-teller, and like all good 
story-tellers never lets the truth get in the way of the point that he 
wants to make. 
 
But I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, once upon a time in Saskatchewan land 
there lived a little boy who once dreamt that he would grow up to be 
Finance minister of the province.  And having grown up to be Finance 
minister of the province, he was going to make all things good and well.  
Except when he came to grips with his notions of what constituted good and 
well, he found he was unable to, no matter whatever the best of intentions 
were, to make things happy here in Saskatchewan land.  And that seems to me 
the fairy-tale story of this particular government.  They believe in 
fairy-tales.  Unfortunately, Mr. Chairman, fairy-tales do not have to do 
much with the question of expenditures of the province. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to ask you, however, about your justification for 
asking for money to deal with the ill-fated Rafferty-Alameda project.  Now, 
Mr. Minister, you know that . . . well I guess everybody in Saskatchewan 
knows, Mr. Chairman, that the Rafferty dam project stands as a symbol of 
this government's waste and mismanagement.  You know, Nikita Khrushchev, 
who I know the Finance minister is intimately aware with, used to say that, 
never trust a politician, they're all the same; they promise to build you a 
dam even when there's no river.  And I want to say, Mr. Chairman, that in 
relation to the Rafferty-Alameda project, that particular observation on 
political life was right on. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder if you will stand here and put forward your 
rationale for asking for expenditures through government departments and 
out of the Consolidated Fund via way of Saskatchewan Water Corporation to 
the Souris Basin Development Authority.  Could you stand here and tell the 
people why is it that your government has spent a fairly large sum of money 
on the creation of a dam where in fact there is no water. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- The reality is, as much as the hon. member won't want 
to admit it, is that south-east Saskatchewan has seen several years of 
drought, Mr. Chairman, several years of drought.  My constituency is on the 
Souris River in the Souris River basin.  I have lived there since 1973, and 
for the first six or seven years I lived there, Mr. Chairman, I thought 
that part of the annual rites of spring were half the town turned out to 
sandbag all the businesses along the Souris River Valley and the Souris 
River, Mr. Chairman, because it would flood and overflow every year.  All 
the water would rush down the Souris, flood Mainprize Park and Estevan and 
Roche Percee and end up down in the U.S., of no value to anybody -- of no 



 

 

value to anybody. 
 
But Minot, one of my colleagues says.  And even Minot wanted some control 
because it would flood them out too and end up back in Manitoba and flood 
them out.  So what was required here was a little:  (a) water management; 
(b) some up-side potential for irrigation for farmers.  A big body of water 
tends to bring a little rain on occasion.  I'm not an hydrologist but that 
seems to be a fact.  And also some requirements for SaskPower, Mr. 
Chairman, for water-fowl habitat, and the list goes on and on. 
 
For all of those reasons, Mr. Chairman, we have gone ahead and built that 
much-needed water project in south-east Saskatchewan.  These people are 
against it, but let me tell you, in my riding and other ridings in 
south-east Saskatchewan they see that as a prudent move, Mr. Chairman, and 
one that should have been done several years ago. 
 
You know I just can't believe these NDP, you know.  There was some kind of 
report came out of somewhere suggesting that it was awful that this dam was 
built, and it has nothing to do with the Free Trade Agreement.  They were 
trying to muddy the water and all the rest of it, how we're giving too much 
water to the U.S.  I said to myself . . . I had to shake my head.  A bunch 
of the ranchers were sitting having coffee the same time.  They had to all 
give their heads a shake because they said where are these NDP coming from.  
We're better off with a dam that at least holds some of the water rather 
than to let it continue to rush down the valley and the river bank and the 
river like it did before. 
 
I tell you, not only do they have a speck in their glass when it comes to 
reading financial statements sometimes, Mr. Chairman, obviously their view 
of water management is quite a bit different than our Premier's and this 
government, and we stand behind our proposal. 
 
And yes, Mr. Chairman, I wish, I wish too I was standing here today and 
saying that that Rafferty dam was full.  It is not.  If we'd have had that 
75 centimetres of snow like they had up at Lloydminster, and a quick melt, 
she would have been full, Mr. Chairman, and it will be full.  It is 
cyclical, I have no doubt.  The weather . . . like I told you the first 
five or six or seven years I was in Weyburn, it flooded every year.  And, 
Mr. Chairman, it will be full. 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- But, Mr. Chairman, the minister speaks about sandbagging and 
I want to tell you this, that given his answer, what he's trying to do is 
sandbag the people of Saskatchewan.  He's sandbagging every small business 
in this province through his PST (provincial sales tax).  Now we're getting 
a bunch of more fertilizer.  I'm sure that those sandbags are filled up 
with fertilizer, given his intimate knowledge of that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I have here a little . . . I've got here a news story 
which deals with this particular interest.  It says: dam project costs 
increase.  Dam project costs increase. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I wonder if you'd tell us how much money that interim 
supply is being expropriated to cover the increased costs in the Rafferty 



 

 

dam project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Page 96, Mr. Chairman.  In terms of appropriation for 
the Water Corporation, we'll be providing two-twelfths, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- I wonder, Mr. Minister, will you give me that particular 
number if you have it with you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- 1.128967 million. 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Now, Mr. Minister, you're saying that happens to be the 
one-sixth of the expropriation; is that what you're saying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- I'm sorry, that's not one-sixth of the expropriation.  
That's one-sixth or two-twelfths of the appropriation, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Mr. Chairman, the minister can laugh.  The minister can laugh 
when it comes to this problem dealing with appropriation or expropriation.  
But I want to tell the minister that to the couple of farmers in that 
particular area we see expropriation, Mr. Minister.  That's what they're 
talking about.  They're not talking about appropriation.  They're talking 
about expropriation. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder if you would . . . Oh now the member from Regina 
South, who's definitely in danger of losing his seat in the next election 
-- here he goes piping up again.  Mr. Minister, will you answer the 
question?  What I asked you was, how much of the appropriation to the Water 
Corporation is going to cover the increased cost of the Rafferty-Alameda 
project? 
 
And I wonder, would you happen to have the particular number there of what 
precisely the increased cost is? 
 
(2015) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- The details of that one-sixth, Mr. Chairman, I'd have 
to recommend you put those questions to the minister responsible in his 
detailed examination of his estimates. 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Well again, Mr. Minister, I can appreciate that.  But if 
you've got the number, why go through the problem of asking somebody else, 
you know; if it's a simple answer just give it to us.. Well, Mr. Minister, 
you obviously don't intend to answer the question. 
 
Mr. Minister, I've seen that a new federal panel has been appointed for the 
Rafferty-Alameda project.  But at the same time while this panel is 
supposedly going about its work, your government has increased expenditures 
on the project, in fact is going ahead with the Alameda portion of that 
project. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, could you tell us why it is that your government is 
spending money on this project when in fact the review panel may in fact 
recommend some changes, maybe indeed some halt to land expropriation such 



 

 

as the expropriation that your government undertook of the farmers in the 
Alameda area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, on a point of order.  As I said 
earlier, I think I've been prepared to, as has historically been the case, 
be part of that latitude that comes with answering questions as it relates 
to the resolution and the Bill.  But this kind of detail goes far beyond 
the scope of interim supply, and for that reason I would recommend that:  
(a) that it be asked to the minister in charge; and (b) that it be ruled 
out of order in terms of the examination for this resolution of interim 
supply. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- I've heard these arguments several times today.  I find 
the point of order well taken.  The Chair has ruled on this issue several 
times this afternoon and I would ask the hon. members to confine their 
questions to the interim supply Bill and to save the specific questions 
until we get into estimates. 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Well thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I was asking the 
minister precisely about those expropriations out of the Bill that the 
minister . . . and I use the word again expropriation in a way in which the 
minister will understand given his government's riding roughshod over the 
farmers down in Alameda who oppose to being expropriate.  The question I 
asked was: Mr. Minister, are you sure that it's the best expenditures of 
money to go ahead with a project while that project is being reviewed by 
the federal appointed panel on the environment, and are you certain that 
you need this amount of money out of the appropriations Bill in order to 
pay for that project when in fact that project may be altered? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, I didn't get into the details of the 
appropriation.  I suggest to the hon. member, other than at Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation, that he put those detailed questions to the minister 
responsible. 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Now, Mr. Chairman, it's not a detailed question at all.  It's 
asking him to defend his government's policy in regards to this particular 
project.  This government is spending money on a project that many people 
think is a project less than worthwhile, that's a boondoggle -- it's 
politically motivated --that's got nothing to do with the economic 
well-being of the province, that's got nothing to do with water management. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, let me quote, let me quote the . . . somebody who is 
probably less than sympathetic to our position on this, who in fact finds 
himself on the same side of the argument.  I want to quote Bob Lawrence, 
the senior vice-president of engineering at Saskatchewan Power.  And what 
does Mr. Lawrence have to say?  Well, Mr. Chairman, he says: SaskPower may 
have to use well water to cool the Shand generating station if there is no 
spring run-off in the Souris River basin next year, says a SaskPower 
official.  Bob Lawrence, senior vice-president of engineering said the 
coal-fired generating station has enough water on its site near Estevan to 
conduct tests this year, but if there's no run-off next year, the plant may 
have to tap local aquifers or underground lakes if it is to start up as 
scheduled in 1992, Lawrence said. 



 

 

 
It goes on to say: the lack of significant run-off this spring has meant 
that little or no water has accumulated in the Rafferty Dam reservoir on 
the Souris River, the planned source of about 70 per cent of the cooling 
water required for Shand. 
 
Now that seems to me, Mr. Chairman, a very legitimate question to ask in 
terms of the government's policy.  Here you have a senior official at 
Saskatchewan Power saying there may not be any water in this dam.  There's 
no water now.  We know there's no water now, we know the government intends 
to spend money out of this appropriations Bill for that particular project. 
 
What I'm asking the minister is, how, Mr. Minister, can you plead fiscal 
responsibility, financial prudence, an overall great fiscal plan in order 
to reduce the deficit in this province if you go ahead and continually 
throw water into a dry mud hole?  How do you explain that in terms of your 
overall government strategy of asking for . . . or government's policy of 
asking for money from this Assembly, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, I can only repeat that this 
appropriation under this resolution on this Bill provides for $1.128 
million for Sask Water Corporation, for various related water management 
projects. 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Mr. Chairman, what I'm asking the minister is: Mr. Minister, 
how do you justify the request, given in fact what people like Bob 
Lawrence, senior vice-president of engineering at SaskPower have to say 
about this project? 
 
Do you still consider this a prudent expenditure of the taxpayers' money? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- What I said, Mr. Chairman, is that I wouldn't and 
don't, I wouldn't and won't get into the details.  I don't have the 
details.  Those questions are best put to the minister responsible, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, this has got to be absolutely shocking 
and disgusting.  Here you have the Minister of Finance standing up in this 
Assembly saying he doesn't know . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order, order please.  The Chair has already ruled on the 
line of questioning the member is putting forth with regard to a specific 
project.  The Chair has asked the member to confine his questions to the 
question before the committee, which is that of interim supply.  The 
minister has answered the same question to the hon. member on more than one 
occasion and has directed him where the question should be deferred to. 
 
And with that I would rule again, and ask the member to confine his 
questions to the committee . . . or to the question before the committee, 
that being the one of interim supply. 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  As I was referring to this 
question of interim supply. This interim supply grants a certain sum of 



 

 

money to the Saskatchewan Water Corporation which is going to be expended 
on this Rafferty-Alameda project. 
 
The question I asked the minister was: does he consider it, given the light 
of changing conditions, does he consider it a prudent investment of the 
taxpayers' money from money voted by this interim supply to that project, 
given . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order, order please.  The member is asking the same 
question again.  The minister has indicated that we are ruling on the 
amount of moneys that are being appropriated to the different corporations 
and departments, not where the specifics of those dollars happen to lie. 
 
With that I would again rule, and ask the member to cease and desist of the 
same question. 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I must say . . . first of all I would 
like it if you'd provide us with a written copy of your ruling so that we 
could pursue . . . because we could pursue it at a later date.  But I want 
to . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order.  If the member would like written correspondence of 
the ruling, I would invite him to read Hansard tomorrow from this 
afternoon's proceedings, at which time it was ruled on.  Again I've 
mentioned this several times this evening, and I hope we won't have to 
mention it again. 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Well let's put it this way, Mr. Chairman; perhaps I can put 
it in terms of a different slant on why I'm asking this particular 
question.  We may want to delete this portion from the appropriations Bill.  
We may want to move an amendment which would not grant to the minister the 
sums of that particular sum granted to Saskatchewan Water Corporation -- 
right? 
 
There is a purpose behind this questioning, and the question . . . and that 
is quite in order from my understanding from your previous ruling that to 
ask questions concerning the granting or decreasing of sums of money 
granted to the minister in terms of interim supply . . . how else, how 
else, Mr. Chairman, is this House to find out whether or not the 
expenditures of this amount of money on a dust bin, on a dry hole, on the 
kind of dry dreams in the dust . . . how are we to know that, if in fact 
the minister refuses to answer the question of whether or not he believes 
and justifies his belief that this is a proper expenditure of taxpayers' 
money. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- I think, Mr. Chairman, to help expedite the 
committee's examination here, as I've said, any details of the Sask Water 
Corporation -- I would say the budgetary appropriation -- those details 
they can take up with the minister responsible. 
 
As it relates specifically to Rafferty-Alameda, even though it's outside 
the scope probably of this committee, I would refer the hon. member to page 
111 of the Estimates because I think the bee he's got in his bonnet is 



 

 

probably . . . and the non-budgetary item or the statutory item that he is 
looking for, I think, is on that page and hence there is no appropriation 
here for that, and hence we're beyond the scope of the committee because 
we're looking for appropriations relative to the budget, not the 
non-budgetary items. 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Well in regards to that particular point, Mr. Chairman, the 
minister just gave us an answer a few minutes ago where he said, whoops, 
one-sixth and he quoted a number of exactly how much was going to be 
appropriated out of this Appropriation Bill.  Now he seems to be saying 
that no, there will be no money granted in terms of the Appropriation Bill.  
Well one-sixth of the appropriation to Saskatchewan Water Corporation out 
of the Consolidated Fund -- and I'm sure the minister will agree that that 
is a portion of The Appropriation Bill which is presently before us . . . 
or did the minister in fact misspeak himself prior to this, and is he now 
saying to the legislature that no money will be forthcoming to Sask Water 
Corporation from The Appropriation Bill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- What I'm saying is the hon. member . . . This is 
another example, I think, where the NDP clearly don't understand the facts 
they have before them in the book entitled the Estimates.  What I'm saying 
here is there is a budgetary and a non-budgetary, a budgetary and a 
statutory, and all we're here in this committee is asking for interim 
supply for the budgetary appropriation, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, that may very well be.  One certainly 
would not want to take the minister's word about it given the past 
performance.  But I want to ask the minister a couple of more questions 
regarding his supposed economic development strategy for this province and 
it's impact on the fiscal ability of the province to maintain itself. 
 
(2030) 
 
Mr. Minister, a portion of the expenditures that you wish this legislature 
to approve will have been derived -- according to your budget and according 
to other documents that are public -- will be derived from dividends from 
the Crown corporations.  And, Mr. Minister, I noticed with some interest 
the other day a newspaper headline that says: SaskPower president agrees 
with Lyons.  That was the title of the newspaper article.  Now, Mr. 
Chairman, I say to the minister, I don't know what kind of dirty deal that 
the president was trying to do to me, but after five years of enmity to 
come up with a statement like that that he agrees with me certainly doesn't 
do any good to my political reputation. 
 
But having said that, Mr. Minister, having said that, I want to ask you in 
all seriousness . . . The president of SaskPower, who certainly cannot be 
accused of being a New Democratic Party supporter, although some have 
suggested . . . but my influence on him has been somewhat undue and he's 
beginning to see the light.  But I personally don't take that.  I don't 
accept that. 
 
But I want to ask you that, Mr. Minister, in terms of his comments . . . 
and the substance of his comments were this:  is that the government is now 



 

 

in a process of stripping dividends from the Crown's corporation, in 
particularly SaskPower, in order to pay off its financial obligations that 
it's incurred -- in other words, the debt that its built up over the last 
nine years of waste and mismanagement. 
 
But that the president of SaskPower in fact is raising a cry of alarm as to 
the extent of the stripping of the Crown corporations . . . I wonder, Mr. 
Minister, if you would justify this policy of in fact digging in and eating 
in to the equity of the Crown corporations in order to pay off your own 
record of waste and mismanagement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, obviously I disagree with the member's 
observations about our Crown Investments Corporation dividend policy.  I 
too read the comments of Mr. Hill, and I don't think he used the words 
"stripping" or suggested for a moment that we  
 Dhad engaged in stripping.  Why he and others might . . . why they don't 
use those words, other than the opposition who is given to flights of 
fantasy and overblown rhetoric, Mr. Chairman, and misstatement of facts, is 
the policy as relates to dividends has been . . . And in fact, I make a 
general comment whether it's SaskPower or any others.  It's varied from 
corporation to corporation.  In some instances they've paid zero by way of 
dividend, in some instances it's been up to 50 per cent, and in some 
instances it's been over 50 per cent. 
 
Now obviously if you're paying zero to 50, or 50 to even to 100 on 
occasional years, that would hardly be classed as a general policy of 
stripping or even a specific policy of stripping.  So clearly, that is not 
the case, Mr. Chairman. 
 
I can tell the hon. members that there's been sufficient cash flow, even 
after all the dividends are accounted for for the corporations to conduct 
their business and to make the dividend payments.  And to further back up 
the case relative to SaskPower, perhaps the hon. member should ask the 
president of SaskPower if indeed . . . Is it true that with this awful 
dividend policy that we've been employing, as it relates to SaskPower, how 
is it then that SaskPower has the best debt/equity ratio of any electrical 
utility in the country? 
 
Now that hardly sounds like stripping, Mr. Chairman.  It sounds like very 
prudent management of SaskPower by the SaskPower employees, by SaskPower 
management, by the SaskPower board, and by the government of this province 
-- the best debt/equity ratio of any electrical utility in the land, Mr. 
Chairman.  Now that sounds like good management of SaskPower to me. 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Mr. Chairman, let me say this to the ministers, that I am 
certainly looking forward to meeting up with the president of Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation in the Crowns Corporation Committee, whenever you guys 
get around to holding it.  And we'll be asking a few questions as precisely 
how that debt/equity ratio was achieved and if in fact it represents a true 
picture, if in fact it represents a true picture of the financial position 
of Saskatchewan Power Corporation or whether or not there were certain 
devices in terms of artificial pricing employed in developing that 
particular financial picture. 



 

 

 
But be that as it may, be that as it may, Mr. Minister, you can stand here 
and say that nobody's really worried about your government's policy of 
dividend stripping in the Crown corporation sector. But how is it that it's 
not just Mr. Hill who has publicly raised the alarm, publicly said, look 
this can't go on; we can't take any more than 50 per cent of retained 
earnings out -- and that's what Mr. Hill said.  So not just Mr. Hill said 
that but in fact the former president of Saskatchewan Telecommunications 
Corporation resigned his position precisely because you guys got involved 
in robbing SaskTel. 
 
Now how can you . . . Will the minister stand on his feet, will you stand 
on your feet and deny that that's the case?  Will you stand up here and 
tell the legislature that that had absolutely nothing to do with his 
departure from SaskTel?  I don't think you will because you know it and I 
know it and everybody in this province knows it, everybody that works at 
SaskTel knows it, that he was opposed to your policy of robbing SaskTel in 
order to come up with basically what was a phoney balance sheet of the 
overall financial position of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, how can you stand here and say that people aren't 
concerned about you stripping the Crown corporations?  And in fact the 
exact is opposite.  And my question to you is, Mr. Minister, after all the 
equity is gone, after you've stripped it out, what next would you use 
should you win the next election, should the people of this province be 
unfortunate enough to be burdened with a Progressive Conservative 
administration?  Where do you go after you've robbed the till, after you 
strip the cupboards, after you've taken the cupboards apart, after you sold 
off the doors and pawned the hinges?.  What's next, Mr. Minister?  Where do 
you think you're going to get some more money? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- I believe that goes far beyond the scope of this 
committee's examination of interim supply.  I'll just repeat on the 
dividends: the policy has been anywhere from zero to in excess of 50 per 
cent by way of dividend, not a policy of stripping at all.  The last three 
years have been 275, 310, and this year were estimating 250 by way of 
dividend. 
 
And just to show you what a generous person I am relative to answering the 
questions in the committee here, Mr. Chairman, the reality is we're not 
appropriating revenues.  But I think it's legitimate to have a discussion 
of revenues because that's a revenue item not an expenditure item, and we 
won't be appropriating it.  But I understand with the latitude that we've 
normally allowed in this debate it would be reasonable to respond.  I have 
responded.  And now I think, Mr. Chairman, we move on to passing this 
resolution. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, in regard to . . . 
I guess maybe getting back on to the agenda here and asking some questions 
regarding the appropriation and the funding here in the province of 
Saskatchewan, I was wondering if the Finance minister could answer this to 
me, the amount of funds that we're asking . . . you're asking under your 
Appropriation Bill here in the legislature: has this amount of funding got 



 

 

anything to do with the GRIP and NISA program?  Will there be any funds 
going in towards that program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, I think this question had been raised 
earlier.  But what's asked for in interim supply here is two-twelfths, and 
that includes two-twelfths of the vote for GRIP (gross revenue insurance 
plan) and NISA (net income stabilization account), Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- With the . . . I believe it's somewhat premature, probably 
at this point in time but, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I'd like to know 
what might happen to your particular assessments and projections for either 
future appropriations, or what would happen to the . . . I guess if you 
will, the forecasts of finance, say the . . . for instance, that the PST 
was, for instance, held up. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well the changes relative to taxes with full 
harmonization come January 1, and with the base broadening effect of April 
1 and the corporate changes, the tax credits for families, etc. -- if I 
look at all those tax changes we expect this year additional revenues in 
the order of $125 million. 
 
If we don't get that $125 million then the deficit will just rise by that 
much because it's that $125 million that will pay the premiums for GRIP and 
NISA.  Had we not found that money we would just have the deficit be that 
much higher. Interest payments down the road would be just that much 
higher. 
 
And so if we're going to pay as we go, control the debt and the deficit, 
yes we need the long-term safety nets but we also need to pay for them.  
And that's how we're paying for them, Mr. Chairman.  I would hate to see 
them put in jeopardy because of our failure to raise the needed revenue to 
pay our share of the premiums for those programs. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- Regarding the GRIP and NISA, I guess probably what I should 
ask, I think, first of all is, do you have any indicators as of now the 
participation of GRIP and NISA across the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- I don't have that kind of detail.  You're probably 
best to put it to the minister or associate minister in the examination of 
estimates.  And I'm going based on what I saw in the newspaper.  I think it 
was approaching in GRIP something in the order of over 30,000 farmers. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- Without, say 100 per cent sign up of GRIP and NISA here in 
the province . . . Well I guess probably what I should do is ask you: when 
you established the program and we signed into the program, what percentage 
basis did we go on?  Did we go on full participation?  Did we go on 90 per 
cent participation?  Eighty per cent participation?  What did you budget 
for? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, that kind of detail I'd have to refer 
once again to the minister in charge.  But I think probably we're looking 
at, with the numbers here in the budget, a fairly substantial pay out.  By 
that I mean something in the order of 70 to 75 per cent. 



 

 

 
Mr. Hopfner: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, in light of the fact of what 
happened with the Ontario budget -- the Ontario NDP budget last week -- the 
reports that we've heard publicly and through the news media had it that 
interest rates in western Canada, if not for that deficit, might have or 
would have dropped another half a percentage point then what it had 
dropped.  What is that half a percentage point mean to the Saskatchewan 
taxpayers in regards to the forecast in the amount of dollars borrowed by 
the province -- interest? 
 
(2045) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- The whole question of the impact of the federal 
budget on our interest rate projections and our interest on the public debt 
goes beyond that, and I'll address it in a second, but it impacts on . . . 
even in areas over and above that, albeit those are the major areas.  It 
also obviously would . . . interest rates, higher interest rates . . . and 
otherwise might have been the case would impact on the Agricultural Credit 
Corporation of Saskatchewan's debt; other Crown corporations' debt; SEDCO 
(Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation); the home program at 6 per 
cent; obviously there's wide spread implications over and above just the 
debt that we have, Mr. Chairman. 
 
We are currently, for at the moment at least, not heavy into the short end 
of the market, so the immediate impact is less than it might normally be.  
In fact, averaged over an entire year, 1 per cent at this very moment might 
mean an additional $2 million -- substantial enough. 
 
But clearly we're concerned about the upward pressure on interest rates 
that this massive deficit in Ontario will have -- not only this year, but 
their projections for the next three years.  The out years would see that 
deficit, their annual accumulated deficits in fact, nearly double, so this 
isn't a one-time blip on the screen. 
 
But they're projecting very, very large deficits for three or fours years 
out, and it's that kind of massive projection, that kind of massive 
borrowing that are going to put upward pressures on interest rates, and 
that's a concern to all of us, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- Regarding that massive deficit in Ontario, and we all know, 
I guess probably we've all had to live by that over . . . from province to 
province over many, many years now, I guess probably as long as Canada was 
a country.  I guess probably what I'm saying is that Ontario is fairly well 
the money Mecca of Canada, and I guess probably the largest expenditure of 
any . . . has the largest expenditure of any province in Canada. 
 
I am wondering . . . I guess probably as far as provinces are concerned, 
with Ontario running a large deficit. . . I'm not pretending to really have 
a full understanding of what . . . is there . . . I guess probably my 
question would be: is there a significant competition between provinces 
when it becomes a point in time for the provinces to, like we have had to 
do in the past, borrow dollars on the . . . in the Canadian market as well 
as abroad?  Does this have a significant impact on what we can do as 



 

 

Saskatchewan itself? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well the other impact could well be, as it relates to 
Saskatchewan, on our expenditure side, interest on the public debt -- yes, 
Ontario has outlined a very, very large borrowing program and that can 
effectively crowd out others in the market.  We could be one of those other 
provinces, could be one of those, and other businesses could be one of 
those, in that there's only perhaps potential for so many people to come to 
market with their bonds.  When you've got one very large borrower, it 
potentially could crowd out others or make the windows far and few between 
when we can go to market.  We might not be able to go to market precisely 
when we would like; it would be more dictated by when Ontario is or isn't 
in the market.  So you've rightly identified another very legitimate 
concern and one that it could impact on our bottom line as it relates to 
the Ontario budget. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- I guess probably what I'd like to raise with you now is 
probably . . . I'll use an example.  In the industrial side of things, 
regarding the potash . . . or the uranium mine in, say, Ontario, were there 
any forecasts, previous forecasts, or forecasts that you'd be looking at 
now into the future, being that that the Elliot Lake mine had closed down 
in Ontario?  And could you give me any kind of an idea what kind of an 
impact that may have for the industry here in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well we didn't base our forecasts on price and 
tonnage relative to uranium on the Denison mine closing.  I think it's fair 
to say it could have some up-side potential.  I hear one of the major 
uranium miners in the province saying that this is something that they were 
clearly interested in.  I can't tell you what the effect will be except 
that our view would be that it would be more up-side.  Clearly it would be 
more up-side as opposed to down-side. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Minister, when I look at your budget document on the 
issue of choices, which is subtitled ". . . Preserving the Saskatchewan Way 
of Life," and when I look at the left-hand corner of page 43, I see that 
the subtitle says, "Reading -- The Key to Learning."  The section that it 
refers to, Mr. Minister, is your province-wide campaign that was launched 
in 1988 to encourage children to read.  And I recall -- you were the 
minister of Education at the time -- and I recall that you had an animated 
dragon called Readmoreforus. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, I want you to tell the people of this province why it 
is that you as the Finance minister, being a former minister of Education, 
the minister responsible for this major campaign to encourage young 
children to read, the minister that launched Readmoreforus the animated 
dragon which was to encourage young people to read and enhance their 
imagination -- why is it, Mr. Minister, that you would have a tax on 
reading? 
 
And I should remind you, Mr. Minister, that we are the only province in 
Canada that not only has the goods and services tax on reading but also has 
the provincial sales tax on reading. 
 



 

 

Why is it, Minister, given your past history and the encouragement that you 
have given children to read, why is it that you would now, as the Minister 
of Finance, introduce a tax on reading? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, that's precisely why in the 
budget we outlined an offsetting mechanism to make sure that reading and 
literacy and books as it relates to our universities, their libraries, our 
school boards, and textbooks and libraries that they have to provide . . . 
so that they wouldn't find their budgets decreased by seven per cent, we 
increased the operating grants to those areas by three and a half per cent, 
and as well provide an additional seven per cent by way of a special fund 
so that in fact, the good news relative to reading, and the importance of 
reading and literacy could continue -- an initiative as you rightly point 
out at the start, in a major way, and in a new and expanded way under this 
administration, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Minister, having spoken to officials in your 
department, I'm advised that this tax on reading will collect about $7.4 
million in revenue.  The rebate that you're giving schools and libraries is 
1.5 million.  Well that's a net revenue to the treasury of some $5.9 
million. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I would remind you that reading doesn't stop at the 
school yard or at the public library.  If, as you have said over and over 
again, we are now into the information age, that learning is a lifelong 
process, Minister, that we should be keeping updated in terms of the 
information age and the technological age, why is it, Minister, that you 
are taxing reading in this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, we chose to make sure that those 
important areas of school libraries, school textbooks, universities, their 
libraries were offset.  If the hon. member gets into the larger question 
about a broad based exemption which would include all kinds of reading 
materials, then the issue changes somewhat. 
 
She might make a case for all reading materials.  I think it was not until 
'75 in fact in this province, even four or five years under that 
administration, where there wasn't the full exemption for reading 
materials.  So under the NDP, we did have something less than full 
exemption under reading materials. 
 
But if you're going to get into exempting certain areas, then that becomes 
a debate.  You set the precedent.  Some might argue reading materials.  
Some might argue baby clothes.  Some might argue home heating fuel.  And 
after a while, if you open the floodgates so to speak, you negate one of 
the major arguments for going into harmonization in the first place, and 
that is to have the basis the same provincially and federally, so it is 
simpler and you can have as low a rate as possible by having as broad a 
base as possible, Mr. Chairman. 
 
No question the area of reading is a difficult one because of how we all 
feel in its symbolic and real importance.  But I think we've handled it in 
a very fair and reasonable way, and I think school boards and universities 



 

 

and others agree with this route, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Minister, somehow your idea that reading is only 
limited to libraries and school boards smacks of a narrow-minded thinking 
on this issue, Mr. Minister. 
 
Why is it, Mr. Minister, that the only other province that has 
harmonization, that being the province of Quebec, has somehow managed to 
exempt reading?  Now you will say that Quebec is collecting their own 
taxes.  But Quebec is, Mr. Minister, mindful of its publishing industry, 
and we have a small, struggling publishing industry in this province.  In 
fact two of those publishing companies are in the constituency that I 
represent. 
 
Minister, we have been able to encourage writers in this province.  We have 
had writers that have been nominated for the Governor General award.  
They've won that award, Mr. Minister.  Saskatchewan writers are gaining not 
only national attention but international prominence.  And I would say to 
you, Mr. Minister, they've been able to get that prominence because we have 
been able, in this province, to develop our own publishing industry. 
 
Now your tax on reading, Mr. Minister, will hurt the publishing industry in 
Saskatchewan and your tax on reading, Mr. Minister, will hurt the average 
consumer who is interested in buying books.  And so I want to say to you, 
Mr. Minister, that with all due respect, I think that your government has 
engaged in a rather narrow-minded endeavour in the last couple of months 
when they've decided to tax reading, rebate schools and libraries; but I 
would remind you, minister, that reading does not end at the school or the 
library. 
 
Citizens across this province, since the NDP in the 1970s, talked about 
learning as a lifelong process through the community college system . . . 
has been important.  Education as a lifelong learning process has been 
important to the people of this province.  Reading is important to the 
people of this province.  There are people, Mr. Minister, who came out of 
the '30s with a grade three and four education but they could read, 
Minister, and they had lots of books. 
 
And I would say to you that you have not been able to rationalize 
whatsoever your attempt to tax reading, yet you say it will collect $5.9 
million.  Well I would say to you, Mr. Minister, that's a pretty measly sum 
given that you're taxing all reading materials in this province.  And once 
again, Mr. Minister, I want you to explain to this House and to the people 
of this province why it is that you have decided to tax reading in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- The question just a moment ago about why you would 
have as broad a base as possible, and not try and set precedents . . . and 
if you have as broad a base as possible, then what follows in that is that 
you can have as low a rate as possible given what revenues you may or may 
not want to raise. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Minister, are you worried that your tax is going to 



 

 

undermine the already fragile publishing industry in Saskatchewan? 
 
(2100) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- No, in fact I think the publishing business will be 
like many other businesses.  They will be in a more competitive position 
compared to say, Alberta, than they are now because of the fact that they 
can get the tax back on all of their inputs whereas today they do not.  And 
so that puts them on an uneven footing, if you like, or not a level playing 
field, say compared to Alberta.  So they'll be on an even footing there; 
point number one.  Point number two, they'll be on a more competitive basis 
than Manitoba or other natives . . . our other neighbours rather. 
 
Now you see when I hear a question like that, and I heard one from the 
opposition the other day -- the education critic that sits behind him from 
P.A. -- what it tells me, Mr. Chairman, is that the NDP don't understand 
the fundamental nature of this tax reform.  They don't understand how the 
business input tax credit works. 
 
I've sent them across the documents.  The member from Prince Albert, his 
question of the day clearly indicated that he doesn't understand how it 
works, this member's question clearly indicates.  I'll make my officials 
available for you to go through and have a technical briefing if you so 
wish.  Either that -- either that -- or we've got a bigger literacy problem 
than I thought we had in this province. 
 
I've sent the documents over time and time again.  Please read them and you 
will see how it helps businesses lower their operating costs.  If you have 
lower operating costs you are more competitive; key to being in business, 
Mr. Chairman. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Minister, you know I have to continue to remind you 
that your patronizing behaviour is not becoming to the Minister of Finance.  
Quite frankly, Mr. Minister, I am quite tired of the kind of patronizing 
dribble I hear emanating from your mouth. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Now I have sat down with the publishers in the 
constituency I represent and they're not buying one word that's coming out 
of your mouth.  They're saying, Minister, that your provincial goods and 
services tax is going to hurt their business.  That's what they're saying. 
 
Now, Minister, if it's good enough for Quebec, if the government of Quebec 
realizes the vitality of their publishing industry and the vitality of 
their gifted writers, Minister, why can't you recognize that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- There's no question that some sectors, from a 
consumer standpoint, that haven't been collecting tax before may face 
potentially some consumer resistance.  I think booksellers, for example, 
may well be the publishers who sell . . . but I think as well if you ask 
some of those booksellers, for example, in January when the GST (goods and 
services tax) came on, what happened to their sales, I don't think you 



 

 

always hear, at least I haven't, that they went down. 
 
And part of the reason economists tell is, why that may not be the case 
when you might think it would be is because of a fact that economists call 
substitution.  And what the substitution phenomena is, Mr. Chairman, is in 
an economy such as we're in now, it may well be that individuals won't 
spring for the big durable good item -- by that I mean a new washer, a new 
dryer, a new car -- but what they do do is substitute the money they might 
have spent, or some of the money they might have spent on those kinds of 
very large ticket items, on things like books and reading material, even, 
quite frankly, snack foods and fast foods and those kinds of things.  And 
that's why sometimes events in the economy relative to consumption are 
quite different than what the hon. members might predict. 
 
And I can tell you, I've sat at a meeting with a bookseller who, when asked 
point blank, when the GST came in in January 1, what happened to your 
January sales -- did they go up or down? -- when the comment was made by 
this particular bookseller that in fact they went up, not down, relative to 
last year's January or whatever her . . . the measurement was of that 
particular bookseller, Mr. Chairman.  So I think there are a number of 
factors that you have to look at here. 
 
 DHaving said that, there's no question that there are some of those 
sectors that face . . . that haven't collected taxes before.  The food and 
beverage industry I've talked about in this legislature before.  I'm not 
trying to suggest that there isn't potentially some difficulty as they go 
through the transition here and collect the tax, not unlike virtually every 
other province does with the exception of Alberta and B.C. I guess, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Minister, are you telling me that booksellers' volumes 
and revenues have stayed constant in 1991 year to date versus year to date 
1990?  Is that what you're telling me? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- No I'm not, because I don't have that kind of 
information.  I can tell you categorically that in one of the meetings I 
had where booksellers were present, one of the booksellers made the point 
in response to a question -- not put by myself, but by somebody else -- 
that indeed . . . because we were talking about impact, that in January 
after the GST came in, you know, was the impact for sales up or down, and 
the impact . . . The sales had gone up.  And I just was relating that to 
you as anecdotal evidence to support maybe what some economists would 
describe as a substitution phenomenon. 
 
Now I don't know whether that's a general situation, but that was the 
answer that we received when the question was put to that particular 
bookseller, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I think, coming from a scientific 
background, you know that you can't use one example and draw far-ranging 
conclusions, Minister. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- I didn't try to draw far-ranging conclusions. 



 

 

 
Ms. Atkinson: -- No, that's what you've just tried to do.  You have tried 
to use one example to draw some conclusions. 
 
I'm also interested in your theory that . . . your theory of money burning 
a hole in one's pocket, and substitution theory. That's an interesting new 
one too.  The restaurateurs will tell you there's been no substitution, and 
the booksellers and publishers in the constituency that I represent will 
tell you the same thing. 
 
Mr. Minister, I happened to be in a book store on the weekend in the 
constituency I represent.  Now this is a book store that sells used books.  
And they will tell you that their volume is down this year, and their sales 
are down this year, and they haven't even begun to pay the provincial goods 
and services tax until January 1992.  But that, Minister, is what the 
federal goods and services tax has done to that business. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- What kind of a store were you in? 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- It's a used-book store. 
 
Now, Minister, you know, Mr. Mulroney last October told Canadians that he 
thought it might be useful for the federal government to remove the federal 
goods and services tax on reading materials.  Mr. Jelinek has made the same 
kind of sentiments known to the public.  Obviously the federal Tories have 
not moved. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, the Quebec Liberals have been able to exempt books and 
reading materials in the province of Quebec.  And they have been able to do 
that, Mr. Minister, because they realize how important the publishing 
industry is to Quebec and they realize how important Quebec writers are. 
 
And I would say to you, Mr. Minister, that we have begun the process of 
developing a publishing industry in Saskatchewan.  We have, Mr. Minister, 
some of the finest writers in this country living right here in 
Saskatchewan.  We've been able to develop those writers and publishers 
because of government support, Minister, through lotteries and through the 
Arts Board which your government has cut back on. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, we have used public moneys to develop the cultural 
industry in Saskatchewan in publishing and writing.  Why is it, Minister, 
that you are putting a tax on reading at a time when this economy of 
publishing and writing can't afford it, Minister?  And really, Mr. 
Minister, a tax on reading is fundamentally wrong. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, once again we have an example here 
where the hon. member either hasn't done her homework, or she's done her 
homework -- and I'm not saying she's trying to deliberately mislead the 
House -- but maybe it's just a case of sloppy homework. 
 
The reality is if she was in a used-book store and she tries to make the 
case that somehow, somehow the E&H (education and health) tax that's now on 
used books is somehow a bad thing, well the reality is, Mr. Chairman, there 



 

 

is no tax on used books; January 1, '92 that will come into effect. 
 
Now I don't know.  Maybe this member, maybe there's another member who had 
a speck of dirt on her glass.  Maybe she read the thing wrong and got the 
decimal . . . we've had so many . . . I think the best thing for the NDP 
when they make misrepresentations of facts here, it would save all the 
committee's time if we just numbered the excuses. 
 
And they could say, whoops, that was a number 3.  Number 1 excuse for 
misrepresentation of the facts could be, I had a speck of dirt on my 
glasses and I got a number in the wrong place.  Number 2 could be, well I 
didn't know; I didn't mean to do it.  You know, we could give them numbers 
and it would speed up the examination here in the committee, Mr. Chairman, 
because we get a constant tirade here of poor research, either that or 
deliberate misrepresentation, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order please.  Before the member from Saskatoon Nutana 
continues, I'm having difficulty understanding why it is when a question is 
asked and the minister goes to respond, there's more questions asked.  And 
when the question is being asked, the minister is responding to questions 
that have not been asked.  So I'm wondering if we could kind of get it 
together here a little bit.  Allow time to ask the question.  Give the 
member the time to ask the question, and then give the minister the time to 
answer. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Minister, I want you to listen carefully, and tomorrow 
I want you to read Hansard because what you will learn from Hansard, 
Minister.  And I will repeat for you the scenario that I encountered on the 
weekend. 
 
I said that I went to a used-book store on the weekend.  This used-book 
store happens to be located in the constituency that I represent.  The 
people that own the bookstore, the proprietors of the bookstore, told me 
that when the federal goods and services tax came on stream on January 1991 
that their sales and volume of sales are down.  They are very fearful about 
what is going to happen to them on January 1, 1992 when the harmonization 
of the provincial sales tax with the federal goods and services tax occurs.  
Because in January 1, 1992, minister, we will now have a tax on used books.  
Now that's what I said. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, what I want you to do is to promise me that you will 
read Hansard tomorrow.  And when you read Hansard tomorrow, Minister, that 
you will stand up in this House and apologize to me for your patronizing 
behaviour. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, if I am in error, in fact I will 
even apologize in advance if I was in error. 
 
Now I think I could be forgiven for not understanding the NDP's position on 
harmonization.  Is it any wonder why one of us here in this side of the 
legislature or anybody out there in taxpayers' land, might be a little 



 

 

confused over what the NDP's position is on taxation?  For example, the 
Leader of the Opposition and his critic said, as recently as a few months 
ago and including as long ago as nearly two years, that if the GST becomes 
a reality, we should have one tax; we should harmonize.  Isn't that what 
they said? 
 
When in fact the NDP Leader of the Opposition . . . When the expert 
committee, GST advisory committee, brought out their report that said we 
should harmonize, did he jump to his feet and say, no, no, no, because that 
would mean you're going to tax books and reading material, and I'm against 
that. 
 
When he put out his press release -- and if it's otherwise, I challenge the 
opposition Leader to stand in his place and tell the public it is otherwise 
-- when that report came out, did he say, no, no, no, do not harmonize as 
the committee recommended, because, Mr. Chairman, we have a GST and that 
would make sense?  No, he put out a press release that said, yes, we should 
harmonize.  In fact he said to me in his press release, get on with it; get 
on with harmonization.  That's what he was saying; that was his position.  
He was in favour of taxing books and restaurant meals then. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, as he sees himself facing the heat of an election, and 
he's checked with his pollster -- okay, his pollster, Mr. Chairman -- and 
he's checked which way the wind is blowing and he says, now it's one thing 
as to what might be in the public's best interest but what is it in my best 
political interest?  That's the question he asked himself.  And he found 
out that it maybe isn't all that popular, this tax measure, Mr. Chairman -- 
not a surprise to any of us. 
 
So then he thought, well we better shift ground here a little bit.  So then 
what he said, along with his Finance critic, well we favour harmonization; 
we favour having one tax but it should be a lower rate, shouldn't be 7 per 
cent.  That's what he said, we favour harmonization but lower the rate. 
 
Now when the media went to him and said, now I want to be clear on your 
stand here, you know, your critic said harmonize, you said harmonize in 
your press release, and now you're saying harmonize but lower the rate.  Is 
that right, Mr. Leader of the NDP, Leader of the Opposition?  And he said, 
no, I didn't say that.  Well then could you clear the issue up for us?  
Well no, I'm avoiding and evading the issue.  Well what will you do?  Well 
I don't know what I'll do.  I'll look at other revenue measures, I'll look 
at other revenue measures, he said.  Well what does that mean?  Payroll 
taxes?  Higher income tax?  Mr. Chairman, he said he'll look at other 
revenue measures.  Okay? 
 
Now I hear them saying waste, Mr. Chairman.  Now these are the only 
socialists in Canada that still believe, that still really believe that 
they can balance the books, get rid of this deficit and this accumulated 
debt by cutting down on paper and paper clips, Mr. Chairman.  That's about 
where they've come to in this endless recitation of waste and 
mismanagement.  Well they're diluting themselves. 
 
Now just this last week, Mr. Chairman -- just this last week -- when 



 

 

everyone was trying to once again determine what the NDP position was on 
harmonization they went to the Leader of the Opposition again. 
 
(2115) 
 
And I raise this because how . . . you know, I'm confused over their 
position; the public are confused over their position.  I mean, there's a 
different position every week, as I said in the budget debate.  I mean, 
these guys have got more positions on harmonization than a contortionist 
has at the fair.  That's how many positions they've got on it, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Now just last week when they went to him and said, well now if these Tories 
pass this E&H Bill, will you repeal it?  Well I'm not saying.  Well will 
you repeal it?  Well I'm not saying.  Well won't you repeal it?  Well I'm 
not saying.  Well could you clear up the issue for us?  Could you clear up 
the issue for us, they said to the Leader of the Opposition.  At which 
point, apparently, he stocked off and went to his office.  Well I'll tell 
you what, Mr. Chairman, he may in front of the legislative media here; it 
may be an option.  It may be a position that he can take by turning on his 
heels and heading to his office and going to hide in his office.  But I'll 
tell you, Mr. Chairman, it won't wash with the public. 
 
I say to the Leader of the Opposition and all the opposition members, when 
it comes to the question of forthrightness and openness and honesty as it 
relates to your position, you can run but you can't hide.  And I say to the 
Leader of the Opposition, come clean with the public, come clean.  Tell us 
where you stand.  When we weren't in the heat of an election, harmonization 
was a good idea.  And now when it's in his best political interest -- not 
necessarily the public's best interest -- he takes quite a different 
approach.  And if he can't evade and avoid, he has a different line for a 
different group every time, Mr. Chairman, and the bigger travesty is his 
betrayal of business. 
 
He went to this business dinner and said, I am a new and improved 
socialist.  I am not like the old guys, and the old ways.  In fact he said, 
I am not even like Bob Rae -- Bob Rae and those guys in Ontario, well 
that's a different bunch.  We're not into that.  We're not just into wealth 
distribution, we're into the new and improved brand of socialists.  We're 
in to wealth creation, that's what he said.  He went to these business 
people -- apparently it was about a 1,000 people out that felt intimidated 
enough, I would argue, to buy a ticket, okay -- and he said, we're the new, 
improved variety of socialists and we believe that we focus too much on 
wealth distribution; we've got to turn our attention to wealth creation. 
 
Well here was his first opportunity to show us that he had abandoned his 
old ways, his first chance to be behind what perhaps is the largest 
competitive advantage ever to be . . . for business ever to have in this 
province, Mr. Chairman, a $260 million advantage, and he betrayed them.  
Here was his chance to stand up and be in favour of a wealth-creation 
initiative, 5,000 new jobs, $325 million, 1.6 per cent increase overall in 
real GDP (gross domestic product).  Those are the hard facts, Mr. Chairman. 
 



 

 

Here was his chance to show that this leopard has indeed changed his spots.  
And did he get behind business and wealth creation?  No, Mr. Chairman, he 
did not.  He turned back to his old ways and said, I'll give them this 
much.  At least as he cavalierly rested upon his chair budget night, he did 
in his remarks provide a bit . . . there was a conditionality to his 
response.  He said something to the effect, I know that perhaps there are 
some advantages here to business.  However, having said that -- and I will 
add parenthetically -- I've checked with the pollsters, checked which way 
the wind is blowing, and I'm sorry, I have to be against harmonization; I 
know I was for it six months ago; I know my critics said that would be the 
way to go if we had a GST, but when it's my political butt that's on the 
line, you can only carry these principles so far. 
 
Well I'll tell you, Mr. Chairman, in my town, in my town and my 
constituency, that party isn't the party of principle like the old CCF 
were, and I'll tell you that leader is no Tommy Douglas, Mr. Chairman.  
That's what I'll tell you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- I want to thank the members opposite for their applause.  
Now this is the minister who last year told this House when he stood up on 
budget night that the taxpayers of this province had had enough.  Enough is 
enough, this minister said.  I recall this minister saying, enough is 
enough.  And now on February 20 he has introduced the largest tax-grab in 
the history of this province, known as the provincial goods and services 
tax.  Well the people of this province are saying, enough is enough.  We 
want an election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- This is the minister and this is the government that said 
that they were opposed to the federal goods and services tax, that they 
were going down to Ottawa to tell their kissing cousin Brian that enough 
was enough, that Canadians and members of the Saskatchewan public couldn't 
take any more tax increase. 
 
Well here we see on February 20 of the year 1991 the flip-flop -- a 
provincial goods and services tax.  And I say to the member opposite, the 
people of this province are saying, enough is enough, and we want an 
election and we want an election now so we can decide. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- This member talks about the flip-flops.  Well I want to 
remind the member opposite of the flip-flops that we have seen in this 
province on taxation.  I recall in the 1982 election campaign that this 
government was going to lower personal income taxes by 10 per cent.  Well I 
want the member opposite to know that anybody in this province who has an 
income of $40,000 pays the highest per capita income taxes in this country.  
So much for the flip-floppers over there. 
 
I recall in 1982 that we were going to get rid of the 5 per cent sales tax.  



 

 

And what did this government do?  They increased the provincial sales tax 
to 7 per cent, and now they're introducing the harmonized provincial goods 
and services tax, and what a flip-flop.  And I recall this government 
saying we're going to get rid of the gas tax.  In fact, I even think that's 
maybe why the PC Party of Saskatchewan was elected in 1982.  They got rid 
of it, then they put it back on, then they took it back off, and now we 
have a provincial fuel tax in this province -- another flip-flop. 
 
And then I recall the used-car tax -- that little tax.  They put it on; 
they took it off.  And now in January, 1992 we're going to have the 
used-car tax back on.  That's called a flip-flop flip-flop flip, Minister. 
 
And then I recall the lottery tax -- the lottery tax.  We were going to 
have a tax on lotteries.  And we had that little tax and the buying public 
said, we're not going to buy lottery tickets in this province.  And what 
did the government do?  They took it off -- another flip-flop. 
 
Now, Minister, you can go after this party on this side of the House all 
you want.  But we know who the flip-floppers are in this province.  We know 
that you have bankrupted this province.  We know that you created a $5 
billion government debt and some $10 billion Crown corporation debt. 
 
Well that's the record of your government: record bankruptcies; record 
numbers of peoples leaving this province; record taxes; record 
privatizations; record food banks; record deficits; record of mismanagement 
and dishonour to the people of this province.  And I also want to say that 
we've had a record number of farm foreclosures and bankruptcies. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, your record has not been a good one.  And I'd like you 
to call the election and then we'll put your record to the test.  We'll put 
your record to the test and I guarantee you, Mr. Minister, on election 
night the people of this province will speak to your record and they are 
going to boot you out of office for the next 50 years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Now, Mr. Minister, as the former Education minister in 
this province, I want you to tell me why it is that SIAST (Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology), your creation, SIAST, is 
laying off 18 employees.  You're cutting back in programs in the area of 
carpentry, electrical, welding, office management, motor vehicle mechanical 
repair, major appliance repair, outdoor power equipment technology, and 
heavy equipment mechanics.  Why is that, Minister? 
 
At a time in this province when we should be training our citizens for the 
future, why is it that your government has had a record of cut-backs in 
programs, lost student spaces at our technical schools, lost jobs at our 
technical schools, Mr. Minister?  Every other futuristic country in the 
world is educating their population, and what are you doing?  We have 
enrolment quotas at our two universities, and we have cut-backs in programs 
and privatization of education in this province.  That's been your record, 
and I want you to explain that to the citizens of this province and the 
young people of this province.  They can't get jobs and they can't get into 



 

 

school -- some legacy that your government's left them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, relative to SIAST and the facts 
surrounding SIAST -- first of all under the NDP, Mr. Chairman, what we had 
is several technical institutes all run by the Department of Education, not 
run by a board of governors like the university had or a board like many 
other of our educational institutions, including schools.  No, the NDP had 
seen fit over their years of administration to have this be a creature of 
the Department of Education and the Department of Education run it. 
 
Now it seemed to make sense to do two things: number one, to put it on the 
same footing, or at least a closer footing, to the way the universities run 
and put in place a board.  We did that.  Secondly, it seemed to make sense 
that rather than have each institute try and be all things to all people, 
better to have one umbrella organization, have centres of excellence to get 
rid of the duplication and overlap. 
 
In some instances you may well want to have the same course offered at 
several places, but that way you get rid of a lot of layers of bureaucracy: 
one organization, one board.  You don't require, you know, several layers 
of financial management in terms of the administration.  You got one set of 
books to keep -- many, many advantages to going that way. 
 
One of the other changes that was made when we set up SIAST was to look and 
see what courses were part of the industrial economy or the dark ages.  I 
mean to say, Mr. Chairman, there's no sense turning out buggy whip 
manufacturers if we have no more buggies and no more horses to be whipped, 
Mr. Chairman.  When you need to turn out high-tech electronic technicians, 
that's what we should be turning out, not buggy whip manufacturers. 
 
Now I know the NDP have trouble getting their head around that.  They've 
got their heads stuck in the sand.  Let's not change, let's not acknowledge 
that the world is changing and there may be some new professions and 
vocations out there.  Well we take the opposite approach.  We say, let's 
get rid of the areas or decrease the area where there's no jobs in the 
future and put the training where there are jobs. 
 
Now I know the opposition have trouble with that concept of changing with 
the times, Mr. Chairman.  That was the basis for the changes.  This budget, 
what we're asking the committee to advance here, is two-twelfths so we can 
pay the bills at SIAST. 
 
One other very important change.  I ask members of this legislature -- both 
sides of this legislature -- before we made the changes, before we 
addressed to the degree that we have post-secondary education in this 
province, I ask you two or three things as it relates to technical 
education.  Was there a campus in Prince Albert?  No.  Since the Premier of 
the Progressive Conservative Party and the Leader of the Progressive 
Conservative Party of Saskatchewan became administration in this province, 
is there now a new, state-of-the-art technical institute as part of the 
SIAST umbrella in Prince Albert?  The answer is yes. 
 
(2130) 



 

 

 
You see, we have added to the educational facilities, point number one.  
The hon. member from his seat says, starved out of money.  Well I say to 
him, stand in your place then.  If the increase to SIAST at three and a 
half per cent this year is not enough, then tell us your plans.  You hide 
behind the desk.  I'm telling you, you can hide but you cannot run.  Our 
plan is clear.  We say three and a half per cent -- modest increase we 
recognize -- but we believe they will manage it and manage it well. 
 
You see this speaks to the mentality of the opposition, Mr. Chairman.  You 
see they think central government should make all the decisions.  They 
think central government should decide whether there should be an 
air-conditioning course or a buggy whip course or a high-tech electronics 
course.  We take the other approach.  We say involve the people.  We say 
involve the people.  That's why we put a board that draws on experts to 
look at the job market of the future and advise us as to what courses 
should go, what should be up-sized, make those kinds of decisions, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Under the opposition, for twenty-five years we had a new agriculture 
college in this province -- didn't get built, Mr. Chairman.  I'll tell you, 
I'll stack up our record any day in education and post-second education.  
They built every fancy, glittery Crown corporation building that could be 
built in downtown Regina and not one new building on university campus, Mr. 
Chairman.  That was their legacy, Mr. Chairman.  We built a new ag college.  
We built SIAST.  We got rid of the aerobic -- what did you call that at 
community colleges -- aerobic dancing. 
 
You know when I became an MLA in 1982, the board at the community college 
in Weyburn asked me to come and meet with them, Mr. Chairman.  At that time 
the board and the principal of the community college in Weyburn asked me to 
come and meet with them.  I went.  They showed me their statistics on what 
their course offerings were.  You know what the most popular course 
offering under the NDP, Mr. Chairman -- prior to the Progressive 
Conservative Party government -- you know what the most popular course 
being offered by the NDP at community colleges was? -- aerobic dancing, 
aerobic dancing. 
 
What the people wanted, Mr. Chairman, was literacy training, university 
training, technical institute program training.  That's what the public 
wanted and what did the NDP give them  -- aerobic dancing and basket 
weaving, Mr. Chairman, and a few on probably Chinese cooking.  Now that 
doesn't mean to say that there isn't a place for those in society, but I 
say leave those to the clubs and the fitness clubs and the various 
community associations to provide.  We'll stick to things like university, 
first and second year programming. 
 
Today, today is a landmark day in Saskatchewan for post-secondary education 
because this very night, this very day under the tutelage of the Minister 
of Justice and the minister in charge of communications, the SCN, the 
Saskatchewan Communications Network has come on the air, Mr. Chairman; 
another landmark that speaks to our commitment to education whether you 
live 200 miles north of La Ronge or in Weyburn or in Meadow Lake.  SCN is 



 

 

on the air, Mr. Chairman, educational programming with the latest of 
technology that knows no boundaries for Saskatchewan people, Mr. Chairman.  
That's another very important part of our record and we're proud of it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  To the Finance minister who should 
have known there was a community college board making the decisions as to 
what the community colleges would offer -- those decisions were made at a 
local level and I think it is to their credit that if they chose to have 
aerobics and that was the most popular course, that should tell you 
something. 
 
That should tell you that a great number of people wanted it, a great 
number of people were looking to the future, to fitness, to wellness, to 
staying out of the hospital, out of nursing homes.  It's popular and you 
bet, I'm happy those community college local boards made those decisions. 
 
With respect to what you are doing, Minister, you're clearly making 
decisions as . . . I think I heard you saying you're making decisions for 
the future with respect to what courses you should be offering and what 
courses you should not.  Certainly under a Conservative administration 
future, there'll be no need for things like carpenters and welders and 
tradespeople, of which there is a shortage of in Saskatchewan.  But 
certainly if you should be so fortunate to be blessed with another mandate, 
there'll be no need for those people in Saskatchewan.  But we choose rather 
to look to the future where there will be a need.  There will be a 
construction industry again in Saskatchewan, Minister. 
 
The people are quite correct when they are suggesting that they want an 
election as opposed to want your tired old rhetoric.  Your building of a 
education building . . . pardon me, a College of Agriculture building at 
the University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon campus and then not providing 
operating funds -- that's a disgrace.  It is a nice building.  But then for 
you not to budget the operating funds, that's a disgrace and something that 
you, as Minister of Finance, should be thoroughly ashamed about. 
 
Minister, I want to turn to SaskTel.  Earlier in one of your responses you 
indicated that you had invested, the government had invested, close to $750 
million, roughly in those terms, in SaskTel.  Well, Minister, I'm having a 
bit of difficulty understanding how it is that on one hand you can say 
you're making this investment in SaskTel, and yet in the other hand in the 
SaskTel annual reports, it shows you stripping the retained earnings. 
 
I point out two years ago you stripped $238 million retained earnings, took 
that as a dividend out of SaskTel.  Minister, it's very difficult, I would 
think, for you to have it both ways.  On the one hand you're saying you're 
pumping money into the Crowns, and on the other hand your own records show 
quite a different thing.  How is it that you can have it both ways, having 
stripped SaskTel, having changed a long-standing practice whereby the 
Government of Saskatchewan took half the retained earnings annually -- half 
the annual retained earnings and took that in the form of a dividend.  And 
in 1988 you changed that policy and took all of the retained earnings with 



 

 

the exception of that year.  You left it some $70 million which represented 
that year's only annual earnings. 
 
How is it that you can strip a . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Minister, you chatter from your seat.  You will have your opportunity 
momentarily to respond. 
 
Why is it, Minister, that you can strip SaskTel of $238 million dividends 
and yet claim you're not stripping the Crowns of their retained earnings?  
How do you do that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, the hon. member . . . and we've gone 
through this, I think this is the third time, second time tonight about the 
dividend policy varies from Crown to Crown. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- I'll try to get you to give an answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- The hon. member from Regina North East says give an 
answer.  I will give it for the third time.  It varies from Crown to Crown.  
In some instances we've asked for nothing, in some it's been approaching 
50, and in some instances it's been over 50. 
 
 DThey have adequate cash flow and then some to make the dividend payments.  
We have pencilled in this year $250 million by way of dividend, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Well, Minister, it varies from Crown to Crown, but it varies 
within the same Crown.  I have here a 1989 and a 1990 annual report from 
SaskTel.  And I would like you to explain.  There's a page in each of them 
that talks about the five-year record of service.  And it has the same 
headings under finance in thousands of dollars.  They show operating 
revenues, operating expenses, other income, interest and related costs, net 
earnings. 
 
And then we come . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- You guys caught me reading from a secret document 
tonight. 
 
Mr. Trew: -- I will go ahead when I have the minister's attention.  Mr. 
Chairman, could you ask the minister to pay some attention. 
 
Mr. Chairman: -- Order.  Order, please.  Order, please.  I wonder if we 
could have a little co-operation on both sides of the House.  We'd get the 
questions asked and the questions answered. 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Minister.  Minister, under the heading of dividend, 
in 1986, in both annual reports you agree that there was some $18.26 
million taken.  In 1987, again both annual reports agree -- $25.27 million.  
But in 1988, in the '89 annual report last year, you show a dividend of 
$237.721 million; yet in the '90 report, in the election year report, you 
show a dividend of some $70 million.  Can you explain why there is a 
discrepancy in the same five-year record of service?  A discrepancy of $168 



 

 

million between the SaskTel 1989 and the SaskTel 1990 annual report?  
Where's the $168 million gone? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, I know we've allowed a fair amount of 
latitude in questioning in this committee's examination of the resolution 
as part of the Bill, but the annual reports of '88 and '89, I think it is, 
of Sask Tel, I think are beyond the scope of the committee.  I've already 
discussed the dividend implications, and I think this is beyond the scope 
and they're out of order in terms of the resolution that's before the 
committee, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Minister, I would like to know why there is a difference of 
180 . . . $168 million between the two SaskTel annual reports. 
 
Now you talk about latitude.  I sat here and listened to you go on for more 
than 10 minutes.  You, talking about the Leader of the Opposition, talking 
in terms of what the Leader of the Opposition will or will not do.  There 
was no question in this legislature even remotely asked of you -- what the 
Leader of the Opposition will do.  Now if that is within the realm of this 
Committee of the Whole, for you to go into that diatribe, that meaningless 
diatribe on your part, it is certainly within the realm of meaning for me 
to ask you, where did $168 million in SaskTel go? 
 
Minister, if you don't know where $168 million went in Sask Tel, how in the 
world can you ask us to pass an interim supply Bill on behalf of the people 
of Saskatchewan?  Where's the $168 million? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you.  Mr. Minister, I asked you a question in 
question period which you evaded, and I wonder if you've had an opportunity 
to give the matter any more consideration.  I asked you what studies had 
been done on the impact of the PST, as it's come to be known, in 
Saskatchewan on the consumers. 
 
Mr. Minister, the effect on the consumers in terms of their cross-border 
shopping seems to be quite dramatic.  Certainly businesses are complaining.  
Consumers at least seem to think that the PST has had a dramatic impact on 
them, and in a sense they're voting, Mr. Minister, with their feet or with 
their cars -- they're driving elsewhere.  I ask you again, Mr. Minister: 
have you a study?  Have you analysed the effect of the PST on the consumer 
in Saskatchewan, and are you prepared to table that report? 
 
(2145) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- The hon. member asks about studies as it relates to 
the implications on cross-border shopping as a result of the E&H tax 
changes that came into effect April 1, because that's all that's happened 
-- that's the only new event. 
 
I mean before April 1, there was the sales tax on a majority of goods in 
this province.  After April 1, the following goods were added: snack foods, 
restaurant meals, reading materials, clothing under 300.  Those are the 



 

 

major items, Mr. Chairman.  So I guess the hon. member is wanting to know 
if I've got any studies to show that since the tax went on snack food 
whether I've uncovered any Cheezie smuggling rings.  No, I can honestly 
tell you I haven't. 
 
There is no question, Mr. Chairman, a lot in the news these days about 
cross-border shopping right across the country.  I think there are probably 
a number of reasons for it.  I can tell you that we've been having 
discussions with the federal government as it relates to possible 
collection of the sales tax that might be owing us when shoppers return to 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Minister, I also have a question with respect to 
the . . . Just before the minister gets into a tirade and begins to red in 
the face and we become concerned about his health, I want to say that these 
questions relate, Mr. Minister, to spending in various departments.  One of 
the matters, Mr. Minister, which has caused a good deal of concern in 
Saskatchewan is the amount of money which this government has spent on 
trying to refurbish its image.  The public of Saskatchewan think they know 
what's wrong with your image.  You've wasted their taxpayers' . . . you've 
wasted their money and you've spent . . . you've behaved as if you were 
drunken sailors in office. 
 
At any rate, Mr. Minister, you have apparently hired Nancy McLean to try to 
refurbish this image.  I would assume that this firm, this image consulting 
firm who you have hired to try and put an acceptable face on your 
government  . . . I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you would tell us what is 
spent by the various departments on this.  This is not something, Mr. 
Minister, we can ask an individual department because the expenditures are 
spread throughout government.  I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you'd tell us how 
much your government's spending on Nancy McLean in the hope that she can 
put some sort of an acceptable face on a government which has become an 
unpleasant fact of life in Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, I can't . . . I just simply don't have 
the details as to whether there's any appropriation in any of the votes as 
it relates to payments to communications firms or others.  I can understand 
and appreciate why the NDP would be worried about that kind of good advice 
that might be provided by that firm to our government.  I can understand 
why they would be worried, but I can't give them any details.  They'll have 
to put that to individual departments, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Minister, will you undertake to provide this?  I 
assume that this is available fairly simply.  It might not be possible to 
get it by 10 o'clock, but I would think that the minister would have no 
difficulty bringing the information back with him tomorrow.  This must be 
readily available.  I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you would undertake to 
provide this information to me some time tomorrow. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- I think it's fair to say although we have allowed a 
fair degree of latitude in questions and answers, that kind of detail is 
more properly put to committees and the committee during the more detailed 
examination of estimates. 



 

 

 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Minister, we can never find out from the individual 
departments.  The individual ministers say, we don't know, we'll let you 
know and they never do respond to these undertakings.  It's been a sad fact 
of government, Mr. Minister, that most undertakings which are given in 
estimates are never filled, never responded to. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Minister, this is a relatively easy bit of information to 
get.  You can get it, Mr. Minister, with a phone call; if not you, some of 
those able gentlemen beside you can get the information.  I ask you, Mr. 
Minister, if you'll give us this information tomorrow.  It is a relatively 
easy matter and an easy question to answer, Mr. Minister.  So I ask you, 
Mr. Minister, to give us the information.  If you don't we can only assume 
that the information is some that you're ashamed of. 
 
Mr. Minister, you sit there like a fence post and refuse to respond to the 
question.  Mr. Minister, these are legitimate questions.  The information 
is readily available and I for one, Mr. Minister, do not understand why you 
think you have the right to sit arrogantly in your seat and refuse to 
respond to legitimate questions put to you by members of this Assembly. 
 
I just simply, Mr. Minister, do not understand what you think your role is.  
Your role, Mr. Minister, is to respond to legitimate questions about the 
use to which this money is going to be put.  And this, Mr. Minister, is a 
legitimate question.  So I ask you again, Mr. Minister: will you provide 
this information to us, if not tonight, then as soon as it can be obtained, 
which I assume would be very shortly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, I would just repeat that that question 
is better put to individual departments in detailed examination of their 
estimates. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Minister, you wonder why interim supply is taking 
so long.  It's taking so long because you have answered no questions.  
Relatively . . . well the Government House Leader . . . I suppose that's 
some sort of a veiled threat. 
 
I say to the members opposite, there may be, Mr. Minister, no way that we 
can force you to answer legitimate questions, but ultimately there will 
come a day of reckoning when the election comes.  Because ultimately, Mr. 
Minister, if you aren't prepared to answer legitimate questions in this 
Assembly, you will have to answer to the Saskatchewan public. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have a . . . Mr. Minister . . . I wonder, Mr. Minister, if 
I could get . . . if I could have your attention just ever so briefly.  I 
don't expect you to develop anything like a normal attention span, but if 
you could just give me your attention just ever so briefly. 
 
Mr. Minister, the level of government advertising has become a matter of 
concern throughout this province.  When people talk about waste and 
mismanagement, one of the things, Mr. Minister, that comes immediately to 
mind is government advertising.  We now have someone who is a parody, Max 
Smart, trying to sell this province.  And I guess perhaps that's as 



 

 

sensible as anything, that someone of Get Smart's ilk ought to try and sell 
this government's image. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question is: will you give us, and will you tell this 
Assembly, how much this government is going to spend in the next 12 months 
on government advertising?  What is the level of expenditure throughout, 
Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Chairman, I don't have the communications 
subvotes all added up, which would include human resources and supplies, 
and obviously in the case of tourism, some media buys.  But it's there in 
all the subvotes to be added up, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Minister, this is really outrageous.  All members 
of this Assembly are getting crushed in some government advertising.  We 
are getting letters saying, what on earth are you doing cutting public 
services.  What on earth are you doing raising taxes when you are paying 
for expensive nonsense such as the Max Smart advertisements.  It really is 
outrageous, Mr. Minister, that you are arrogant enough to come here and 
say, I don't have the information and I'm not providing it.  And that's 
what you've been saying for four days -- I don't have the information and 
I'm not supplying it. 
 
Mr. Minister, before 10 o'clock, I have another question which I'd like you 
to deal with.  You have said, Mr. Minister, that the implementation of the 
PST is going to create 5,000 new jobs.  Mr. Minister, is that a figure you 
pulled out of the air -- as you've pulled out of the air so many other 
figures -- or do you have some study or some analysis which justifies that 
figure? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- No, the 5,000 jobs is based on the fact that real GDP 
will grow by about 1.6 per cent under full harmonization.  I've sent across 
. . . I've said the member from Regina North East chirps from his seat and 
says, show us the analysis.  I've sent across the sector by sector 
analysis.  In fact I would even invite him . . . It's done in black and 
white; he can connect the dots and colour it if he wants, Mr. Chairman. 
 
But let's go back to the hypocrisy of this question about the harmonization 
of the E&H.  That member in his heart of hearts knows, as does that member, 
as does that member, and I believe as does that member, and maybe that 
member -- not the Karl Marx trio on the back row maybe -- but those guys 
there I would say do know.  They know in their heart of hearts, Mr. 
Chairman, they know that through harmonization, through the business input 
tax credit, that you get economic expansion in this province. 
 
The Finance critic, the NDP opposition Finance critic on more than one 
occasion, on several occasions, has said, we should harmonize.  He has said 
several times we should harmonize.  The leader backed him up.  This was no 
mistake.  The leader backed him up.  This was before an election was being 
called.  They know in their heart of hearts.  They will not stand in this 
House, Mr. Chairman, and say that those figures are flawed, Mr. Chairman, 
because they know in their heart of hearts there is economic expansion 
under harmonization with the business input tax credit.  They know that, 



 

 

Mr. Chairman. 
 
That's why they said what they said in this House nearly 2 years ago; 
that's why they said what they said outside this House 6 and 8 and 10 
months ago, Mr. Chairman.  They know that to suggest otherwise would be 
intellectually dishonest. 
 
Now we can debate whether it's 1.5 or 1.9, but they know that it would be 
intellectually dishonest.  I challenge that member to tell the people of 
Saskatchewan, if there is some new position that we're now against 
harmonization, tell the people why he and his leader took the position they 
did six months ago and eight months ago and a year.  They know, Mr. 
Chairman, that indeed harmonization is the way to go, if in fact GST is the 
reality.  GST is the reality, Mr. Chairman. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10 p.m. 
 


