





























































Hansard: May 15, 1991


 

 

May 15/91 
 
The Assembly met at 2:00 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 

Standing Committee on Public Accounts 
 
Deputy Clerk: -- Mr. Van Mulligen, chairman of the Standing Committee on 
Public Accounts, presents the sixth report: 
 

 Your committee recommends to the Legislative Assembly that Bill 53, An Act 
to amend The Provincial Auditor Act, be referred to the Standing Committee 
on Public Accounts for clause-by-clause consideration. 

 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to make just a few remarks, and at 
the conclusion of my remarks I'll make the motion that the report be 
concurred in. 
 
I just want to explain to members what this report is all about.  What it 
is, is a request from the Public Accounts Committee to the Legislative 
Assembly that the Assembly consider at the conclusion of second reading 
debate on Bill 53 that, as opposed to normal procedure which is to refer 
the Bill for study to a committee of the whole House, that it refer the 
Bill for clause-by-clause study to the Standing Committee on Public 
Accounts, where it will then be considered and then sent back to the House 
with a recommendation. 
 
The Bill -- and I don't want get into any debate on the Bill -- but the 
Bill itself contains essentially four changes to the Act which governs the 
Provincial Auditor -- Bill 53.  One is to do with the term of appointment 
for the auditor, which has been a lifetime appointment, is proposed to be a 
six-year appointment with an option to renew.  It also clarifies the 
qualifications for the Provincial Auditor.  I believe it expands the 
various memberships or the qualifications that an auditor can bring to the 
job. 
 
Thirdly, it proposes to provide the Provincial Auditor with an expanded 
mandate on behalf of the Legislative Assembly, with additional powers and 
responsibilities to conduct value-for-money audits of government 
operations.  And that is in addition to simply determining whether 
expenditures are in accordance with the edicts of the House, also whether 
or not the people of Saskatchewan, the taxpayers, have got good value for 
their money in the expenditures that were made by the government. 
 
And fourthly, there is another change that proposes to change the way in 
which the auditor's office is funded.  As of now, or up until this spring, 
the office of the auditor had been funded by a vote of the Legislative 
Assembly.  And the change has been made to have the moneys for the 
auditor's office be provided through the Board of Internal Economy, the 



 

 

same as other offices which report to the Legislative Assembly as opposed 
to the government. 
 
That's the Bill that is before the House, and that is the Bill that we're 
asking the members to refer to the committee for clause-by-clause study.  
And the reason that we've done that, Mr. Speaker, is that, first of all the 
committee structure is such that it expands the possibility of witnesses 
that can be called before us.  In Committee of the Whole, the only witness 
that we in effect hear from is the minister who answers questions from 
members about a Bill.  In the committee, in addition to hearing from the 
Minister, we can hear from a deputy minister, we could hear directly from 
the comptroller, we can also hear from the auditor himself as to how he 
views the legislation.  I might say that, from what I understand, he views 
it positively, as we view it positively on this side of the House, and I 
assume on that side of the House. 
 
But anyway, it expands the opportunity for witnesses to be heard, and 
perhaps also others that we may see as necessary to be called into this. 
 
Secondly, the atmosphere of the committee is usually somewhat different in 
the House itself.  The proceedings are usually more informal than the 
House.  We don't quite have the pressure cooker, hothouse atmosphere -- 
highly charged, political atmosphere -- that the House has.  And so that in 
a more informal way, the committee feels it can assist the Assembly by 
considering the Bill. 
 
Thirdly, the structure of the committee also engenders greater involvement 
on the part of members and especially, in this case, members who belong to 
the governing party.  The structure and the Committee of the Whole 
generally means that most of the questions are put by members of the 
opposition to a minister, and that gets into political debate at times.  
But in the committee there is an onus on all members to participate, and it 
provides a greater opportunity for members of not only the opposition but 
members of the government party to ask questions, to put forward 
suggestions, and should they so wish, to put forward amendments -- 
something that is not as easily accomplished here in Committee of the 
Whole. 
 
And I might point out for . . .  you know it's understood by members in the 
House but perhaps by others who are watching . . . that there is a 
difference between members who belong to the governing party and members of 
the government and that they, the members, also have an obligation to hold 
the government accountable. 
 
Finally it means that . . . well, Mr. Speaker, I would just conclude by 
saying I believe that this would pave the way for all members to be 
involved in the questioning and the clause-by-clause study. 
 
But I might say that it would not preclude any opportunity for any other 
members of the House to participate in Committee of the Whole because, when 
the Committee is finished, it will report back to the Legislative Assembly.  
And the Legislative Assembly then can consider the matter further in 
Committee of the Whole so that other members of the House who have not had 



 

 

an opportunity in Public Accounts to participate can then participate as 
well in the Bill, whether it's questions or amendments or suggestions on 
the Bill or discussion on the Bill. 
 
Members will be concerned, Mr. Speaker, about precedent.  I might point out 
that the action that we are suggesting is of course action that's followed 
by parliament in a number of other jurisdictions where Bills and other 
significant matters are not necessarily dealt with by the House in 
Committee of the Whole, but are referred to appropriate standing and other 
committees of the House for review and report back to the House. 
 
I might also point out that in 1983, Mr. Speaker, there is a precedent of 
the House, at which time the House, on the motion by the Hon. Bob Andrew at 
the time, who was the minister of Finance, moved that an Act, Bill No. 48, 
which was also an Act respecting the Provincial Auditor, be read a second 
time and then referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for 
review.  We've reviewed this and in fact the Public Accounts Committee did 
review the Bill and then sent it back to the House, I believe, the very 
next day with its recommendation on that, and allowed the committee to have 
a very meaningful role in the review of the Bill.  So I think that there's 
good, solid precedent for this action. 
 
Finally I might just say as an aside that I heartily recommend this kind of 
process for other Bills as well.  I believe that the time has come to look 
for opportunities to involve all members of the House more meaningfully in 
items before the House.  There are, for example, members of the government 
side who might not have had much of an opportunity to participate in the 
proceedings in the House who I think have very excellent qualifications and 
will add a lot to a discussion on a Bill.  And these are not members of the 
government but members who have an interest and certainly a lot of 
experience to bear, and that is the reason that I believe the committee is 
bringing this Bill before you.  And I might say that all members of the 
committee agreed in bringing this report before you. 
 
So I will now move, Mr. Speaker, seconded by my colleague, the member for 
Cut Knife-Lloydminster: 
 

 That the sixth report from the Standing Committee on Public Accounts be 
now concurred in. 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'll just take a few 
moments to speak on behalf of this recommendation from Public Accounts 
Committee.  I'd like to indicate to you that it had been a unanimous 
recommendation from the Public Accounts Committee to have Bill 53 brought 
forth to the committee for study. 
 
I know that there is a lot of confusion with the different types of 
accounting systems that is used throughout government and the private 
sector, and therefore some of the clarities have to . . . or should be 
brought forth to the Public Accounts Committee, and indeed by that it is 
showing an openness to the public of Saskatchewan.  Because since 1982 the 



 

 

public for the first time were allowed to enter those particular committee 
meetings along with the press and take part in the hearings of the 
auditor's report. 
 
I think it's just another step to more openness and reform in the province 
of Saskatchewan.  I believe, Mr. Speaker, that people will also be able to 
gain a better understanding for what Public Accounts is all about -- the 
expenditure of government -- and it will give people a better understanding 
what the Provincial Auditor is all about. 
 
I know in my particular riding, and I suppose it's not anything unique, I 
believe it might be across this province, that a lot of people say, well 
the Provincial Auditor works for the Department of Finance.  The Provincial 
Auditor does not work for the Department of Finance.  He represents all 
members of this Legislative Assembly and he reports through you to this 
Assembly by way of the auditor's report.  And therefore I think that 
probably what we are recommending here today, Mr. Speaker, is just again a 
sign of reform in the province and indeed what's happening right across the 
country, and what people in the public of this province is requesting of 
all politicians and all parties these days. 
 
And I believe it's one move that I hope will be taken into serious 
consideration by the Minister of Finance, and have it pushed onto the 
committee. 
 
So I again thank you for few minutes that I've taken to speak on this. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I want to add some 
comments as a member of the Public Accounts Committee, and even more 
importantly as an individual member of this legislature, to the motion that 
was put forward in interim report from the Public Accounts Committee.  The 
items that I want to touch on here this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, I want to 
talk about a number of things actually in regard to this report. 
 
And I know the government is anxious to get on with other business today; 
that they've given notice that they're bringing in closure on Bill 61, the 
tax Bill in which they want to make sure that by the time today is over 
that they can bring in closure for the first time in the history of the 
province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I know that they want to get on with that.  But first they're going to 
have to listen to some of the comments I have to make in regard to The 
Provincial Auditor Act and also in regard to the interim report from the 
Public Accounts Committee. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about the background of the 
interim report.  I think that's very important.  And the member from Regina 
Victoria and the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster have alluded to that 
somewhat. 



 

 

 
I also, Mr. Speaker, want to talk about the Act respecting the Provincial 
Auditor and the auditing of certain accounts.  I want to also talk about 
the role of the Provincial Auditor, Mr. Speaker.  I want to talk about the 
role and structure of the Public Accounts Committee.  I want to talk about 
value-for-money auditing, and it's sometimes referred to as comprehensive 
auditing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. J.J. Macdonell, the Auditor General when I had the privilege of serving 
as a Member of Parliament, often referred to value-for-money auditing as a 
very important part of the accountability process.  And he always talked 
about the three E's, Mr. Speaker -- the economy, the effectiveness, and the 
efficiency of expenditure of the public's tax dollars. 
 
I want to also talk, Mr. Speaker, in regard to this interim report, about 
the timeliness of the budget loop in the province of Saskatchewan, going 
through the steps from the introduction of the budget through the Estimates 
and then the Public Accounts, and the auditor's observation on that 
process.  So I want to talk about that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But most importantly, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about what else is needed 
in the interim report, but members of the government side would never agree 
to having included in an interim report to the Legislative Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- When we look at a government who has done more to erode the 
economy and the community of Saskatchewan, I think that it deserves some 
comment as to what should be in an interim report placed before the 
legislature and before the people in the province of Saskatchewan.  When 
you look at the waste and mismanagement, people are saying, enough is 
enough, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Some of the things, Mr. Speaker, some of the things that 
should have been in this interim report are going to be mentioned here this 
afternoon.  Now before I do that I want to point out to you, Mr. Speaker, 
that the Bill, Bill 53, that's being referred to the Public Accounts 
Committee through the motion put forward by both sides of the House here 
today -- I commend that action -- but I want to point out that in Bill 53, 
it does four things, Mr. Speaker.  It defines the term of the Provincial 
Auditor to six years.  It secondly gives the Provincial Auditor a reference 
that he must be a member in good standing of related professional groups. 
 
And thirdly, an important move, it takes away the budget from the 
Legislative Assembly for the Provincial Auditor because the Provincial 
Auditor is really a servant of this Assembly, and there should be some 
removal of his own budgetary process.  It puts the budget into the Board of 
Internal Economy so that they may review the Provincial Auditor's annual 
budget. 
 



 

 

And fourthly and most importantly, Mr. Speaker, what Bill 53 does, is that 
it provides value-for-money auditing which I had mentioned earlier, and I'm 
going to go a long way into value-for-money auditing here today.  Because 
value-for-money auditing is important so that people know that the 
government, who always has the weight of the majority, not only spent money 
with due regard for the legislative authority, but they spend that money 
with due regard for the efficiency, the economy, and the effectiveness when 
they're spending taxpayers' dollars in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And some of the things that we have to look at, Mr. Speaker, would be items 
that should be brought out into the public.  For example, in a publication 
I have here called: 50 Ways They Waste Your Money -- and that refers to the 
members opposite -- they talk about $27,089 to buy a Citroe pën.  That's 
not a fruit, Mr. Speaker, that's a luxury European automobile for the 
Conservative government's agent-general in London.  That's a former cabinet 
minister, one Paul Rousseau, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to also talk about the need to have examined the $7,327 that was 
spent on airfare for a trip by the Premier and the Deputy Premier from 
Regina to Minneapolis and then to Edmonton and New Delhi and Kathmandu and 
New York and Frankfurt. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- What were they doing there?  Does anybody know? 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Well the member here asks what were they doing there?  We 
don't know what they were doing there, Mr. Speaker.  But if we had 
value-for-money auditing within our system of the budgetary process in 
Saskatchewan, the people would know what their elected public officials are 
doing in places like Kathmandu. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- The interim report will also provide a way, Mr. Speaker -- 
for the fourth point in value-for-money auditing that's contained within 
Bill 53 -- to look at the $17,423 in expenses run up by the Premier's 
office at Regina's Hotel Saskatchewan in one year.  That comes from the 
Public Accounts of 1987-88.  People in Saskatchewan wonder, Mr. Speaker, 
why can't meetings be held in the Legislative Assembly which isn't a bigger 
drain on the people's taxpayers' dollars.  Why would the Premier have to 
use $17,423 to meet people at the Hotel Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? 
 
How about, Mr. Speaker, the $19,368 in expenses run up by the Premier's 
office at the Regina Ramada Renaissance Hotel in one year, Mr. Speaker, in 
the same year -- in the same year. 
 
People in Saskatchewan are saying, what is that for, Mr. Speaker?  Why 
would they have to run up those expenses at that hotel?  Isn't the 
Premier's office in the Legislative Assembly a good enough place to meet 
with people, Mr. Speaker? 
 



 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think we should look at the $230,000 that this government 
spent buying and refurbishing a condominium in Regina, Mr. Speaker.  I 
think we should look, Mr. Speaker, at the $137,000 this government allowed 
Guy Montpetit to spend on a condominium for Dr. Paillet when he was running 
GigaText in the province of Saskatchewan and trying to translate the laws 
of Saskatchewan from English into French with artificial intelligence, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
 DAnd the artificial intelligence didn't exist, my fellow members.  It 
didn't exist.  It cost us over $5 million for that experience, Mr. Speaker.  
And the members opposite are the ones responsible.  People in Saskatchewan 
are saying, enough is enough, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Speaker, it's time we talked about the unprecedented 
patronage in the province of Saskatchewan through value-for-money auditing, 
Mr. Speaker.  What about Stan Korchinski, the former Progressive 
Conservative member of parliament, who was supposed to advise the Devine 
government on how to lobby the Mulroney government.  They hired a defeated 
PC (Progressive Conservative) member of parliament who lost his nomination, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: -- The hon. member has indicated in his remarks that he 
intends to make remarks which are going to be a very wide-ranging nature 
covering very many different issues.  I would just like to make these few 
remarks. 
 
The Bill itself, in general terms, can be referred to in order that the 
hon. member can make his case why the Bill should go to Public Accounts 
Committee; however, not discussed in depth.  The report of the Public 
Accounts Committee itself of course can be discussed because that's the 
motion we're debating. 
 
The Provincial Auditor's report is not acceptable for in-depth debate 
because the issue we're discussing is the report itself or the report of 
the Public Accounts Committee.  The in-depth report of the Provincial 
Auditor is not the issue we're discussing right now. 
 
And therefore I wish to draw that to the attention of the hon. member for 
The Battlefords who, in his opening remarks, has indicated that he intends 
to carry on a very wide-ranging debate on the Provincial Auditor's report . 
. . not on the Provincial Auditor's report but the report on Public 
Accounts. 
 
Why is the hon. member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, out of respect for all of our guests in 
the gallery, I would seek leave of the Assembly to move to introduction of 
guests.  And if it is the preference of the opposition to revert back to 
the business now at hand, that's certainly fine.  But I would ask for that 
leave to move to introduction of guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 



 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: -- In the spirit of co-operation and I guess the wish to 
introduce guests, we would give leave to introduce guests at this time, but 
remain on this point on the agenda. 
 
The Speaker: -- It is agreed with the understanding that we revert to the 
present business at hand. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I just would like to introduce 
to you and to all members of the Legislative Assembly the president of the 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses and one of her executive members who are in 
the gallery, the east gallery, Mr. Speaker.  As members in the legislature 
will know, all of our citizens will know Ms. Stuart is very much involved 
in leading her members in part of a democratic process just now in our 
province. 
 
And I would ask all members to join with me in welcoming her, other members 
of SUN (Saskatchewan Union of Nurses) to the gallery today to watch how the 
democratic process is carried out in this forum. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I too on behalf of the 
New Democratic opposition, would like to welcome Pat Stuart and Joan 
Fockler and any nurses who are in the gallery.  I'd like to welcome them to 
this Assembly. 
 
They have been keenly interested, I know, in the proceedings here and are 
presently out on strike protesting this government's underfunding of the 
health-care system and the many job lay-offs that they've suffered as a 
result of government underfunding of health care. 
 
So I know that these nurses are the front line workers, Mr. Speaker, with 
respect to health care.  They see the situation that exists in our 
hospitals today, and that is very much a part of the strike that we are 
witnessing in Saskatchewan today -- is their protest with respect to 
patient care being jeopardized by government underfunding.  Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my privilege and my 
pleasure to introduce to you, and through you to all members of the House, 
66 grade 10 students from Campbell Collegiate.  Mr. Speaker, I appreciate 
the opportunity to introduce them now -- they're sitting in the west 
gallery, Mr. Speaker -- because several of them had to catch a plane at 3 
o'clock.  So it's nice to get this over with and have an opportunity to 
talk with them after. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the teachers are Peter Charles and Pat Hanson from Campbell 
Collegiate; Norman Grant and Nicole Desrosiers from Matane.  And, Mr. 



 

 

Speaker, I'll have an opportunity to meet with them in a few minutes, have 
our picture taken and meet with them in a few minutes.  And I wish them 
well.  Glad to see them here today and hope that you enjoy the remaining 
few minutes that you have, and I'll see you later for pictures.  Thank you 
very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gleim: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It gives me great pleasure today to 
introduce to you and through this Assembly 31 students from Ponteix, 
Saskatchewan, which is in my constituency.  They're seated in your gallery, 
Mr. Speaker.  Along with these students from Ponteix that are from grade 7 
to 11, there are 18 exchange students from Acton Vale, Quebec. 
 
I want to congratulate you and thank you for coming to visit us in the 
Assembly.  And I hope you listen carefully and maybe some day you will have 
a chance to be in the position we are down in here.  It is a great 
challenge I know, and I just wish you the best.  And I'll be meeting with 
you for pictures and drinks later.  Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's a pleasure for me today, Mr. 
Speaker, to introduce to you, and through you to the members of the 
Assembly, a number of Progressive Conservative candidates that are here in 
our legislature today.  Some are sitting in the west gallery and up in your 
gallery and in fact, in the east gallery, Mr. Speaker.  And they are indeed 
a bunch of bright, young men and women that have come all the way to Regina 
here to join us in a caucus, and I'd ask all members of the Assembly to 
please give them a warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  My introduction very 
much follows on the heels or in the theme of what my colleague and friend 
from Lloydminster-Cut Knife did a few moments ago. 
 
I'd like to introduce to you, sir, sitting in your Speaker's gallery, a 
group of 19 individuals who come from several ridings throughout the 
province of Saskatchewan and are very strong activists in the New 
Democratic Party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm sure that you and all the members of this Assembly realize 
that in politics everything depends upon the dedication of the volunteers.  
And none of us would be here if we didn't have the activists and the 
volunteers who devoted those endless hours and worried about all the cake 
sales and bake sales and getting the nominations organized and supporting 
some of the candidates. 
 
We in our party have the same kind of dedication, and every year we have 
something known as a leader's club announcement where the top performers of 
the 66 constituencies in terms of memberships and fund raising are, if I 
may use this word somewhat immodestly, are honoured by the leader.  And 



 

 

today the leader's club is meeting, and as part of the proceedings they are 
in the legislature to watch the proceedings. 
 
I will not give all the names because time doesn't permit, but I would just 
simply ask you, sir, and the members opposite, in the spirit of 
co-operation and democracy, to acknowledge the representatives of the 
following six constituencies, 19 in all -- I won't ask them to stand -- but 
19 representatives, six constituencies which have topped the membership 
role and the fund raising for us.  And they come from the constituencies of 
Humboldt, Biggar, Shaunavon, Regina North West -- of course I have to say 
-- Saskatoon Riversdale, and finally Estevan.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  I think we can now proceed.  If 
there are no further introductions -- I see that there aren't any.  I'm 
assuming that then we will, as agreed to, revert to the motion under 
discussion, under debate, and we will recognize the hon. member for The 
Battlefords. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 

Standing Committee on Public Accounts (continued) 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  And first off I want to say that I 
do recognize your intervention and how you do desire to have the debate 
more confined to the specifics of the Bill.  And I suppose I did get 
somewhat carried away. 
 
I had prior to speaking today, Mr. Speaker, I did have a number of things I 
wanted to put on the record in regard to the report.  So I had looked at 
Beauchesne's, the Fifth Edition, citation no. 659, and I thought that point 
(2) of that citation gave me some leeway, Mr. Speaker, to be able to put on 
some of the things that I want to get onto the record. 
 
But I will, Mr. Speaker, for the rest of my presentation, try and confine 
my remarks to the more specific items that you would like covered here this 
afternoon, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  Yes, I appreciate the remarks of the hon. member 
for The Battlefords.  And I would also like to perhaps clarify my comments 
about it. 
 
I believe that the debate on this motion should . . . can discuss the Bill 
in a general term, once again so as to outline why it should go before the 
Public Accounts Committee, and the desirability of referring the Bill to 
the Public Accounts Committee and why the Public Accounts Committee is the 
appropriate place to review it.  But I'm sure you'll agree with me that we 
are not debating the Provincial Auditor's report itself. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Yes, I appreciate that, Mr. Speaker, and I'm glad you gave 
me clarification on that.  And I will confine my remarks as best I can to 
the reasons why Bill 53 should be referred to the Public Accounts 



 

 

Committee. 
 
And a large part of that has to do with the actual role of the committee 
itself, Mr. Speaker, and the role of this Assembly. 
 
And I do have a few well-chosen words for the members opposite, Mr. 
Speaker.  And if I deviate from what I'm supposed to be saying, I'm sure 
that you will call me to order again this afternoon during the course of 
the presentation I want to make, to have on the record here in the Assembly 
on behalf of myself, the members of my caucus, and the members of the 
Saskatchewan public at large, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Speaker, this Bill should be referred to the Public 
Accounts Committee because the role of private members has to be 
strengthened within this Assembly.  Far too long, Mr. Speaker, we've seen 
the heavy hand of government do things under the majority rule of this 
Legislative Assembly with little regard for the role of back-bench members 
of the legislature. 
 
And I think by referring Bills to appropriate committees, not just the 
Public Accounts Committee but the Agriculture Committee, the Committee on 
Privileges and Elections . . . There are several committees of the 
Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker, which very seldom, if ever, meet.  I 
know that some of the committees have not met since back into the 1950s, 
for example. 
 
And I would say that we have to strengthen the role of committees or else 
get rid of the committee structure entirely, Mr. Speaker.  And I certainly 
do not advocate doing away with the role of committees.  I think we should 
strengthen the role of committees, and therefore we should be referring 
Bills like Bill 53, An Act to amend The Provincial Auditor Act, to the 
Public Accounts Committee. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Now, Mr. Speaker, we have to realize that the Public 
Accounts Committee is still not the ideal situation, but it's better than 
the partisanship that has happened over the past few years within this 
Legislative Assembly, where the opinions of back-bench members, whether 
they be on the government side or whether they be members on the opposition 
side, are very seldom if ever listened to by the Executive Council. 
 
The Executive Council use far too often the authority and the weight and 
the clout that they have to override the public interest of members of this 
Assembly and members of the public at large, Mr. Speaker. 
 
By referring this Bill to the Public Accounts Committee, Mr. Speaker, we 
will involve at least 10 members of that committee in the discussions.  We 
have on the Public Accounts Committee, 10 members, Mr. Speaker.  Six of 
those members come from the government side; four of those members come 
from the opposition side. 



 

 

 
And the importance that has been placed on the Public Accounts Committee 
historically, Mr. Speaker, is that a member of the opposition always chairs 
the Public Accounts Committee.  It's not a government member that chairs 
it; it's a member of the opposition who chairs the Public Accounts 
Committee, and that would be the member from Regina Victoria who introduced 
the motion in the House here this afternoon.  And of course the vice-chair 
would be the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster who seconded the motion 
here this afternoon. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there's still the majority of the government on that 
Public Accounts Committee.  But the Public Accounts Committee has seen -- 
although rare -- has in fact seen displays of co-operation in the 
committee.  And I think the motion that comes before us here this afternoon 
-- I'm sure all members will support -- is an example of that co-operation 
amongst members of the Legislative Assembly, regardless of the party he 
represents. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- This Bill in particular, Mr. Speaker, is appropriate for 
the Public Accounts Committee because the Public Accounts Committee 
functions in such a way as I'm about to describe. 
 
The Public Accounts Committee takes references from the Provincial 
Auditor's report and from the Public Accounts, Mr. Speaker, to examine how 
the government has spent their money in the previous year.  And now 
sometimes this is not very timely.  For example, we have had situations in 
the Public Accounts Committee where we have dealt with budgetary 
expenditures . . . I should say expenditures in the budgetary process that 
have been sometimes two years and sometimes more than two years old. 
 
We also look at the Provincial Auditor's Act, Mr. Speaker, and in the . . . 
or the Provincial Auditor's report.  And each fiscal year the auditor does 
issue a report, Mr. Speaker -- and, incidentally, they're getting thicker 
and thicker every year -- on observations of where the government has 
inadequate financial controls.  And the auditor also makes observations as 
to whether or not the government has spent money with due regard for the 
legislative authority that's been given to them. 
 
And so with the auditor's Act coming up before the legislature, it's only 
appropriate that that Act would go to the Public Accounts Committee, 
because it is the Public Accounts Committee that deals most often with the 
auditor. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, you would know, as a long-standing member of this 
Assembly, that the Provincial Auditor comes to all meetings of the Public 
Accounts Committee.  And every Tuesday morning and every Thursday morning 
the 10 members of the Public Accounts Committee get together.  And we have 
Mr. Strelioff, who is a new auditor, comes there with his staff and we also 
have Gerry Kraus who is the comptroller for the Department of Finance or 
for the government, I suppose.  And we examine the accounts. 
 



 

 

And there's some very important things that happen in the accounts of 
government, Mr. Speaker.  And I would just for a moment refer to an example 
of something that would be looked at by the Public Accounts Committee.  We 
would look at volume 3 of the Public Accounts, for example, Mr. Speaker.  
And when I open volume 3 of the Public Accounts, and look at the Department 
of Environment and Public Safety, I find on page 119 where there are 
detailed expenditures to individuals, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And when I look at this one name of an individual who was a deputy minister 
for the Department of Environment and Public Safety, I find that he was 
paid in the fiscal year 1989-90 a grand total of $242,152, Mr. Speaker.  
Now this particular deputy minister, we don't know why he left the employ 
of the government of Saskatchewan, whether he was terminated or whether he 
left of his own accord.  But the Public Accounts Committee would ask, Mr. 
Speaker, why did this individual get paid $242,152 in the fiscal year 
1989-90, Mr. Speaker? 
 
We would ask questions like: was it severance pay?  If it was severance 
pay, Mr. Speaker, did this person go on to another job or is it the same 
kind of severance pay that was paid to people like the trade minister in 
Minneapolis now, the former member of this Assembly from Kindersley.  Or 
was it a similar severance package like was paid to the member, former 
member from Indian Head-Wolseley who's now over in Hong Kong, Mr. Speaker?  
Does this mean that these people are just drawing more from the taxpayers 
of the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
And I know that members on the opposite side get a little upset because I 
do realize that you want to bring in closure on the tax Bill, the biggest 
tax grab in the history of the province, but just bear with me, Mr. 
Speaker, just bear with me on this. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Why is the hon. member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- Mr. Speaker, just on a point of order, as we had concurred 
. . . the member is a part of Public Accounts Committee.  We had already 
established the fact that this would be just an interim report to the 
committee with a recommendation.  The member is babbling on regarding 
things that have . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I wish to interrupt the hon. member, to draw 
to the hon. member's attention that we should consider carefully the words 
we use when we refer to other members in the House.  And I'm drawing this 
to your attention not only for your benefit but for the benefit of all 
members so that our debate flows in as smooth a manner as possible. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- I'm sorry, I'll just finish my point of order, Mr. Speaker.  
But the member is a member of the Public Accounts Committee.  We have 
discussed the whole format of why we brought this interim report here to 
the Assembly for the recommendation for the auditor's Bill to come forth to 
the Public Accounts Committee. 
 
The member is going at great lengths of things that have already been asked 
of the Provincial Auditor in the Public Accounts Committee.  And those 



 

 

particular points have already been asked or can be asked in the forum of 
the Public Accounts Committee that is already in session.  The member is 
really, Mr. Speaker, dwelling at great lengths away from what the interim 
report of the Public Accounts Committee had recommended here in the first 
place. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to comment upon the member's point 
of order, if one could be so generous.  While I think the member's 
comments, the member from The Battlefords' comments were clearly in order 
-- he was talking about the Bill in the committee -- relevancy is going to 
be an issue I think in the next few days.  And it's going to be important I 
think to what we're doing and to the relevance of this legislature to the 
public.  And I think your decision on relevancy is very important.  It 
transcends the importance that it would normally have. 
 
I have the view that what we are dealing with in the next few days in a 
general sense is the ability of this legislature to discuss issues of 
concern and to bring the public point of view to bear on the issues of the 
day.  I therefore think that we need to consider the issue of relevance 
very important because if we narrow the debate on any given subject down -- 
this one included -- if we take a very narrow focus we will frustrate the 
ability of the legislature to bring public opinion to bear on the subject. 
 
I have some quotations with the general comments, Mr. Speaker.  I'd ask you 
to consider a quotation from Erskine May.  I want to refer to Beauchesne's 
in a moment but I sometimes find that Erskine May has a more philosophical, 
if you like, approach to it and I think that's important in this context. 
 
He says quite properly on page 372: 
 

 A Member must direct his speech to the question under discussion or to the 
motion or amendment he intends to move, or to a point of order. 

 
He can't wander around and discuss whatever the spirit moves you.  It does 
say however: 
 

 . . . when bills, in the charge of the Government, dealing with subjects 
bound together by a common principle, stand in a series upon the Notice 
Paper, debate on the first bill may include a discussion of bills of a 
cognate character. 

 
It seems to me what this says is if Bills are related in their subject 
matter, you're not necessarily restricted to strictly focusing on one Bill 
because the principle may be intertwined with that of other Bills. 
 
Thus I think the member when he's talking about the Provincial Auditor . . 
. this is a different subject, this is the Provincial Auditor.  It goes -- 
and I'm not going to make his arguments for him, but it's relevant to my 
point -- it deals with the Public Accounts consideration of the 
jurisdiction of which should be given to the Provincial Auditor.  And 
that's directly germane in our view to the whole issue of waste and 



 

 

mismanagement and thus Bill 61. 
 
So I want to make the argument and I want to ask Mr. Speaker to consider it 
very carefully because I think it's important to the view people have of 
this legislature.  I want you to consider very carefully the importance of 
this principle and that is that when Bills are related in nature and stand 
together, then one ought to be able to discuss the general principles which 
includes them all and not in an artificial way try to restrict your focus 
to one of those in several related Bills. 
 
I just want to make one other comment before I take my seat and that is a 
Beauchesne's, and I think this ought to be an overriding principle in any 
of Mr. Speaker's decisions.  "Relevance is not easy to define."  And this 
is the subject I want you to consider on page 136, rule 459(1): 
 

 Relevance is not easy to define.  In borderline cases the Member should be 
given the benefit of the doubt . . . 

 
So I'd ask you to take that into consideration as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  I appreciate the hon. member's point of order and I 
appreciate the hon. member from Regina Centre's arguments.  I think that 
they have both put forward particular views and they have put them forward 
with sincerity. 
 
As it pertains to this particular debate, which we must recall is a debate 
on a committee report, on a committee report -- not a Bill but on a 
committee report -- let me express to you these views. 
 
Members will have further opportunities to fully debate the broad and 
detailed issues raised by the Bill -- further opportunities.  For example, 
the Bill, Bill 53, is currently before the House at the second reading 
stage.  The second reading debate has not been concluded, and members may 
speak to it at length at that time. 
 
If indeed the Bill is referred to the Public Accounts Committee, then 
members will have a further opportunity for detailed, clause-by-clause 
debate.  In addition, the whole House will again have the opportunity to 
debate these issues in Committee of the Whole and at the third reading 
stage. 
 
Therefore I must rule that this debate should be strictly relevant to the 
Public Accounts Committee request which is contained in one simple sentence 
as follows: 
 

 That your committee recommends to the Legislative Assembly that Bill 53, 
An Act to amend The Provincial Auditor Act, be referred to the Public 
Accounts committee for clause-by-clause consideration. 

 
And the motion before us which reads: 
 



 

 

 That the sixth report of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts be now 
concurred in. 

 
So you see, sir, we are not discussing the Bill itself.  We are discussing 
the sixth report of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts. 
 
I've listened to your arguments on relevance carefully, and of course those 
are important arguments.  However I also would like to draw to your 
attention citation 657 in Beauchesne's Fifth Edition, page 205, which 
reads: 
 

 When the House is debating the report of a committee, it is not competent 
for a Member to open the whole subject matter that was originally referred 
to the committee. 

 
And therefore, you see, this is a different type of debate than what the 
hon. member for Regina Centre was referring to. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Well thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'll certainly honour your 
ruling on that.  And I can understand wanting to stick to the specifics of 
the debate as you guide, and that's your role in the Assembly here is to 
guide the debates so there is some decorum and rules under which we can all 
operate. 
 
I do though want to on behalf of my constituents express some concerns I 
have this afternoon, and I will try and keep those expressions relevant to 
the debate.  And there are some reasons to support this motion and, on the 
other hand, there may be other reasons not to support the motion.  I think 
though right now I will speak from the aspect of wanting to support this 
motion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the reason for wanting to support this is that this Assembly 
doesn't really have the chance to get into a lot of detail, Mr. Speaker.  
And the reason it doesn't have a chance to get into a lot of detail is 
because of the diverse interests that this House must encompass. 
 
We deal with statutes, Bills that cover a wide, wide range of law in the 
province of Saskatchewan.  In fact that's the role of this Assembly and we 
couldn't get bogged down with the budgetary process itself, otherwise the 
system in Saskatchewan would certainly come to a standstill.  And I'm sure 
that people like the Government House Leader understand that very well.  
They have to continue on the business of the people in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So when a Bill like this is referred to committee, you get an opportunity 
to look at greater detail, and that's true, so we don't have to go into 
detail.  But just the example I was using, Mr. Speaker, of this one 
particular individual getting a payment of $242,152 -- chances are that 
that may never come up in the Legislative Assembly itself, Mr. Speaker.  
Oh, it might come up in question period, but maybe the members on this side 
might think there's something of greater importance on the day that that 
particular question is brought forward.  And there could well be. 
 



 

 

And it may never come up in the estimates process, Mr. Speaker.  But it's 
certain that a question surrounding something like a huge payment like that 
to one individual would certainly be looked at in detail in the Public 
Accounts Committee. 
 
We don't have the luxury of deviating to other items in the Public Accounts 
Committee such as we do in this Assembly.  But in the Public Accounts 
Committee, if it's in the Public Accounts . . . there's three volumes to 
the Public Accounts each year.  They're supposed to be put forward very 
close to the end of the fiscal year which is always March 31.  But this 
government seldom if ever does that.  But if it's referred to us in one of 
the three volumes of Public Accounts or the Provincial Auditor's report 
which is done after the end of each fiscal year, Mr. Speaker, we can look 
at that in great, great detail. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other reason it's important to have this Bill referred to 
the committee is the knowledge of members on both sides of the House as to 
the importance of the role of the Provincial Auditor, Mr. Speaker. 
 
 DThe knowledge of members opposite and on this side of the House . . . the 
10 members that are composed of the committee have a fairly good 
understanding of the authority, the responsibilities, and the role of the 
Provincial Auditor.  And I know that that's not encompassing to all members 
of this Assembly when it comes to the Public Accounts and to the auditor, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I give you an example of that.  The auditor puts out this report so 
that the government and the Assembly -- mainly the Assembly because the 
Provincial Auditor is a servant of this Assembly, a watch-dog of the public 
purse . . . the auditor can detail in here things that the government 
should do in their financial management to make it better or to correct 
deficiencies that the Provincial Auditor and his staff find within the 
operations of government and Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But it is difficult for the Provincial Auditor, Mr. Speaker, if the auditor 
doesn't have the respect of all members of the Assembly.  And we've seen in 
the past where the former member from Kindersley attacked the provincial 
auditor in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker.  It was a shameful display on an 
officer of this Assembly, Mr. Speaker.  He had to publicly apologize to 
Willard Lutz, the former provincial auditor, Mr. Speaker.  And I can 
imagine the stress and the discomfort that that particular cabinet minister 
caused Mr. Lutz and his family. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we now have Mr. Strelioff as the Provincial Auditor and he is 
a professional just like Willard Lutz was before him. 
 
And in the report, Mr. Speaker, we have a chance, and the public have a 
chance, and this Assembly in a non-partisan way should have a chance, to 
make things better in the accountability process of government, Mr. 
Speaker.  And we can't attack people who bring bad messages or messages 
that are harmful or messages that are unfavourable to a government.  The 
strength of the government would be in, Mr. Speaker, honouring the requests 
of the Provincial Auditor.  If there's a deficiency, that deficiency should 



 

 

be corrected. 
 
(1500) 
 
And you see, Mr. Speaker, the reason this Bill should go to the Public 
Accounts Committee is that we have the luxury and the expertise on that 
committee to look at The Provincial Auditor Act amendments in greater 
detail and with greater scrutiny than the entire Assembly would have, Mr. 
Speaker.  And I know that members on the government side and members on the 
opposition side want that to happen.  But, Mr. Speaker, the things that 
will come out of the examination in the Public Accounts Committee will 
serve Saskatchewan well in the democratic process as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor each year when he publishes the 
Provincial Auditor's report sets out in the back of the auditor's report -- 
I have here just as an example, Mr. Speaker, the 1986-87 Provincial 
Auditor's report . . . You turn to the back, Appendix I, and you'll find a 
copy of The Provincial Auditor Act.  So those people that are truly 
concerned can determine what the role of the Provincial Auditor is by 
statute.  What is the law that governs the activities, the role, the 
responsibilities, and the conduct in fact, of the Provincial Auditor. 
 
And now we have had before the Assembly, we've had first reading of Bill 
53.  Bill 53 is An Act to amend The Provincial Auditor Act.  And we're 
asking that that be referred to the Public Accounts Committee.  And I think 
that it's important, Mr. Speaker, we look at what the Bill actually does.  
And just in brief, I'd like to lay those out because I think it fits well 
into the argument that I'm putting forward here today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The first item of that Bill makes sure that the auditor's term is for six 
years, and I believe with the ability to be appointed for another six 
years.  Now in the Assembly, something like that could get passed over very 
quickly.  But it will not be passed over very quickly in the Public 
Accounts Committee because it may be determined by the Public Accounts 
Committee, by the wisdom of the 10 members present and voting, that maybe 
the term should be for five years or ten years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you see the other thing that happens in a situation like that, Mr. 
Speaker, is that we have witnesses that come before the committee.  We have 
the ability on the Public Accounts Committee to call forward expert 
witnesses.  If we wanted to, Mr. Speaker, we could hear from the Provincial 
Auditor himself or a member of his office who the Act directly affects, Mr. 
Speaker.  That's a good reason why it should be there. 
 
But do you know, Mr. Speaker, it could be a very cumbersome -- possible but 
cumbersome -- process to have the Provincial Auditor appear to give 
testimony before the Legislative Assembly as a whole.  Now it has happened 
in the past, Mr. Speaker, where witnesses have come before the bar of the 
Assembly to give their expert evidence on a particular situation.  But it 
becomes a political show, Mr. Speaker.  It puts it into the political 
arena.  The Public Accounts Committee is, or it least should be, beyond 
that, Mr. Speaker. 
 



 

 

If we wanted to call Kenneth Dye, the former auditor general of Canada, as 
an expert witness to the Public Accounts Committee, all that would have to 
happen is ten people -- or in fact just a majority -- six people would have 
to agree that we call Kenneth Dye before the Public Accounts Committee. 
 
And he could provide us with expert evidence in his role as the auditor 
general for Canada.  He has gathered expertise that very few are privileged 
to gather in this country, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It's a very prestigious position.  It's a position in which you are a 
select person to attain the position of Auditor General.  Now I would think 
that we would have a great deal of difficulty convincing members of this 
House, all the members of this House, in sufficient time to get Mr. Dye 
before this Assembly to in fact look at Bill 53, the Bill that's the 
subject of the referral here today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But just six members would have to agree on the Public Accounts Committee, 
and can you imagine . . . and I'm sure that members opposite would be so 
excited to have that quality of a Bill come out of the Public Accounts 
Committee, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another thing that would happen, Mr. Speaker, is it would ease the burden 
that's placed on this legislature.  Because of the very heavy work-load of 
the large number of Bills and the budgetary process, the estimates, and the 
budget speech and the throne speech -- which I guess we didn't have this 
time round; we're still continuation of the last session that recessed back 
on June 22, 1990, Mr. Speaker.  But, Mr. Speaker, the members on all sides 
of the House would be extremely excited, extremely excited about the 
quality of a Bill that would come out of the Public Accounts Committee 
because of the expert evidence that could be provided, the expertise of 
witnesses that could be called before the Public Accounts Committee, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So people like Kenneth Dye would have very strong opinions as to whether 
the term of the Provincial Auditor should be for six years, as this Bill 
suggests, or maybe it should be for a different term, Mr. Speaker.  Who 
knows that until we have a detailed look at the legislation that would be 
before the Public Accounts Committee. 
 
The other thing that can happen, Mr. Speaker, is that I'm sure that if a 
member of the public felt they had a great deal of request and asked the 
Public Accounts Committee if they could appear before it, I'm sure that at 
least six members -- the majority of the committee -- would agree to 
hearing someone from the Saskatchewan public at large to provide expert 
evidence, maybe someone from a private-sector accounting firm, Mr. Speaker.  
Because we've got into a wide-ranging argument about private-sector 
auditors versus the Provincial Auditor and what their role is . . . I mean, 
when the Provincial Auditor points out that he in some years only sees 50 
per cent of the revenues of government . . . or I shouldn't say government, 
of taxpayers' dollars, those expenditures, that's unbelievable. 
 
And I think that if we called a private-sector auditor before the Public 
Accounts Committee, there could be a dialogue between the Provincial 



 

 

Auditor and the private-sector auditor or auditors, with questions coming 
in from members of the committee, the four members on the opposition side 
and the six members on the government side. 
 
I think that would be important in resolving conflicts that happen like 
that, Mr. Speaker, between private-sector auditors and the Provincial 
Auditor and the role that he has to serve as the watch-dog over the public 
purse, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So that again is another advantage of having that Bill come before the 
Public Accounts Committee, Mr. Speaker.  Even a Bill like Bill 61, I think, 
may have some role in coming before the Public Accounts Committee -- that 
Bill that the government members want to bring in closure on here this 
afternoon. 
 
I think that the public could have greater input if there was a 
strengthening of the Public Accounts Committee and other committees of the 
Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker.  There is no doubt in my mind about 
that.  One of the greatest things in making democracy work could be for 
this Legislative Assembly to pass this motion and pass other motions that 
give greater responsibility, a greater role, to private members who sit on 
those public accounts committees, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor must be a member in good standing in 
related professions.  That's stated in this particular Bill, Mr. Speaker.  
And let's look at how the Public Accounts Committee could better deal with 
that particular item than this Legislative Assembly could as a large 
collective group that gets tied down in partisan politics.  And I know it 
would frustrate the member from Melfort from time to time in his role as 
the House Leader of the government, in wanting to get forward and put 
forward the business of this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, as harmful as that 
business sometimes may seem on the public of Saskatchewan, just like the 
big tax grab Bill would be, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you look at this, there are a number of Acts that have to 
do with this Bill.  And you see, we can never get them all together at one 
time in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, but we can get them together all at one 
time in the Public Accounts Committee with a number of people who have 
expertise.  Wouldn't that be a great thing, Mr. Speaker?  These Bills that 
are affected by this piece of legislation, they would have to be brought 
in.  If you just bear with me for a moment, Mr. Speaker, I want you to know 
which other Acts would come in.  We'd have to bring in experts into the 
committee. 
 
But you look in particular to . . . the auditor must be a member in good 
standing in related professional groups.  Well, Mr. Speaker, you have The 
Chartered Accountants Act.  Mr. Speaker, you also would . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  I know it's going to be rather 
difficult for the hon. member.  The range of the debate is somewhat 
narrower than the members are often accustomed to.  Let me read once again 
what we are discussing. 
 



 

 

 Your committee recommends to the Legislative Assembly that Bill 53, An Act 
to amend The Provincial Auditor Act be referred to the Public Accounts 
Committee for clause-by-clause consideration. 

 
And the motion before us at this moment reads: 
 

 That the sixth report of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts be now 
concurred in. 

 
In other words, the issue I've just read.  I'm bringing that to your 
attention again because I may have to intervene from time to time because 
as I say, the perimeters are not of a wide area. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- I appreciate that, Mr. Speaker, and if I stray somewhat and 
you feel it's appropriate, please do bring me to the more appropriate 
debate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was providing reasons as to why this particular Bill would 
be better dealt with in committee than before this Assembly as a whole.  
And I think that's the argument that I'm trying to make, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The point I was on -- and I do recognize I may have been straying -- there 
are, as an example, Mr. Speaker, some of the things that have to be dealt 
with is that there would be a number of Bills involved at one time that 
affect this particular piece of legislation.  I'm just trying to establish 
some relevancy here, Mr. Speaker.  In the Assembly the mechanism is that we 
deal with one piece of legislation at a time.  This Bill has to go in all 
good conscience to the Public Accounts Committee because it deals with 
several different Acts and we have the ability in the Public Accounts 
Committee to deal with several different pieces of legislation or several 
different items at one time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Just in terms of this Bill, Bill 53, that we're referring, Mr. Speaker, to 
the Public Accounts Committee or asking for it to be referred . . . And I'm 
sure by the time I'm done all members will support referring this Bill to 
the Public Accounts Committee. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Speaker, I've read through the Bill.  We have the 
financial management Act.  We have the Legislative Assembly Executive 
Council and legislative secretaries Act.  We have The Financial 
Administration Act, Mr. Speaker.  We have The Tabling of Documents Act.  We 
have The Certified General Accountants Act, and we have The Chartered 
Accountants Act, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the point I'm making is that we have here one, two, three, four, five, 
six Acts that are consequential to the Bill that's being referred to the 
committee, Mr. Speaker.  Now this Assembly has no format to get all of 
these pieces of legislation before the Assembly at one time.  But in the 
Public Accounts Committee we do have that ability, Mr. Speaker. 



 

 

 
In the Public Accounts Committee, for example, if you had here six pieces 
of legislation that are consequential to Bill 53, you could bring in one 
witness, expert witness, on each of these particular pieces of legislation, 
Mr. Speaker.  And you could have the Provincial Auditor himself or Kenneth 
Dye as the auditor general for Canada be a witness, expert witness, on the 
subject Bill itself. 
 
And wouldn't it be great if you could have members of the committee 
question all of those people at one time so if there was something that was 
contradictory, Mr. Speaker, from say the witness that was appearing on the 
subject Bill to someone who's appearing as a witness for The Certified 
General Accountants Act, Mr. Speaker, that discrepancy could be cleared up 
immediately.  Just immediately, Mr. Speaker, because they would be all 
there listening to the expert testimony at the same time.  And you would 
have the verbatim transcript.  You have the press there, Mr. Speaker.  The 
whole forum is so opened and complex but yet simple, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the detailed examination of such an important Act that governs the 
accountability of the public purse should in fact go before the Public 
Accounts Committee, Mr. Speaker, and not this Assembly where we don't have 
the luxury to be able to deal with the breadth and the consequences of a 
piece of legislation that's passed, Mr. Speaker.  And just as a side-note, 
I think that this should happen for many, many Bills of the Assembly. 
 
Another reason, Mr. Speaker, this should go before the committee is to give 
members a more meaningful role in their jobs as a member of the Legislative 
Assembly.  Quite often I know, especially members that are back-bench 
members of government feel insignificant in their role, Mr. Speaker, 
because they don't seem to have any impact on the overall scheme of things.  
Of course they go to their caucus meetings and they make decisions with 
their colleagues, but quite often those decisions are already made at 
cabinet level, Mr. Speaker, and they're imposed on the back-bench members 
of a government. 
 
And I'm not being partisan here, Mr. Speaker.  I'm sure that's happened 
with our government in the past.  I'm sure it's happened with the Liberal 
government in the past.  I'm sure it happened with the CCF (Co-operative 
Commonwealth Federation) in the past, Mr. Speaker.  But it's time to change 
that, Mr. Speaker.  We have to make sure that the role of members of the 
Legislative Assembly is relevant and meaningful, Mr. Speaker.  They have to 
have impact on the system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Far too long, Mr. Speaker, governments have been 
maintainers of a system that has been not very well serving to the people 
of the province.  If we're to ever change the system, Mr. Speaker, we have 
to start here today, Mr. Speaker, so that the public in the province of 
Saskatchewan are respected and listened to by their members of the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 



 

 

 
Mr. Anguish: -- That's another reason, Mr. Speaker, that this Bill should 
go before the Public Accounts Committee, to make the role of members of the 
Legislative Assembly meaningful in every way possible, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also think that it's important for this Bill to go before 
the Legislative Assembly so that we can establish a more at arm's-length 
budgetary process for the Provincial Auditor's office itself.  And I do not 
have confidence, Mr. Speaker, that that will happen here. 
 
Again in a non-partisan way I would say, Mr. Speaker, that a government 
would want to have control over the budget of the Provincial Auditor, but 
that should not be so.  That should not be so, Mr. Speaker, because that 
Provincial Auditor should never have to compromise his position because of 
the cabinet pulling the string purses to choke the responsibility and the 
authority out of the Provincial Auditor, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- That should never happen, Mr. Speaker, and that's why we 
need to strengthen the role of the Public Accounts Committee in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
 DSome Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- I'm confident, Mr. Speaker, if this Bill goes before the 
Public Accounts Committee that it will return a much improved Bill from 
what it is right now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that by putting this Bill into the Public Accounts 
Committee we will assure, we will assure in the future that the role of the 
Provincial Auditor is independent from government and serving to the 
Legislative Assembly and therefore the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Speaker, also I think that it should go to the Public 
Accounts Committee because of the aspect of value-for-money auditing, Mr. 
Speaker.  Value-for-money auditing has been used by the federal government 
for a good number of years now.  They make sure that there is due regard 
for efficiency, economy, and effectiveness. 
 
Now again in an non-partisan way, no cabinet, no cabinet feels well served 
by a Provincial Auditor that not only looks at how the government spent 
their money and if they had the authority to spend that money, but also to 
look at the waste and mismanagement, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That's what value-for-money auditing provides.  And this government, Mr. 
Speaker, the cabinet, the Executive Council would never allow 
value-for-money auditing to pass, but the Public Accounts Committee would, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have on our verbatim transcript of the Public Accounts Committee -- 



 

 

every member of this Assembly who has spoken in that committee -- some 
indication that they support value-for-money auditing.  But has there ever 
been a government in the history of the province that supported 
value-for-money auditing, Mr. Speaker?  No, there has not been. 
 
But the time has come when people in Saskatchewan say enough is enough.  We 
have to change the system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- The public feel that it is an appropriate place in the 
Public Accounts Committee; the members of the committee on both sides of 
the House feel that the Public Accounts is the appropriate committee.  And 
we're asking this Assembly here this afternoon to also sanction that it is 
the Public Accounts that is the appropriate place, not in the hands of 
cabinet, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Speaker, the other reason it should be referred to the 
Public Accounts Committee is that we will strengthen the Bill.  Mr. 
Speaker, we will make sure, when this Bill comes back from the Public 
Accounts Committee, that the Provincial Auditor has all the authority to go 
along with his responsibilities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- The Public Accounts Committee, Mr. Speaker, will make 
certain that the Provincial Auditor doesn't just look at 50 per cent of 
taxpayers' expenditures by a government; the Public Accounts Committee, Mr. 
Speaker, will make sure that the auditor has access to every single penny 
spent by a government or their agencies, Mr. Speaker.  That's the 
commitment of the Public Accounts Committee. 
 
That's what members on that side on the Public Accounts Committee want; 
that's what members on this side on the Public Accounts Committee want, is 
for the Provincial Auditor to have the authority to look at all the books.  
Open the books, is what people are saying, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- And, Mr. Speaker, pathetically that is not the case right 
now.  The Provincial Auditor has reported in his annual report that he 
doesn't have the co-operation of government, for example.  We would make 
sure when this Bill came back from the Public Accounts Committee that the 
government would co-operate with the Provincial Auditor, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We cannot allow politics to interfere with the job of the Provincial 
Auditor, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor and his good office and 



 

 

his good staff should be beyond reproach.  There can be no perception that 
he is being interfered with by government.  But he has been interfered with 
by government, Mr. Speaker.  There are citations in his annual report of 
being interfered with, Mr. Speaker -- information being withheld, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Public Accounts Committee would make sure that the Provincial Auditor 
could not be interfered with.  Mr. Speaker, the public have the right to 
know. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- You see, Mr. Speaker, the reason the public has the right 
to know, through the Public Accounts Committee and then finally, I admit, 
through this Assembly . . . We have the right to know that this government 
has raised its revenue since 1982 by 70 per cent, Mr. Speaker.  But the 
problem we're in today is that they've increased their expenditures by 90 
per cent, Mr. Speaker.  And they don't open the books to determine what 
those expenditures are. 
 
Fifty per cent is hidden from the Provincial Auditor, Mr. Speaker.  That's 
not good enough, Mr. Speaker.  We need to know if it's waste and 
mismanagement that's causing this to happen, Mr. Speaker.  The public has 
the right to know.  And they're saying, enough is enough.  If you've got 
four and a half billion dollars every year of our money, you bloody well 
better account for it -- open those books. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- I know the hon. member feels emotion.  I'm going to however 
. . . We're trying to restrain our comments even under great emotion and 
sincere feelings, and I'm going to ask the hon. member to withdraw that 
particular remark. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- I'm sorry, Mr. Speaker, which remark?  Could you just tell 
me which remark and I'll withdraw it. 
 
The Speaker: -- The remark referring to, the government bloody well should 
do something or other.  That particular remark. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- I certainly withdraw, Mr. Speaker.  I had no intention of 
offending the Chair or the Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- I apologize for getting carried away.  When I start talking 
about four and a half billion dollars of the people's of Saskatchewan's tax 
dollars that can't be accounted for, I tend to get a little bit emotional 
about that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- You see, Mr. Speaker, in the Public Accounts Committee, if 



 

 

the Bill comes before there, we look at expenditures this year, the 
government's estimating total expenditures of $4.8 billion -- $4.8 billion.  
We're just talking about the Consolidated Fund.  Revenues, $4,554,200,000 
-- $4.5 billion in revenue. 
 
(1530) 
 
The Speaker: -- Order. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- Mr. Speaker, again I'd like to draw to your attention that 
the member is becoming very broad on his debate again and he's becoming 
very repetitious regarding the issue at hand here.  And he's abusing his 
rights as an individual and I'd like you to bring the member back to the 
Bill, that Bill 53 that we had recommended to be sent back to the Public 
Accounts Committee. 
 
The member is trying to mislead the public in this House about the fact 
that documents that he is reading from have not been set forth to the 
public.  Those documents he is reading from are already in Public Accounts, 
Mr. Speaker.  We are dealing with them in Public Accounts and what he is 
saying is not actual of what is in that documentation.  So, Mr. Speaker, 
I'd just like you to rule on that. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- I just want to point out, Mr. Speaker, you've been more 
than fair with members of all sides of the House.  But I just want to point 
out, perhaps for the benefit of the member from Lloydminster as much as 
anyone, that certainly members can and do become repetitious, but I don't 
think the member here had.  While he has not necessarily been concise, 
neither has he been repetitious.  Members opposite . . . if the member from 
Lloydminster thinks he's repetitious, he ought to be a little more specific 
and not just make the comment. 
 
The member from North Battleford is speaking about a subject which we 
happen to feel is important and we think it's worth a little time in this 
Assembly.  We think, Mr. Speaker, the member's not being repetitious nor is 
he being irrelevant.  You have defined the limits of the debate and I think 
he's stayed within it.  And I think his comments are appropriate and in 
order. 
 
The Speaker: -- I've listened to the hon. member's point of order and the 
member for Regina Centre and his response.  I wouldn't at this point rule 
that the hon. member is being repetitious as such.  However, I would once 
again draw his attention to rule no. 657 in Beauchesne's.  And I'm going to 
read it again: 
 

 When the House is debating the report of a committee, it is not competent 
for a Member to open the whole subject matter that was originally referred 
to the committee. 

 
I know it's a difficult concept perhaps to grasp, but once again I can only 
bring to the hon. member's attention that we aren't discussing specifics of 
the Provincial Auditor's report, or we aren't discussing specifics of the 
Estimates, which does restrict you, I appreciate; however that is the type 



 

 

of debate that is presently taking place. 
 
And as I have remarked earlier, all hon. members will have sufficient 
opportunity on several different occasions to discuss items in detail and 
bring up many different issues at times when further opportunities are 
presented, for example, continuing second reading, if it's referred to the 
committee; discussion before the committee, Committee of the Whole, third 
reading -- many opportunities as I mentioned earlier to discuss specifics. 
 
But that opportunity, I'm afraid, isn't offered to you although perhaps the 
hon. member would like to.  But this debate doesn't offer you that. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- That's fair, Mr. Speaker, thank you.  I appreciate your 
ruling, Mr. Speaker.  I do fail to understand though, the member from Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster, that he doesn't understand the reason for this debate 
taking place here this afternoon. 
 
Certainly part of the whole purpose of this debate, Mr. Speaker, is to give 
some strength and support from this side of the House to members on the 
government side who sit on the Public Accounts Committee.  We should be 
wanting to put forward the strongest arguments possible to give the members 
opposite who sit on the Public Accounts Committee the ammunition and the 
strength to stand up to their own government when they have to, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- If something is wrong and harmful to the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan, it shouldn't matter whether you're a Liberal or a 
Conservative or a New Democrat or a Reformer or whatever you are on that 
Public Accounts Committee.  You should stand up for the people of 
Saskatchewan -- not your government, your cabinet, your Executive Council 
to tell you how to vote. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- So we want . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Why is the hon. member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- Mr. Speaker, regarding the statement the member from The 
Battlefords has just made, I'd like to draw a point of order.  The point of 
order I'd like to draw to your attention is the fact that the member has 
accused members of the Public Accounts Committee of not being part of that 
recommendation and this motion that is before the floor.  There is no one 
on this floor of this legislature, be it the NDP opposition or any 
government member, Mr. Speaker, that are not willing to support this 
particular motion.  And the member likes to make it sound like there are.  
I want to draw it to your attention that the member is speaking on behalf 
of every other member of this legislature and that's . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- I have listened to the hon. member and the hon member's 
remarks are not a point of order. 



 

 

 
Mr. Anguish: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to continue on that point.  
Part of the purpose of this debate here this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, is to 
make sure that all members who sit on that Public Accounts Committee have 
the strength of their courage and their convictions to represent the public 
interest in the province of Saskatchewan.  And that has not always been the 
case.  And I said that in a non-partisan way, Mr. Speaker -- totally 
non-partisan.  It doesn't matter who's in government, Mr. Speaker.  The 
members who look at the Public Accounts of Saskatchewan have to stand for 
what's right not what's partisan, Mr. Speaker.  That's the point I wanted 
to make to the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster. 
 
And we have seen situations in the past, Mr. Speaker, to be quite frank and 
honest with you, where if a member of the government side voted with the 
opposition because they believed in it, they were not treated very nicely, 
should I say, by other members on that committee of the same political 
party, Mr. Speaker.  And those things have to stop. 
 
If something's right, it's right.  If something's right, we should do it, 
Mr. Speaker.  If something's wrong that's happening in government, we 
should correct it, Mr. Speaker.  And we need a strong Public Accounts 
Committee with a strong Provincial Auditor to assure that the people's 
interests in the province of Saskatchewan are protected and not 
obliterated. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- One of the things that I want to touch on before I end my 
intervention in this debate, Mr. Speaker, is the strengthening of the Bill 
itself.  We've gone through four items in the Bill -- the four direct 
impacts that it has.  There's first off, the term of six years, and we've 
dealt a bit with that.  There's the Provincial Auditor must be a member in 
good standing in related professional groups, and we've dealt with that.  
We've talked about the Board of Internal Economy to review the budget of 
the Provincial Auditor, and there may be more that could be added to that 
but we've touched on that. 
 
And fourthly in this Bill, it provides for value-for-money auditing.  And 
there is much, much more that could be said about value-for-money auditing, 
but I know that this Assembly is not the proper place to do that today, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
There are volumes on value-for-money auditing.  We could have a debate for 
many, many, many days, many, many months.  In fact the debate about 
value-for-money auditing is going on for years across Canada amongst those 
in the public accounting profession, those provincial auditors and the 
Auditor General who are the watch-dogs of the public purse. 
 
So I realize that that debate is far too complex to get into here, and that 
in itself I think, Mr. Speaker, is a reason why all government members and 
all opposition members should vote to see this Bill go to committee, Mr. 
Speaker, go to the Public Accounts Committee. 
 



 

 

So we've reviewed those four items, Mr. Speaker.  But I think that there's 
another area that deserves some debate here this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, 
and that is, what could be added to the Bill by the Public Accounts 
Committee to be brought back in reference to this Legislative Assembly, so 
that the housework that takes place in here could be much more streamlined 
than what it is today. 
 
Now the Public Accounts Committee, once it got a hold of an Act to amend 
The Provincial Auditor Act, the list is endless what you could do to 
improve Bill 53, Mr. Speaker.  I would think that the amount of information 
that could be put into this Bill would assure the Provincial Auditor was 
very clear about the role that he has, and he would be absolutely certain 
that he had the authority to carry out that role and responsibility that he 
has to the Legislative Assembly and therefore the people of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I think one of the things that could be added into the Bill by the 
Public Accounts Committee -- that wouldn't happen here because that 
encompasses too broad a range -- is that the auditor could play a greater 
role in reviewing the budgeting procedures of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
You see, timeliness has always been a very important aspect of the 
budgetary loop, Mr. Speaker.  And we have a situation today in Saskatchewan 
where sometimes these Public Accounts, Mr. Speaker, this annual volume 
that's produced, is not produced and yet they're starting to bring in next 
year's budget. 
 
Well the whole idea behind the Public Accounts is so you can look through 
it and study it in the Public Accounts Committee in great detail and make 
recommendations before next year's budget comes out, to make sure you don't 
find the same pitfalls in next year's budgetary process, Mr. Speaker.  But 
the timeliness is not there. 
 
Now it would be possible, I suppose, that if The Provincial Auditor Act 
went to the Public Accounts Committee that we could hear professional, 
expert evidence that could tell us how to put in place the mechanism to 
assure us, for example, that if the fiscal year  
 Dends on March 31, 1990 in this case, that we should have those Public 
Accounts by December 31 of 1990, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That gives you a period of time in there of about nine months, if I'm not 
mistaken.  Nine months should be enough time to prepare the Public Accounts 
for this Assembly, Mr. Speaker.  Nine months should be enough time. 
 
But when did we get this particular Public Accounts, Mr. Speaker?  We got 
this particular Public Accounts, not at the end of 1990; we got this Public 
Accounts into 1991, Mr. Speaker -- long too far after to be really 
meaningful to the process. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there is a list of dates that I want to just put out to 
you to assure you that this is unusual.  And it's happened by tradition as 
to when this document is presented, but tradition has gone by the wayside 
lately.  I don't know whether it's the rapid-moving technology or the 



 

 

burden on the Government House Leader, but tradition no longer means what 
it used to mean in our British parliamentary system, which is the forbear I 
suppose to our conduct in the way we operate here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But if you look between 1945 -- this is as an example to stress the need 
for having this added in by the Public Accounts Committee, which we could 
do -- between 1945 and 1970, Mr. Speaker, this Public Accounts document was 
put out in February of each year.  All those years, 1945 to 1970, it always 
came out in February, the month of February. 
 
And then you start looking at some of these dates in here, Mr. Speaker.  
It's not at the end of the year; it's not in the spring.  Sometimes these 
documents, you don't get them for almost a year.  Sometimes I believe it 
has been a year.  I'd stand to be corrected on that but I think sometimes 
it's been more than a year for this document to come out to the public. 
 
(1545) 
 
And what a farce that is, Mr. Speaker.  What a farce, when you've items 
where the budget for the government comes out before the public accounting 
for the last year.  Mr. Speaker, how can you tell where all the money went?  
Where did all the money go? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- And, Mr. Speaker, you see the problem that happens is that 
when people don't know where all the money went, they don't want to give 
more.  And now we're looking at the largest tax grab in the history of the 
province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So this loop . . . I call this the budgetary loop, Mr. Speaker.  And the 
Public Accounts Committee plays a vitally important role in the budgetary 
loop.  And the auditor is a vital link to the Public Accounts Committee to 
information, Mr. Speaker.  That's where we get our information from.  We 
get our information from the Provincial Auditor. 
 
So we would want in The Provincial Auditor Act that this Bill does come to 
committee, that we make sure that this budgetary loop -- from the budget, 
from the expenditures, from the raising of revenue, through to the 
accountability of looking at the Public Accounts -- is timely, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We would, for example, put into this Bill, if it went before the Public 
Accounts Committee, Mr. Speaker, that the Public Accounts would be tabled 
by December 31 following the closure of any fiscal year, end of the fiscal 
year being March 31.  And it wouldn't have to be the legislature assembled.  
That would be preferable.  But if the legislature was not assembled, those 
reports could be in fact presented to you, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the 
Legislative Assembly.  You're an elected member, now of that Chair, the 
position you hold, and I think that the Public Accounts Committee would see 
it as appropriate for you to receive the Public Accounts, if in fact, the 
legislature was not assembled, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Because we can't allow a government to avoid public accountability just by 



 

 

not calling in the legislature, Mr. Speaker.  You can't allow that to 
happen.  So that's happened in the past, and I think that the public are a 
little tired of things like that happening, just a little tired of things. 
 
But the Public Accounts Committee could deal with it because do you know 
that if the Public Accounts Committee wants to sit when the legislature is 
not in session, all they have to do is sit down and agree with it.  The 
chairman of the Public Accounts Committee phones the vice-chairman of the 
Public Accounts Committee representing both sides of the House.  They'll 
contact the rest of the members. 
 
The members say there's got to be some accountability here and by gosh, Mr. 
Speaker, there will be accountability there, because the members of the 
Public Accounts Committee care about what happens with the taxpayers' 
dollars in the province of Saskatchewan.  That's another reason this Bill 
should go to the Public Accounts Committee, Mr. Speaker, because we can 
deal with it intersessionally.  This Assembly does not have to in fact be 
in session, Mr. Speaker.  So you see, tradition has gone by the wayside in 
terms of putting out the Public Accounts to this Assembly. 
 
So I think that it has to be entrenched in The Provincial Auditor Act, Mr, 
Speaker -- when it's going to be tabled, how it's going to be tabled, and 
to make sure that the process is timely so that a government does not bring 
in a budget before you can even account for the previous year's spending, 
Mr. Speaker.  That is just not acceptable in today's society.  That sense 
of Saskatchewan integrity has to be restored, Mr. Speaker, and the Public 
Accounts Committee and the Provincial Auditor can make sure that that goes 
a long way to having that restored, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the other things that would happen in this Bill when it 
goes before the Public Accounts . . . I'm sorry I keep saying when it does, 
I assume that all members will want to be supporting the motion when it 
comes up, when everyone has had their chance to speak on this motion here 
this afternoon. 
 
And I think it's important to realize that if other members want to get up 
when I've concluded my remarks, they should feel free to get up and give 
their views on this particular Bill and the process that we are debating 
here this afternoon.  All members I remind you, back-benchers included, 
have a right to get up and give your intervention on this particular and 
very important motion.  I wanted to mention that, Mr. Speaker, to certainly 
make sure that they have their share of the debate as well, and the courage 
of their convictions to get up.  And if they feel there are ways to 
convince everybody in the House to support this Bill going before the 
Public Accounts Committee, they should feel in fact free to do so, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Speaker, there's another item that I think deserves 
mentioning here this afternoon, as to why this Bill should go before the 
Public Accounts Committee, that I don't think could be adequately dealt 
with in this Assembly, in this forum here.  I understand it would have to 



 

 

come back and be approved finally by the ultimate authority of the 
legislature, but we could save an extreme amount of work for this Assembly, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of the things . . . what I want to mention is that we need to review 
the accounting procedures within government, within the departments and 
agencies of the government, Mr. Speaker.  I give you an example where the 
Provincial Auditor has some concerns, and that has to do with the 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation, Mr. Speaker.  Loans are given 
to the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation from the Consolidated 
Fund, Mr. Speaker.  You would be aware of that.  And in turn, the 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation makes loans to hospitals, 
schools -- to be specific, I guess, or to be more general -- to capital 
construction projects.  But then the Property Management Corporation shows 
that as an account receivable on their books when they make a loan.  But 
they never get that money back in from the hospital or school, from the 
third party -- that's correct expression -- from the third party that 
they've loaned the money to.  So the Provincial Auditor has a problem with 
the accounting process of government. 
 
And I don't think that we can allow that to continue.  The Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation has given no indication that they're going 
to correct that accounting procedure which is not in line, in the 
Provincial Auditor's opinion, is not in line with generally acceptable 
accounting principles.  It doesn't fit in. 
 
So if this Bill comes before the committee, we can make amendments that 
assure that the accounting principles in government, and the methods of 
accounting, the procedures of accounting, are in line with generally 
accepted accounting principles as set out by the accountants' association 
and that are accepted by other provincial governments right across this 
country, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have to make sure that the Provincial Auditor has the authority to go in 
and say -- in this case the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation -- 
say to them: look, you're doing something here that is not in line with 
generally accepted accounting principles, and I want you to correct that 
and this is how I want you to correct it. 
 
But does he have the authority to do that right now?  No, he does not have 
the authority to do that at the present time.  And members on this side of 
the House, and that side I would hope, but certainly members of the Public 
Accounts Committee are very well aware of that, Mr. Speaker, very well 
aware of that.  It has been discussed in committee. 
 
So if this Bill gets to the Public Accounts Committee, Mr. Speaker, we will 
make sure that it comes back with a mechanism by which the accounting 
procedures of government agencies and departments and Crown corporations 
will be standardized, Mr. Speaker.  No good, not sufficient any more to 
have different methods of keeping the books in different places of the 
government, Mr. Speaker.  Just not acceptable. 
 
So we would assure -- I know that members on both sides of the House sit on 



 

 

that Public Accounts Committee -- would make very, very sure that the 
accounting procedures are consistent. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- And they're not now, are they? 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- And they're not right now.  That's correct as the member 
points out.  They're not consistent right now.  It's a whole hodgepodge of 
different methods. 
 
So we would make sure that there was expert testimony before the Public 
Accounts Committee to correct that deficiency that's pointed out by the 
Provincial Auditor. 
 
Now this Bill has room for that type of an improvement in it.  There's no 
question that this Bill has left room for improvement.  And I think that 
the House would only deal with a very narrow scope of the things that are 
immediately rushed into the Bill.  But if that Bill gets to the Public 
Accounts Committee, Mr. Speaker, that's our role, to make sure that the 
Provincial Auditor can do the job that he has set out to do -- to serve the 
people of this Assembly, and we serve the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The reason I can speak with confidence that I know that that Bill would 
come back with something in it, Mr. Speaker, is that every one of the 
committee members, on the Public Accounts Committee, all 10 members agree 
that there's a problem there with the accounting procedures.  So I know 
that when I speak here today, I do have the confidence that the members of 
the committee would have such a provision come back in the Bill.  And I 
can't give you the exact wording of it.  It would be presumptuous of me to 
do that, Mr. Speaker, to give you the exact wording.  But the committee 
members themselves . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  I'm giving the hon. member some bit of latitude.  
In effect the hon. member has been suggesting proposed amendments.  I must 
rule that he's out of order.  The purpose of the committee -- that is the 
purpose of the committee, not the purpose of this debate -- the purpose of 
the committee is to suggest any possible revisions or amendments or 
whatever they may have in mind. 
 
We're discussing the narrow issue of the motion that reads: 
 

 That the sixth report of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts be now 
concurred in. 

 
We're not discussing all the possible changes that might occur to that Bill 
in committee.  We're just discussing that the sixth report of the Standing 
Committee on Public Accounts be now concurred. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- I recognize I'm just a touch late.  I should have 
perhaps suggested comments before you began to speak.  But the member is 
giving the reasons for the importance of the reference of this to the 
committee. 
 



 

 

Now I'm not challenging the Chair.  I'm seeking a clarification.  He's 
giving the reasons why it is important that this matter go to the Public 
Accounts because the Public Accounts can consider matters of a sort, and 
these are examples. 
 
So I wonder, Mr. Chairman, if you didn't mean to restrict his discussion of 
the reasons for the importance of referring this Bill to the committee, did 
you? 
 
The Speaker: -- I'll address your remark.  I don't intend to restrict the 
hon. member's discussion in any way.  Far be it for me to do that. 
 
However I also have the duty as the Speaker to keep the hon. member on the 
topic under discussion, and that is what I am attempting to do.  The hon. 
member is beginning to introduce possible amendments.  Well, as you and I 
both know, there are any number of possible amendments which are not 
germane to the debate under discussion on this topic.  Let me read the 
topic once more: 
 

 Your committee recommends to the Legislative Assembly that Bill 53, An Act 
to amend The Provincial Auditor Act, be referred to the Public Accounts 
Committee for clause-by-clause consideration. 

 
That's where all those considerations take place.  And today's motion to 
effect that, reading: 
 

 That the sixth report of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts be now 
concurred in. 

 
So in no way am I restricting the hon. member's ability to speak on the 
topic.  I'm only trying to keep him on the topic, not off it. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Well thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I appreciate that.  I know 
that I have ranged off of the specific topic of the items under debate 
here, but I tried only to do that in terms of example rather than describe 
in detail the differences between this Legislative Assembly and a committee 
of the legislature, going into detail about that. 
 
I tried, and I thought it would be more topical and convincing for the 
members opposite and for people to understand . . . that would pay 
attention to what's happening here this afternoon.  I thought it would be 
better to use examples, Mr. Speaker, and maybe I should try and limit the 
use of examples I make to try and make it a more interesting intervention. 
 
(1600) 
 
The Speaker: -- I want to clarify again that it's not the examples, it's 
that the examples aren't relevant to the topic under discussion.  Because 
those possible amendments and discussions of all the possible amendments 
are during committee stage, if the Bill is referred to the committee.  
That's the point I'm trying to make. 
 
Now as I said earlier, you may propose any number of possible amendments 



 

 

but I can't accept that as being relevant to the debate today. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Well I thought we had a clear understanding before, Mr. 
Speaker, but I'll certainly try and honour the ruling that you make. 
 
You see there are great differences, I suppose, between this Assembly here, 
where the debate quite often gets heated and tempers run short and people 
have very strong opinions . . . We deal with a wide variety of topics, of 
legislation. 
 
I guess the main roles of this Chamber here, Mr. Speaker, are first off to 
preserve democracy and make sure that we do have a democratic society in 
Saskatchewan.  A second reason that we have this Chamber here is to approve 
the appropriations for budgets and review budgets of the Government of 
Saskatchewan that are supposed to serve the people of the province.  And 
thirdly, the role of the Assembly I guess is to bring into place laws, to 
amend laws, change laws, delete laws -- to deal with the law-making process 
of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I think that the Bill should go to the committee and make the committee 
role more meaningful because we don't have as many stages, and the process 
is more meaningful in committee as opposed to here.  I know that members 
here would understand, but people listening today may not understand the 
different stages that a Bill has to go through before it becomes law. 
 
In here in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, a Bill is brought forward usually by 
the government and with the blessing of the Government House Leader when he 
works it into his very busy agenda  -- just like Bill 61, which may be a 
topic here today.  But that particular Bill, Mr. Speaker, has gone through 
first reading.  And basically that means that the government member or 
government cabinet member has stood up and introduced that Bill and very 
little happens on it.  Usually no debate, sometimes there's a vote, 
sometimes there's not a vote. 
 
And then it goes into something called second reading, Mr. Speaker.  And 
during second reading is quite often where we get the very heated debates 
on sort of the general principles of the Bill that's before the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
And then we have of course Committee of the Whole, Mr. Speaker, meaning 
committee of the whole House, where you look at the Bill clause by clause.  
We certainly haven't got to that stage yet on Bill 61, the new tax increase 
Bill.  So people haven't had the opportunity to see that heated debate on a 
Bill that they very much oppose, but they should have the access to see 
that being opposed, because people in this Assembly speak of the public 
will and the wishes and desires of their constituents, Mr. Speaker. 
 
After Committee of the Whole, the Bill is reported back and we get into 
something called third reading.  And after third reading, at some point, 
Mr. Speaker, the Lieutenant Governor will give Royal Assent, and that Bill 
is no longer a Bill.  That Bill becomes a statute. 
 
And I think usually when people in the public hear some of these terms, 



 

 

they sometimes become confused with it.  But a statute or a law in the 
language we use is interchangeable, it means the same thing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The committee, Mr. Speaker, doesn't go through all of those stages.  Mr. 
Speaker, let me explain the difference and why the committee would more 
appropriately deal with this Bill than the Legislative Assembly.  I think 
you would recognize that the procedure I described, if it's a controversial 
piece of legislation, can get to be quite a cumbersome process that needs 
to be gone through.  Especially, I think, if it's a controversial Bill like 
Bill 61, where this government wants to bring in the biggest grab of tax, 
the provincial goods and services tax, in the history of the province.  So 
that will be a heated, heated debate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But in the Public Accounts Committee there aren't all those hurdles to go 
through, Mr. Speaker.  And you don't get into the partisan political 
interest that members quite often in this Assembly stand up and grandstand 
on to be quite honest with you, Mr. Speaker.  In that Public Accounts 
Committee . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I'm going to once more intervene and I'm 
afraid I'm going to have to continue doing it.  The member discussing 
procedure, procedure, certainly isn't on . . . That's not relevant to the 
sixth report as proposed by the Public Accounts Committee.  The member is 
discussing procedure and wandering from the topic and I'm going to have to 
keep intervening.  But I said earlier that it's a debate with a relatively 
narrow scope compared to what members are ordinarily accustomed to. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Well I understand you to continue intervening, Mr. Speaker, 
on this particular case when I was describing . . . And I'm not questioning 
your ruling at all.  I was trying to describe the difference from this 
physical place here, this Assembly, this Chamber where we all come and 
meet, as opposed to what the structure is in the committee, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  I once more draw to the hon. member's attention 
that the issue he raises applies to all committees.  That is not what we're 
discussing today.  We're discussing Bill 53, An Act to amend The Provincial 
Auditor Act be referred to the Public Accounts Committee for 
clause-by-clause consideration, and the committee's presentation of the 
motion presently under discussion that the sixth report of the Standing 
Committee on Public Accounts by now concurred. 
 
You, sir, are off the topic, very clearly, and I must ask you to move to 
your next point. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Well one of the major reasons, Mr. Speaker, why the Bill 
should be referred to the Public Accounts Committee is the ease with which 
the Public Accounts Committee can deal with this particular Bill.  And it's 
vitally important to us in this case because it deals with the Provincial 
Auditor. 
 
You see when the Bill comes before the committee -- and I stress again, I'm 
sure all members will vote to have this Bill go before the Public Accounts 
Committee -- when that Bill arrives before the Public Accounts Committee, 



 

 

it will receive the highest priority of anything that we deal with in the 
committee, Mr. Speaker, the highest priority.  Because without the good 
services and the strengthened role of the Provincial Auditor, it makes our 
job more difficult in the Public Accounts Committee.  In fact, if the role 
of the Provincial Auditor was allowed to deteriorate, Mr. Speaker, you 
would find there would be a day when the committee would cease to operate 
in any kind of a meaningful way whatsoever. 
 
And I think that this Bill should come before the Public Accounts 
Committee, because the day is rapidly approaching when we will find that 
the committee cannot get the information they need because of constraints 
that are placed upon the Provincial Auditor, Mr. Speaker.  And we think 
that we have such a vested interest in this Bill 53, An Act to amend The 
Provincial Auditor Act, that we want to see this Bill come before that 
committee. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Speaker, this Bill will be dealt with with a higher 
priority than it would be in the legislature.  Now the debate here this 
afternoon is, should this Bill be continued to be dealt with in the 
legislature only, in this Assembly, in this House, or should it go to the 
committee, the Public Accounts Committee? 
 
I'm making the argument this Bill cannot get the adequate consideration and 
respect and high priority it needs before this Assembly because of all the 
meaningful work that the government has to do, and members of the 
opposition have to watch and contribute to, Mr. Speaker.  But I make the 
argument this Bill should go to the Public Accounts Committee because every 
one of the ten members on that Committee feel that it should go there, and 
they would give it the highest priority of anything. 
 
And it would in fact be the only topic before the committee until we had 
concluded our discussions and our input into it.  And we would have the 
opportunity to make additions to the Bill. 
 
 DThe Bill that comes before the Legislative Assembly . . . I think I could 
count on my fingers, Mr. Speaker, the number of times there's been a change 
in a Bill once it came before the legislature.  And I tried to talk about 
the different stages a Bill goes through, Mr. Speaker.  I've seen very, 
very few changes made since I've been a member of the Legislative Assembly, 
or in my time as a member of parliament, Mr. Speaker.  Very seldom, if the 
government brings in a Bill, do they allow any changes to it, no matter how 
rational and how valid those changes might be. 
 
But in committee, Mr. Speaker, I tell you it's different because you're 
removed from the realm of politics.  And in that committee we know right 
now that every member on the Public Accounts Committee wants this Bill to 
come before the Public Accounts Committee. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- We know also, Mr. Speaker, that it would be the only item 



 

 

dealt with until every member had voiced their concerns, suggested any 
amendments, suggested even possible deletions, Mr. Speaker, to enact, to 
amend The Provincial Auditor Act.  Because we know how valuable it is to us 
and we know how valuable it is to the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan, because it provides strength to the watch-dog of the public 
purse which is the Provincial Auditor, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now just the mechanism in the way in which the committee works makes it 
non-partisan, especially when you're dealing with a Bill like this that is 
so important to the functioning of the Public Accounts Committee. 
 
This particular Bill, I'm sure that the member from Shellbrook-Torch River 
would have input into it.  I'm sure that the member from Biggar would make 
input into it.  I know that there would be interventions from the member 
from Cut Knife-Lloydminster.  The member from Wilkie sits on the committee, 
and I know he has some very strong concerns when it comes to the Provincial 
Auditor, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I know the very capable chair of the Public Accounts Committee, the member 
from Regina Victoria, would make an intervention on this Bill when it comes 
before the Public Accounts Committee. 
 
I know that the member from Saskatoon South would have very strong ideas.  
He also happens to be our critic for the Provincial Auditor.  So I think 
very appropriately the member from Saskatoon South -- and very 
knowledgeable, a long-serving member of this Assembly -- would make an 
intervention. 
 
I know from working with the member from Regina Rosemont that he would make 
an intervention on this Bill when it came before the Public Accounts 
Committee.  I know that I will make suggestions, Mr. Speaker, when this 
Bill comes before the Public Accounts Committee. 
 
And you see, most of the time on a Bill like this we would agree to the 
changes that needed to be made because they're in the public interest.  But 
this Assembly seems to be a forum more for dramatics, Mr. Speaker, quite 
often, than making change for good, for the good of the public purse, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So I think it is just imperative that this Bill go to the Public Accounts 
Committee and not to be dealt with solely before this Legislative Assembly, 
because it deserves more attention than what this Assembly, this House, 
could adequately have, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we could start dealing with this Bill very soon.  It's timely, 
Mr. Speaker.  I see no opposition.  There may be; I haven't checked with 
everyone.  I see no opposition to the Public Accounts Committee dealing 
with this Bill immediately. 
 
The next time we meet is tomorrow morning at 9 o'clock, Mr. Speaker, the 
Public Accounts Committee meets.  We meet every Tuesday morning and every 
Thursday morning at 9 o'clock.  We could deal with this Bill until it's 
completed, Mr. Speaker.  That's the reason why we should get it before the 



 

 

Public Accounts Committee. 
 
Another reason is, Mr. Speaker, in regard to timeliness, if for some reason 
the work of this Assembly, the Legislative Assembly was concluded, if this 
House adjourned or prorogued, we could sit intersessionally, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There are provisions made.  The authority is there.  And even if this House 
isn't sitting, the Public Accounts Committee can sit to make sure that all 
the work is concluded on Bill 53.  And I think all members would agree to 
that because they realize the importance of this Bill. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- And the seasoned member from Rosetown. 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- We need . . . I'm sorry, I forgot to mention the member 
from Rosetown is also a member of that committee.  I knew that I was short 
one member of the committee. The member from Rosetown is also on that 
committee.  He's a former Speaker, very knowledgeable, Mr. Speaker, about 
the process. 
 
Now I think it would be interesting, Mr. Speaker, to see who the witnesses 
would actually be.  You see, we have some expertise beyond the members of 
the Committee, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have before the committee the Provincial Auditor. Unless he's ill, or 
something very pressing, the Provincial Auditor himself, Mr. Strelioff, is 
at every meeting.  The assistant auditor is also at every meeting and they 
usually have one staff person with them. So there's three people right 
there that have a great deal of expertise, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They could each be called as witnesses before the committee.  Can't do that 
in this forum, or at least it would be very difficult to do that in this 
forum.  So therefore that's the reason why this Bill should go to the 
Public Accounts Committee, Mr. Speaker.  Okay? 
 
Let's look at who else you have in the Public Accounts Committee.  We have 
a Clerk of the Public Accounts Committee, same Clerk that happens to be 
sitting at the Table here right now, Mr. Speaker.  In terms of the process 
and procedures, he provides a great deal of expertise that would be useful 
in looking at this Bill in the Public Accounts Committee, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We also have Gerry Kraus, the Provincial Comptroller, and usually Mr. 
Kraus, the Provincial Comptroller, has someone with him at the Public 
Accounts Committee meetings, Mr. Speaker.  They would provide a great deal 
of expertise. 
 
And you see it's not just a mutual admiration society there, Mr. Speaker.  
I wouldn't want to lead you to believe that.  Sometimes the comptroller and 
the Provincial Auditor may have a disagreement before the Public Accounts 
Committee, but they feel free to do that if it's a valid difference of 
opinion, because no one is going to reprimand them for that.  If there's a 
problem there, they have a sincere desire, and members of the committee 



 

 

themselves have a sincere desire to see that those differences are resolved 
so that it's in the best interest of the public purse, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I've reviewed just the people who would be at the Public Accounts 
Committee, the normal stage of events.  Those are the people who would be 
there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But we have the ability to call witnesses to give testimony to the 
committee which is a matter of record.  There's a verbatim transcript just 
as there is for the House that's published after each meeting.  We have it 
within a day or so after.  And it's called the Standing Committee on Public 
Accounts -- Minutes and Verbatim Report.  So there's a record there as to 
what happens. 
 
And if we were to call, as I mentioned earlier, people like Kenneth Dye who 
was the auditor general for the federal House of Commons, he could provide 
valuable, valuable information as to how we could change The Provincial 
Auditor Act to reflect the desires that people have, to reflect the desires 
that the public and this Assembly have, to make sure that there is sound 
accounting . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I'm sorry, does the 
Minister of Finance wish to say something? 
 
Well the ministers are making interventions over there.  I don't know why 
they would say that we don't understand SPMC (Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation).  And the Minister of Finance says they all agree, 
so let's vote.  I just want to make sure that everyone has an opportunity 
to participate in this debate.  And if the back-bench members opposite want 
to participate in this debate, I want you to feel free to participate in 
the debate and not be intimidated by the Minister of Finance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- I caution the back-bench members that the only reason he's 
trying to intimidate you is because he wants to force through by closure 
Bill 61, the biggest provincial tax grab in the history of the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  I'd ask the member to keep 
his comments on the motion.  Order, the Minister of Finance.  I'd ask the 
member to keep his comments on the . . . Order.  The member from Regina 
Centre, I'd ask him to be quiet while the Speaker is on his feet also. 
 
The motion before the Assembly is: 
 

 That the sixth report of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts be now 
concurred in. 

 
And I'd ask the member to keep his remarks to the motion that's before the 
Assembly. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Yes, I apologize to you, Mr. Speaker.  You know, Mr. 
Speaker, I do, I regret that you had to intervene, but I respect that.  I 



 

 

guess I got carried away.  Some of the members opposite were yelling across 
the floor at me and I was just responding to the comments they were making. 
But I know I shouldn't do that; that it's really proper for this Assembly 
for me to direct my comments through the Chair to all members of the 
Assembly.  And I'll continue to try and do that, Mr. Speaker, but I tend to 
lose my train of thought if the members are too rowdy on the other side of 
the House.  I'll try and stick to the Bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Speaker, I was talking about witnesses coming before 
the committee and why Bill 53 would be more appropriately served by the 
Public Accounts Committee.  But before I continue on to the importance of 
having those witnesses come forward before the committee in terms of 
providing expert evidence, I again reiterate that a major purpose in this 
debate here today is to give back-bench members the courage of their 
convictions to do what is right in terms of the accountability process in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
No longer is it good enough . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- No longer is it good enough to have members fear to say 
what they really believe because of intimidation by the Executive Council. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Enough is enough, and we have to correct that situation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- And this debate today is an important step towards 
strengthening that conviction of those members opposite to stand up and 
speak for what is right on this particular motion today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Now back to the witnesses, Mr. Speaker.  The Public 
Accounts Committee can call pretty well anyone they want for expert 
evidence.  And as I mentioned earlier, this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, can't 
deal with more than one piece of legislation at a time.  You  
 Dknow, they can work the agenda out so that one Bill comes in at the 
beginning of the day, maybe another one at the end, but to deal 
concurrently . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- Mr. Speaker, I've listened very attentively to what the . . 
. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  I would like to ask the member from Moose 
Jaw North to be quiet so I can hear what the member has to say. 



 

 

 
Mr. Hopfner: -- I have listened very attentively, Mr. Speaker, to what the 
member from The Battlefords has been . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  I'd ask the member for Regina North West 
also to be quiet while the Speaker is on his feet.  Order. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- I've been listening to the member from The Battlefords, Mr. 
Speaker, and he has been in the last few minutes again been repeating 
himself over and over and over of things that he has . . . If you would 
look . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  Allow the member to make his point of order. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm sure that you're going to be able to rule 
that he is becoming repetitious because it has been over and over and over 
again that he's been saying the same particular issues and of bringing his 
relevancy back to the Bill.  I'm sure that you would rule in that favour. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Well thank you, Mr. Speaker.  This is the second time 
we've been around this Horn with the member from Lloydminster.  The least 
that I think a member is called upon if he's going to allege repetition is 
to cite some examples.  Surely if the member from Lloydminster is bored and 
bothered by repetition, he can think of one single example. 
 
This is the second time he's stood up, complained about repetition, and sat 
down, unable to think of an example of repetition.  I would think, Mr. 
Speaker, if nothing else he ought to learn by rote what it is that the 
member's repeating.  And the fact that he can't think of an example 
suggests to me that his complaint is without any foundation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  The point of order is well taken.  Order.  
Order.  The member himself from The Battlefords referred to comments that 
he's made previously.  Yes.  Order.  But I will be listening very closely 
for any more repetition. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to give an example of why 
the Public Accounts Committee is more appropriate to deal with this Bill 
than the Legislative Assembly is.  Now, Mr. Speaker, the example that I 
want to use, Mr. Speaker, is that this reference when it passes . . . and 
I'm sure that when I'm done I will have convinced all members to support 
this motion.  This Bill, Bill 53, An Act to amend The Provincial Auditor 
Act, refers to several different Acts, Mr. Speaker.  First off there's this 
Bill itself, An Act to amend The Provincial Auditor Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- The other Acts that are cited in the Bill and I'll tie the 
relevancy into this, Mr. Speaker -- you have then The Chartered Accountants 
Act, 1986; you have The Certified General Accountants Act; you have The 
Management Accountants Act. 



 

 

 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, order.  The question before the Assembly is: 
 

 That the sixth report of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts be now 
concurred in. 

 
And also that it be sent to the Public Accounts Committee for referral.  I 
don't think it's the place here to go through the Bill point by point when 
it's being referred to the Public Accounts Committee to be gone through 
point by point. 
 
Order.  If the member from Regina Rosemont wants to interrupt the Chair, or 
the member for Regina Centre is interrupting the Speaker when he's on his 
feet and I'd ask members to refrain from that.  The member from Regina 
Rosemont keeps chirping at the Chair, at the Speaker, and I would ask him 
once more to refrain from that. 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Speaker, the reason this Bill should be referred, 
likely the most important reason -- I shouldn't say the most important but 
one of the very important reasons -- and I've listed several reasons here 
this afternoon to build my case as to why the Public Accounts Committee 
should deal with this Bill instead of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
One of the most important reasons is that the Public Accounts Committee, in 
viewing this particular Bill, will have many pieces of consequential 
legislation that have to be dealt with at the same time.  Now this House 
cannot do that, Mr. Speaker, but the Public Accounts Committee can.  And 
part of the importance of the Public Accounts Committee being able to do 
that is that you get such a wide scope of the impact of this piece of 
legislation as it is consequential to other pieces of legislation, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And there is no mechanism really to do that in this House that is not 
cumbersome and time-consuming.  So in the Public Accounts Committee, if you 
need to deal with six different Acts or maybe seven different Acts of the 
legislature at one time, we actually have the ability to do that where this 
Assembly does not have the ability to deal with more than one piece of 
legislation at a time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think that the number of people you can draw on, their expertise, by 
being able to deal with so many pieces of legislation at one time is an 
additional value as to why this Bill should go before the Public Accounts 
Committee.  I think it serves this Assembly well.  I think it serves 
members individually as well as collectively, and I think, major and most 
of all, it serves the people of the province of Saskatchewan well, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 



 

 

Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- If there was another mechanism, Mr. Speaker, we'd suggest 
it.  But it seems to me that there is not a better suited mechanism of this 
Legislative Assembly than the Public Accounts Committee. 
 
It wouldn't be appropriate to send it to the Crown Corporations Committee.  
It wouldn't be appropriate to send it to the Agriculture Committee which 
hasn't met for many, many years.  It would not be appropriate to send it to 
the municipal affairs committee. It wouldn't be appropriate to send it to 
the Education Committee. It wouldn't be appropriate at this point at least 
to send it to the Regulations Committee. And it certainly wouldn't be 
appropriate to send it to the Committee on Privileges and Elections of this 
Assembly or, one of the members mentions, the Board of Internal Economy. 
 
So I can't understand where else this Bill should go to if not to the 
Public Accounts Committee.  I'm absolutely convinced that that's where this 
Bill should go to. 
 
Now I suppose we could leave it because that's the alternative, is either 
over to the Public Accounts Committee or leave it to be dealt with in this 
Assembly.  But if it's dealt with in this Assembly, the process is too 
cumbersome to really serve the public good in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- I know that the House Leader wants to get on with taxing us 
more and not dealing with this Bill anyway.  So the only level of comfort 
that we have that this important piece of legislation to strengthen the 
watch-dog of the public purse in the province of Saskatchewan is off to the 
Public Accounts Committee. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Members on this side of the House are very fearful, very 
fearful that this Bill will not again see the light of day unless we refer 
it to the Public Accounts Committee.  Why won't it see the light of day 
again if it stays before this Chamber?  Well because the government 
obviously has many higher priorities than to improve public accountability.  
What are you willing to do to hide what's going on in your government? 
 
I ask all members to vote to send this Bill to the Public Accounts 
Committee.  Don't leave it in the hand of the cabinet that wants to tax our 
citizens even more. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Speaker, this particular motion that we have today, I 
mentioned earlier that I have mixed feelings on.  I think I thought it 
through fairly well, and on balance I think it has to go to the Public 
Accounts Committee.  But not if it's just a way for the government to get 
away from their responsibilities. 
 



 

 

The opposition is going to hold this government to their responsibilities, 
Mr. Speaker.  And one of those responsibilities is to stop taxing to death 
the people in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- People in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, are saying this Bill 
should be dealt with expeditiously because they're concerned about the 
waste and the mismanagement in the province of Saskatchewan.  And people 
are telling us enough is enough, Mr. Speaker. 
 
People are saying, give the Provincial Auditor the authority to open the 
books of the province of Saskatchewan.  And this Bill going to the Public 
Accounts Committee will make sure he gets that authority, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- I think we also have to look at what would happen if this 
Bill doesn't get to the Public Accounts Committee.  If this Bill doesn't 
get to the Public Accounts Committee to be dealt with, people in the 
province of Saskatchewan won't know where we stand financially because the 
Provincial Auditor can't look at all the accounts of the province.  That's 
what will happen if this Bill doesn't go.  If this Bill stays before this 
legislature it will be swept aside, Mr. Speaker, because . . . Why?  
Because the government . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Why is the hon. member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- Mr. Speaker, I apologize for having to stand in my place 
again and talk to this point of order.  But the member in just his last 
couple few sentences, if you would, you will find if you research the 
verbatim that he has repeated this time and time again.  He is starting his 
same . . . in the same time as he's starting new sentences lately, Mr. 
Speaker, he has been referring back to what he has said earlier in his own 
submission here in this Assembly.  He's obstructing this Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: -- I've listened to the hon. member's point of order.  I will 
make this particular comment.  That the hon. member for The Battlefords has 
been called to order several times today for relevancy, and I think he 
should take note of that. 
 
I don't think that the Chair or the Speaker can be expected to repeatedly 
stand and call the hon. member to order regarding relevancy.  If he is 
having difficulty being relevant, yes, I'll make the appropriate decision. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Well I respect your ruling, Mr. Speaker, that was brought 
on by the point of order from the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster.  And 
I guess I do realize that I've been called to order several times.  I feel 
so strongly about this piece of legislation needing to go to  
 Dthe Public Accounts Committee that I suppose I've strayed with some of my 
examples. 
 



 

 

And I guess the other reason, Mr. Speaker, is that what's happening here 
today is a little unusual.  I would have to admit that -- that there is not 
usually lengthy debate on a report from the Public Accounts Committee.  But 
there were a number of things, I think, that needed to be put on the 
record, and I have put most of them on the record. 
 
In the next short while, I'll be doing a summary of the important items I 
think that I have pointed out here today, Mr. Speaker, and I hope you will 
allow me to do that summary without me being accused by the member from Cut 
Knife-LLoydminster as being repetitive.  I think there has been very little 
repetition. 
 
And I would remind members that for one to retain information, sometimes 
there has to be repetition to a certain extent because the . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order, order.  I believe that the matter has 
been dealt with, and I ask the hon. member to continue with his remarks as 
it pertains to the motion and the question. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The Public Accounts Committee, Mr. 
Speaker, has a major role to play.  The debate here this afternoon is one 
as to whether or not the House, this Chamber, is better suited to dealing 
with Bill 53, or whether or not the Public Accounts Committee is better 
able to deal with Bill 53.  And now the arguments that I've been making 
have been in favour of the committee dealing with Bill 53 as opposed to 
leaving it before this Assembly. 
 
Now I believe that when this Bill arrives before the Public Accounts 
Committee, that there will be a system whereby we will go through a session 
where everyone will offer a general opinion on how we proceed, because it's 
not usual either, Mr. Speaker, I would point out, for the Public Accounts 
Committee to deal with pieces of legislation.  We usually deal with the 
auditor's report and the Public Accounts of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So the last time that a Bill actually appeared before the Public Accounts 
Committee was, I believe, in 1983.  I'm sorry I don't have the exact month 
that that happened.  But the last time a Bill appeared before the Public 
Accounts Committee was in 1983.  Now that's a while ago, and I don't know 
if there are any members that currently are on the Public Accounts 
Committee that were there in 1983.  There may have been one or two, but I'm 
not sure there were.  In fact, I think there were not. 
 
So I want to tell you that the first thing that will happen, the first 
thing that'll happen when Bill 53 comes before the Public Accounts 
Committee, Mr. Speaker, is that each and every one of the 10 members on 
that committee will offer their ideas.  I think first off they would offer 
their ideas on what is good in the Bill and what they feel may be harmful 
in the Bill, and it will be sort of a harmful, helpful suggestion routine 
that will be gone through by members. 
 
I think then we would be looking at each of the members offering their 
opinions as to what could be added to the Bill to make it a more meaningful 
piece of legislation than it was coming into the committee because the 



 

 

committee certainly wants to improve the Bill . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order, order.  Why is the hon. member 
on his feet? 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- Again, Mr. Speaker, I will apologize to the Assembly in 
having to raise the point of order, but I would indicate to you, sir, that 
the member is once again becoming very repetitious.  Just exactly the last 
sentence he had used is he had already said it on different occasions 
during his remarks to the legislature.  And again I say he's obstructing 
the rights of this legislature. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- I guess we have this ongoing discussion with the member 
from. . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- You weren't even listening. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, I was listening.  We have this ongoing discussion 
from the member from Lloydminster.  If he's going to make a charge -- it is 
elemental to any system of fair play -- if you make a charge you provide 
specifics. 
 
All the member did was stand up and say he's been repetitious in providing 
those specifics.  I've been listening.  It is true the member from The 
Battlefords has given us a thorough discussion of the matter, but that's 
different than being repetitious.  I think he has not been repetitious. 
 
And I say to the member from Lloydminster, it is not very helpful to stand 
up every five minutes and say: you're being repetitious.  Provide the 
examples or I think your charge is without substance. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order, order.  The hon. member is referring 
to issues he has raised previously in his remarks.  I think anybody who has 
sat in the House and listened would agree with that. 
 
In this instance, in this particular instance, I was waiting for further 
clarification of his remarks, so I'm not prepared on this specific issue to 
say that he was being repetitious.  However I will say that, generally 
speaking, the hon. member in the last while is becoming repetitious, and 
any fair-minded person including he, himself, will admit that. 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Thank you again, Mr. Speaker.  The point I'm making right 
now -- I'm going to do a summary very, very shortly of my remarks this 
afternoon -- but the point I was making, I wanted to convince members on 
the government side of the House how the process would work so that they 
could be confident, when they vote to send this Bill to the Public Accounts 
Committee, that we would deal with it in a process that is workable, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I was describing the process -- the process of having all 10 members 
have the opportunity first off to have their input into what they feel is 



 

 

helpful and what they feel is harmful about the Bill, what they feel needs 
to be added to the Bill.  And then, Mr. Speaker, I wanted them to know that 
each member could suggest professional, expert witnesses to give testimony 
before the Public Accounts Committee. 
 
I think members of all sides of the House have to have that level of 
comfort that there is a process there that's adequate to deal with this 
Bill.  Otherwise, my goodness, how could they have confidence in referring 
the Bill before the Public Accounts Committee as opposed to the . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Why is the hon. member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to introduce some guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure 
to introduce to you and other members of the legislature a group of grades 
4 and 5 students from Mayfair School in Saskatoon, which is in my riding.  
They're on a tour of the legislature this afternoon and have dropped in 
here to watch the proceedings for a few minutes.  They're accompanied today 
by their teacher, Barbara Wright, and chaperons Kathy Schell and Val Garbe.  
So I would ask all members of the Assembly to bid the students from Mayfair 
School a very warm welcome here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- I'm sorry, I'm sorry.  I cannot recognize the hon. member.  
She's not in her seat. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- I want to join with the hon. member for Mayfair in 
welcoming the students from Saskatoon Mayfair constituency.  I've had a 
long association with that area of the city, one time as an MLA (Member of 
the Legislative Assembly) for that area, the first MLA for Saskatoon 
Mayfair, and later as an alderman serving part of that area.  And I want to 
join with the hon. member for Saskatoon Mayfair in welcoming those students 
to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I want to join my 
colleague, the Education minister and the member from Saskatoon Mayfair, in 
welcoming the students from Mayfair School.  As our party's education 
critic I have spent a lot of time in Saskatchewan in a number of schools 
and I've had the privilege of being in Mayfair School. 
 
And I note that there is a young person in the group, Mr. Speaker, who is 



 

 

hearing impaired and in particular would like to welcome her.  I'm quite 
interested in the whole area of deaf education and I'm pleased to see that 
we have an integrated program at Mayfair School. 
 
At present we are involved in debating a report that is going to be sent . 
. . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order, order.  Some time ago we made 
an agreement that we would not involve hon. guests in the galleries.  I'm 
sure that they will take a note of what we are discussing.  I'd like to ask 
you to refrain from that. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I just wanted the young people to 
know what we were doing.  But since that's not possible, I want to again on 
behalf of my colleagues welcome the students from Saskatoon Mayfair.  We 
hope you have a good time at the legislature.  This is the centre of 
democracy, so-called, in the province of Saskatchewan -- and welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 

Standing Committee on Public Accounts (continued) 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- I also welcome the students from Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The final point that I'm making here now, Mr. Speaker, is that members of 
the government side, and I guess members from our side of the House as 
well, should have some level of comfort that the mechanism, that the 
dedication, that the ability is there to deal with this Bill.  Because if 
they don't have that level of comfort, of course members would want the 
known abilities of the Legislative Assembly itself to retain this Bill.  
I'm asking you, don't fear that the Public Accounts Committee cannot deal 
adequately with this Bill. 
 
We have, in the Public Accounts Committee, a new spirit of co-operation 
there that's been unprecedented in the last four and a half years, Mr. 
Speaker, unprecedented. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- This motion before the House today came about unanimously 
supported by all members of the Public Accounts Committee.  And that spirit 
of co-operation is important, Mr. Speaker.  This Bill should go back to 
that Public Accounts Committee in that spirit of co-operation which does 
not exist in the Legislative Assembly itself.  The partisan nature and our 
concerns about waste and mismanagement that are portrayed through this 
Assembly, voiced on members of government, does not exist in the Public 
Accounts Committee, Mr. Speaker.  That has been done away with. 
 
The Public Accounts Committee has been able to rise above the partisan 
nature to be able to deal with legislation such as The Provincial Auditor 
Act.  So I think that with the input of members and if we're all assured 



 

 

that 10 members of the Public Accounts Committee . . . that we will have 
equal access, input, influence on what happens, this will come out a much 
better piece of legislation.  It will be respected not only by members of 
the committee who will feel good about themselves but it will be respected 
by this Assembly and therefore the people in the province of Saskatchewan, 
because it will be a much improved piece of legislation coming out of the 
Public Accounts Committee, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- One of the other reasons this Bill should go there, Mr. 
Speaker, is that there's no such thing as time allocation really in the 
Public Accounts Committee.  We've seen in this Assembly a couple of cases 
where time allocation, or closure if you want to call it that, has been 
moved, which gives some question as to the validity of government that 
would do that. 
 
But that won't happen in the Public Accounts Committee, Mr. Speaker.  
There's no one who would bring in time allocation or closure on the debate 
on this Bill in the Public Accounts Committee.  Because we are there not to 
grandstand for constituents like some members on the government side have 
done, we are there for the constructive good of developing a piece of 
legislation which we think is paramount to the functioning of the 
Provincial Auditor in this province.  There is no question about that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other thing that happens on the Public Accounts Committee, 
and the reason I think is very valid for this Bill to go before the Public 
Accounts Committee, is that the members are consistent in terms of who they 
are that attend the committee.  The Public Accounts Committee is not like 
the Crown Corporations Committee where you can substitute for other members 
onto the Crown Corporations Committee. 
 
The members of the Public Accounts Committee are there because they're 
appointed there by this Legislative Assembly and cannot be changed except 
by this Legislative Assembly.  Therefore, if we come on Thursday morning 
dealing with this Bill 53, we will have 10 members there. 
 
The member from Shellbrook-Torch River would be there, Mr. Speaker.  The 
member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster would be there.  The member from 
Rosetown-Elrose would be there, and likely a couple of other members from 
the government side. 
 
And I know that the member from Saskatoon South would be there.  I know the 
member from Regina Rosemont will be there.  I know the member from Regina 
Victoria will be there.  And I know that I would be there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And then the next day of Public Accounts, which would be on the Tuesday, 
there would be continuity because those same members would be there, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
It is an awesome responsibility of the members of the Public Accounts 
Committee to provide that consistency, and provide the good and clear 
dialogue and information and scrutiny that we do in fact provide in that 



 

 

committee.  And that is another reason yet, that has not been mentioned 
before, Mr. Speaker, as to why this Bill should go before the Public 
Accounts Committee. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- There is at least one other reason that has not been 
mentioned yet as to why this Bill should go before the Public Accounts 
Committee, and that is to show the members of this Legislative Assembly 
that it can come back a better Bill than it was before.  So that even 
further pieces of legislation will be referred to committee with a level of 
comfort that they will come back a more wholesome, meaningful piece of 
legislation to govern the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- So people in this Assembly and the public can see the 
process in action and follow it from beginning to end without a number of 
interruptions.  All those interruptions, Mr. Speaker, that happen in this 
place, all the unexpected things that happen in this place . . . like today 
would be an unexpected event.  There are very, very seldom, if ever, any 
unexpected events that happen in the Public Accounts Committee. 
 
So the stable, sober, second thought of that Public Accounts Committee 
would serve any piece of legislation well.  In this case it happens to be 
such an appropriate piece of legislation, I see no alternative but for all 
members to vote in favour of the motion that we have before us here today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Speaker, I just want to do a very brief summary and 
then allow any other members to participate in the debate if they wish, or 
if we want to bring the Bill to a vote here this afternoon.  I don't want 
to unduly delay the operations of the House here, but I started out by 
indicating the debate . . . I can see the members are getting a little 
rambunctious on the other side of the House, understandably so.  And 
understandably so, Mr. Speaker, because at the initial outset I did mention 
that they had given notice to bring in closure on the biggest tax grab Bill 
in the history of the province this afternoon, and I can see them irritated 
by that. 
 
I tried to make some points, Mr. Speaker, as to what else should have been 
in the interim report here, and I guess those were drawing a long bow.  
They were somewhat out of order, but I appreciate you did allow me to play 
some of those forward anyway. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the important thing here is the role of the Provincial Auditor 
in the province of Saskatchewan, and to assure that through the good 
workings of the Public Accounts Committee, and not the partisanship of this 
Assembly, that we make sure through the Provincial Auditor -- the watch-dog 
of the public purse -- that the people of Saskatchewan are served in a way 
so they can see that they're being served, and they won't have to condone 
with hidden waste and mismanagement of a partisan government, Mr. Speaker.  



 

 

That's how people will be served.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 
 


