





























































Hansard: June 10, 1991


 

 

June 10/91 
 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to introduce to you, 
and through you to the members of the legislature, Her Excellency Mary 
Madzandza Kanya, High Commissioner of Swaziland, who is seated in the 
Speaker's gallery.  And with her is Mr. Leo Kanya, spouse of the High 
Commissioner. 
 
This is Her Excellency's first official visit to Saskatchewan, and while 
here she will be meeting with the Lieutenant Governor, the Speaker, 
officials of the Saskatchewan Council for International Co-operation, and 
officials on international development with the University of Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of the legislature to please welcome 
the High Commissioner of Swaziland to Regina. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise actually to introduce a school.  I 
want to, however, join the Premier in welcoming the High Commissioner from 
Swaziland. 
 
I am impressed by the fact that Swaziland, they're apparently appointing 
female high commissioners.  In some ways you're further ahead than we are.  
My congratulations to your country as well as to you, madam. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- I actually rise, Mr. Speaker, to introduce a school 
which I believe is seated immediately behind Her Excellency.  It's the 
Monseigneur De Laval school. 
 
There are 17 students who come with their teacher, Edna Chabot, and a 
chaperon, Miss Suzanne Abdulla.  I'm not sure I've done that name justice.  
The handwriting is not quite . . . I gather by the amused looks on the 
children's faces, I haven't done that name justice.  I will make my 
apologies and get the name right at 2:30 when I meet with the students for 
a discussion of today's proceedings. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'd like to 
introduce to you and through you to other members of the Assembly on behalf 
of my colleague, the member for Cumberland, a group of 17 Churchill High 
School students from La Ronge, Saskatchewan, who are visiting in your 
gallery today.  Mr. Speaker, they're accompanied by their teacher, Miss 



 

 

Martina Cain, and the chaperons, Mr. and Mrs. McCartan. 
 
And I might say, Mr. Speaker, that my wife had the opportunity some years 
ago to teach at Churchill High School.  And I look forward to meeting with 
the students at 2:30 for pictures and for refreshments.  And we can discuss 
the activities going on in the legislature here today.  And I'd ask all 
members to welcome these students who have taken a long ride down from La 
Ronge, and ask them all to welcome them here. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Costs of Decentralization 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to address my question to the 
minister in charge of the decentralization program of the government.  Mr. 
Speaker, today it becomes very apparent why the government is hiding its 
studies on decentralization and the cost/benefit analysis from the public. 
 
In Saturday's paper -- I'd like to quote, Mr. Speaker -- in an article 
titled, "Highway dept. next to go," I quote: 
 

 According to an internal department study, the cost of the moves is 
estimated to be about $50,000 per (person). 

 
 The total cost of relocating 250 jobs could top $12 million, a far higher 

figure than that announced for similar decentralization moves. 
 

Mr. Minister, I would like to ask you why is it that you are misleading the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan and hiding the true cost of your political 
program to decentralize the civil service?  Why are you doing that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I think the appropriate response, 
and particularly from an academic point of view with respect to 
decentralization and Fair Share and costs, come from an academic himself 
like Dr. Leo Kristjanson who talks about decentralization and Fair Share as 
the sensible thing to do for smaller communities in the province. 
 
And I refer to an interview that he had, Mr. Speaker, because we have had 
management consultants go through the costs.  And they've said that the 
costs are in the neighbourhood of 8 to $12,000 per employee, but it's an 
investment, Mr. Speaker, in the infrastructure and in the people and with 
the taxpayers in smaller communities, Mr. Speaker, from Humboldt to Canora 
to Yorkton. 
 
Dr. Kristjanson goes on to say that: 
 

 There are so many urban institutions that are so centralized that people 
making the decisions with the best of intentions can't be sensitive to the 
needs of rural populations. 



 

 

 
 And I think that applies to both the private and the public sector (he 

says) whether it is Farm Credit Corporation or the university or a 
chemical company. 

 
Mr. Speaker, he encourages all of them to decentralize to rural 
Saskatchewan and indeed to rural Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, new question to the Premier.  Mr. 
Premier, you stand in your place and ignore the question of why you have 
this kind of overrun and what you estimate the cost of decentralization to 
be.  You stand there and you say, take my word, trust me.  Well I say to 
you, Mr. Premier, the people of this province are sick and tired of your 
promises and your lack of commitment to the people of the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Premier, isn't it true that you've underestimated 
the cost of decentralization by about 80 per cent and that the 
decentralization to date won't cost $8 million but will cost in the area of 
$42 million, and isn't this why you have refused to give us the cost 
analysis on what this is going to cost the taxpayers of the province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I think it's a fair comment to ask the 
opposition to join me in remembering that we've been doing this since 1984.  
We have moved the Crop Insurance Corporation to Melville and we have all of 
the experience that is consistent with the research that has been going on 
that says it's going to be somewhere in the neighbourhood of 8 to $12,000 
per position.  We've moved the Water Corporation to Moose Jaw, and the 
research is very similar, Mr. Speaker.  We've moved ACS (Agricultural 
Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan) to Swift Current.  We've been doing 
that since 1984, Mr. Speaker.  And all those positions have been allocated. 
 
The members could have stood in their place and said they're against it or 
the studies weren't right or any of this other stuff, but they didn't say 
that, Mr. Speaker, at the time.  I'll say from our vantage point, our past 
experience shows that our research and our national consulting firm's 
research is absolutely accurate, and we will live by it.  And if you look 
at the situations in Melville, Swift Current, Moose Jaw, Kindersley, 
Kamsack, Mr. Speaker, over the last five to six years you'll find that that 
information substantiates itself, Mr. Speaker.  It's absolutely accurate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, new question to the Premier.  I notice in 
the Estimates for this year's budget under Sask Property Management 
Corporation, you've estimated that the total decentralization bill for this 
year will be $2.2 million.  Mr. Premier, that is laughable in the face of 
the reality that the move of the Highway department is going to cost far in 



 

 

excess of that.  In fact you've promised that you would move 2,000 people 
-- 2,000 government workers -- out of Regina.  Your own internal studies 
say $50,000 per job.  That's a $100 million that you're going to spend on 
decentralization. 
 
Why don't you come clean with the people of the province, Mr. Premier, and 
tell them that the reason you jammed through -- using closure -- the 
provincial goods and service tax has nothing to do with GRIP (gross revenue 
insurance plan) and NISA (net income stabilization account) and everything 
to do with this madness you have of decentralizing and moving 2,000 people 
out of Regina?  Isn't that the truth? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it's very, very clear 
that the NDP (New Democratic Party) opposition doesn't care about rural 
Saskatchewan, and they don't even care about farmers.  They're back into 
their political agenda, Mr. Speaker, their political agenda. 
 
It's about time, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I'm not sure who is stupid or who isn't or 
what the policy is, but I'm sure that that kind of unparliamentary language 
by the member from Saskatoon Nutana . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- People use more stronger words than that about him. 
 
The Speaker: -- Well, nevertheless, I think bandying around words like that 
in the legislature is unparliamentary and I ask hon. members to keep that 
in mind. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, when you hear remarks like that in the 
legislature and you're in a democratic forum it says something about their 
own agenda, Mr. Speaker.  We can talk about decentralization; we can talk 
about agriculture, and we can do it with respect, mutual respect.  That's 
the way it should be. 
 
When I was involved today with decentralization, I announced, Mr. Speaker, 
that this would take place over the next three years.  And the hon. member, 
he lumps it all together and he says, how could this be the case?  Why 
doesn't he get his figures straight? 
 
I mean, they don't care about the facts, Mr. Speaker.  They don't care.  
They're out in Humboldt, Mr. Speaker, and the NDP member from Humboldt 
says, oh we'll do exactly the same thing.  Then when they come back in here 
they're against it, Mr. Speaker.  When they're out in Canora they said, oh 
it's really just fine, but when they're back in here, Mr. Speaker, they 
say, oh no, they're against it. 
 
I wish they'd come clean, Mr. Speaker -- come clean with the people, tell 
them their plan, tell them their strategy, and say the same thing in the 
country as you do in the city. 
 



 

 

Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have a question to the 
Premier.  Mr. Premier, this is yet another example of your waste and your 
mismanagement because you're not able to justify what you're doing on a 
cost/benefit analysis. 
 
You took a surplus in 1982 of $139 million; you've turned it into a total 
debt of $14 billion.  And the Minister of Finance who sits on your right, 
Mr. Premier, prior to the last election underestimated his deficit by $800 
million at 217 per cent.  And isn't it true that that's exactly the process 
you're using here today?  You're being dishonest with the Saskatchewan 
people in order to try to get you by an election, Mr. Premier. 
 
Show some honesty; show some integrity, and tell them the truth. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Our estimates, Mr. Speaker, our estimates on this goes 
back from our past experience and is absolutely correct.  Our estimates are 
a lot closer than that member from Regina North East who's the NDP minister 
of Finance, who is only 450 to $500 million out on his estimate. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if you look at the NDP in Ontario, Mr. Speaker, the NDP 
in Ontario have so far out, they're $10 billion in the first six months -- 
36 times our deficit, Mr. Speaker, the first six months of an NDP 
administration in Ontario.  That's why they hide.  That's why they won't 
come clean.  In the country they're for something; in the city they're 
against it.  In the country they say this; when they're some place they say 
something else, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Those people.  Those people.  All they can think about is politics.  They 
won't stick up for the farmer.  They won't stick up for rural people.  They 
won't stick up for jobs, Mr. Speaker.  They just stick up for themselves. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Meeting of the Crown Corporations Committee 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to the Premier.  
Mr. Premier, we want to give you and your government an opportunity to be 
open and honest to the people of this province.  Since the legislature was 
reconvened on April 11, I have written to your chairman of the Crown 
Corporations Committee, the member for Pelly, on four separate occasions, 
asking that he call regular meetings of the Standing Committee on Crown 
Corporations. 
 
In addition to that, Mr. Premier, I've spoken to him on two or three 
occasions verbally requesting a call the committee meet.  Since this 
session began, the Public Accounts Committee has been meeting on a regular 
basis and I see no reason why the Crown Corporations Committee cannot do 
the same. 
 



 

 

My question is this: will you today, Mr. Premier, instruct the member from 
Pelly to schedule meetings of the committee immediately so that we can get 
on with doing the public's business? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, as Government House Leader, I will 
certainly commit to the opposition that very soon, I will take this up with 
the member from Pelly.  The member opposite all of a sudden wants to get 
down to work.  And, Mr. Speaker, I think it would be very fair to say that 
this session has been anything but a normal and a working session in many, 
many ways.  Members opposite have obstructed the general business of this 
Assembly.  They have turned the normal proceedings into what is commonly 
referred to as a circus. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, in light of the opposition's new-found desire to actually 
do some work, I will indeed deal with the member who is the chairman of 
Crown Corporations, and indeed we will have some meetings. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Premier.  Mr. Premier, 
everyone knows that you and your House Leader establish when the committee 
meets.  The Public Accounts Committee has been meeting for the last 35 
days, and you've failed to call the Crown Corporations Committee to meet. 
 
What are you trying to hide from the people of this province?  Why are you 
not calling this committee to meet immediately, after repeatedly being 
asked to do so? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, to the member opposite once again, I will 
give the member my commitment that very soon, within the next very few 
days, I will discuss the issue with the chairman of Crown Corporations; we 
will set forth a proposed agenda.  And I would ask the member opposite to 
co-operate in that regard and remind the member opposite that with respect 
to the opposition, with all respect, you do not set the agenda; but the 
government will set the agenda on which day which committees will meet, and 
what Crown corporations will be called forth.  And if you're willing to 
deal with it on that basis in a gentlemanly and business-like fashion, I 
can assure you that that committee will meet. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, a new question to the House Leader.  Mr. 
House Leader, you're absolutely right.  You set the agenda.  We've had 
unprecedented bankruptcies in this province.  We've had thousands of 
people, 80,000 people leave this province.  We've got $14 billion in debt.  
That's your agenda, Mr. House Leader. 
 
And my question to you is this: what are you trying to hide?  Why haven't 
you called the Crown Corporations Committee to meet?  What are you hiding?  
It's over half of the expenditures in this province.  What are you hiding?  
Are you hiding the STC (Saskatchewan Transportation Company) scandal, Mr. 



 

 

Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I remind the member again that this 
session has been anything but a normal session.  Members opposite only have 
a new-found interest in working.  Up until a very short while ago, Mr. 
Speaker, members of the NDP were much more interested in ringing bells, 
walking out when the day was half over, reading petitions, dealing with 
things in a less than satisfactory or business-like manner.  And if indeed 
they are sincere about getting down to work, we will indeed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Effects of Government Policies on Small Business 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my question 
today is to the Premier.  And, Mr. Premier, I had the opportunity late last 
week of being in your constituency in the city of Estevan.  And I noticed 
that Estevan looks like the economic disaster zone that the rest of 
Saskatchewan has been. 
 
Today I pick up the paper, Mr. Premier, and I see that the owner of the 
Estevan Country Motor Lodge closed the doors of his business today, 
throwing 25 people out of work.  Mr. Len Strobel, the owner of that 
business, says: 
 

 I'm just another victim of the Conservative governments . . . They've cost 
me my business and my livelihood. 

 
Mr. Premier, I ask you: why have you followed an economic policy that not 
only kills small businesses and loses jobs in your own constituency, but 
kills small businesses and kills jobs throughout Saskatchewan?  Mr. 
Premier, are you even going to run in your own constituency come the next 
election? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I was in my constituency on the weekend, 
Mr. Speaker.  We had the Saskatchewan Mining Association had its annual 
awards for mine safety and there was several hundred people there, and it 
was very positive, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And then we had the oilmen's golf tournament there at the same time, Mr. 
Speaker, and we had over 200 people in from across the province.  They were 
involved in the oil patch in my constituency, Mr. Speaker.  I went to a 
local hotel, I believe it was the Beefeater, Mr. Speaker, and you could 
hardly get in the door; it was packed with people. 
 
And they were talking about economic activity and the plans and water 
projects.  And, Mr. Speaker, what I hear more often than not is that when I 
mention the . . . or somebody mentions the name of the member from Regina 
Rosemont and they know how he really fought Rafferty and Alameda, that 



 

 

great project in south-eastern Saskatchewan, they are really upset, Mr. 
Speaker, because they know we need to save water.  It's important that we 
have our own power, we create our own jobs. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, when I mention that they are against projects no 
matter where we do them, whether it's a Saferco project or its paper mills 
or its operators, Mr. Speaker, the NDP are against them all.  Every time we 
try to diversify, whether it's in Estevan or whether it's in Prince Albert 
or any place else, Mr. Speaker, and that member's against every single one 
of them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, new question to the Premier.  Mr. Premier, 
you may be able to attract people to Estevan by providing them with free 
food or free liquor.  The point is, while you're out playing golf and 
enjoying the sunshine, you have small-business operators in Estevan and 
throughout Saskatchewan who are closing their doors, and you have workers 
throughout this province who are losing their jobs. 
 
My question to you, Mr. Premier, even though you put the Rafferty dam at 
the wrong end of the stream, won't you get something right, call a 
provincial election. call a provincial election so that the people of 
Saskatchewan can judge your own economic record in terms of building jobs 
and building this province.  Won't you have the guts to do that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- If you look at the wreck that Ontario is in today under 
the NDP, Mr. Speaker, and how the business community and the co-operatives 
and everybody else are taking on the NDP administration, there are now more 
people leaving Ontario than in the history of Ontario, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As you know, there's more people living in Saskatchewan now under difficult 
times than there was under the NDP under good times, Mr. Speaker.  We went 
right up to a million people.  We're 30 or 40,000 people more now than when 
we took office in 1982.  The Investment Dealers Association say that we'll 
lead the nation again in economic diversification and development, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And the NDP said no, we're going to turn this into Ontario.  We're going to 
run it just like they do in Ontario -- huge deficits, duck all the 
questions that really matter, don't take a position on anything, Mr. 
Speaker, go into every corner of the province, be against this, be against 
that.  Mr. Speaker, we've heard all that before; it's the same old 
rhetoric, Mr. Speaker.  The people in Estevan or in the rest of the 
province will not be fooled, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Mr. Premier, now you can talk about deficits in Ontario, 
right?  But it seems to me you don't talk about the deficit here in 
Saskatchewan, which is your record.  Why do you want to talk about 



 

 

everything else under the sun or the moon?  And I understand you can see 
the Rafferty dam from the moon now, even though there's no water in it.  
Why don't you talk about things that are real to real people in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. Strobel, the owner of the hotel in your constituency that closed down, 
says he believes unfair taxation, cross-border consumption, which your 
members support, and free trade with the United States have combined to 
force him to close his doors. 
 
Mr. Premier, you have supported each and every one of those economic 
initiatives.  Can't you stand in the  
 Dlegislature here today, say we want to put that record -- your deficit, 
your support for the GST (goods and services tax), your support for free 
trade, and your support for cross-border shopping -- put it on the line and 
call a provincial election.  Never mind the BS, let's get on with it, okay 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: -- The hon. member in the course of his question has, in my 
opinion, made quite a clear, unparliamentary statement.  I'd like to ask 
him to withdraw it. 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- I will withdraw it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I will apologize to the guests and to the 
members of the gallery and the students . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order, order, order.  I'd like to, 
with due respect, ask the hon. member to leave our guests out of the debate 
and ask him to continue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I made the point to the hon. member that 
all of the promises made by the NDP and all of the positions that they took 
finally came to pass in Ontario, and the whole country can watch them run a 
province.  And it's an absolute shambles -- $10 billion deficit the first 
six months.  And they have businesses leaving, businesses coming out here, 
businesses closing down, and it's all because of the NDP administration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all I'm pointing out to the hon. member is if he'd take a 
position on how we would build economic activity, diversify, how we'd build 
water projects or paper projects or various kinds of things like 
fertilizer, upgraders, new colleges of agriculture . . . We have an 
opportunity now to balance the budget, Mr. Speaker, have the largest tax 
break in the history of Saskatchewan, sales tax free in this province for 
co-ops, businesses, farmers.  And the NDP now said no, they've got a better 
plan.  They're going to raise income tax by 23 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the NDP would happen to get in power like they are in 
Ontario and raise income tax 23 per cent, Mr. Speaker, it would be 
disastrous for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

Policy on Judicial Appointments for Former Politicians 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 
the Minister of Justice.  Some years ago the Canadian Bar Association 
passed a resolution urging that Canada's governments not make appointments 
of people who hold political office until they've been retired for two 
years. 
 
My question to the Minister of Justice is whether or not . . . And I say by 
way of background, that I believe I asked your predecessor in office this 
same question with respect to an earlier judicial appointment and was told 
that the government generally subscribes to it, but with some exceptions, I 
think was Mr. Andrew's comment. 
 
The question to you, Mr, Minister, is does the Government of Saskatchewan 
still subscribe to and support the Canadian Bar Association policy that 
people in political office should not be appointed directly to a judicial 
office? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- The hon. member may recollect that Canadian Bar did not 
ultimately make that recommendation. 
 
Secondly, I would remind the hon. member that it is the desire of our 
government, and I gather the national government, to appoint the most 
qualified people to office.  I hope that that continues, and I do believe, 
the hon. member, that appointing the most qualified people is the 
appropriate way to go. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Minister, the . . . Wait till I have the minister's 
attention.  Mr. Minister, the concern of the Canadian Bar Association -- 
and I say to the minister that I have read at least a summary of the 
proceedings from that convention -- the concern of the Canadian Bar 
Association was that when politicians appoint their own numbers to the 
bench, the public have no assurance that the most qualified people are 
appointed.  And judicial posts are some of the most important in the land; 
they define our institutions and our laws. 
 
If, Mr. Minister, governments appoint their own members directly to the 
bench, what assurance do the public have that the most qualified people are 
appointed to these offices which are of the utmost importance? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- I'm going to tell the hon. member, because he obviously 
doesn't know, that those being appointed to the Provincial Court go through 
a process called judicial council, the Saskatchewan judicial council, and 
they review the qualifications of those to be appointed. 
 
On the federal level there is a national judicial council with judicial 



 

 

councils in each province.  That process is also followed at the national 
level.  Those judicial councils make ratings as to whether the individual, 
amongst other things, is qualified or not.  And the appointment process is 
one, in my view, that assuming the individual complies and passes the 
judicial council, that that is a fair and traditional manner of vetting and 
clearing the individuals that leads, in my view, to a system whereby in 
Canada that I believe that generally the most qualified people are being 
appointed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 73 -- An Act to amend The Oil and Gas Conservation Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am pleased to rise today 
and move second reading of The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 
1991.  This Bill amends various provisions of The Oil and Gas Conservation 
Act which was last amended in 1988, Mr. Speaker.  The Oil and Gas 
Conservation Act establishes the basic framework which governs the 
exploration and development and production of the province's oil and gas 
resources. 
 
The main elements of the Bill address the requirements for horizontal 
drilling, the establishment and operation of the Oil and Gas Conservation 
Board, the introduction of a mechanism to facilitate joint 
government/industry funding of the board and certain oil and gas services, 
activate activities provided by Saskatchewan Energy and Mines, and the 
licensing of wells. 
 
Mr. Speaker, horizontal drilling is recognized as one of the most 
significant technological advancements in the petroleum industry in recent 
years.  It has the potential to increase recovery rates and improve the 
economic attractiveness of developing many oil reservoirs in this province.  
This technology holds considerable promise for the industry and the 
province. 
 
Since the drilling of the province's first horizontal well in late 1987, a 
further three wells were drilled in 1988, 13 in 1989, 77 in 1990, and 28 to 
date in 1991. 
 
A dispute over a horizontal well drilled in south-east Saskatchewan last 
year led to a legal challenge of the province's authority to approve 
certain horizontal wells.  The court ruled the province's authority to 
approve these wells was limited under current legislation and quashed the 
order approving the horizontal well in question.  This has created 
considerable uncertainty for the industry, Mr. Speaker, and has resulted in 
several horizontal well projects and considerable industry investment being 
postponed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to say that the provisions of this Bill, which 



 

 

provide the flexibility and authority needed to accommodate and encourage 
the expanded use of horizontal drilling technology in the province . . . It 
also provides greater flexibility to accommodate other new technology which 
may be associated with the implementation of EOR (enhanced oil recovery) 
projects. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill will also update and enhance the provisions in the 
Act dealing with the establishment and operation of the Oil and Gas 
Conservation Board.  As noted in the budget speech this year, the province 
intends to re-establish the board to deal with problems and issues that can 
arise due to the size and complexity of the province's oil and gas 
industry. 
 
The province has not had an active board since the mid-1970s.  The board 
would respond to the issues or matters referred to it by the Minister of 
Energy and Mines.  The board could hold hearings, investigation, and 
inquiries in addressing issues referred to it.  Findings, conclusions, and 
recommendations of the board would be reported to the minister for a 
decision. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the board could be used to review any further issues relating 
to horizontal wells, adjudicating pooling, unitization, and other disputes, 
review appeals to the minister's order or approvals, review proposals for 
major enhanced oil recovery projects, review policies pertaining to 
pipeline prorationing, production allowables, and waste disposal.  And 
review any matter referred to it where the minister considers it advisable 
to have an arm's length review of that matter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during these difficult economic times, it is a challenge to 
maintain existing oil and gas related services in the department, let alone 
add new services such as the board.  These kinds of services, however, are 
essential to the development of our oil and gas resources and the 
diversification of the provincial economy. 
 
For that reason we are creating a mechanism to facilitate joint 
government/industry funding of the board and other oil and gas services 
provided by the department.  The mechanism of this joint funding is the 
establishment of an oil and gas revolving fund. 
 
Industry contributions to the fund will be made by way of an annual 
assessment on oil, gas, and service wells in the province.  An average fee 
to be assessed under the new legislation for the 1991-92 fiscal year is 
approximately $125 per well.  This will generate nearly $2.5 million in 
revenue for the special fund. 
 
The mechanism for this joint funding is the establishment of an oil and gas 
revolving fund.  Industry contributions to the fund will be made by way of 
an annual assessment on oil wells in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill will also amend the provisions respecting the 
licensing of wells in the province.  The current drilling licence will be 
amended to become a licence to drill, operate, and produce a well.  A valid 
licence will be required for all phases in the life of a well.  The licence 



 

 

can be used more effectively to ensure the responsible operation of wells. 
 
A requirement for the prior approval of the transfer of a licence is also 
being added.  This will ensure wells are being transferred to responsible 
operators.  We must protect Saskatchewan taxpayers from the potential costs 
which can be associated with orphaned wells left by irresponsible 
operators. 
 
A number of other housekeeping items are also included in this Bill, such 
as clarification regarding the overall authority and jurisdiction of the 
minister under the Act, limitations regarding the liability of the minister 
in the department for anything in good faith done under the Act, and 
changes to penalty provisions. 
 
Overall, Mr. Speaker, I an confident the provisions of this Bill will 
greatly enhance the ability of the province to manage our valuable oil and 
gas resources.  With those comments, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of 
Bill 73. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well, Mr. Speaker, I rise to make 
some comments with respect to Bill 73, An Act to amend The Oil and Gas 
Conservation Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have been in communication with a number of representative 
organizations in the industry as well as a number of individual companies 
who operate in the oil and gas business in Saskatchewan over the past 
number of months.  I just want to commence my remarks this afternoon by 
saying that the industry officials and the industry players and many of the 
employees in the business support the amendments that are put forward by 
the member opposite.  The amendments, in many cases, will resolve some 
important questions that have been really . . . in essence, holding up 
large amounts of expenditures, capital expenditures that oil companies have 
wanted to make with respect to horizontal oil-well drilling. 
 
The concern that I have and the New Democratic Party caucus has, Mr. 
Speaker, is the method by which this government has introduced this Bill.  
Last October, last fall of 1990, the courts decided that the two companies 
involved with the dispute with respect to horizontal oil-well drilling -- 
Gulf Oil and Kennebar -- they made a decision that the regulations which 
existed in Saskatchewan could not resolve that dispute easily.  Therefore, 
a number of capital expenditures that were planned by oil companies in 
Saskatchewan and those that operate in the province were put on hold.  
They've been on hold, in essence, since last October. 
 
However, the problem we've got with the introduction of the Bill at this 
time is very simply that this government has made a commitment to the 
industry last fall to introduce the Bill last fall, to resolve the disputes 
last fall with respect to horizontal oil-well drilling.  It is now June 10, 
1991 -- fully seven, eight months since they made that commitment to the 
industry with respect to resolving disputes. 
 
I've met with a number of the associations last fall and they told me this: 
that the government had made the commitment to introduce these amendments 



 

 

in the fall session of the legislature.  As we have seen, Mr. Speaker, this 
government has failed to call a session last fall.  They failed to call a 
quick spring session or an early spring session.  They ragged the puck.  
They delayed.  They refused to bring to the people of this province any 
kind of commitments with respect to accountability and responsibility of 
government. 
 
Finally, on April 11, 1991, they reconvened the legislature -- April 11, 
Mr. Speaker -- after they told, not just the oil and gas industry, but many 
other organizations and associations in every social and economic field in 
this province they would call a fall session to be held accountable, to put 
forward amendments to certain Bills and Acts which many of these 
organizations and associations had been promised they would do. 
 
Well we see now, Mr. Speaker, June 10, 1991, the government finally 
introducing second reading of this Bill.  They have refused to come forward 
on a matter which the industry considers very important with respect to 
horizontal oil-well drilling and on a matter which the opposition considers 
very important.  But they refuse to bring this Bill to the Assembly for 
consideration in a timely fashion. 
 
This is another example, Mr. Speaker, of the arrogance of this government, 
of the insensitivity of this government in all matters which concern the 
people of this province.  And this amendment, this Bill No. 73, in essence 
would have freed up, if it was passed last fall as was promised by the 
government to the industry, a significant amount of money -- 10 to $20 
million, depending on who you speak with, but perhaps even more.  And what 
that means is that 10 or $20 million of oil and gas sector capital 
commitments have not been spent in this province because of the hold-up by 
this government. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we find as an opposition this move on behalf of the 
government to come June 10 as unacceptable.  It is consistent with the way 
they've dealt with people in the past, however, Mr. Speaker.  They always 
make a commitment and they never ever keep the commitment.  They have 
failed on every occasion to keep commitments they've made to the people of 
this province, whether it be taxpayers or senior citizens or young families 
or oil and gas companies. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this is really, really a situation that we find has to be 
resolved fairly quickly.  And with that, I want to make a few comments with 
specific relation to the Bill and will allow it to proceed into committee. 
 
I might add, Mr. Speaker, that on more than one occasion during the time 
when the opposition were reading petitions opposing the unfair and 
unnecessary harmonization of the provincial sales tax in this Assembly, we 
offered to allow any other business to come before the House which was of a 
sensitive or an important nature -- as a matter of fact, anything but Bill 
61, which dealt with the tax.  We made this offer in writing to the House 
Leader of the government on more than one occasion.  The House Leader of 
the government has refused to bring forward the legislation, including Bill 
73 and other matters, until today, June 10, 1991. 
 



 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have made the commitment in writing to consider this 
Bill.  We have also in the . . . I believe it was on May 30, I rose in this 
House and I read the following motion into the books, Mr. Speaker.  I moved 
that: 
 

 . . . with leave I would like to move a motion that we interrupt the 
presenting of petitions this afternoon to consider second reading of Bill 
No. 73, An Act to amend The Oil and Gas Conservation Act. 

 
That's page 3552 of Hansard, May 30, 1991. 
 
And with leave, the only way we could have considered Bill 73 at that time, 
Mr. Speaker, was with leave of the Assembly.  And the Minister of Energy 
and Mines said no.  He said we couldn't consider the Bill.  He's telling 
the industry, on the one hand, this is a very important Bill; it's very 
sensitive, that his government supports it, and they will with haste and 
with expedience have the Bill brought to this Assembly for consideration by 
the opposition and by the government to make into law. 
 
So we've asked them; yet he in every case, every opportunity we've put 
forward for him to bring this Bill forward for consideration, has refused 
that consideration.  And there's no excuse for that other than, Mr. 
Speaker, that this is another consistent move on behalf of the Conservative 
government opposite. 
 
(1445) 
 
They're incompetent; they have no concern. They have no sensitivity to what 
is happening in this province, unless it's to fill their own pockets or to 
fill the pockets of their friends.  And, Mr. Speaker, we believe that that 
has to cease and desist.  We've made that premise clear in the last number 
of thousands of hours of debates in this Assembly since 1982. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Bill 73 does two things, as the minister says.  It sets up an 
Oil and Gas Conservation Board -- or restructures it because it did exist 
in the province in the '70s -- and it sets up mechanisms to settle 
disputes.  And it will resolve the horizontal well-drilling backlog that 
has been in existence since last October. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have communicated with all of the associations that are 
involved in the industry in Saskatchewan -- the Canadian Petroleum 
Association, which represents the larger oil companies that have oil 
production in Saskatchewan; I've raised the matter with the Independent 
Petroleum Association of Canada, who represent medium-sized oil companies 
that operate in Canada, in particular in Saskatchewan; as well as the Small 
Energy Producers Association of Canada; PSAC (Petroleum Services 
Association of Canada), and the Federation of Saskatchewan Surface Rights 
Association which represents the landholders. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in every case the associations do support this Bill.  
Some of them have reservations with respect to some of the details, and I'd 
like to raise those during the committee stage, and I'll do that with the 
minister and his officials.  And I want to say that, almost unanimously, 



 

 

they felt that this would only work if it was done without political 
patronage and political appointments that this government is so well known 
for in every other economic initiative in the province. 
 
And this is quite interesting, Mr. Speaker, because as you know the oil 
industry is an industry which runs their business very professionally.  
It's not surprising they do that, but it's surprising that they would say 
this to an opposition, knowing that the opposition is not in government.  
But perhaps some day we will be, and I would predict, Mr. Speaker, that our 
sensitivity will be far more responsive than theirs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the associations had some specific concerns which I'll raise 
in committee; therefore I would allow the Bill to proceed to committee 
stage at this point, and I'll raise those questions at that time.  Thank 
you very much. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee 
of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 83 -- An Act to amend The Medical Profession Act, 1981 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, thank you very much.  I'm pleased to rise 
today to move second reading of An Act to amend The Medical Profession Act. 
 
The amendment to The Medical Profession Act deals with the regulation of 
locum tenens physicians, that is physicians who provide temporary services 
in the province.  Typically these locum physicians provide services in 
rural areas by filling in for local physicians who may want to take some 
time off to further their education.  They also provide services to 
communities who may have lost their local physician and are in the process 
of recruiting a replacement. 
 
The existing Act limits locum physicians to a four-month permit, which does 
not meet the needs of local communities or physicians.  Often it takes more 
than four months for a local community to find a permanent replacement.  In 
the interim, another locum physician must be found to provide temporary 
services.  This frequently results in gaps where the community has no 
physician, and sporadic care due to the turnover of locum physicians. 
 
Our government and the College of Physicians and Surgeons of Saskatchewan 
recognize the difficulty rural communities face in this area as well as the 
need to effectively regulate locum physicians.  This amendment will allow 
the college to specify the qualifications, length of locum permits and 
conditions of permits in the by-laws pursuant to the Act.  An important 
feature of the new locum physician by-law will be longer terms for permits, 
up to two years in many cases. 
 
Another important feature will be a requirement for the locum physician to 
practice in a specific community for the length of the permit.  This will 
also allow locum physicians sufficient time to meet the college's 
requirements for full licensure, should these physicians want to remain 
practising in Saskatchewan.  And that's really the goal that many of the 
rural communities have. 



 

 

 
The amendment is fully supported by the College of Physicians and Surgeons, 
the Saskatchewan Medical Association, by rural communities, by rural 
hospital administrators, rural physicians and locum physicians.  The 
efforts of the College of Physicians and Surgeons of Saskatchewan to ensure 
competent, stable, medical services in rural areas are supported. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of an Act respecting an amendment to The 
Medical Profession Act. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill will provide some help and some relief to rural 
hospitals and rural Saskatchewan with respect to the provision of medical 
services in the country.  And I must say that this is long overdue, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
This government has simply had no plan and no strategy to deal with the 
very serious problem that we face in rural Saskatchewan, and that is 
getting medical doctors to practise in rural Saskatchewan.  It is a 
problem.  It's been a long 
_standing problem, and this government has had absolutely no will to take 
measures to correct the problem  
 Din the last nine years. 
 
In fact the Murray Commission report that talks about centralizing the 
administration of hospitals and health care in regional centres, and 
putting the ownership of hospitals in the regional, the centre board as 
well as making funding a central issue with respect to small rural 
hospitals, would very respectfully, Mr. Speaker, detract from getting 
doctors to many of our small hospitals. 
 
And this is a policy of course that the Minister of Finance has indicated 
that he approves, that the Minister of Health has said he supports.  With 
respect to the Murray Commission report, just the other day I heard him 
saying that the Murray Commission report was going to be their plan, which 
is centralization of service in regional centres.  And there are a number 
of things that this government has done in the last nine years that 
detracts from the provision of services to rural Saskatchewan -- the 
cutting back with respect to public health in northern Saskatchewan where 
we find it very difficult to obtain medical help, doctors' help, and 
community health workers.  We've seen government cut-backs with respect to 
community health workers for example, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so with respect to even the provision of health services in northern 
Saskatchewan where we need more doctors, what we have seen are policies 
that have detracted and have actually hindered the provision of services in 
northern Saskatchewan and rural Saskatchewan. 
 
We have noticed hospital bed closures throughout the province just this 
spring as a result of government cut-backs, hospital bed closures, and 
nursing lay-offs.  The government came out with a policy that trustees on 
hospital boards would not be paid the honorarium, and I'm not sure where 



 

 

that's at now. 
 
But all of these policies by this government are seriously hindering the 
provision of health care services in rural Saskatchewan and in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The policies with respect to home care, we've seen a moratorium on home 
care for a number of years now by this government.  Last year however, the 
associate deputy minister of Health indicated that maybe it was time to 
start expanding home care.  Well where have they been since 1982?  That was 
the policy prior to 1982 and has been put on hold for a number of years. 
 
So I wish to say, Mr. Speaker, that it's very clear to the people of rural 
Saskatchewan and to the people living in urban Saskatchewan that this 
government's commitment to rural health care services has simply not 
existed.  It has been shaky and it has simply not existed. 
 
Now I believe that the Bill that's coming forward is a step in the right 
direction, but it's coming too late, Mr. Speaker.  And the government has 
failed to put forward any sort of detailed strategy with respect to getting 
doctors out to rural Saskatchewan; notwithstanding, it has been an issue 
for years.  And there are studies on the matter with proposals and 
suggestions.  And this government has failed to implement those proposals 
and those suggestions.  And I say has been negligent, Mr. Speaker, with 
respect to dealing with the health care problems of people living in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And once again I want to reiterate my very serious concern about the 
government's proposal to centralize the administration of hospitals and 
nursing homes in large regional centres.  I want to express my concern 
about that.  And the people of rural Saskatchewan, right across this 
province, are expressing concern about that, because they believe it takes 
away community control and it detracts from their local hospital which will 
make it even more difficult to get doctors and medical professionals to 
work in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And so I urge the government with respect to its health care policy to 
maintain the base that we have in rural Saskatchewan for providing services 
at a local community level and to enhance and expand on that, not to cut 
back on public health nurses, not to fire nurses, not to lay off dental 
therapists, not to close hospital beds.  Because that's what they've done 
this spring with respect to their cut-backs to hospitals, Mr. Speaker, 
their funding cuts -- I think it's a $40 million shortfall in the hospital 
and institutional sector -- a $40 million shortfall. 
 
Well what happens when these administrators are faced with that shortfall?  
They have no alternative but to close hospital beds and lay off nurses.  
And that has an effect on the medical profession, the doctors practising in 
rural Saskatchewan.  And then this government wonders why it's having 
trouble getting health care professionals out to rural Saskatchewan, and 
attempts to come forward with a piece of legislation, speaking as though 
it's doing some wonderful thing. 
 



 

 

Well it is a step in the right direction, but it's inconsistent.  Its other 
policies and health care with respect to bed closures and lay-offs are 
inconsistent with the overall goal, or which should be the overall goal, in 
health care in Saskatchewan.  And that's taking health care services back 
to the people, not taking people to health care services, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- And this is the policy of the New Democratic government and 
I would like to know what the Minister of Health's plan is with respect to 
getting doctors to rural Saskatchewan.  What is his detailed plan?  Is he 
familiar with the rural medical practice study?  What has he done to 
implement that?  So we will have many questions which we will be asking the 
minister when this comes up in Committee of the Whole. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there are a couple more people that I wish to speak to 
with respect to this Bill before I close off second reading, and so I would 
like to adjourn this debate at this time. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Bill No. 82 -- An Act to Implement Certain Provisions Respecting Pension 
Benefits and Annuity Plans for Teachers Agreed to in the 1990-91 Provincial 
Teachers' Collective Agreement 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm pleased to rise to 
give second reading to the Bill to amend the teachers' collective 
agreement.  And I want to begin by outlining for all members, the purpose 
and substance of this Bill. 
 
Last October, Saskatchewan teachers ratified a new provincial collective 
agreement for the years 1990 and '91.  The most significant feature of the 
collective agreement is the provision that the existing annuity pension 
plan for teachers is to be eliminated. 
 
The annuity plan is to be replaced on July 1 this year by a new pension 
plan for which teachers themselves, through the Saskatchewan Teachers' 
Federation, will have full legal and administrative responsibility.  This 
is in accordance with the proposal put forward by the federation during 
negotiations.  The new plan will cover current members of the annuity plan 
and all teachers who begin teaching in the province in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should explain that there are currently two pension plans 
for teachers in the province.  There's the old formula plan in place for 
teachers who began teaching in Saskatchewan prior to July 1, 1980.  Then 
there's the annuity plan for all teachers who began teaching since that 
date. 
 
All terms and conditions of both these pension plans are currently included 
in one piece of legislation, The Teachers' Superannuation Act.  A number of 
legislative steps were required to bring about the changes to teachers' 
pensions specified in the provisions of the collective agreement.  This is 
what the Bill before us is designed to accomplish. 



 

 

 
(1500) 
 
First, Mr. Speaker, there are provisions to authorize the transfer of funds 
associated with the annuity plan to the Teachers' Federation for use in the 
new pension plan.  In addition, all teachers and retired teachers who 
belong to the annuity plan are transferred to the new STF (Saskatchewan 
Teachers' Federation) pension plan. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, the Bill includes amendments to The Teachers' 
Federation Act.  At present, STF has no authority to be involved in the 
operation of a pension plan.  The amendments give the federation the 
required authority and define various terms and conditions of the new 
pension plan in accordance with the provisions of the collective agreement. 
 
Thirdly, Mr. Speaker, this Bill provides for the amendment of The Teachers 
Superannuation Act.  The amendments specify that from July 1, 1991 onward, 
the Act will apply only to the old formula plan and its members.  This plan 
will continue to be in place under the administration of the Teachers' 
Superannuation Commission. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the provincial collective agreement includes several other new 
provisions related to the formula plan and also the group life insurance 
plan.  These new provisions require legislative amendments and are 
therefore included in this Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Bill is being developed in full consultation with the 
Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation, the Saskatchewan School Trustees 
Association, and the Teachers' Superannuation Commission.  All parties are 
satisfied that the Bill accurately incorporates those provisions of the 
collective agreement which require legislative authority. 
 
As I indicated earlier, Mr. Speaker, the change from the annuity pension 
plan to the new STF pension plan is scheduled to occur on July 1 this year. 
However, in order for the change to be legally possible,0the necessary 
legislation must be in place. 
 
I am therefore pleased to move, Mr. Speaker, that Bill No. 82, An Act to 
Implement Certain Provisions Respecting Pension Benefits and Annuity Plans 
for Teachers Agreed to in the 1990-91 Provincial Teachers' Collective 
Agreement, be now read a second time. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, teachers 
in this province have been waiting since October for this legislation, and 
I am happy to say that the members of the opposition have been able to 
consult teachers in the Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation and that we are 
fully in agreement with the legislation that is being presented here today. 
 
This is one of the rare occasions in the legislature, Mr. Speaker, where 
both government and opposition can jointly endorse a piece of legislation 
that will be of some benefit to teachers in this province.  And we 
recognize that teachers have been lobbying and negotiating for this kind of 
legislation through their collective agreement for some time. 



 

 

 
So I'm happy to say, Mr. Speaker, that we have no difficulty whatsoever 
with this legislation.  This legislation simply will provide the 
legislative authority for the collective agreement for the 1990-91 year, 
negotiated between the Government of Saskatchewan, the School Trustees 
Association, and the Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation, to be put into 
effect.  And I would not wish to adjourn debate, Mr. Speaker.  I think that 
we can now go to Committee of the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee 
of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 84 -- An Act respecting the League of Educational Administrators, 
Directors and Superintendents 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It gives me pleasure as 
well to move second reading of a Bill respecting the League of Educational 
Administrators, Directors and Superintendents. 
 
I first want to explain the background of this Bill and its major 
provisions.  The League of Educational Administrators, Directors and 
Superintendents, commonly known as LEADS, is an organization of educational 
administrators employed in our school system.  These individuals all have 
teaching certificates and teaching backgrounds, but because they work in 
administrative positions they belong to LEADS rather than to the 
Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation.  LEADS has operated under its own 
statute since 1984.  However, under its existing legislation, the league 
has lacked the ability to function in the full role of a professional and 
regulatory body. 
 
In particular, Mr. Speaker, the league currently has no control over the 
criteria for membership or the registration of members.  And it has only 
limited ability to enforce high standards of professional competence and 
conduct.  The new Act represents a thorough revision and updating of the 
existing statute.  It incorporates the provisions now being included in all 
our professional legislation, most notably a detailed discipline procedure 
designed to meet today's requirements for due process and fairness to all 
parties. 
 
The key provisions of the new legislation are as follows.  The league will 
now have the authority to establish qualifications and procedures for 
membership.  At present any person hired as an educational administrator by 
a board of education is automatically entitled to become a league member. 
 
Qualifications will be specified in law for all categories of educational 
administrators employed by school divisions.  At present there are no 
minimum qualifications except for directors of education. 
 
The legislation will define offences and penalties for non-members who 
accept or retain positions for which membership in LEADS is required by 
law.  The current Act does not enable the league to enforce these legal 
requirements effectively.  As part of its disciplinary powers, the league 
will be authorized to recommend to the Minister of Education that the 



 

 

teaching certificate of a LEADS member be suspended or cancelled. 
 
A grandfathering clause is included for individuals who are currently 
members of LEADS but who would not meet the new criteria for membership.  
The Lieutenant Governor in Council will appoint a public representative to 
the league executive.  This person will also serve on the discipline 
committee. The discipline committee will also include one member nominated 
by the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association. 
 
Policy by-laws made by the league will not take effect until they have been 
approved by the Minister of Education and published in the Saskatchewan 
Gazette.  This provision is consistent with the requirements included in 
many professional statutes over the past several years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this legislation has been developed in close consultation with 
the league.  The LEADS executive has reviewed and approved this final 
version of the Bill.  The Saskatchewan School Trustees Association has also 
indicated its support for the principles incorporated in the Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill represents a major step forward in the development 
of LEADS as a professional and regulatory organization.  It will help to 
ensure that only well-qualified individuals work as educational 
administrators in our school system.  It will also protect the interests of 
parents, pupils, teachers, and our school system as a whole by ensuring 
high standards of professional conduct among educational administrators. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm therefore pleased to move that Bill No. 84, An Act 
respecting the League of Educational Administrators, Directors and 
Superintendents, be now read a second time. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Once again I'm pleased 
to indicate to the Assembly that the opposition will be supporting the 
amendments to the Act. 
 
And I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that I've had the opportunity to meet 
with representatives of LEADS to discuss fully with them the Act that has 
received the endorsement of the provincial government.  We believe that 
there is nothing in this Act that other professional groups don't now have 
in terms of powers and authority.  And LEADS is simply coming into its own 
in terms of other professional groups that have their own legislation and 
have their own ability to discipline their own members, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I should point out to the minister, in Committee of the Whole I will be 
wanting his assurances that the principle of natural justice will apply 
when members of LEADS are being disciplined by the LEADS executive or the 
governing body, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But once again we are ready to proceed with this legislation and we could 
move into Committee of the Whole right now, if the minister would like to 
do that.  We could get this Bill well on its way.  In fact, Mr. Speaker, we 
are prepared to pass this legislation today. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and, by leave of the 



 

 

Assembly, referred to a Committee of the Whole later this day. 
 
Bill No. 60 -- An Act respecting Certain Payments to the Meewasin Valley 
Authority, the Wakamow Valley Authority and the Wascana Centre Authority 
(No. 2) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise today to move second 
reading of The Urban Parks Financial Arrangements Act, 1991. This Bill will 
establish the level of funding from the participating parties for the 
Wascana Centre Authority, Meewasin Valley Authority, and Wakamow Valley 
Authority, for the 1991-92 year. 
 
In the context of the current fiscal environment, the province's statutory 
contribution to urban parks funding will be maintained at the same level as 
last year, Mr. Speaker.  While it might be desirable to announce increases, 
this is just not possible at this time.  These payments to the urban parks 
are statutory in nature, and the level of funding defined by this Bill 
applies to all their participating parties.  Other participating parties 
may of course choose to contribute more to the Authorities. 
 
The urban parks are important features of our major cities, Mr. Speaker.  
While they have faced budget challenges in the past, the essential 
activities and the role of each has continued with the ongoing support of 
the provincial government. 
 
Other types of valuable assistance, financial or in kind, from the 
provincial government departments and agencies have been made available in 
the past to the urban parks to reinforce the funding. 
 
Our commitment to Saskatchewan's urban parks remains.  I therefore move 
second reading of this Bill to amend The Meewasin Valley Authority Act, The 
Wakamow Valley Authority Act, and The Wascana Centre Act, and trust other 
members will join with the government in contributing to the support of 
these organizations. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well, Mr. Speaker, I would 
say right at the outset that I will not join the minister.  We will not 
join the minister in supporting this Bill.  We oppose this Bill very, very 
strongly. 
 
This Bill . . . or I might say another year, another freezing of the funds 
for these three urban parks.  These funds have now been frozen since 
1986-87.  The government has decided to not make any more money available 
for these urban parks.  I won't speak for the park in Saskatoon or the one 
in Moose Jaw, and my colleagues will be doing so.  I do want to make some 
remarks about Wascana Centre and what this government's policy has meant 
for the Wascana Centre Authority. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Wascana Park in Regina is not just a Regina park but it's a 
park that's there for the whole of Saskatchewan to enjoy.  This is a park 
that has won awards across the country and across North America because of 
the facility that it is and the benefits that it is able to provide for all 
of the people of Regina and of Saskatchewan.  And although the government 



 

 

has cut its funding, has frozen funding to the park, the park is still 
green, is still well groomed, still well cared for in many ways.  And 
that's apparent by a cursory inspection. 
 
But if you begin to look more closely at the park you can begin to see the 
beginnings of a crumbling decay which needs to be arrested and turned 
around.  If this park is to continue to serve as a model for urban parks 
throughout North America, if this park is to continue to be something that 
all people of Saskatchewan can point to with justifiable pride, you cannot 
allow this thing to crumble. 
 
If you begin to look closely at the roads and at the sidewalks in the 
Wascana Centre, you'll see that decay and deterioration setting in.  One 
doesn't need to go much further than a hundred yards from this building 
today, Mr. Speaker, to recognize that.  To see on the east side here, the 
Lakeshore Drive right by the lake is a pot-holed, rutted roadway which has 
no place in a park of this repute. 
 
(1515) 
 
The money just doesn't seem to be there to fix that.  We've brought this to 
the government's attention I don't know how many years now, but the money 
just doesn't seem to be there to fix that.  And you can't fix that unless 
the funds are there.  So you cannot continue to freeze funds and hope the 
park can be maintained. 
 
More importantly, the Wascana Centre hasn't been able to keep pace with 
developments around it.  We have seen a remarkable increase in the number 
of tour buses visiting the Legislative Building and visiting the grounds.  
Yet the government refuses to make the money available so that there can be 
some proper parking space for these tour buses as opposed to parking space 
for vehicles.  You know, the changes just aren't being made. 
 
And this is the government, on the one hand that's spending I don't know 
how many dollars on Get Smart, to advise people to come up here.  And we're 
getting all kinds of tour buses coming to this building because they want 
to see this wonderful building which belongs to all of the people of 
Saskatchewan, yet the government and Wascana Centre doesn't seem to have 
the money to provide the proper facilities for those vehicles. 
 
We've seen a tremendous increase in the number of joggers and bicyclers 
making use of the park, yet the government refuses to make the money 
available to Wascana Centre so that the proper facilities can be put in 
place to facilitate these people.  There are no bicycle paths which are 
being developed in the park.  The joggers seem to be finding their own park 
across the green grass and beating their own path across the grass.  The 
government refuses to recognize that there's a need to upgrade facilities 
to accommodate these people.  It just isn't taking place. 
 
Lately we've seen the development, the expansion, of the Wascana Rehab 
Hospital within the confines of the park.  I have seen myself, Mr. Speaker, 
on recent occasion, we've seen people pushing other people in wheelchairs 
down pot-holed roads in the Wascana Centre because the facilities aren't 



 

 

available to have these people wheeled so that they can see and enjoy the 
park.  The facilities just haven't been available.  And the facilities 
haven't been available because the government has not made the money 
available to Wascana Park. 
 
And we say on this side of the House, this starving of the funding to the 
Wascana Centre must end and it must end soon if we are to have a park that 
not only accommodates the needs of the people in Saskatchewan, but also is 
something that can continue to be pointed to with pride by the people of 
Saskatchewan as a foremost urban park in Saskatchewan. 
 
This is a great park, Mr. Speaker; it's a wonderful park.  As I indicated 
earlier -- a park that has won awards because of the kind of facility that 
it is and what it has to offer to the people of Regina and Saskatchewan.  
And the government, I fear, is taking the wrong approach by taking an 
institution such as this -- one of the few in Saskatchewan, one of the few 
things that we can point to and say, this is world-class, this is something 
that we are recognized for throughout the whole world, something that we 
can point to with great pride -- and the government is taking the approach 
that it can starve it for funds. 
 
And that is not something that we can support.  And therefore, Mr. Speaker, 
on the basis of the Wascana Centre alone, we will oppose this Bill and 
oppose it strongly.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for recognizing me.  I listened 
very carefully to the minister's remarks.  The minister's remarks were 
designed to leave an impression with the public.  The impression would be, 
if you listened to the minister's remarks and didn't know the history of 
the three urban parks and their funding since 1982, the impression the 
public would gather that this government in its wisdom and support for 
these parks is maintaining the funding at a certain level, when in fact 
this government, since 1982, has made its constant objective to restrict 
the funding of these parks to a lower level than it was prior to 1982.  The 
minister, in his remarks, attempts to deceive the people of Saskatchewan 
about what the true stand of this government is. 
 
I want to take an opportunity to comment on some of the inconsistencies of 
this government with regard to the urban parks, Mr. Speaker.  There's been 
an inconsistent stand with regard to the urban parks in the bureaucratic 
treatment of those parks since this government came to office.  Consistency 
is only evident, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to the bottom line, which is 
reduced funding.  There they've been consistent with all the parks, and the 
message is the same year after year.  These three large urban parks, 
Wascana Centre in Regina, Meewasin Valley in Saskatoon, and Wakamow Valley 
in Moose Jaw, are admired and appreciated by Saskatchewan people, not to 
mention people from outside of the province of Saskatchewan that visit 
these parks as well. 
 
All three of these parks came about as a result of co-operative and 
sensitive leadership by a provincial New Democratic government and three 



 

 

different municipal governments, in Regina, Saskatoon, and Moose Jaw. 
 
Former premier Allan Blakeney, under the Tommy Douglas government, led off 
with this innovative, bold experiment in Regina in Wascana Centre when the 
Authority was created.  After that project began to mature, it was again 
time for a New Democratic government to move ahead with step number two. 
 
Under the Blakeney government, the present member for Riversdale, Saskatoon 
constituency, the Leader of the Opposition now, put together another 
partnership in Saskatoon, among the province, the city, and the university, 
later to be called the Meewasin Valley Authority.  The Wakamow Valley 
Authority followed soon after in Moose Jaw.  Since that time this 
government, the present government, has demonstrated time and time again 
that it views the three urban parks as unwanted stepchildren -- unwanted 
stepchildren. 
 
Let me illustrate, Mr. Speaker.  At the very first legislative opportunity, 
this PC (Progressive Conservative) government in 1982, reduced the matching 
statutory funding to the Authorities.  For my part I have reported in the 
past that the Meewasin funding formula was reduced from 5 mills to 4 mills 
in 1982 and has remained at that lower level ever since that time. 
 
I've stated, Mr. Speaker, that this government treats the three Authorities 
as unwanted stepchildren.  Mr. Speaker, go with me back to 1987, only 
recent history.  In 1987 the minister from Regina South piloted Bill No. 82 
and 83 through the legislature to continue reduced funding to Wascana 
Centre, Wakamow Valley.  At the same time the minister from Saskatoon 
piloted Bill 84 through the legislature, which accomplished the same end -- 
in other words, reduced funding -- to Meewasin Valley Authority.  Then in 
1988, the same two ministers piloted Bill 22 and 23 and 36 through the 
legislature to accomplish the same end -- again reduced funding to these 
valuable public Authorities. 
 
In 1989 a different minister, Colin Maxwell, the MLA (Member of Legislative 
Assembly) from Turtleford, piloted three Bills -- 57, 58, and 59 -- dealing 
with the three Authorities through the legislature, again to maintain 
reduced rates for another year. 
 
In 1990 a different minister, the member from Canora, managed to bring in 
one Bill, Bill No. 14, dealing with reduced funding for all three 
Authorities.  This year, 1991, this government has again changed ministers, 
and with Bill 60 seeks to maintain the reduced level of funding to all 
three Authorities. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, keep in mind at the same time the minister who brought 
in Bill 60 is not the minister for any of the Authorities, since each of 
the Authorities has a different minister who reports separately for each of 
them. 
 
At the same time it's interesting to note that the minister reporting for 
Meewasin Valley Authority soon after 1982 was Mr. Paul Schoenhals.  This is 
really a side-note, Mr. Minister, and I'm sure you'll be interested in 
this.  In 1982 it was Mr. Paul Schoenhals.  Mr. Paul Schoenhals was 



 

 

defeated.  Thereafter Mr. Rick Folk reported for Meewasin Valley. Mr. Folk 
was defeated.  Now my MLA, the minister for Mayfair, reports for Meewasin 
Valley.  Soon, I suspect, a new minister will be reporting for Meewasin 
Valley, and I think the public awaits that with anticipation, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, to state that statutory funding has been frozen at a reduced 
rate since the government came to power is not altogether accurate.  If the 
declining value of the dollar is taken into consideration by dealing in 
constant dollars, then each Authority has suffered an even greater loss of 
funds than is apparent on the surface. 
 
You see, Mr. Speaker, they, the government, have reduced funding every 
year.  They have not kept up with inflation.  They have constantly juggled 
ministers who handle the legislation with regard to these three 
Authorities.  They have often shifted ministers who report for the 
Authorities.  Mr. Speaker, it's time this government treats the three 
Authorities as wanted stepchildren, if that's the way they must view it. 
 
I dare say, Mr. Speaker, if this government had saved all the money they 
spent on fancy cabinet shuffles and creating and discarding departments of 
government, they could have funded all three Authorities at the higher 
level, which our government originally set the funding at, for the total 
nine years that they've been in power.  That,  
 DMr. Speaker, demonstrates a colossal amount of waste and mismanagement by 
this PC government. 
 
It takes hundreds of thousands of dollars to discard one department and 
create another one -- money for new stationery, new listings, new 
advertisements, new signage, etc., all costly, Mr. Speaker.  At the same 
time it would be necessary to scrap unused stationery, outdated signage, 
shift staff and records location, and many other costs that are hidden on 
the brief, surface examination of the treatment of these Authorities by 
this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these Authorities perform a valuable function to the people of 
Saskatchewan.  They provide a valuable service to the tourist industry in 
Saskatchewan.  They deserve the undiminished support of the government for 
their financing.  I think if the government was to examine the creation of 
valuable jobs in all three of these cities that are involved in these 
Authorities, one of the less expensive ways of creating jobs would be to 
fund the Authorities up to their original level.  Then the municipal 
authorities would also fund them up to that same level, which would be 
responsible for creating and sustaining more jobs in these three centres. 
 
So I think the government has missed the opportunity -- and I say by 
design, Mr. Speaker -- has missed the opportunity to support these valuable 
public, urban parks.  And for that reason I cannot vote to support the 
continued restriction of funding to these three Authorities.  I do not 
approve of that, and therefore, Mr. Speaker, I cannot support that. 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I am pleased, 



 

 

I guess would be the word, to enter into debate, but not very pleased with 
the recommendation of the government in Bill 60 before us now. 
 
Let me say first of all in outline why I say that, Mr. Speaker.  It's 
because of a record of history behind the government's handling of the 
funding for the three municipal parks.  And I want to direct my comments 
most specifically to Wakamow as they relate to the Wakamow Valley Authority 
in Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, let me say that I find the ministerial handling 
of the funding for Wakamow Valley Authority to be absolutely appalling.  In 
1988 the Bill came to this House, as my colleague the member for Westmount 
has just said, came to this House piloted by the Minister of Urban Affairs.  
And we were told at that time that he was bringing this Bill to this House 
because this had to do with municipal funding and these were municipal 
parks, he said. 
 
Well then in 1989 it came to this House, I was very pleased to see -- and I 
entered my comments on the record at that time -- being piloted by the 
minister of Parks, the Hon. Colin Maxwell, who has now seen fit to go on to 
other duties. 
 
And I complimented the government on its decision at that time to transfer 
this authority for the funding for Wakamow Valley Authority to Parks, 
because perhaps at long last it was going to indicate that the funding for 
Wakamow was going to assume some kind of priority for the provincial 
government, for the provincial PC government.  And I think the minister of 
Parks at that time, Colin Maxwell, was very pleased to have as one of his 
responsibilities, responsibility for Wakamow Valley and the other 
Authorities. 
 
Well then along came 1990, the former member of Urban Affairs was out of 
the picture, Colin Maxwell was out of the picture by that time, and the new 
Minister for Parks was in his place and introduced the legislation for the 
funding of Wakamow. 
 
And I said again at that time how pleased I was to see that at long last 
the PC government had decided for two years in a row to make this an item 
which came under the authority of the minister responsible for Parks.  
Maybe it indicated that at least they believed that as a park it had a 
place to play in the province of Saskatchewan.  But how disappointed I was 
that the funding had not changed.  The funding formula was still the same 
tired, old formula. 
 
We were also told last year that the minister responsible for Wakamow 
Valley Authority had now become not the minister of Urban Affairs, not the 
minister responsible for Parks, but the Minister for Energy and Mines. 
 
Well here we are, 1991, and here we are again, Mr. Speaker.  And I simply 
have to ask -- I think inspired by that old Abbott and Costello routine, 
Mr. Speaker -- who's on first?  Here we are again.  Now we're back.  Now 
we're back again to the minister for Urban Affairs; I think he calls 
himself community affairs . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Community 



 

 

Services, he said. 
 
Well we can stand in our place and debate what he's the minister for, but I 
note very, very specifically, Mr. Speaker, that it's not the minister of 
Parks. 
 
Here we are back to Urban Affairs again with the minister, we're told, 
still the Minister for Energy and Mines, still the minister responsible for 
Wakamow Valley Authority.  And as we debate in this Assembly the funding 
for Wakamow Valley Authority, the minister responsible, we're told, the 
Minister of Energy and Mines, is not even in his place in this Assembly.  
That's not because he's not here; he was earlier this day.  And I find that 
reprehensible. 
 
I think we should be hearing, when we're in second reading on this Bill, we 
should be hearing from the minister responsible for the Authority.  And I 
will await debate, because I assume we're going to conclude second reading 
debate in this Assembly today. 
 
Now it's not our intention to hold up deliberation of the Bill, but I will 
wait to see if the minister responsible for Wakamow Valley Authority 
funding will stand in his place and defend the Bill.  And I suspect that we 
may not see that. 
 
And so who's on first?  It seems to me that there is absolutely nobody on 
that side of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, who cares to hold, in any kind of 
priority, consideration for the funding of these parks and specifically for 
Wakamow Valley Authority. 
 
Well let me just outline my anger, Mr. Speaker, by tracing history, 
specifically to do with Wakamow Valley Authority.  1991, Wakamow Valley 
Authority this year is celebrating its 10th anniversary -- its 10th 
anniversary.  Wakamow Valley Authority was established in 1981.  And at 
that time the government of the day, the New Democrat government of the 
day, had committed for funding from the province for the operation of 
Wakamow Valley Authority the equivalent of 2 mills -- 2 mills of funding. 
 
Not only that, Mr. Speaker, it was made abundantly clear to absolutely 
everybody who was involved at that time that it was only 2 mills when it 
was starting because Wakamow Valley was just in its start-up stage.  And 
obviously in its early stages there would be some capital costs, but as 
time went by, Mr. Speaker, those costs of operating the park would continue 
to increase. 
 
And very, very clearly, Mr. Speaker, I remind this House that the 
commitment was made by the government of the day that the funding for 
Wakamow Valley Authority would start at the equivalent of 2 mills of 
funding in 1981 and then would gradually increase over time to a point 
where it was up to 5 mills, the equivalent of 5 mills of funding from the 
province, putting it on par, approximately, with the funding from the 
province for Meewasin and for Wascana Park. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, what's happened?  What's happened?  The government 



 

 

changed in 1982, and in 1983 the minister of the day responsible for 
Wakamow Valley Authority funding came into this Assembly.  Did he say it's 
now time to increase the funding from 2 mills to a higher amount because 
Wakamow Valley Authority is up and running and has greater ongoing 
maintenance costs to keep the park going?  Mr. Speaker, he did not.  Not 
only did he not say that it was going to increase, what he did say was it's 
going to decrease, if you can believe it or not. 
 
In 1983 the minister responsible said it was going to decrease to the 
equivalent of 1.6 mills, a funding from the 2 mills that it had been at. 
 
I mean, let's just stop and think about this for a moment.  We've got a 
brand-new urban park that is being developed and as each step of 
development that takes place, the maintenance has to apply to it in order 
to keep it going.  I mean, it just blows your mind to think that some 
responsible government -- and I use the word "responsible" in quotation 
marks -- would come along and say, well now that you got up and running 
you're going to cut the funding. 
 
Well not only that, Mr. Speaker, in 1984, in 1985, in 1986, in 1987, in 
1988, and 1989 and 1990, and here we are in 1991, and what has the minister 
just stood in his place to say?  He's just stood in his place to say -- 
let's translate this into reality -- he stood in his place to say that for 
the eighth consecutive year, that the PC government is going to restrict 
provincial funding to the Wakamow Valley Authority to 1.6 mills. 
 
Well who is on first?  Who's on first?  Who in the world is in charge over 
there?  Does anybody care, I wonder?  It doesn't seem to matter whether 
we've got the minister of Urban Affairs, whether we got the Minister for 
Parks, the Minister for Energy and Mines, and the minister now for 
community whatever, it doesn't matter who's in charge over there.  The 
message is the same -- sorry, folks, we're going to have to cut the funding 
from the 1982 level once again this year.  That's what they're saying.  
That's the reality. 
 
Well very, very clearly, Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that funding for the 
urban parks and specifically funding for Wakamow Valley Authority is low, 
low, low on the totem pole of priorities for the PC government. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, is this because we've not brought this little issue to 
the attention of the ministers opposite?  Clearly not.  Every year since 
I've been in this Assembly -- since 1986 -- either the member from Moose 
Jaw South, soon to be the member for Wakamow, I mean in many ways is that . 
. . it was a pleasant time for the member from Moose Jaw South to know that 
come the next election he will become the member for Moose Jaw Wakamow.  
What an attractive name.  Wakamow Valley Authority will be in his . . . is 
in his constituency now and it will be in his constituency after the next 
election.  And in many ways it's with pride that he can come into this 
Assembly following the next election and be referred to as the member for 
Moose Jaw Wakamow. 
 
Well each year since the future member for Moose Jaw Wakamow, current 
member for Moose Jaw South, and myself will come into this Assembly, one or 



 

 

the other, and on many occasions both of us, have stood in our place in 
this Assembly and asked the minister responsible, whoever that might be -- 
if they could get that figured out -- what in the world is going on?  Is 
this under review?  Is there any hope for change? 
 
And each year they say, oh, well gee, we've got tough times.  Yes, yes, we 
know that the NDP government was funding to the equivalent of 2 mills and 
that was just start-up time, but now that it's up and running, we can't 
afford, we can't afford to carry through that original commitment made to 
the people of Moose Jaw, they say. 
 
And it's recognized in this House by both sides that the Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Valley Authority has done a fine job of fund-raising, private fund-raising, 
both corporate and individuals -- many individuals, in fact hundreds of 
individuals in the city of Moose Jaw who have personally made significant 
financial commitments to the operation of Wakamow Valley.  And we've 
recognized this.  But the government opposite has tended to say -- and so 
that's an excuse for not funding them -- because they've done such a fine 
job of raising money from local citizens, they don't need funding from the 
province. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I remind the minister opposite that people in Moose Jaw 
are in Saskatchewan too.  And Moose Jaw people have the same right to 
expect the same support for their Wakamow Valley Authority as for the other 
urban parks in this province.  And I'm getting a little sick and tired of 
hearing the lame-duck excuses from whoever it is that claims to be 
responsible this year on the other side.  When is this going to end? 
 
 DLast year in this Assembly, putting the question to the minister of Parks 
at that time, who was responsible for Wakamow Valley Authority, asking him 
on June 6 in Hansard, I quote from page 1851 of Hansard of June 6 last year 
in Committee of the Whole.  The minister at that time said that the funding 
formula was under review -- still under review.  What did he say?  Let me 
quote.  He said, and I quote: 
 

 The options identified for discussion during those November meetings were 
presented to a meeting of the urban park executive directors in January -- 
January 23, 1990 to be specific. 

 
January 23, 1990.  That's over a year and a half ago. 
 

 And as well, an executive summary of the review paper as well as the 
feedback of the urban park executive directors was presented to a meeting 
of the three relevant ministers who look after the specific authorities. 

 
I assume that includes the Minister for Energy and Mines. 
 
I go on and I quote: 
 

 And we work quite closely within that framework, or within that 
information, and were not able of course to complete the review at this 
time, in time at least for the submission of any sort of a change in time 
for (the) budget. 



 

 

 
And then he went on, and I'll quote just one more paragraph; Mr. Speaker, I 
don't wish to be lengthy.  The minister said, and I quote: 
 

 We are still in a process of reviewing those options with the individual 
ministers. 

 
I remind the House this was said on June 6, 1990; today is June 10.  This 
was said a year ago in this Assembly. 
 

 We are still in a process of reviewing those options with the individual 
ministers.  There's still not a definite resolution as to how it will be 
resolved, but to assure the member that it is still very much a part of my 
concern and that we are working towards a resolution of this review 
progress with the hopes of completing it just as soon as we possibly can. 

 
Well the minister stood in this House a year ago -- a year and four days 
ago to be precise -- and said the funding is under review and they're 
taking up it with the ministers, the three ministers responsible, including 
the Minister for Energy and Mines, the member from Thunder Creek. 
 
Well then he goes on to say on page 1852 of the same day, Mr. Speaker, that 
the study is ongoing.  And again I quote from the minister of Parks at that 
time who said: 
 

 The study -- I wanted to emphasize the study is still not complete.  We 
still have not resolved the details at all of this review process. 

 
And he goes on later to say: 
 

 And if I could assure the member that we have a target date in mind and 
it's this fall (it's this fall, he said, the fall of 1990), if that would 
suffice . . . 

 
He goes on, I quote again: 
 

 . . . if that would suffice (he goes on to quote again) if that would 
suffice, I would certainly like it to because when you deal with so many 
different interest groups, it's so hard to predict just how things are 
going to work out in your negotiations. 

 
Now this was, Mr. Speaker, I remind the House, when I had been asking the 
minister the same line of questions the year before that, in 1989, he said 
they were going to do a review of the funding formula. 
 
So we come back to this House a year and four days ago and the minister 
says it's still under review and we've got to make sure that there's 
opportunity for interest groups to have their input.  But the Minister for 
Energy and Mines, he's on top of this.  But he says, and I quote: "And if I 
could assure the member that we have a target date in mind and it's this 
fall" . . . 
 
And it's this fall, fall of 1990.  That's when the minister last year 



 

 

expected the review to be complete, fall of last year, of 1990. 
 
(1545) 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, then what happened?  Here we come back to this Assembly 
again, having raised the question of equitable funding for Wakamow Valley 
Authority in this Assembly, equitable for Wakamow as compared to Meewasin 
and Wascana.  What did the minister say last year? 
 
He said much the same, Mr. Speaker, as the minister for Parks had said the 
year before when asked about the matter of equitable funding for Wakamow 
Valley Authority. 
 
And let me refer, Mr. Speaker, to first of all my question, to put it into 
context, and I quote again from June 6 of Hansard, page 1853, the 
conclusion of my question, and then I'll quote the minister's response.  My 
question was: 
 

 I have no difficulty whatsoever, Mr. Minister, going on record as being 
fully in support of funding for 2 mills, 1991-92, and then increasing the 
funding level after that point with an objective of arriving in the equity 
position for funding from the province of Saskatchewan, putting Wakamow in 
an equity position with Meewasin, Chinook, and Wascana, taking into 
consideration that some of those have other funding inputs from other 
sources as well. 

 
 Mr. Minister, can I ask then whether that approach to funding is something 

that you would find objectionable or that you would see as being worthy of 
your support, and I guess through you, to the Minister of Energy and 
Mines.  Although I do hope, as I said before, that the authority will come 
back to you.  Do you see that as being worthy of support as a long-term 
plan for the funding of Wakamow Valley Authority? 

 
End of question.  The minister stood on his feet in this Assembly a year 
ago, a year and four days ago, and what did he say?  He said: 
 

 I think I understand what the member is saying, and equitable treatment of 
the parks is something, I think that we can both agree on (he said). 

 
That we can both agree on.  I go on to quote: 
 

 I think that's only fair, if I can use that word once more. And certainly 
I intend to take the member's comments under advice. 

 
So what's happened?  What's happened?  Zippo -- that's what's happened, Mr. 
Speaker.  Nothing.  Nothing.  For the eighth straight year, nothing has 
happened.  It doesn't matter who's on first over there.  They all get the 
same results when it comes to funding for Wakamow Valley Authority -- 
nothing. 
 
They inherit a park, the funding responsibilities for an urban park.  In 
1982, their first opportunity to trot in this Assembly and state their 
priorities for funding is to cut it, to cut it by 20 per cent.  And then 



 

 

for eight straight years bouncing around year after year with a different 
minister every time, for eight straight years to hold it there. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the constituents of Moose Jaw North, the 
constituents I represent in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, I say I am appalled 
at the lack of responsibility being exhibited by the government in funding 
for Wakamow Valley Authority.  We can only assume . . . and I wish somebody 
over there, I wish the minister responsible for the park would stand in his 
place today and tell us just what happened. 
 
The minister for community whatever, when he introduced this Bill, made no 
reference to the funding formula review, no reference whatsoever.  I'm not 
even sure that he knows that we talked about in this Assembly the last two 
years.  He made no reference whatsoever, not a single word. 
 
The minister responsible for Wakamow Valley Authority doesn't even stand in 
his place.  So who's on first?  It looks like nobody's on first over there. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- He's already hit a home run. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Yes, the minister says he's already hit a home run.  Well, 
Mr. Speaker, I'd say it'd be more accurate to say he's long lost in deep 
right field and he's looking for a place in the dug-out. 
 
So we simply have to ask.  And there will be some pressing questions.  I 
asked the minister responsible for community whatever, when we come back to 
Committee of the Whole, to request that the minister responsible for 
Wakamow Valley Authority at least have the decency to be in this Assembly 
when we're considering the Bill and to be here to answer questions.  
Because it would seem to me that somebody has to be prepared to answer 
questions.  The minister for Parks is no longer responsible. 
 
We've got a new minister again, and so . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Well there goes . . . Mr. Speaker, I would ask that you would ask the 
member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster to withdraw his remark that he shouts 
across from the floor.  Mr. Speaker, would you ask him to withdraw that 
remark.  Did you hear that, Mr. Speaker?  Would you ask him to withdraw 
that remark, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Has the member got a point of order? 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Speaker, on a point of order.  As I'm speaking in my 
place, the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster shouts across, there are the 
women-beaters.  And I would ask, Mr. Speaker, that you would ask him to 
withdraw that remark and apologize to the House. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- I was paying attention to you on your feet and I 
didn't hear it, but I don't . . . Order.  I ask members on both sides, I 
ask members on both sides of the House to watch their unparliamentary 
language that I hear going across the floor from time to time. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Well, Mr. Speaker, I 
simply conclude my remarks by serving notice to the minister for community 



 

 

whatever that when we deal with his Bill in Committee of the Whole, we will 
have some very specific questions to ask as to what happened on this 
funding formula review that took over a year, well over a year, and which 
we were assured in this House one year and four days ago that would be 
completed by the fall of 1990; and which somehow has led to him coming back 
to this House in this budget presentation then, Mr. Speaker, and saying 
that the funding -- there's no more money.  The funding is still the same 
as it's been.  It's being held again for the eighth straight year. 
 
And I would ask that as well, that when he comes to this Assembly to defend 
the funding, that he would also bring -- the minister for Energy and Mines 
-- the minister responsible for the Wakamow Valley Authority into the 
Assembly with him so that he can be asked to defend the funding decision of 
this government. 
 
I'm getting sick and tired of ministers saying: I'm not in charge, I'm not 
in charge; nobody seems to be in charge.  Would they please bring in the 
ministers, whoever they are, who are responsible for these three urban 
funding . . . the funding for these three urban parks.  Would they bring 
them all, if that's what it takes, into this Assembly so that the 
opposition can ask some questions and get some straightforward answers to 
those questions. 
 
So I take my seat in this second reading debate, Mr. Speaker, saying very, 
very clearly that I strongly support the work of the Wakamow Valley 
Authority, of the board and the staff of the Wakamow Valley Authority.  I 
strongly want to express my appreciation on the record for the volunteer 
work and for the financial contributions, the donations that have been made 
by Moose Jaw citizens and corporations. 
 
But I also want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I very clearly -- because I 
support the Wakamow Valley Authority and the fine work that it does -- I 
will very clearly be voting against Bill 60 because I think it is 
reprehensible that for the eighth straight year the funding is being 
limited to the amount that was reduced from the actual funding that was 
received in 1982. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I want to add just a few 
remarks to this debate, because as the member from Moose Jaw North pointed 
out eloquently only moments ago, I have a very particular interest in the 
Wakamow Valley, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In fact at the outset of my remarks, I'd almost want to admit to the House 
some conflict of interest, given that the Wakamow Valley Authority falls in 
its entirety within the constituency of Moose Jaw South, and because I and 
my family and so many of my neighbours and friends in Moose Jaw spend a 
great deal of time in the Wakamow Valley Authority enjoying its facilities. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is an important debate to the constituency I 
represent, to the community I represent, and to myself as an individual 
member.  And I want to put a few remarks on the record. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a certain sense of de péja pà vu as we approach this 



 

 

debate yet one more time, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Each and every year since 
I've had the privilege of serving in this House, we have engaged in a very 
similar debate as the debate we are now engaged in, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  
Each and every year since I've had the privilege of serving here, the 
government opposite has come into this House, one more time frozen the 
funding to the Wakamow Valley Authority in spite of all of the protests 
from the community that I represent -- along with the member from Moose Jaw 
North -- in spite of the many presentations made by the board of the 
Wakamow Valley Authority and members of the Authority, in spite of 
commitments made by ministers in this House.  Year after year, the 
government returns in the legislative session to freeze the funding to the 
Wakamow Valley Authority and also to Meewasin and to Wascana, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
And so there's a certain sense of de péja pà vu.  We have seen this Bill 
before and many of the arguments are not new arguments, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  
What changes each year, as my colleague from Moose Jaw North has just 
pointed out, all that seems to change is the minister who brings the bad 
news into the House.  That's all that seems to change.  The news is the 
same; all that changes is the messenger. 
 
And this year we have the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg bringing the 
news even though he is not the minister responsible for any one of the 
urban valley authorities, and not the minister for Parks, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker.  He's minister for some new branch of government that no one seems 
to be able to understand. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, my colleague from Moose Jaw North was reminding 
yourself and members of the House that a year ago in this House . . . and I 
sat here in my place and heard those commitments being made by the then 
minister of Parks, referred to today by the member from Moose Jaw North.  
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that was not the first occasion on which 
commitments had been made by ministers regarding both the lack of funding 
to the Wakamow Valley Authority and to the inequity which affects Wakamow 
particularly -- the inequity of the funds, Wakamow at a much lower rate 
than the other urban authorities here in the province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, you will be interested to know that on June 8, 1988, 
the then minister responsible said right here in the House, admitted there 
is an inequitable situation to the formula.  The minister responsible at 
that time admitted right here in the House that there is an inequity.  Here 
we are these many months and years later and there is no change in the 
inequity, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we can go to 1989.  And at that time the member from 
Melfort . . . why he was speaking to second reading on the Wakamow and the 
urban park authority funding is beyond me, but anyway it was the member 
from Melfort that day speaking to the issue.  And he announced that it was 
the intention then of their government to carry out -- and I quote from 
Hansard, page 2427, July 6, 1989 -- the member from Melfort announced that 
it was the intention of his government to carry out a ". . . comprehensive 
review of the funding formulas for all of the urban parks.  This will be 
done over the next several months . . ."  That was in 1989, Mr. Deputy 



 

 

Speaker. 
 
If I turn then to August of 1989, page 4197 of Hansard, August 18, 1989.  
And I remind you again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 1989, not a year ago but two 
years ago. 
 
The member from Moose Jaw North puts a question that day to the then 
minister of Parks, Mr. Maxwell.  The member from Moose Jaw North asks the 
minister or says to the minister: 
 

 . . . (we're) not asking for preferential treatment, but simply that 
Wakamow receive funding to a level that is equitable with the other 
authorities.  That's the nub of my question. 

 
To which the then minister of Parks, Mr. Maxwell, responded: 
 

 Mr. Chairman, we'll do our level best . . . 
 

He committed in the House, we'll do our level best to address the inequity 
in funding to the Wakamow Valley Authority. 
 
Here we are, Mr. Deputy Speaker, these two, three years later, nothing has 
been done to address the inequity in funding, and yet one more time this 
government comes to the House and freezes the funding for the urban park 
authorities. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, what is tragic here is that this decision in many ways 
reflects the priorities of this government.  When this government was 
elected in 1982, they inherited the two longer established urban park 
authorities, Wascana and Meewasin, and the new and  
 Dbudding Wakamow Authority in Moose Jaw. 
 
Almost as soon as they were elected, what did this government do, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker? Slashed the funding -- cut the funding by 20 per cent.  The 
first chance they have to put their hands on the finances of this province, 
what did they do?  They slashed the funding to those three vehicles, those 
three parks, those three urban park authorities, by 20 per cent. 
 
(1600) 
 
They did that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you'll recall, not in a time of economic 
downturn in our province. No, no, not in a time of economic downturn, but 
in a time of relative economic prosperity.  You recall that oil prices at 
that time were as high as they'd ever been and still climbing, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
They came into office and what did they do?  One of the first things they 
did was to cut the funding to the urban park authorities by 20 per cent in 
a time of relative economic prosperity. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I maintain that tells you something about the 
priorities of this government, priorities which have continued from that 
day to this. Because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, have there been some other 20 per 



 

 

cent cuts to some of their own perks?  Oh, no.  Have there been 20 per cent 
cuts to many of their corporate friends?  Oh no, unless we're talking about 
the taxes they pay.  No, but when it comes to programs for people, which 
the parks are -- they're facilities for people, for families -- they take 
the cuts, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  We saw it as soon as they were elected.  You 
cut programs for people; meanwhile you continue to fund and feather your 
friends, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do want to give some credit where some credit is 
due.  And in terms of Wakamow I want to give credit for the government 
opposite for the environmental youth corps and some of the young people who 
have worked last summer through the environmental youth corps in the 
Wakamow Valley Authority.  They did a great job, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  We've 
seen some good work done through New Careers and the Wakamow Valley 
Authority. 
 
But you know, sir, and any thinking member will know, that you can't do 
long-term planning and long-term building on ad hoc programs that come this 
year and may be here next year or may not be.  That's no way to do 
long-term planning, long-term funding, long-term growth, and long-term 
building, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  The way that you do that, the way that you 
build for the future, the way that you build sensibly, the way that you 
make good use of public funding is to have a funding base that is adequate, 
established, and long term. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- And a mirror of government. 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Indeed, as one of my colleagues in the House just said, in 
some ways that's a bit of a mirror of the government, what's happened since 
1982.  We go to sort of from ad hoc to ad hoc to ad hoc.  Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, what the urban park authorities need and deserve, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is a sense of long-term funding and appropriate levels of 
long-term funding, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- What did you do prior to '82? 
 
Mr. Calvert: -- Now the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster, perhaps he 
would like to enter the debate.  I will be sitting down in a moment or two.  
He has a great deal to say from his seat.  He asks, Mr. Deputy Speaker, now 
what did you folks do before 1982?  Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I'm sure you 
were listening even though the member from Cut Knife-Lloyd was perhaps not.  
The member from Saskatoon this afternoon talked about the foundations of 
Wascana as a dream of the Douglas government, a dream that came to be a 
reality here in the city of Regina.  The member from Saskatoon, former 
Speaker of this House, Mr. Deputy Speaker, reminded members this afternoon 
of how the member from Riversdale and others worked for a dream in 
Saskatoon called the Meewasin Valley Authority, and that dream became a 
reality. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can tell you there would be no Wakamow Valley 
Authority in the city of Moose Jaw if it had not been for New Democratic 
Party government, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when the 
New Democratic Party government of Allan Blakeney, working with people like 



 

 

Gordon Snyder from Moose Jaw, John Skoberg from Moose Jaw, Bill Davies from 
Moose Jaw, and many others, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when that . . . former 
mayor, Scoop Lewry, someone reminds me. 
 
When the Wakamow Valley Authority was put together, it was given a funding 
base of 2 mills by the then New Democratic Party government as opposed to a 
5 mill funding base for Meewasin and Wascana, as the start-up initial 
funding for Wakamow, with the full intention that once the Authority was 
established, projects had been put in place, that funding, that inequity in 
funding would be changed, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  That's what the New 
Democratic Party governments in Saskatchewan have done in regard to urban 
park authorities.  And if the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster would pay 
attention to debate, rather than chirping from his seat, he would know. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the member took me off my train of thought; let me 
return.  I was attempting to give government some credit where credit was 
due.  Mr. Speaker, I want to say also, to give credit where credit is due, 
I think in some regards this government has recognized a potential for 
Saskatchewan, a potential that exists for the community of Moose Jaw for 
sure.  And that's the potential in the whole realm of tourism and 
attracting visitors to our province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Our urban parks -- be it Wascana, Meewasin, Chinook in Swift Current, or 
Wakamow in Moose Jaw -- can play a major part in that marketing of our 
province to the visitor.  By cutting funding to this very attractive 
feature of our province, our urban parks, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it just makes 
no sense.  At the same time we're attempting to encourage more to visit our 
communities, be it Regina, Saskatoon, Swift Current, or Moose Jaw.  It just 
makes no sense, this starving of the urban park authorities in this way. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we're not talking here of vast amounts of money to give 
appropriate increases to the urban park authorities.  We're not talking 
about vast amounts of money to deal with some of the inequity, the 
particular inequities faced by the Wakamow Valley Authority.  Mr. Speaker, 
it just means some change in priorities, some change in the way government 
chooses to spend the money that they're currently spending, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
I have here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a document that came out very recently 
from the Department of the Environment.  It's described as The State of the 
Environment Report.  It has many figures contained within it, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, but very little analysis, very little of real, public value. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I wonder what this thing cost.  I wonder what this 
thing cost.  We would be better, in my view, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to save 
all of these expensive printing jobs that go on from this government, 
better to save that money, invest it in the environment.  Save the money 
cutting down trees and printing books.  Invest the money in the 
environment.  Invest it in our urban park authorities.  Invest it in the 
environment and not in political propaganda from members opposite. 
 
We had a budget this year, Mr. Deputy Speaker; you recall that.  It was 
accompanied by a booklet called CHOICES; you know the book.  I understand 



 

 

this thing is being mailed out all over the province.  I saw in newspapers 
everywhere -- the weeklies and the dailies -- full page ads, half page ads.  
Thousand and thousands of dollars spent on pure, political propaganda.  
Don't cut the trees down to print your political propaganda.  Make it so 
that our urban park authorities can plant more trees in this province. 
 
All the ads, the Fair Share ads, the budget ads -- materials like this 
printed on glossy paper must weigh half a pound -- Mr. Speaker, this is 
where we can find some of those valuable tax dollars to reinvest in our 
environment, to reinvest in our community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm going to take my place in this debate.  I know that other 
members will want to get into it.  I am hopeful that the minister 
responsible for the Wakamow Valley Authority, the Minister of Energy and 
Mines, the member from Thunder Creek, I'm hopeful that he will take a few 
moments to address this Bill, to enter this debate.  I share the view of my 
colleague from Moose Jaw North that when we get to committee on this Bill, 
it is my sincere hope that that member, the minister responsible for the 
Wakamow Valley Authority, the member from Thunder Creek, it is my sincere 
hope that he will be here in the House and prepared to answer the 
questions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be voting against this Bill.  I will be voting against 
this Bill because -- I ask you to note -- if this Bill is defeated, if this 
Bill were to be defeated this afternoon, funding for Wakamow Valley, 
funding for Meewasin and Wascana, would revert to 1982 levels. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can you imagine this.  We're almost a decade away, and if we 
defeat the Bill today, funding for these urban parks would revert to 1982 
levels, and that's better than the funding this government wants to put in 
today.  Can you believe it, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
 
And so I look forward, as do other members on this side of the House, to 
the committee stage of this Bill when we will have opportunity to address 
some very specific questions to the minister who's brought the Bill today, 
and we hope to the ministers who are responsible for the urban park 
authorities. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I will be voting against this Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
Mr. Gleim: -- Could I have leave, Mr. Speaker, to introduce some guests, 
please? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Gleim: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It gives me great pleasure today to 



 

 

introduce to you and to the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the member 
from Maple Creek which is not here today, to introduce 22 students from the 
school, Abbey School, grade 7 and 8 students.  They are accompanied today 
by teacher Miss Ann Sawatsky, and chairpersons are Mrs. Lil Hylland, Mr. 
Dwight Erickson, and bus driver Mr. Harley Burgess. 
 
I would like to welcome them all to the Assembly today and to watch some of 
the proceedings.  We're in second readings right now, whether you know what 
that is or not, but second reading of Bills.  And I hope you enjoy your 
stay today and watch what's going on today and maybe take back some of the 
things that you've learned here today to your district and town of Abbey. 
 
With that, I'd like all the members to welcome these students from Abbey 
here to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 72 -- An Act to amend The Northern Municipalities Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm pleased to move second 
reading of this Bill -- The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 1991.  
This legislation was recommended by the northern economic development task 
force that toured the North earlier this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, three years ago the government amended The Northern 
Municipalities Act to permit municipalities in the North to take an active 
part in municipal economic development corporations.  It was intended that 
the 1988 amendment would put northern municipalities on a similar basis 
with urban municipalities and rural municipalities in the South. 
 
As you know, under The Rural Development Act, urban municipalities and RMs 
(rural municipality) can take part in rural development corporations.  
However, Mr. Speaker, a technical problem with the legislation we passed 
has been discovered.  Specifically, an old section of the Act prevents 
municipalities from participating through share ownership in these local 
corporations.  Therefore, Mr. Speaker, we've drafted the Bill that is 
before us today to resolve this problem.  This Bill will provide clear 
authority for northern municipalities to participate through share 
ownership in municipal economic development corporations. 
 
Since the Act was amended in 1988, a number of northern municipal economic 
development corporations have been established in the North, Mr. Speaker.  
At this time they're engaged primarily in forestry-related activities in 
northern Saskatchewan, and they're also actively pursuing economic 
opportunities in construction, mining, and the use of other northern 
resources.  These economic development corporations in turn will be able to 
carry out industrial or commercial activities. 
 
Because some of these economic development corporations in the North are 
fairly well advanced in industrial or commercial enterprises, the Bill 
makes this amendment retroactive to January 1, 1988.  In this way, the 



 

 

original intent of this legislation will be restored, Mr. Speaker.  This 
retroactive section will validate municipal participation that may have 
occurred to date, subject to ministerial approval. 
 
In summary, Mr. Speaker, this Bill will help ensure that northern 
communities have a maximum opportunity to take part in economic development 
in the North.  I urge all members to support this Bill.  Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I would indicate 
that members on this side of the House will support the Bill.  But I must 
express our displeasure and regret that it's taken the government three 
years to correct a mistake.  And I guess in many ways the government's 
action represents their whole attitude towards northern Saskatchewan.  That 
even though it was able to make amendments to The Rural Municipalities Act 
and The Urban Municipalities Act so as to allow urban municipalities and 
rural municipalities to set up rural development corporations, economic 
development corporations, it so badly flubbed this whole matter that it's 
taken three years to sort this out for northern municipalities.  And I 
think it indicates a lack of concern and a lack of attention on the 
government's part as far as northern Saskatchewan is concerned. 
 
The minister pointed out that the amendments were put forward in 1988.  
Then they discovered a technical problem.  We knew this technical problem 
last year, if not before, yet it has taken the government such a long time 
to actually come forward with the amendment that's here now.  That 
amendment should have been here last year and could have been passed last 
year, Mr. Minister.  But again it indicates the lack of priority that this 
government has with respect to northern Saskatchewan. 
 
I might say that this represents their political thinking, that because the 
North is represented by members of the New Democratic Party government, the 
government puts a low priority on northern Saskatchewan and doesn't seem to 
care.  Everyone in Saskatchewan knows that the PC government tends to put a 
lot of effort into looking after constituencies that they represent.  But 
when it comes to constituencies represented by the New Democratic Party, 
the government just doesn't seem to care and drags its feet even though 
there's agreement on both sides as to things that need to be done. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, we'll support the Bill, but again we're just very sad 
that the government has taken for ever to make this minor change, this 
minor change in the legislation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee 
of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 75 -- An Act to amend The Municipal Revenue Sharing Act (No. 2) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I rise today to 



 

 

move second reading of Bill No. 75, The Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment 
Act, 1991. 
 
As many members will know, The Municipal Revenue Sharing Act establishes 
the level of provincial assistance to be allocated to both urban and rural 
municipalities.  Accordingly, the amendment gives legal effect to decisions 
reflected in the government's 1991-92 budget. 
 
While challenges have obviously changed over the years, Mr. Speaker, our 
shared goal of making Saskatchewan a better place to live has remained 
constant.  Given the economic challenges we face, it has never been more 
important that we build and protect our communities.  Consistent with this 
heritage, the government has embarked on several efforts to help stabilize 
the rural economy and at the same time stabilize communities, large and 
small.  The GRIP and NISA programs and community bonds have been designed 
for this purpose.  The recently announced Fair Share program will 
contribute as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government remains committed to retaining the concept of 
revenue sharing with the province's municipalities.  In 1991-92 the 
revenue-sharing allocations to urban and rural municipalities, Mr. Speaker, 
will total over $102 million.  The reduction in the overall pool this year 
was necessary due to the difficult economic and fiscal circumstances.  
Still revenue-sharing funding remains an important source of revenue for 
local governments to enhance local autonomy and to minimize property tax 
increases. 
 
I urge all members to support this Bill so that payments to  
 Dmunicipalities can be undertaken in prompt manner.  Accordingly, I move 
second reading of Bill No. 75, The Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 
1991. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it was with 
interest that I listened to the minister's remarks.  And I'm glad that I 
paid attention to his remarks because if I hadn't paid attention there for 
a minute, I might have missed his remarks. 
 
And one can only guess why he didn't want to spend very much time on his 
remarks.  But I think it's got something to do with the fact that the 
minister is just not very proud of what he's doing with his Bill, and the 
government has no pride in what it's proposing to do with this Bill, which 
is to cut and to cut deeply the funds that normally go to urban and rural 
municipalities to assist municipalities with providing the necessary 
services and programs that they're expected to provide in Saskatchewan.  
And he's cutting, and cutting deeply, which is why he just didn't have very 
much to say, Mr. Speaker, because he's not proud of what he's doing, and 
neither is his government very proud of what they're having to do. 
 
The Bill before us proposes to cut funding to urban municipalities by about 
seven and a half per cent, cut funding to rural municipalities by about 14 
per cent.  Anyone that knows anything about how urban and rural 
municipalities operate will know that this cut in funding will severely 
impair their ability to continue to provide services and programs at a 



 

 

reasonable cost to property taxpayers in Saskatchewan. 
 
The government, Mr. Speaker, is doing this -- cutting its funds to 
municipalities -- because the government has so badly mismanaged 
Saskatchewan over the last number of years.  It's because of its 
mismanagement that the money is no longer available to provide for urban 
and rural municipalities.  It's through mismanagement that we find 
ourselves at this stage of having to cut funds by 7 per cent, 14 per cent, 
respectively to urban and rural municipalities.  It's through mismanagement 
that the government finds that the money just isn't there to continue to 
support property taxpayers, to enable them to provide services, a good 
level of services and programs at a reasonable cost.  And it's just not 
taking place because of mismanagement in Saskatchewan. 
 
One of the examples of mismanagement that I could point out that I think is 
a great mismanagement, as an example -- the government is proposing that 
oil companies this year be allowed . . . or it's projecting revenues from 
oil companies of about $252 million.  Ten years ago the revenues from oil 
companies were $532 million.  And even though the amount of production from 
the oil companies has increased, the amount of revenues that we get, which 
is related to production, has in fact gone down and is in fact one-half of 
what it was 10 years ago.  If the money were there, we need not take the 
drastic action that we're taking today with respect to urban and rural 
municipalities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Similarly the government has made a number of investments over the years 
which have proven to be just textbook examples of fiscal mismanagement. 
 
The GigaText corporation is one, Mr. Speaker, an example of where the 
government got taken by speculators from eastern Canada.  Government didn't 
have its eyes open, didn't consult widely as to what it is that these 
speculators were trying to interest them in.  And before they regained 
their senses, the government had wasted $5 million or more -- $5 million on 
a project that . . . Well it's mindful of the old story of someone trying 
to sell a machine that could turn lead into gold, Mr. Speaker.  That's what 
the government got taken in with.  But in the meantime -- it was that bad 
-- in the meantime, the government had wasted, just wasted more than $5 
million. 
 
Another example of an investment on the part of the government, they gave 
the Weyerhaeuser corporation of Tacoma, Washington, they gave them a pulp 
mill and other related facilities in Prince Albert and Saskatoon.  Gave it 
to them. Gave it to them and said, well you don't have to pay back again 
for 30 years, you don't have to give us any down payment, and you only have 
to pay in those years your profits exceed a certain level. 
 
And there's never been 1 cent, 1 cent come back to us from Weyerhaeuser.  
Not 1 cent has come back to us from Weyerhaeuser.  If that money had been 
forthcoming, we might have had the fiscal flexibility so as to ensure that 
we didn't need to cut back on fundings to urban municipalities, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Cargill is another example of where this government has decided to give 



 

 

money to the Cargill corporation, one of the wealthiest companies in the 
world, to give them money to set up a fertilizer plant.  And even though 
Cargill is one of the wealthiest companies in the world, the government 
here is on the hook in terms of guaranteeing loan payments by this company 
set up by Cargill, which makes no sense to anyone. 
 
And again it's something that inhibits our fiscal flexibility, a fiscal 
flexibility which is desirable and necessary if we want to continue to 
ensure that urban and rural property taxpayers can provide services and 
programs at a level that we expect in this province, not at a level that's 
commensurate with services that are provided in third-world countries, not 
at a level that's being provided in Honduras or El Salvador, or a level 
that's commensurate with services that are being provided in Kenya or any 
number of other countries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe the member has a guest 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Mr. Speaker, with leave, I would like to introduce some 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Mr. Speaker, on behalf of my colleague, the member from 
the Quill Lakes, I would like to introduce to you and to the legislature 12 
grade 10 students from the Lake Lenore School seated in your gallery.  
They're here with their teacher, Marilee Sterner. 
 
And as I indicated before, I'm introducing this group on behalf of my 
colleague from Quill Lakes, and on behalf of myself and the member and the 
rest of the members here, we want to wish you well in your trip today and 
we sincerely hope that your trip will both be educational and joyful.  I'd 
ask all members to join me in welcoming the students from Lake Lenore. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to join with the member 
opposite in welcoming the students from Lake Lenore.  I've had the 
opportunity to be in Lake Lenore at the official opening of their school a 
few . . . a couple of years ago I guess it is now, and I've also had the 
opportunity to attend the school and lived the first 16 years of my life in 
Lake Lenore. And I'd like to welcome the students. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(1630) 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 75 (continued) 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, the Bill that we 
are discussing is Bill 75, which is The Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment 



 

 

Act.  And it's an Act which proposes to cut funding to cities, towns, and 
villages and to rural municipalities. 
 
Normally the cities, towns, and villages and rural municipalities get a 
certain amount of money from the provincial government to help them provide 
for services and programs.  And we've done this because to simply expect 
property taxpayers to pay for all of the costs in municipalities would mean 
that property tax bills in Saskatchewan would be very high. 
 
And the property tax is not a very good tax because property taxes, there's 
not much relationship between the ability to pay and the taxes that are 
actually paid, which is why governments have taken the position that senior 
government should provide moneys for municipalities so as to help the 
property taxpayers to provide the services and programs that are necessary, 
whether it's maintaining the streets and roads or to provide fire service 
or policing service or any number of services that people in local 
municipalities need. 
 
We've taken a position that municipalities should be provided with this 
help so as to make it more possible for them to do that at a reasonable 
cost to the property taxpayers. 
 
Well with this Bill the government is proposing to cut the amount of money 
that is going from the provincial government to the cities and towns and 
villages, and cut it because over the years we've seen a great deal of 
mismanagement on the part of the government.  They haven't been able to run 
things right, and they've just blown all kinds of money, tens of millions 
of dollars which have just gone out the door because they haven't been very 
careful as to how they spend money or they haven't been very thoughtful in 
terms of some of the things that they've undertaken. 
 
We mentioned GigaText as one example of where the government just blew $5 
million because they didn't pay very much attention to what it is that they 
were doing.  And if they had paid attention and if they had had their wits 
about them we might not have seen the government waste that kind of money. 
 
And it's really waste, Mr. Speaker, that accounts for the government being 
in a position where they say that we've got no alternative but to cut funds 
to our cities, towns, villages, and rural municipalities. 
 
Now to make a cut for one year might not pose such a great problem for our 
municipalities.  To say, well we have to cut this year because we've got 
overwhelming problems fiscally and that's why we're having to cut you, just 
to do it for one year might not pose such a great problem for our 
municipalities.  But this cut is being put after many years of other cuts 
and freezing of funds to municipalities, or a negligible increase. 
 
And I'd just like to review the history of what is taking place, Mr. 
Speaker, so that people might better understand, might better understand 
what this cut in funding will mean for our municipalities. 
 
In 1984-1985, revenue sharing was at $65 million.  Inflation rate was 
running at 4 per cent.  But next year, in '85-86 there was no increase, no 



 

 

increase whatsoever, even though inflation the previous year had gone up by 
4 per cent and in that year had also gone up by 3.6 per cent. 
 
So even though costs for municipalities had increased, Mr. Speaker, the 
government decided to freeze the amount of money to municipalities.  And 
even though government's revenues had gone up tremendously because of extra 
taxes that they put on taxpayers of Saskatchewan, they decided to not 
transfer any additional money to the property taxpayers through their 
municipalities. 
 
The following year, '86-87, there was a 3 per cent increase in the revenue 
sharing -- a 3 per cent increase for urban revenue sharing even though 
inflation had risen in '84-85 by 4 per cent and the next year by 3.6 per 
cent, this year by 3.1 per cent.  In all those three years all we saw was 
the 3 per cent increase, even though inflation in those three years is 
probably more . . . you know, probably closer to 12 per cent, if not more. 
 
I might point out too, Mr. Speaker, that increase in funding occurred 
during an election year.  And that was when the government was still 
playing some games that in the years between elections you didn't provide 
for any increases, and then during the election year you would provide an 
increase so as to give people the impression that you really did care about 
them, that you really did want to support what it is that you're doing at 
the local level.  That was the year they did that and they increased it by 
3 per cent. 
 
Because the very next year, the year after the election, the government 
decided that it would cut on funding.  So here you have the year before the 
election the government said, well here's a 3 per cent increase for you.  
The year after the election the government decided to cut funding to urban 
municipalities, and cut it even though inflation was running at 5 per cent. 
 
The year after that, '88-89, the increase was somewhat less than 1 per 
cent, even though inflation that year was running at 5.7 per cent, Mr. 
Speaker.  In '89-90 the government froze its funding at the level that it 
was at in '88-89, although inflation was up 4.5 per cent.  Last year, '90 
to '91, the revenue sharing was again frozen, although inflation went up 
4.7 per cent. 
 
So we have a history here of the government not only freezing funding at a 
time that inflation was going up and the costs for municipalities were 
going up, deciding to freeze its funding, but has also at times cut funding 
to municipalities -- cut at a time that inflationary costs meant that 
municipalities had to pay more to continue to provide services and 
programs. 
 
This has put severe pressure on municipalities over the years, Mr. Speaker.  
And although some municipalities have had reserves, financial reserves, 
rainy day accounts to help them weather fiscal storms such as the one that 
they've had for the last number of years, it's becoming apparent to me and 
of course to municipalities that the financial reserves that were there are 
simply no longer there to help them weather the storms that have resulted 
from this government's fiscal mismanagement, Mr. Speaker. 



 

 

 
So we have a situation where this is not a cut of one year only, a cut in 
the context of increases and generous increases to municipalities, but this 
is a cut that's taken place at a time that we've had in the main . . . 
where we've seen in the main, funding frozen to municipalities, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Also I should point out that this is being done at a time that the 
government has also cut other transfer payments to municipalities.  You 
know, money also flows to municipalities as a result of other programs.  As 
an example, the government used to provide generous allowances to assist 
the larger municipalities with transit, to give them the kind of money that 
would help them provide transit services at a reasonable rate.  And we did 
that because transit service is desirable. 
 
Transit service means that you don't have to spend as much money on roads 
and other facilities which you would have to do if the transit weren't 
there.  Transit also means that people are driving their cars less, 
polluting the air less, using less gasoline.  So it's environmentally . . . 
transit is a desirable direction for municipalities, yet government has 
seen fit to cut back on its transfer payments for urban transit. 
 
The government has also cut its capital funding.  This is a government that 
announced a few years ago at the time of the provincial election that we're 
going to reinstate the urban capital program, that this capital program is 
going to be $12.5 million a year.  And no sooner had they said that, then 
they decided to cut.  In the first year they only provided, I think, 8.5 
million out of the 12.5.  The next year they only provided 7.5 of the 12.5 
million. 
 
This year they say, well we're going to change our minds on that program.  
We're going to have a new program called block funding.  And no one knows 
what they're going to get, but most municipalities expect that the amount 
of money that they're going to get for capital assistance under this new 
block program from the minister will be less than they were promised three 
years ago. 
 
So this cut which is represented by this Bill, Mr. Speaker, is not just an 
isolated cut, but it's a cut that follows a history of frozen funding by 
the government and is a cut that takes place in the context of other cuts 
which have also been made by the government to urban municipalities. 
 
Municipalities, Mr. Speaker, as you will know, provide a great service to 
Saskatchewan.  We have municipalities because it's simply impossible for 
the provincial government to provide the kinds of services that 
municipalities have to provide or the kinds of services that people in 
communities expect.  We've seen it desirable over the years to give 
municipalities powers to enable them to provide services and programs, to 
make sure that the streets are laid out for people past their houses, to 
build sidewalks, to pave the roads, to provide fire service, to provide 
police protection, to provide parks and recreational services -- a whole 
host of services.  That if the provincial government were to try and 
provide that and to administer those kinds of programs and services from 



 

 

Regina, would mean that it would cost all of the taxpayers a tremendous 
amount more because a central bureaucracy would never be able to provide 
those services and programs in a cost-effective way.  That's why we set up 
municipalities so that local people can have a great say in the decisions 
that are to be made about providing those kinds of services. 
 
But in order to do that you need to support those local units.  You need to 
support local government so that they can provide those services at a 
reasonable cost.  Yet we see a government that seems to be moving the other 
way. 
 
And we cannot continue on in the way that we have, Mr. Speaker.  We cannot 
continue on in this way to expect municipalities to provide more and more 
and to make do with less and less, such as the government is doing. 
 
But it's indicative of the government's priorities, Mr. Speaker.  We've 
seen over the years that the government has moved from a situation of where 
property tax levels in Saskatchewan, net property tax levels were at what 
might be termed a reasonable level, a reasonable level, and were among the 
lowest in Canada, to where now we have a situation where property tax 
levels, Mr. Speaker, are if not the highest, are certainly close to the 
highest in all of Canada.  The situation where the people in Saskatchewan 
pay far more for property taxes than anyone else in Canada, Mr. Speaker.  
And that's because of the actions of this government. 
 
And this is a change that's taken place, Mr. Speaker, in the last 10 years 
or so, the last eight, nine years where the government has decided to cut 
back on its funding to urban property taxpayers.  And consequently we've 
seen a dramatic increase in the expectations of property taxpayers to fund 
their own services and programs.  And so this government has moved in the 
opposite direction from what we would see as desirable and I think that all 
taxpayers in cities, towns, and villages would see as being desirable, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- I'm especially troubled by the effect that this cut in 
funding will have on some of the poorer communities in Saskatchewan.  This 
funding that has gone . . . this revenue sharing, Mr. Speaker, that goes to 
urban municipalities is structured in two ways. 
 
About 60 per cent of it is per capita, that is to say that all 
municipalities get a certain amount depending on their population.  But 
about 40 per cent of it is there to provide additional assistance for 
poorer communities, so that poorer communities can provide relatively the 
same level of service that wealthier communities can provide and therefore 
not have to increase taxes to an abnormal level. 
 
Now everyone knows that we have wealthier communities and we have poorer 
communities.  Wealthier communities tend to have a very high assessment 
base.  And it might be because the area around them has a large number of 
farmers who gravitate towards the towns and villages to take advantage of 
the services there, which means that stores and other businesses get 



 

 

developed to service the area around it whereas some other communities 
don't quite have that. 
 
Meadow Lake is probably an example of a community, although there is an 
agricultural area surrounding Meadow Lake, there's also a great deal of 
forest land.  So you don't have as many farmers.  You don't have as much 
demand for local businesses to supply services. 
 
Bedroom communities are another example.  The bedroom community of Pilot 
Butte is an example just outside of Regina, or Warman just outside of 
Saskatoon.  We have people living there but they don't have much in the way 
of resident business because they tend to do their shopping and purchase 
the goods and services they need in the nearby cities so that they don't 
have the business tax base to support local services and programs. 
 
(1645) 
 
And so we do have disparity between municipalities within Saskatchewan.  
And this revenue sharing was intended in part to equalize these disparities 
so that communities of the same size could provide relatively the same 
kinds of services and programs and to do it at relatively the same costs.  
But these cuts in revenue sharing have meant that we have not been able to 
see the kind of equalization that is desirable and that I think all of us 
would see as being necessary.  This government through its cruel cuts has 
meant that poorer communities continue to have to prove to provide services 
and programs that are not as desirable as we would like and to do it at a 
higher cost than is acceptable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the PC government's record of cuts and freezes and negligible 
increases means that equality is not being achieved by our municipalities.  
And this is particularly a problem, as I mentioned, for our bedroom 
communities. And I say shame on the member for Qu'Appelle-Lumsden and the 
member for Rosthern who haven't seen fit to lift one finger or to say one 
thing in this Legislative Assembly in a way that might redress the problem 
that has been created. 
 
Now this is no mere dispute between provincial taxpayers and property 
taxpayers, Mr. Speaker.  As I indicated earlier, the property tax is not a 
fair tax.  There is a very little relationship between ability to pay and 
the taxes that must be paid. 
 
I think I pointed out over the years in this House, where a cabinet 
minister who was a minister of Urban Affairs at that time, that 3.4 per 
cent of his known income was going to pay for his property taxes; whereas 
an elderly widow in my constituency, only receiving the pension, was having 
to pay 5.9 per cent of her known income to support property taxes on her 
house, which is one of the more modest houses in one of the least sort of 
taxed areas of the city.  She can't afford any more.  It's not as if she's 
got a big, wealthy house and she's having to pay on that, but she had a 
very small house on a very small lot and yet her taxes were 5.9 per cent of 
her known income.  And the government continues to support this inequality 
in our urban municipalities, Mr. Speaker. 
 



 

 

And I would just let the members of the Assembly know that we do not 
support this because it goes the wrong way as far as we're concerned.  And 
therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would tell you that we will be opposing this 
Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 
Bill No. 84 -- An Act respecting the League of Educational Administrators, 
Directors and Superintendents 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to introduce 
my officials.  To my right is Michael Littlewood, board and teacher 
services, Saskatchewan Education; and Susan Amrud from legislative 
services, Saskatchewan Justice. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Pages 2 to 18 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Page 19 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much.  I'd like to refer the minister to 
clause 43(2).  And under this subsection, it reads: 
 

 The discipline committee may accept any evidence that it considers 
appropriate and is not bound by rules of law concerning evidence. 

 
In this section, Mr. Minister, I want you to advise the committee whether 
or not the principle of natural justice applies when the discipline 
committee is undergoing its disciplinary procedures for alleged misconduct 
on the part of its member. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, I advise that the discipline as 
outlined in this particular Bill follows very closely that that was used 
with regard to the speech and language pathologist Bill and also with The 
Registered Nurses' Act. And the Charter of Rights applies to this 
discipline committee's proceedings and it requires them to comply with the 
rules of natural justice.  The disciplinary provisions of this Act were 
drafted to comply with the rules of natural justice. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much.  Mr. Minister, based on your 
assurances that the principle of natural justice will apply to the 
disciplinary proceedings, then I have no difficulty with this clause.  And 
my impression is that the LEADS will adhere to the principle of natural 
justice when they have to undertake a disciplinary procedure. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Well we certainly can give that assurance, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Page 19 agreed to. 



 

 

 
Pages 20 to 27 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Chairman, I would also at this time like to 
thank my officials for being here with us this afternoon. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 
Bill No. 84 -- An Act respecting the League of Educational Administrators, 
Directors and Superintendents 
 
The Speaker: -- When shall the Bill be read the third time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- With leave, now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: -- Mr. Speaker, if I could have permission at this 
time, I would also like to thank my critic for the co-operation with this 
Bill.  We've had many discussions with regard to it and I know that she's 
had a lot of contact with the LEADS administration.  And I certainly 
appreciate that co-operation and I think that if we could work much more 
closely on Bills of this nature and in this manner, that the whole system 
could move much more quickly, and I really appreciate that co-operation.  
Thank you. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I too appreciate the 
co-operation that we've been able to generate on this Bill.  The minister 
for the first time gave me the documentation prior to this Bill being 
entered into this House on first reading and that was able to expedite the 
situation. 
 
I know that there are very few occasions in this House where both sides of 
the House co-operate, and I think that this in fact is a very historic 
moment in some ways because we've been able to get this legislation through 
the legislature very, very quickly.  I believe it was introduced Friday and 
here we are on Monday, and the legislation has now been past third reading, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I want to thank the minister and his officials.  And I'm sure that all 
of the people over in LEADS will be very, very happy to have their 
legislation finally in place. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


