





























































Hansard: April 18, 1991


 

 

April 18/91 
 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise under rule 11, Mr. Speaker, 
to present a petition signed by many residents of north-western 
Saskatchewan, particularly The Battlefords area.  And they have some 
serious concerns about the cut-back in funding to the Western Development 
Museum branches throughout the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
In this particular case they are opposed to the Western Development Museum 
heritage farm and village in North Battleford being closed from September 
15 of '91 until some time into the following year and the lay-off of all 
the permanent staff.  I think this petition, Mr. Speaker, is reflective of 
the concerns of other Western Development Museum branches throughout the 
province and I present this to you here today, sir, for your consideration. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure to be able to 
introduce to you and through you, to the members of the legislature, His 
Excellency, Bjorn Olsen, Ambassador of Denmark, and Mrs. Olsen, wife of the 
ambassador, who are here visiting the province of Saskatchewan.  His 
Excellency arrived last night, is meeting with the Lieutenant Governor.  I 
will be meeting with His Excellency along with the Minister of Economic 
Diversification and Trade, other government officials and there's a 
luncheon hosted by yourself. 
 
I would ask all members of the legislature to join me in welcoming these 
special guests to the province of Saskatchewan.  A lot of us have 
Scandinavian connections and roots, Mr. Speaker, and we're very proud of 
it, and we're very happy to host and have in our province, His Excellency, 
Bjorn Olsen.  Please welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Saxinger: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to introduce to you and 
to the members of this Assembly two schools visiting here from my 
constituency.  And I want to start with the Wakaw School.  There's grade 11 
and 12.  There's 31 students sitting in your gallery.  They are accompanied 
by their teachers, Rivard, Dale Ebert, and Dale Girodat, and their bus 
driver Les. 
 
I also have in the Speaker's gallery, 17 grade 8 students from Cudworth.  
They are accompanied by their teacher Will Yaworski.  I will be meeting 
with them at 3 o'clock for drinks and pictures. 



 

 

 
I hope they have an enjoyable stay and they enjoy their sessions here 
today, and I wish them a good trip home.  And I would ask everybody 
involved to please help me welcome them to this legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Speaker, I too would like to introduce through you to 
the Assembly some guests from my constituency from the grade 8 class in 
Bruno.  There are 16 students, their teacher Tom Schwinghamer, and chaperon 
Connie Doetzel. 
 
I hope these students and teachers and chaperons enjoy their visit to the 
legislature and trip to Regina.  I wish them a safe trip home, and invite 
all members to warmly welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Federal Funding for Agriculture 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  My question today, Mr. 
Speaker, is directed to the Minister of Agriculture, the Hon. Premier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would say that today is a dark day for Saskatchewan farmers 
and for Saskatchewan farm towns in the light of the announcement by Ottawa 
and Regina on the so-called third line of defence. 
 
The president of the Prairie Pools, Mr. Leroy Larsen*, has said the 
following today in response to this inadequate announcement: 
 

 We had a commitment from the Minister of Agriculture and the Prime 
Minister that they would not abandon our industry.  We don't see that 
commitment in today's announcement (Mr. Larsen and the Prairie Pools say). 

 
Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier is this: knowing full well that the 
farmers of this province needed $550 million in cash as a minimum now, for 
spring seeding, knowing that our farmers and our rural communities are in 
crisis, isn't today's announcement really a condemnation of you and your 
government's ability to negotiate the best deal possible for the farmers of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, in response to the hon. member's question, 
there were four parts to the announcement this morning that were made 
public to the general media and to farm organizations when the federal 
minister made the announcement. 
 
I would say to the hon. member firstly, that the farmers wanted cash as 
quickly as possible and announce as early as possible in their hands, and 
as much as the federal government could come up with.  They wanted it as 



 

 

unlinked as possible as well, Mr. Speaker, so they were talking about at 
least, put it in NISA (net income stabilization account) or in some 
separate account. 
 
The second thing that the farm groups have said to me and to others was, 
perhaps you could help us with the premium because they're afraid; it's a 
new program.  If in fact we could have some assistance so that in fact we 
start the program, given the commodity wars . . . that the reduction in 
that cost would make it that much more affordable. 
 
Third, they certainly wanted the basket of the commodities to be treated 
this way for a long, long time to come.  And that's something that we have 
been producing.  They wanted the cash advances continued, Mr. Speaker, and 
for this province that's very important.  And as you saw last year with the 
very large crop, be able to have the cash advance was very, very helpful.  
And I'm arguing, and I think the rest of the members of the legislature 
would like to see, the early GRIP (gross revenue insurance plan) payment. 
 
And you put all those together, Mr. Speaker, and I know it takes just a 
minute to go through this.  For the province of Saskatchewan, it's $90 
million into the separate NISA account now which means that the farmers can 
apply for this separate account, no strings attached -- 5 per cent of your 
gross income.  And you can pick the year you like, whether it's 1988, 1989, 
or 1990 -- pick your best year -- 5 per cent of that will go into a 
separate account, whether you put money in it or not. 
 
And if it's $100,000 in sales, it's $5,000 cash -- and I have a chart here 
that I'd be glad to go through.  Plus, Mr. Speaker, 25 per cent of the 
revenue portion of GRIP will be paid for by the federal government.  So 
that those farmers that were concerned about the GRIP, saying is this a 
little too expensive on the revenue side, they've decided to pick up 25 per 
cent of it.  And, Mr. Speaker, I'd be glad to go through more details of 
this with respect to all the program but I know that you want me to be as 
briefly possible and I'll let the hon. member ask the subsequent question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the Premier.  Mr. 
Speaker, I must say that this answer by this Premier is totally inadequate, 
in an attempt to defend a totally inadequate announcement of today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, just how inadequate this announcement is -- 
both the Premier's announcement and the government's announcement today -- 
is reflected by the fact that Mr. Larsen of the Prairie Pools said the 
following, quote, in response to this announcement: 
 

 It is very difficult to look to the future, (Mr. Larsen says) when you 
don't know if there will be a future for your farm . . . That is what the 
government is asking Prairie grain and oilseed producers to do with 
today's announcement of a third line of defence for the Canadian grain and 
oilseeds industry. 



 

 

 
Mr. Larsen says it's very difficult to look to the future.  He said it's an 
abandonment of the farmers of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Premier, my question to you is this: farmers left not knowing the 
future of their industry because of the announcement today, can't say 
there's going to be a tomorrow.  How can you possibly justify being a part 
of this deal which clouds the future of rural Saskatchewan so much? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm sure that you would . . . If the hon. 
members and yourself, Mr. Speaker, would allow me to give a little bit more 
of the details just in response to the second question, so that in fact we 
can add it up. 
 
If we take the NISA program, Mr. Speaker, that was announced today, it's 
$90 million.  If you take the 25 per cent assistance on the producer 
premiums with respect to the revenue portion of GRIP, that's $60 million.  
If you look at the permanent cover program that was announced, that's $7 
million.  And if you look at the cash advance system that was put together, 
Mr. Speaker, it is $20 million.  That, added up, Mr. Speaker, is $177 
million. 
 
Let me just put it in terms of acreages, so that the hon. members can just 
have a flavour for what this means to the province of Saskatchewan.  If you 
look at western grain stabilization, Mr. Speaker, NISA, the cash advance 
program, and the GRIP program, Mr. Speaker, here are the numbers.  If you 
farm a thousand acres, which is average in the province of Saskatchewan, 
western grain stabilization will be $4,220; GRIP will be $6,620; NISA will 
be 2,410; and finally the third line of defence with respect to NISA and 
the revenue insurance will be $1,800; for a total of $14,455, Mr. Speaker, 
per farmer that's farming a thousand acres.  The government portion of 
that, Mr. Speaker, is $10 an acre. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question for the Premier.  Mr. 
Speaker, I want to preface my question by saying that when the Premier 
throws in the, for example, the interest-free cash advance program, I want 
to tell the Premier opposite and all of his front bench members that this 
is not a new program.  It's been a long-standing program, at least until 
the Tories tried to do away with it last year and it got bumped.  This is 
not new money. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- This is not new money.  Now, Mr. Speaker, my question to 
the Premier is as follows.  This $170 million which is the amount of the 
announcement today made by this farm assistance program is even worse 
perhaps than I've intimated in the first statement that I asked in the 
question.  And I'll tell you why.  Will the Premier confirm that today's 
announcement of $170 million for Saskatchewan farmers is valid only if 



 

 

there is a 95 to 100 per cent sign-up in GRIP and NISA, and that the actual 
dollars which will be directed to Saskatchewan could be considerably lower 
than that if that sign-up target isn't met? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, that's . . . I commend the hon. member.  
That's a more relevant question.  And I want to go through some numbers for 
the hon. member. 
 
In the release that's out to the general public, Mr. Speaker . . . and I'll 
just refer to one page, and the hon. members have it, I'm sure.  If a 
farmer had 50,000 in sales and they want to participate in NISA, which 
means you just open the account, there's no other obligation; and if in 
fact you decide that, because of the premium that's going to be paid for it 
in part by the federal government as well as the provinces, you would 
receive this year a benefit of $7,250 in cash if, Mr. Speaker, that you had 
50,000 in sales. 
 
If you have a 100,000 in sales, Mr. Speaker, you will receive $11,000 in 
cash this year, 1991; that is if you participate in the NISA, and the GRIP 
is laid out there.  And if you had 250,000 in sales, which is the cap, Mr. 
Speaker, you would receive as a farmer this year as a result of this 
program, the third line of defence, $22,250 cash from the government. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that's a combination of 50,000 in sales or 100,000 in 
sales or 250,000 in sales.  I'll point out, Mr. Speaker, that the western 
wheat growers association . . . You don't want me to carry on?  Well I'll . 
. . 
 
Next question, Mr. Speaker. If you want me, I'll go through the example in 
another fashion if you like. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question. And I say, Mr. Speaker, 
as a preface to this question, that I find it very difficult to accept the 
Premier's rationalization of this program, this inadequate program, in the 
face of the fact that Leroy Larsen of the Prairie Pools has condemned it, 
that the Canadian producers association's condemned it, raised questions 
about it, in view of the fact that it's so obviously shortfall of the 
amount of money which is required by the farmers of the province of 
Saskatchewan.  In fact the 19 members on the producers' committee 
themselves say that they recommend a shortfall be bridged by a combination 
of direct income assistance and other measures, something this plan does 
not do. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier is this: can you not admit 
that you and your government and the Progressive Conservative government in 
Ottawa headed by Mr. Mulroney, blew these negotiations.  You didn't deliver 
the bacon for the farmers as required. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 



 

 

 
Mr. Romanow: -- There's no harm in admitting that you did not negotiate the 
deal that should be negotiated.  Will you join the opposition, Mr. Premier, 
if we introduce today, at the end of question period, an emergency 
resolution of this House which will give us a chance, give you a chance, 
give all of us, to pass a non-partisan motion saying to Ottawa, it's not 
enough; it's tied to GRIP and it shouldn't be; let's get on with the job of 
doing it right.  Will you join us in this resolution today so we can speak 
to the farmers of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I would be glad to take the opportunity to 
go through precisely what the farmers have asked for and in the response.  
And I will say to the hon. member, as I said in the media, and I'll use 
NISA as the example. 
 
This will not be enough for all farmers, Mr. Speaker.  And that's readily 
admitted by the minister, the federal minister, the farm organizations and 
other people.  I would point out to the hon. members that, when you open up 
this NISA account, that is the federal government will put -- plus the 
province -- 5 per cent of your gross sales in a special account. 
 
It is my estimate, somebody's else's ballpark, that it's about 50 per cent 
of the farmers will probably leave the money in the account.  Another 25 
per cent of the farmers might take some money out of it, might not.  And 
among another 25 per cent of the farmers, ballpark, need even more money, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So you heard the western wheat growers talk today, and you heard other farm 
organizations that said, look, for 65, 75, or 85 per cent of the farmers, 
this is going to be fine.  But for some of those farmers that are in the 
difficult position -- and we know, Mr. Speaker, that about half of them are 
all right; 25 per cent, some problem; and about 25 per cent, a lot of the 
problem -- this is not enough.  And, Mr. Speaker, what also they said is, 
with the universal national program, it is fairly difficult to target just 
for those in a specific area in a specific province. 
 
I point out, Mr. Speaker, that his colleagues in the NDP administration in 
Ontario have farmers signing up for this as fast as they can, Mr. Speaker.  
Now what that does for the province of Saskatchewan is dilute it a little 
bit, Mr. Speaker, and that implication for this national program is pretty 
significant.  Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- I believe we're kind of getting into the area of debate, 
and I know there's a great deal of information that the minister would like 
to impart, but I'd just like to draw to his attention that there are limits 
and I'd ask him to adhere to it. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my question is 
directed to the Premier, the Minister of Agriculture.  Mr. Minister, in a 



 

 

report to the ministers of Agriculture on grains and oilseeds safety net 
committee, the definition of a third line of defence, the last of three 
lines of defence, I just want to quote.  It says: 
 

 The third line of defence represents a systematic approach to events that 
are beyond the scope of the first and second lines. 

 
Mr. Minister, this announcement today is simply an extension of the second 
line of defence and farmers still don't have the promised third line of 
defence. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Minister, my question to you is: will you tell this 
House if farmers can still expect, as promised by you and the federal 
government, a third line of defence? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, a couple of quick points, Mr. Speaker, as 
briefly as I can.  Many groups . . . and I'll just read one, the news 
release from the western wheat growers have said that NISA would be a very 
good vehicle to put the third line of defence because it's a separate bank 
account, and you put some money in there, you get prime plus 3 per cent, 
and the government could top it up, kick start it, and put some cash into 
the hands of farmers.  That's exactly what they've asked for and it was 
released today, Mr. Speaker, to make that point. 
 
Secondly, if you allow me, Mr. Speaker, in the Leader-Post it says, and I 
can quote:  "The NDP Agriculture critic, Eric Upshall, says he hasn't made 
a final decision yet but he expects he'll sign up for GRIP." 
 
But the key part of this, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that the premiums were a 
little bit high.  So when the farmer said, look, we need some help in 
premiums, could you help us pay for some of these premiums to get into this 
program, the federal government . . . along with lobbying from some of us 
and agricultural people said, could you help on that premium side because 
the cash flow's difficulty here because this GRIP program will pay over a 
billion dollars this year; so if you could just get into it then we know 
that that income's there. 
 
So I'd say to the hon. member, if he was expecting to sign it, Mr. Speaker, 
before the 25 per cent help and premium, I expect he'd certainly sign it 
today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- A new question to the Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Speaker.  
And I might say that listening to his answers today, if a farmer were to 
listen to these they'd be even more confused, and after the meetings he ran 
in the country and give conflicting stories at different meetings. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 



 

 

 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, in the middle of the 1986 
election you and Mr. Mulroney came forward with a cash program . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order, order.  The member from Humboldt is 
attempting to put the question; however, he's being interfered with.  He's 
being interfered with and I ask you to allow him to put his question. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I can understand why they are a 
little nervous on this one.  Mr. Minister, in the 1986 election, in the 
height of the election you and Mr. Mulroney at the 11th hour came forward 
with a cash program that was long overdue for Saskatchewan farmers.  That 
was your strategy to buy rural votes. 
 
In the light of today's miserable announcement, Mr. Speaker, is this your 
hidden agenda for the 1990 election . . . or 1991 election?  Is this a 
political ploy?  I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, if it is, the farmers of this 
province will kick you and your government out so long and so far you won't 
see another Tory in this province for 40 years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, with respect, the hon. member did raise 
the question of politics. 
 
But let me just say that in an interview with Mark Wyatt of the 
Leader-Post, the NDP (New Democratic Party) member from Regina Centre, I 
think it is, said that our approach to this GRIP, which was taking the 
harmonization, about $125 million, is all wrong, and it's criminally unfair 
to the people who don't live on farms.  That's the NDP response -- that 
it's criminally unfair for us to put this kind of money into agriculture, 
Mr. Speaker.  Criminally unfair.  That was his quote. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we haven't seen their plan.  We haven't seen how they 
would find more money from Saskatchewan.  We certainly can see, Mr. Speaker 
. . . and if you'd allow me, I'll point out and I'll go through every 
single year when they were in power.  They got no money from the federal 
government.  We've got $10 billion from the federal government in the last 
eight years, plus $2 billion from ourselves, is this $12 billion.  And when 
we put money into it, the NDP say it's criminally unfair unless you live in 
the country. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, they don't have any money in their plan, and they 
couldn't get any out of the feds when they were in government, Mr. Speaker.  
I think it would be an apt time for the Leader of the Opposition to stand 
up and say, here's my plan for the farmers of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Cut-backs at Saskatchewan Hospitals 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to the Minister of 
Health.  Mr. Minister, media reports yesterday stated that the Plains 



 

 

hospital in Regina will close 25 beds and cut as many as 19 jobs to make up 
for your government's lack of funding.  The Pasqua Hospital will close 37 
beds and cut 30 jobs, and the Moose Jaw hospital will close beds and lay 
off staff.  The reports indicate perhaps as many as 20 beds and 38 hospital 
staff. 
 
This, Mr. Speaker, comes on the heels of previously announced proposed 
closures of 20 beds and lay-offs of 20 staff at Yorkton Union, 38 beds and 
52 jobs at the Regina General, and 60 beds and 24 jobs at the Pioneer 
Village in Regina.  That's some 200 beds closing, Mr. Speaker, with more 
announcements yet to come.  And I'm hearing similar reports from throughout 
rural Saskatchewan.  Does the minister call this a commitment to health 
care? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, I don't confirm the number of beds that 
the member has cited, but I will say to the hon. member: we were very open 
on the day in February when the Minister of Finance announced the payments 
to the third parties in this province -- including hospitals and nursing 
homes across the province -- that their increase in this year would be 
three and a half per cent. 
 
Recognizing the budget and recognizing the economy of the province, I'd say 
to the hon. member, while all citizens across the province recognize the 
economy of the province, I'd ask the hon. member as well to recognize that 
economy; and say in a short answer to the member's very last question which 
was, is there a commitment to health care: Mr. Speaker, this government and 
the spending on health care over the last number of years, and certainly in 
the current year, and the expenditure on health care in the year to come, 
shows a definite commitment to health care, given the economy that is there 
for our taxpayers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, the minister asks us to recognize the economy 
of the province.  Well I'm going to ask him to recognize the fact that he's 
the Deputy Premier of a government which has the worst record in Canada for 
debt creation, the worst record in Canada for tax increases, and the worst 
record for program cuts.  That's the reality, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Now, Mr. Speaker, my question is: why should the sick and 
elderly in Saskatchewan have to carry the load because your government is 
totally incompetent with its financial management in managing the finances 
of the province.  Why do the sick and elderly have to carry the burden for 
your incompetence, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, as I've said, I'll stand behind the record 
of this government as it relates to health care expenditure.  Members here 



 

 

say they won't.  The record of this government as it relates to health 
care, the delivery of health care, is very sound, Mr. Speaker, and 
recognized as sound -- there's no question about that.  I'll stand behind 
that.  So will all the members of this government. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, I hope that citizens who will follow this 
legislature and all members of the House, try to follow the logic of what 
the hon. member said in her last question.  She said, we lead the nation in 
debt creation or whatever her words were.  I said to you that we spend a 
billion five, one and a half billion dollars per year on health care in 
this province of a million people -- a huge expenditure on health care. 
 
People recognize that it's a huge expenditure and they recognize it's a 
commitment, a significant commitment by them, the citizens and the 
taxpayers, on health care and we carry that forward.  The hon. member . . . 
if you follow, Mr. Speaker, the things that she has raised in this House 
over time, the expenditure on health care would be well over $2 billion.  
Talk about debt creation -- there's the irresponsibility. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, governments that believe in universal health 
care don't use it as a whipping boy for their financial incompetence. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Instead, Mr. Speaker, they priorize government expenditures, 
making sure that tax dollars go to needed services and not waste and 
mismanagement, and to making the minister look good, that he cares about 
health care.  Isn't that the corporate strategy, Mr. Minister, to make you 
look . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order, order.  I'm going to call the 
hon. members to order again.  And the member from Regina Lakeview is having 
some difficulty putting her question, and I'm going to give her an 
opportunity to do so now and I'd ask that you do the same thing. 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, why don't you just 
admit what everyone in Saskatchewan knows -- that your government does not 
have a real commitment to medicare. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, we have demonstrated a commitment to 
health care over a good number of years.  The hon. member raises questions 
of communication with the public of the province in terms of what are the 
costs of health care.  Mr. Speaker, those have been successful programs of 
information to our public in terms of an understanding across our society, 
of what this very large enterprise, our health care system, costs each of 
us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that's a valid communication to our public, so I reject what 
the member says.  She says three and a half per cent is not enough to 



 

 

hospitals.  I ask the hon. member, as the Premier has asked her leader and 
as others have asked her leader and as more and more citizens will soon be 
asking that leader and that member and a few others over there:  what is 
your plan?  Is it eight and a half per cent?  Is it 10 per cent?  Is it 20 
per cent?  What percentage is the NDP plan for hospitals, given the economy 
that we are in? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 39 
 

Federal Funding for Agriculture 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day, as I indicated 
in question period, I would like to, pursuant to rule 39 -- and I might add 
in the obvious  
 Dintention of the Premier to tell us many details about this program as he 
sees it -- pursuant to rule 39, I would ask for leave of the Assembly to 
move the following motion: 
 

 That this Assembly expresses its deep disappointment at the complete 
inadequacy of the agricultural finance measures announced today by the 
federal government, which fails to provide the $550 million direct cash 
assistance that is urgently needed by Saskatchewan farmers this spring; 
and further, that this Assembly urges the federal government to provide an 
immediate program of direct financial assistance to Saskatchewan farmers 
that is independent of the GRIP and NISA programs, and that this motion be 
communicated immediately to the Prime Minister. 

 
I beg leave to introduce this motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Leave not granted. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like it clarified whether or not it 
was the Premier who refused leave for the debate. 
 
The Speaker: -- Quite frankly, several people spoke at the same time, and 
I'm not . . . Order, order, order.  Order.  Order, order.  Order, order.  
Each of you will have an opportunity to enter debate; each of you will have 
an opportunity.  I ask you all to allow the proceedings to continue. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Not Debatable) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, I suggest that we move resolutions no. 26 
through 30 to debatable, please. 
 
The Speaker: -- Debatable. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 



 

 

 
SECOND READINGS 

 
Bill No. 53 -- An Act to amend The Provincial Auditor Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to rise today and move 
second reading of a Bill to amend The Provincial Auditor Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the public has indicated that the role of the Provincial 
Auditor as an independent watch-dog over government spending should be 
reinforced.  Last November the government announced a plan to address this 
issue and improve accountability to the public. 
 
Firstly, this Bill introduces an amendment that will provide the Provincial 
Auditor be appointed for a six-year term, and provides for renewal of that 
term.  This provision is consistent with the practice in the majority of 
other provincial jurisdictions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Secondly, I'm pleased to introduce an amendment that will allow the office 
of the Provincial Auditor to be held by any member of the major 
professional accounting groups. 
 
Prior to this amendment the Provincial Auditor was required to be a member 
of the Institute of Chartered Accountants.  With this amendment, certified 
general accountants and certified management accountants will now be 
appropriately represented. 
 
The third change provides for a review of the Provincial Auditor's budget 
by the Board of Internal Economy.  This section enhances the independence 
of the Provincial Auditor's office from the executive government and 
reinforces his role as an officer of the Legislative Assembly.  It is 
relevant for the Assembly to know the Board of Internal Economy reviewed 
the Provincial Auditor's budget for the '91-92 year. 
 
The fourth change explicitly provides the Provincial Auditor . . . Sorry, 
Mr. Speaker, that should be '92-93 year. 
 
The fourth change explicitly provides the Provincial Auditor with a 
value-for-money mandate.  It allows the Provincial Auditor to report on the 
economy and efficiency of the government's administration of public money.  
The public has indicated the Provincial Auditor's responsibility should be 
expanded to include value-for-money auditing. 
 
These amendments are in accordance with our government's plan for improving 
government accountability announced to the public last November. 
 
The amendments increase the independence of the auditor and expand his 
mandate to assess the economy and efficiency of program delivery. 
 
I'll be pleased to answer any of the members' questions concerning these 
amendments when discussing this Bill in Committee of the Whole. 
 
It therefore gives me great pleasure to move Bill No. 53, an Act to amend 



 

 

The Provincial Auditor Act, 1991, be now read a second time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I listened 
very intently to the Minister of Finance as he gave second reading to this 
Bill.  And I must admit, Mr. Speaker, that if one recalls just a few years 
ago when we spoke about the Provincial Auditor, this minister, the Minister 
of Finance as he's introducing these amendments, is much, much more subdued 
than was the former minister of Justice who felt that he was justified in 
vilifying the Provincial Auditor when the Provincial Auditor was only 
performing his duties as a servant of this Assembly. 
 
I want to say to the present Minister of Justice that in order for one to 
say whether one is in favour or opposed to these amendments, I think it is 
only fair that one puts the record of this government on the line to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The last nine years, Mr. Speaker, have not been very good financial years 
and accountable years for this government.  In 1982, as you well know, the 
financial statements of this province read that there was $139 million in 
the Consolidated Fund. And this government, through its mismanagement and 
its waste and its patronage and its total disregard for the accountability 
of expenditures, has taken that surplus that we had, has taken it to at 
least, as far as we know, a $4.8 billion deficit. 
 
And if we look at the present Provincial Auditor's account we will have to 
add on another 500 million because that is what he says SPMC (Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation) owes the provincial government.  So you're 
really looking at about a 5.2 or $5.3 billion deficit. 
 
I want to put into perspective the record of this government, Mr. Speaker, 
in order that the people of Saskatchewan will know the insincerity of this 
government in moving these amendments.  There is no way that there can be 
that conversion unless we have the second conversion of St. Paul as he was 
riding to Damascus. 
 
We may have; miracles do happen.  And the Minister of Finance, as he came 
into this session this year, may have had that conversion; I don't know. 
But I doubt it.  I doubt it, Mr. Speaker.  And I think that the only reason 
this government is moving with these amendments today is because they 
realize that they are in the last few months of their term and they want to 
try and create the picture out there, during the next election, that they 
are converted; that they really believe in the democratic process and that 
they really want to restore to this Legislative Assembly, to this 
Legislative Assembly, the respect that it had before they took office. 
 
Mr. Speaker, no one is going to be fooled. Not even a member from Regina 
South will take seriously what this government is proposing.  Because I 
remember well, Mr. Speaker, I remember well a few years ago when that 
member sat in this legislature, when his colleague, when his colleague 
vilified, vilified the previous auditor and he stood by and he supported 
him.  When there was a vicious attack, a scurrilous attack on the 



 

 

Provincial Auditor, he sat by and supported it and so did the Premier. 
 
Instead of that member, the former Justice minister, minister of Justice 
resigning from his seat when he was proven to be wrong, he sat there and 
remained a member of that Executive Council with the support of the 
Premier.  And not only that, Mr. Speaker, instead of asking that minister 
to resign because of his unwarranted attack on the Provincial Auditor . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- What about the Bill? 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Yes I am on the Bill, because this Bill, as you have 
presented the amendments to this Act, very clearly show that you have no 
intention, no intention of carrying out those amendments, and you will put 
road-blocks in the Provincial Auditor's way again, as you have done in the 
last nine years.  I will show, Mr. Minister, the insincerity of that 
minister when he introduces these amendments to this Act.  I will show the 
insincerity of this government -- that they have no intentions, no 
intentions of opening up the books, no intentions of making the role of the 
Provincial Auditor such that he can do his job as a servant of the 
Legislative Assembly.  I will show that. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I think it is important, I believe it is important 
that we look back on the record of this government and just to see, did 
they take any steps at all to correct the inadequacies of their government, 
of the expenditures of their government, of living by the laws that were 
established by this Assembly in the expenditures of those funds?  Did they 
make any attempt at all to correct those inadequacies?  And if they have, 
then I think, Mr. Speaker, they would have some legitimacy in us believing 
or accepting their sincerity. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I want to at this particular time, so that we don't 
forget, refer to the auditor's reports of the late 1970s and '80s, and I 
want to show you the 1978 report and I want the Minister of Finance to 
watch.  This is the 1978 Report of the Provincial Auditor.  It has in it, 
Mr. Speaker, 29 pages, and the pages are about two-thirds of the size of 
the pages of the present book that we have.  Twenty-nine pages, Mr. 
Speaker, in the 1978 report, the Provincial Auditor's report. 
 
And this year's Report of the Provincial Auditor -- and I want you to note 
the difference in the sizes -- the Provincial Auditor's report does not 
have 29 pages but it has a hundred and forty . . . Well let me get to it.  
It has about a hundred and forty . . .  Aw, he's got a lot of appendices 
too. 
 
(1445) 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Not even counting . . . 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- No, can't even count those.  Because if you did those, you'd 
get way . . . oh, oh, lots more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are so many pages where the Provincial Auditor -- and I 
have those marked . . . it's just criminal.  As someone says, criminal.  A 



 

 

hundred and forty-one pages -- a hundred and forty-one pages, and that does 
not include the appendices.  A hundred and forty-one pages where the 
Provincial Auditor time and time again has indicated where this government 
has not lived by the legislation that was approved by this Legislative 
Assembly.  They've totally ignored that legislation.  They did not have 
legislative authority to spend hundreds of millions of dollars, and they 
think nothing of it. 
 
And they're asking now the people of Saskatchewan to believe them, in the 
last few months of their last term in office, that they are sincere about 
reform; that they are really going to put power back into the hands of the 
legislature here in Saskatchewan; and that they are going to really have 
respect for the role of the Provincial Auditor. 
 
I for one, Mr. Speaker, am very sceptical about this government, very, very 
sceptical.  And let me . . . Mr. Speaker, I want to show to you, sir, and 
to the members in this legislature, here are three reports.  I have six in 
one hand and three in the other.  These are the last three reports of the 
present and immediately past Provincial Auditor, 1988, 1989, and 1990.  
These are the reports of the Provincial Auditor, the six reports from 1978 
to 1983. 
 
And I ask you . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . oh, I see the member 
from Cut Knife-Lloydminster says we didn't do anything for the auditor to 
report.  He is absolutely right.  We did not do anything wrong, or very few 
things wrong, because we respected, we respected the law.  We respected the 
law and the Provincial Auditor had nothing to report on the then 
government, or very little to report. 
 
So I say to the Minister of Finance, he had his opportunity to explain and 
give his government's side of the story.  I wish to give the side of the 
story of the Provincial Auditor, the official opposition of the people of 
Saskatchewan.  And I have a few more words to say to you, Mr. Minister, and 
on this Bill and on the amendments that you have moved. 
 
Mr. Minister, I say to you, I think the evidence is here.  You say that you 
are sincere in your recommendations on these amendments.  If that were 
true, Mr. Minister -- and you have been a member of that Executive Council 
and therefore you share as much blame as though you were the minister 
responsible for the Provincial Auditor all that time -- you had a duty.  A 
year or two ago when your colleague attacked unjustly the Provincial 
Auditor, you had a duty to stand up in this House and not support that 
position.  And yet you did nothing.  In fact if I remember correctly, you 
got up in this House and you spoke in favour of the attacks that were made, 
even after the Provincial Auditor presented a special report to the 
legislature, showing very carefully and in much detail that the Minister of 
Justice was wrong in his attack. 
 
Did the Premier then come to the assistance of the Provincial Auditor as a 
servant of this legislature and ask that his Minister of Justice resign?  
No, he did not.  What he did was he rewarded him.  He rewarded him with his 
severance pay.  He rewarded him with a beautiful job, I believe in 
Minneapolis.  That was the reward that he received for the unjust attack on 



 

 

a provincial servant who was only trying to do his job -- only trying to do 
his job. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are so many examples that one can use.  Just a few years 
ago, I remember well when this government again tried to circumvent the 
legislature and the powers of the members of the legislature, and they 
didn't want to be attacked by their privatization policies that they were 
putting into effect. 
 
What did they do?  What did they do to show again, Mr. Speaker, that they 
are not interested?  In my opinion they are not interested in expanding the 
role of the servant of the legislature here in Saskatchewan.  They put into 
this House, enacted a piece of legislation called Bill 5.  And Bill 5, Mr. 
Speaker, has taken away from the members of this legislature the right to 
discuss and to debate legislation that should be brought before this 
legislature.  And what they have done is they've taken powers away from 
each and every member of this House and have subscribed those powers to the 
Executive Council, the cabinet. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, does not indicate to me that those members opposite are 
interested one iota in expanding the powers of the Legislative Assembly or 
to aid and assist in the democratic process that we have established in 
this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to also refer to the Report of the Provincial Auditor 
just a few years ago, to demonstrate again that I am right in what I am 
saying here today in that the government is not interested.  That all that 
this is, is simply to try and pull the wool over the eyes of the public 
just before an election so that they can take it to the people during an 
election and say, well look what we have done; look what we have done in 
expanding the role of the Provincial Auditor; look what we have done in 
bringing forth democratic reform. 
 
Please forget the nine years when we abused the democratic process of the 
House; please forget the incident when the Executive Council and members of 
the Executive Council unjustly attacked the Provincial Auditor when he was 
only trying to do his job.  What they're trying to do again is to put 
themselves in the best light they possibly can in the legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is the role, what is the role of the Provincial Auditor?  
I mean, I think this has to also be examined.  What is he?  Well some 
people have referred to him as the policeman.  Others have referred to him 
as a watch-dog.  Well a policeman or a watch-dog over what?  Well basically 
he is a watch-dog over the expenditures of government. 
 
But who are these people of government that do the expending?  They are the 
members of the Executive Council by and large.  Oh, there are a few other 
expenditures but by and large they are the people who do the expending. 
 
And it is the role of an auditor to make absolutely certain that not one 
dollar is expended by the Executive Council that does not have legislative 
authority for that expenditure.  And if the Provincial Auditor finds that 
the Executive Council expends money that there is no legislative authority 



 

 

for, he will note that in his annual report and criticize the Executive 
Council for it and suggest how it can be corrected. 
 
And I say again, if they are serious, if they are sincere, then why haven't 
some of those corrections been made?  Instead of doing that, as I said 
before, they attacked the Provincial Auditor. 
 
And it's not just, Mr. Speaker, it's not just the members of the Executive 
Council.  I remember well government members on the Public Accounts who 
attacked the previous Provincial Auditor.  They didn't say well, no you are 
a servant of the Legislative Assembly and if you found this to be an 
inappropriate expenditure, we will support you.  No, they attacked him.  
They told him he was biased.  They told him that he was trying to get the 
government, which is simply false.  He was simply trying to do his job.  
And no auditor is worth his dollar if he does not note in his annual report 
when there are expenditures that do not have legal authority to do so. 
 
The other thing, Mr. Speaker, I want to also refer to, in the annual report 
-- and I could go back to three or four annual reports because the same 
thing has happened -- and that is we have legislation which says that there 
must be a tabling of documents.  Well if that is true then why, why does 
this government persist in not tabling some of those documents?  Every year 
we have numerous documents that have not been tabled by the Executive 
Council, simply not been tabled. 
 
And I will refer now to this last report by the Provincial Auditor . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . The minister says I've got the wrong Act.  
I'd just to explain to the Minister of Finance, and maybe I should do this 
very slowly.  Minister of Finance, if you would just listen for just a 
second, there is no way that the Provincial Auditor can do his job, number 
one, if you people insist in not giving him the information that he 
requires -- number one.  And I will refer to that again a little later, 
where we have documented evidence that members of the Executive Council 
instructed, instructed the executors of Crown corporations not to 
co-operate, not to co-operate with the Provincial Auditor in giving him the 
information that he has required. 
 
Number two.  How can we expect the Provincial Auditor to do his job if each 
and every year the Executive Council cut down his budget, didn't give him 
the staff required so he could do his work, complete his work on time?  So 
again, time and time again, the Provincial Auditor in the last number of 
years has said that it is important, it is very, very important that 
information be presented to the legislature on time. 
 
In other words, if we receive information in the annual report which is 16 
months old or 17, 18, or 19 months old, that information is out of date.  
And really, other than to vilify the government and take them to task for 
the expenditures . . . or illicit expenditures of money 18 months ago, what 
do you accomplish by that? 
 
So it is important that the information be given to the Provincial Auditor, 
that he be given sufficient staff to do his work.  And thirdly, that it be 
tabled on time. 



 

 

 
And here, Mr. Speaker, let me say that I welcome the amendments that are 
being put forward.  But they don't go far enough, simply do not go far 
enough in order to accomplish what the government has indicated that it 
wants to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I said that in order for the Provincial Auditor, and not only 
that, Mr. Speaker, for the members of the Legislative Assembly, to perform 
their function, it is important that all documents be tabled in this 
legislature. 
 
I note here on page 1 in appendix III of this year's Report of the 
Provincial Auditor.  I note again, and he says, that there are a number of 
agencies who have not completed, not completed, their audit.  Now one can 
say, well okay, you could excuse maybe one or two or three.  There may be 
circumstances as to why they haven't completed their audit. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we find on page 1 of appendix III that there were 18 -- 
18 agencies or corporations or departments who have not completed their 
audit.  And the Minister of Finance is saying to us, oh we are very sincere 
to open the books; we are sincere in making certain that this legislature 
receives all the information that it requires in order to perform its duty. 
 
(1500) 
 
We find, Mr. Speaker, also in appendix III that the appointed auditors did 
not submit information for the annual report of another one, two, three, 
four agencies or Crown corporations.  And some of these are very 
interesting as to why they have not been submitted. 
 
For example we have Investment Corporation of Saskatchewan.  Why would they 
not submit the information that is required?  Here's another one -- Saferco 
Products Inc..  It's been very hotly debated in this legislature.  And they 
have not submitted the required information in order that the annual 
reports can be tabled.  I wonder why.  Oh, I'll bet you we'll get it once 
that election is over.  I'll bet you we'll get it when the government feels 
it is safe to release that particular report. 
 
Here's another one -- Saskatchewan Transportation Company, STC.  Because 
there is a dispute on right now and it could be very embarrassing for the 
government to have the annual report released, we don't have the 
information. 
 
And I say to the Minister of Finance, when you come forth with amendments 
like you have today, then you've got to also prove and show to the people 
of Saskatchewan that you are sincere, and take it very sincerely the points 
that are made by the Provincial Auditor and try and correct those.  But you 
have not done so.  So I just don't believe that you people are sincere when 
you do this. 
 
Appendix IV, here's a list of financial statements and/or annual reports 
not tabled in the Legislative Assembly in a manner required by convention.  
And I say to the members opposite again, I could excuse that if there were 



 

 

only two or three.  Well maybe there were five or six or ten.  
Twenty-three.  Twenty-three have not tabled according to the convention 
that is required of them.  And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, what does that 
tell you of the members opposite?  What does it tell you of their sincerity 
of trying to democratize the Legislative Assembly and the Provincial 
Auditor of this province?  I say it looks to me pretty cute. 
 
And it's very convenient of them at this particular time to move these 
kinds of legislation in order to show to the people of Saskatchewan, just 
before an election, that we are converted, that we are sincere, that we 
will change our way of conducting government.  And I say to you people, you 
won't be able to hoodwink the people again.  They've caught on to you 
people and there's no way that it will work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to refer back, as I said before, to the role of the 
Provincial Auditor.  In a democracy, Mr. Speaker, it is extremely important 
that the Executive Council is controlled.  If it cannot be controlled by 
the  
 DLegislative Assembly because the Executive Council implements or enacts 
legislation which diminishes our authority, and if they then implement also 
vehicles which diminish the role of the Provincial Auditor, then I say to 
the people of Saskatchewan, you better look twice at the people who are 
doing it.  You better look twice and ask those members when they come to 
your door for support, do you really believe in the democratic process in 
this province. 
 
I want to, Mr. Speaker, show also to the members opposite that when the 
Provincial Auditor -- and it's not just the previous provincial auditor, 
but the present Provincial Auditor -- when they report in their annual 
report that they cannot see 50 per cent or they cannot analyse and examine 
50 per cent of the expenditures of this government, then there's something 
seriously wrong with the process, something seriously wrong. 
 
I remember the Premier in this House and also the former minister of 
Justice saying that the appointment of private auditors did not diminish 
the role of the Provincial Auditor.  And, Mr. Speaker, I want to simply say 
this -- there has been sufficient evidence to show that not only was a 
memorandum sent by the Executive Council to top executives in the Crown 
corporations that they should not co-operate with the Provincial Auditor in 
giving him information, but also, Mr. Speaker, the private auditors. 
 
I think this is a distinction -- a very important distinction -- that has 
to made.  Who, Mr. Speaker, does the Provincial Auditor serve?  Who, Mr. 
Speaker, do the private auditors serve?  The private auditors serve the 
Executive Council.  The private auditors carry out the wishes of the 
Executive Council.  I'm not saying that the private auditors aren't good or 
that they're not professional people -- not at all.  What I am saying is 
that they serve two different clients. 
 
The Provincial Auditor serves us, the elected members of the Legislative 
Assembly, and thereby serves the people of Saskatchewan.  The private 
auditors, on the other hand, carry out the wishes of the Executive Council, 
the cabinet.  And therefore, Mr. Speaker, they have two different roles -- 



 

 

entirely two different roles to perform.  And if the private auditors will 
not give the information to the Provincial Auditor, then I think we put 
road-blocks in the way of the Provincial Auditor in order to carry out his 
function and his role, and that is to serve us, the legislative members of 
the Assembly, and thereby the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, should be, I think, something that the back-benchers 
should be very concerned about.  Oh I know the Executive Council won't be 
worried about it.  But certainly the back-benchers should be concerned 
about that, and so should all members who don't sit on the Executive 
Council. 
 
Mr. Speaker, having said that, having made the distinction between the 
private auditors and the Provincial Auditor, I think one way to correct 
that would certainly be to increase the staff and the resources that the 
Provincial Auditor has.  And I think we have to very seriously look at 
that, to make absolutely certain that he has the resources necessary to 
carry out those duties. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have tried to show so far that . . . a number of things.  
One, the record of this government over the last nine years in how it has 
dealt with the Provincial Auditor.  I think I've shown that they don't have 
very much respect for him or his role.  I think I have shown how they 
unjustly treated him when they didn't like his annual report or the 
comments in his annual report.  I think I have shown that they've 
constantly decreased his resources so that he could not carry out his role 
as Provincial Auditor or as the provincial watch-dog. 
 
I think I have shown, Mr. Speaker, that consequently reports have not been 
tabled in this legislature on time; they have not been completed on time.  
And consequently, Mr. Speaker, we, the members of the Legislative Assembly, 
have not had access to pertinent information that we should have had I 
think within six years at the end of the fiscal year. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker . . . and I think I've also shown how this government 
by enacting legislation through Bill 5, for example, have decreased, 
diminished our role -- your role and my role -- as members of this 
Legislative Assembly.  And that's why I find it somewhat difficult.  I find 
it somewhat difficult when members on that side of the House take . . . 
they make no attempt to rectify some of these things, make no attempt at 
all, and then bring in this legislation which they hope will help them get 
through the next election.  I think it clearly shows the insincerity of the 
members opposite -- I think clearly shows that. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I find it difficult, very difficult, to stand up in 
this House with some joy, let's say, in supporting the legislation that is 
brought forward.  It is good legislation; it's long overdue, although there 
are some things that I think I would like to have seen in the legislation, 
and our members on this side of the House will certainly speak to that 
later.  But I think there have to be some other safeguards that we have to 
put in place in order that this legislature can get back to what it was 
meant to be, and that is a servant of the people.  It is called the 
Legislative Assembly; it's not called the executive assembly. 



 

 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, we just saw the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster come 
in, and he is a member of the committee that examines the Provincial 
Auditor's report.  And he is one, Mr. Speaker, he's a member that I will 
admit I don't have a very high regard for.  And that is sad to say, but his 
record, I think, speaks for itself.  And when it comes into . . . when he 
is a member of the . . . he is as disruptive, Mr. Speaker, in the . . . 
well he is as disruptive in the Public Accounts committee as he is in the 
legislature. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order, order.  Order!  Quite frankly I don't 
think it's appropriate for hon. members to refer to the actions of other 
hon. members in the House, how they behave.  If probably the truth is known 
we've all at one time or another behaved in a manner we'd rather had not, 
and I think we should leave those kinds of remarks out of our debate. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- One member said to keep my cool.  I'll keep my cool as long 
as the members opposite don't interrupt me when I'm speaking.  And, Mr. 
Speaker, the Minister of Finance had his opportunity to speak.  He only . . 
. I wanted to say to the people of Saskatchewan that when he made second 
reading, when he did his second reading, I had expected that he would bring 
in these amendments and that he would say, yes we have made mistakes.  And 
we have diminished the role of the Provincial Auditor over the last number 
of years, and here's how we've done it.  But here's how we are going to 
correct it now.  Here's how we're going to correct it. 
 
And I say to the members opposite that you cannot have it both ways.  You 
cannot on the one hand say that yes, we are for democracy; we are for 
strengthening the role of the committees in the legislature, and we are for 
strengthening the role of the Provincial Auditor, but then our actions 
speak otherwise. 
 
We will not allow the Provincial Auditor to see 50 per cent of the books.  
We will not allow the Provincial Auditor to increase his staff, so he can 
do his job.  And by the way, Mr. Speaker, I wonder where the Provincial 
Auditor's report was because I am told that it was submitted to somebody 
last December.  We have not seen it.  We have not seen it until just a few 
days ago. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Who was that somebody? 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Well I don't know who received it, but that is a concern.  
That is a real concern because what happens if the government doesn't want 
the opposition to see the reports, all they have to do is not call the 
session because we have no vehicle in tabling the documents.  We have no 
vehicle in tabling the documents if the session isn't on.  There's no way 
of tabling it if the session isn't on.  That is one thing that is missing 
in the new amendments, is that I think we have to have some other mechanism 
whereby when the reports are ready, that they become public. 
 
And the minister again says, you cannot separate the tabling of documents 
from the Provincial Auditor's report.  I want in the Provincial Auditor's 
report some very strict suggestions to the government as to how we deal 



 

 

with it when the Provincial Auditor's report is completed.  And if the 
government, as it did in 1987, wouldn't call the session until June of that 
year, we didn't see the Provincial Auditor's report until June, well over 
18 months after the end of the fiscal year.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is 
unacceptable, it's unforgivable.  And we've got to find some ways of making 
those corrections so that not only the Provincial Auditor, but many others, 
like the Public Accounts, for example, that they are available to the 
members of the legislature when they are completed. 
 
(1515) 
 
And as the Provincial Auditor has often said, there should be no reason at 
all why these reports can't be ready six months after the end of the fiscal 
year.  We used to have it that way, used to be that way, that by November 
30 or December 1, December 2, the reports were ready and they were tabled 
in this House because we had fall sessions at that time, and they were 
available to the members.  And between the sessions the members were able 
to study those reports so that in the spring session they would have all 
the information and knowledge and they could then go about doing their 
work.  But it's very difficult, Mr. Speaker, to go through 5 or 600 pages 
in detail in one week with all the other duties that a member has, and then 
be expected to scrutinize the expenditures of the government.  But that's 
why I think governments do it.  And I think we have to make those 
corrections. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I've said that if the government had shown over the last 
number of years that it was correcting some of the criticisms, legitimate 
criticisms that provincial auditors have made, and then now had brought in 
these amendments, I think that the people would not only welcome it, but 
the people would be thankful and graciously thank the government for 
bringing it in.  But has that been the case?  I say no, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And all one has to do is study the last Provincial Auditor's report as I 
have done, and you will find numerous examples, I mean numerous examples, 
of expenditures where there is no, no legislative authority at all for 
those expenditures -- none whatsoever. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what does a government do?  It shrugs them off.  And I 
hear time and time again the government saying, well those are arguments 
between an accountant and another accountant.  And we know, Mr. Speaker, 
that that is simply not the case. 
 
Now I remember also a few years ago  -- in order to set the record straight 
-- it was the minister of Justice then who said that, well Mr. Lutz is just 
a tough guy to get along with; he's a hard individual; he can't get along 
with anybody.  Well we now have . . . They went and attacked this 
individual and his integrity and it was clearly shown that it was not the 
provincial auditor. 
 
We now have a new Provincial Auditor, and what does he find?  What does he 
find about the expenditures of this government and whether or not they 
abide by the laws that are established in this province? 
 



 

 

Well I read in the Leader-Post, Regina Leader-Post, April 13, 1991 -- 
that's just a few days ago, Mr. Speaker, just a few days ago: "New Sask. 
auditor finds old complaints -- and then some." So have we got a conversion 
of this government?  Are they really sold on those amendments that were 
introduced in the House today?  Are they really convinced?  Have they taken 
to heart the criticisms of the previous auditor, and now the new auditor?  
Hardly.  I haven't seen for example, that conversion.  All you need to do, 
as I said before, is to examine this document and you will find numerous, 
numerous examples of expenditures that have no legislative authority 
whatsoever -- none at all. 
 
Now the present auditor says . . . and here, Mr. Speaker, I want to read 
from this article a bit, because I think it makes the point very well.  The 
Provincial Auditor says: "The government is accused of hiving off 
SaskEnergy from SaskPower without proper legislative authority." 
 
Now I hear the minister say, well that's just an argument between lawyers.  
But, Mr. Speaker, that's not the point.  The point is the Provincial 
Auditor is the watch-dog.  He is the policeman for the expenditures of this 
government.  And if the servant of the Assembly, the Provincial Auditor, if 
he says that you are doing things which are not within the legislative 
authority, then why not change it?  If you really believe that the 
Provincial Auditor is the servant of this Legislative Assembly, why not 
bring in legislation which makes that correction?  That's what other 
governments do.  But what do they do?  No, this is just a legal argument. 
 
That's why I say, Mr. Speaker, they are not sincere about expanding the 
role of the Provincial Auditor.  What they do is they attack him.  And that 
wasn't last year; that was just a few days ago.  And I listened to the 
Deputy Premier in this House when he was questioned in question period on 
it.  He says that no, this is a legal argument. 
 
If I would have been him, the minister responsible, I would have said, all 
right we're bringing in legislation.  This is what the Provincial Auditor 
says.  He is the watch-dog of this legislature, of the expenditures.  We 
will bring in legislation to correct it.  That's the appropriate thing to 
do.  But oh no, they won't do that. 
 
Here he goes on to say: 
 

 The Department of Finance is challenged for having disbursed some $555 
million to the Saskatchewan Property Management Corp., recording it as an 
asset of the province's Consolidated Fund." 

 
Now I want you, and I want members opposite, to listen to the reasoning of 
this if this makes sense, if you can count this as an asset. 
 

 However, if SPMC is to pay that sum back, it must receive that money from 
the very same Consolidated Fund. 

 
In other words if SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation) is 
going to pay it back, the government has to give the money to SPMC to pay 
it back.  But the government considers that an asset.  Where's the logic of 



 

 

that? 
 
Now why did the government do it?  If it doesn't make sense, why do it?  
Well of course the reason they did it was in order to keep the debt down in 
the Consolidated Fund.  The Minister of Finance would have to show that the 
provincial debt is not $4.8 billion but it would be about $5.3 billion.  
That's why it was done. And it has nothing to do with whether or not it is 
legal; it has everything to do with politics, because they don't want it to 
be seen that they have increased the debt to $5.3 billion. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, he also goes on to say: 
 

 Variance of these refrains pop up throughout the report: "The appointed 
auditor has not submitted required reports in a timely manner.  In our 
opinion, these delays impair the corporation's public accountability"; or, 
"The audits for 1988 and 1989 are now complete . . ." 

 
1988 and 1989.  Mr. Speaker, this is 1991.  This is 1991 and these reports 
are just now completed?  In fact some from 1988 and '89, I believe from 
'89, are not even completed yet, two years later. 
 

 In our opinion, the accounts of the fund were not faithfully and properly 
kept to permit the preparation of financial statements. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that is why I question the sincerity of the people opposite in 
bringing forth these amendments. 
 
Now we find here that the Provincial Auditor slammed the provincial 
government in his first report.  And I think that lays to rest what we have 
said time and time again, that the Provincial Auditor is a servant of the 
Legislative Assembly, and they will do the job that is required of them to 
serve all of us -- not just a few members of the Assembly, but all of us. 
 
Here's another, Mr. Speaker, as to what I've said before about the debt: 
"Auditor says debt higher."  Now this one, Mr. Speaker, is even worse.  It 
says: 
 

 Wayne Strelioff (that's the Provincial Auditor) says the provincial debt 
is almost more than $3 billion more than reported and creation of 
SaskEnergy was irregular. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, now we have the debt in the Consolidated Fund well over 
$7 billion.  I think, Mr. Speaker, when that new government comes in there 
are going to be lots of shocks.  There are going to be lots of surprises.  
We will find that the total debt of this province is not what has been 
recorded by the members opposite and by the Executive Council, but the 
people of the province will find that the debt, not only in the 
Consolidated Fund, but the long-term debt is considerably higher than what 
the members opposite are reporting -- considerably higher.  And that's why, 
Mr. Speaker, we know the insincerity of the members opposite when they 
bring forth such amendments. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Same as we found. 



 

 

 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Speaker, the member from Wilkie says it's the same as 
they found.  In other words, Mr. Speaker, he has said that his former 
minister of Finance was dishonest in his report when he signed a report in 
July of 1982, the financial report, and he said that he found $139 million 
surplus in the Consolidated Fund.  What the member from Wilkie is saying, 
that his Minister of Finance, his colleague, was dishonest because he 
signed the report. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I am very glad to hear that the member from Wilkie has 
accused the former member of Kindersley, Bob Andrew . . . that Bob Andrew 
was dishonest in putting his signature to the financial statement issued in 
July of 1982. 
 
I did not bring that with me, Mr. Speaker, but I have one in my office, 
because I didn't think that anybody would question -- anybody on that side 
-- would question the honesty and the integrity of his own colleague, which 
of course the member from Wilkie has done.  Had I known that, I would have 
brought it and would have submitted it to him so he could see for himself.  
Mr. Speaker, I can't help that if the member opposite can't even support 
his own colleagues. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, also there are again a number of other statements made by 
the press where the auditor . . . for example, I'll just read the headlines 
on these, "Auditor cites illegal sale of business."  I mean there are 
numerous ones that one could mention. 
 
Now here again, this is in the Star-Phoenix on Friday, April 12.  The 
headline reads, "Millions improperly accounted for, says new Sask. 
auditor."  Mr. Speaker, I think this clearly, this clearly . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well, "Millions improperly accounted for, says new 
Sask. auditor."  Millions . . . And the Minister of Education, it may be 
well that we have a little debate on this because . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . This is in the Star-Phoenix, Mr. Minister.  It says, 
and the title, the caption, just for the Minister of Education, the title 
is this: "Millions improperly accounted for, says new Sask. auditor."  To 
me that indicates very clearly that the Saskatchewan auditor found improper 
expenditures. 
 
I tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this again clearly shows that the members 
opposite are not sincere.  If they were sincere of giving more powers to 
the Provincial Auditor, do you not think that they would have taken steps 
to correct these things?  Would they not have set the stage to show their 
sincerity?  I think they would.  I think the present Minister of Finance 
would have said, hey look it you guys, if we're going to bring forward 
legislation, amendments to The Provincial Auditor Act, we better clean up 
our act.  We are going to have a report by the end of March 31, 1990 
presented to the Legislature which will have corrected many of the 
criticisms that have been levied against our government, against our 
ministers, against our departments.  We will have those corrected. 
 
(1530) 
 



 

 

But did they do it?  No.  That's why I question your sincerity about 
bringing forth these amendments.  Should you by any chance at all form the 
next government after the next election there is no way I'd tell the people 
of Saskatchewan that these amendments will mean anything to the members 
opposite, because just as they have ignored legislation that is presently 
on the statute, so will they ignore this legislation. 
 
This legislation is there to improve your image to the people of 
Saskatchewan just before the election.  And I can see it already during the 
30 days of the campaign.  That members opposite will take to their people 
-- well we move these amendments; we are going to allow the Provincial 
Auditor to examine the books to make absolutely certain that the 
value-for-money auditing has been done and that the money has been 
appropriately spended.  But they have no intentions of abiding by that 
legislation, they've proven time and time again.  It's not my words; it's 
not even the words of the present Provincial Auditor.  These are what Mr. 
Lutz, the former provincial auditor found, and this is what the present 
Provincial Auditor finds, numerous examples. 
 
And I want to simply, Mr. Deputy Speaker, again reiterate what happened in 
the '70s and why the provincial auditor did not have to have 140 pages to 
explain the expenditures of this government, of the government of the day, 
and why the present auditor needs 140 pages to explain all the 
inappropriate expenditures of the Progressive Conservative government 
sitting opposite.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is why we again question the 
sincerity of the members opposite. 
 
I want to spend just a little bit of time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on the 
tabling of the documents.  I think that this is imperative.  If, for 
example, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Provincial Auditor can complete his work, 
if we give him sufficient resources, and if all the agencies and 
departments and Crown corporations co-operate with the Provincial Auditor, 
if he can or she can -- in this particular it's a he -- if he can complete 
his audit within six months -- let's say within six months -- why then 
would we not make that available to the public and to the members of the 
Legislative Assembly? 
 
And I think this is something that needs to be done, and it needs to be 
incorporated in the Bill or in The Tabling of Documents Bill.  One of 
those.  We need to move another amendment which clearly states that when 
the auditing is completed, we have a vehicle in tabling the report if the 
House is not in session. 
 
I do not want to give the government the excuse again, as they've done on 
several occasions now . . . but the most outrageous one was in 1987 when 
they refused to call the legislature until June of that year, and we had no 
way of getting access to the Public Accounts or to the Provincial Auditor.  
And you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and we believe that the main reason of 
course was that the Public Accounts clearly showed that the then minister 
of Finance underestimated his deficit by $800 million. 
 
That's why they didn't want us to get access to the Provincial Auditor's 
report.  That's why they didn't want us to get access to the Public 



 

 

Accounts.  Because they knew it would be embarrassing, and they knew that 
should we have received them six months in advance, that the opposition 
could have taken it to the public and could have embarrassed the 
government.  That's why they didn't call a session; that's why they 
wouldn't give us the Provincial Auditor's report or the Public Accounts. 
 
I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we need to have, we need to have some 
mechanism in the tabling of those documents.  And I'm not sure whether they 
should be tabled with the Speaker and then made public and available to the 
Public Accounts Committee, but certainly there must be some mechanism 
available that those reports will become accessible to us. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to therefore on the tabling of documents make it 
very clear that I personally feel that there's got to be a time limit set, 
and I think six months is ample time for the books to be examined, 
analysed, and reported and submitted to the legislature, to the Speaker, 
and made available to the public and to the members of the legislature. 
 
I feel that if we are going to keep the government accountable and the 
Executive Council accountable for those expenditures, then it is imperative 
that we have timely information.  And you, sir, being a member of the 
Public Accounts, I know will agree with me, will agree with me that it is 
important that that is the latest information and that we don't examine 
information of a government expenditure that is 18 months or two years old.  
Because people lose interest in it. 
 
So again, Mr. Speaker, I think that we need to have that kind of amendment 
brought forward in the legislation. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think I have shown again that the record of this 
government just does not support, in my opinion at least, the bringing 
forward of these amendments and the sincerity of this government in 
carrying it out. 
 
I welcome the amendments; no doubt we all welcome them. And I do hope that 
the track record of this government simply ignoring statutes that are on 
the books, authority that is prescribed to the Executive Council by the 
Legislative Assembly, that they will not ignore those.  And should these 
amendments go through and become law, I would hope that the next government 
will abide by those, and will make absolutely certain that the Provincial 
Auditor as a servant of this Legislative Assembly, that the Provincial 
Auditor who is a servant of the Legislative Assembly will be able to carry 
out his role in holding the Executive Council accountable for the 
expenditures that they have incurred in that particular year. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I've indicated before, I hope that a conversion has 
taken place, and I hope that we will be shown that all governments, all 
governments will not only have respect for and respect the role of the 
civil servants, and in this particular case, the Provincial Auditor, I hope 
that in the future that the Executive Councils will endeavour to carry out 
as minutely as they can . . . and will abide by the spirit of the law that 
there is established in the Legislative Assembly and will co-operate with 
the Provincial Auditor in carrying out his function. 



 

 

 
Because I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, we've talked so often, and you know 
that it exists, about the cynicism that there is out in the public. And a 
lot of that cynicism stems from the fact that people are saying, well if 
the Executive Council, the cabinet can break the laws, if they don't have 
to adhere to the laws as indicated clearly by the Provincial Auditor, then 
why should I?  I mean I have never seen, I think, in the history of this 
province, where a government has been in the courts so often. I mean I 
don't think there is a week that goes by, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where we ask 
questions in this legislature where some minister has to say, well it's in 
the courts.  That is not the rule.  That has not been the rule in this 
province. 
 
But I have noticed more and more that the government is being taken to 
court because it flouts the law.  It will not obey the law and it thinks 
that it is a government . . . the cabinet thinks it's a government unto 
itself.  And I'm very concerned that even though they passed these 
amendments, that they are passed only because they know that they are close 
to an election.  They hope it will improve their image, that they hope the 
people will forget all the things that they have done wrong and mismanaged, 
the waste. And they are hoping that when it comes election time that people 
will only remember these things. 
 
I will tell members opposite that I think it's a dream; it's a wish that 
simply will not be fulfilled.  I think the people out there are caught on 
to you.  And yes, I welcome these amendments and they are long overdue.  
But more important, Mr. Speaker, I would feel much better, I would feel 
much better if I thought that the minister who presented these and the 
government that he represents has had a conversion; that they will, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, abide by those laws and not flout those laws like they have 
flouted many of the other laws, as clearly demonstrated by not only this 
report but by previous reports and the previous provincial auditor.  
Numerous occasions, numerous occasions where they have simply not obeyed 
the law. 
 
The law that exists they have simply not been concerned with it.  If the 
law says that they can only expend money in certain fashion, they've simply 
ignored it.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is a real indictment of the Executive 
Council and of that government. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I've said, I certainly welcome these amendments.  We 
will have some amendments that we wish to make, but we will do that in 
Committee of the Whole, and we will have a number of questions that we want 
to direct to the Minister. 
 
But with those words, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I thought it was very important 
that we put this Bill in the context of which I think it should be placed 
and why it is necessary, for example, that we need these amendments.  And 
I'm hoping, Mr. Speaker, that in the future . . . that a future government 
will note the amendments that have been made and the statutes that are 
there and will not put road-blocks in the way of the Provincial Auditor, 
but will assist the Provincial Auditor in his role and his duties as a 
watch-dog on the expenditures of government.  Thank you, Mr. Deputy 



 

 

Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I have listened very 
carefully to the member from Saskatoon South, and as some of my colleagues 
have indicated, this member didn't come from Saskatoon South but came from 
a place called Babylon.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, the member from Saskatoon 
South, in all due respect to the member, I don't believe that this member 
particularly believes about even a tenth of what he has stated on the floor 
of this legislature. 
 
I would like to say now for months that government has been out in the 
public and has been consulting with the public and has been in every riding 
across this province doing these consultations.  And in every way, shape, 
and form, at each and every one of these meetings, people have been asked 
to have more input into government, into receiving information, and into 
being a whole big part of government.  And this is exactly what the 
amendments to the public accounts is doing. 
 
We've done it in 1982 where we have expanded the Public Accounts Committee 
to allow the meetings to be opened up to the public, and it was this 
government that did it.  It was the previous NDP administration that kept 
refusing, refusing this party, the PC, the Progressive Conservative Party, 
when they were in opposition, when asking the NDP of that day, the 
government of that day, back prior to 1982, to allow the Public Accounts to 
be open to the public and allow the media to be in there just to see what 
exactly what was going on.  Freedom of information, there is probably one 
of the greatest reforms that have ever been hit in the province, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and that we intend not to allow to be talked down upon.  And we're 
going to continue with that movement, and we're going to continue on with 
the improvement. 
 
I want to say that the member opposite had been talking about ministers 
breaking the law and operating outside the law in this province.  Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the member from Saskatoon South knows very well that there 
is no member of the legislature allowed to operate outside of the law. 
 
And I will tell you, sir, the NDP have been going across this province 
indicating cover ups and mismanagement and all these kinds of things.  Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I'll indicate to you one thing, that this government has 
taken this province and has been moving this province into a diversified 
province, has been doing its utmost in a world economy that has a major 
effect on our farm communities and our business communities in this 
province.  But we've taken this province to new heights in bad times.  And 
I'll tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that with the drive that this 
administration has been showing, the people should be just significantly 
satisfied that the NDP had not had the reins of power during these few 
years of fairly hard, world economic times. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I've always been told that if you say 



 

 

something long enough and loud enough you begin to believe it, and I 
believe that that is exactly what happened to the NDP.  They have been next 
to annihilated in this province, and they have began to say just about 
anything and everything that they felt might be popular out there, and have 
people believe a lot of untruths, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I don't want to stay at a lot of length on this particular amendment, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, but I had to say that -- and I address this to you and 
through you to the member from Saskatoon South -- that he himself in the 
Public Accounts Committee has been asking for us to come forward with more 
and more information, and this is exactly what we're doing for him now.  
We're showing him by bringing these amendments onto this floor that we're 
more than willing to start bringing these things in. 
 
But you see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there was that member that is actually the 
kind of a member that is saying, well, oh yes, well, this is all good -- 
it's all motherhood and apple pie and we can't do anything else but go 
along with it.  He really doesn't like this kind of legislation because 
that member full well knows that he will not be able to go back to the old 
tactics of the NDP.  He will not be able to hide the information if he was 
ever, ever able to form a government administration in this province once 
again. 
 
All the information would have to be public.  It will be going from . . . 
will be expanding in the freedom of information, and the Provincial Auditor 
will be entitled to a lot more information and a lot quicker.  I do agree 
on a point here, Mr. Speaker, that I too would like to see the reporting 
maybe sped up at some length, and I think we're working towards that.  And 
the Premier has definitely asked all the ministers in the departments to do 
their best in bringing the information forward a lot quicker.  And I 
believe that has been done to some degree.  And I think that probably as 
we're able to go on, that this information will become more and more quick. 
 
When the member opposite had indicated as well that he shows the thickness 
of an auditor's report versing thicknesses of auditor reports years ago, 
well I look at the fact of just that, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  That to me 
proves one thing, that there is more information flowing to the Provincial 
Auditor's office.  The Provincial Auditor has had a whole lot of 
opportunity to deal with a broader scope of information.  He is reporting 
on all of that. 
 
And I am, yes, a member of the government and I am not ashamed to go into 
the Public Accounts Committee and deal with the bureaucrats and the 
departments as they come ahead of us and deal with what is in front of the 
auditor and the committee.  I will ask questions of those bureaucrats as an 
independent member in that committee, as members of the opposition are 
supposed to do. 
 
I believe that every department spending taxpayers' dollars in this 
province is supposed to spend them in the most honest fashion, and give the 
best delivery of services to the public through that expenditure of 
taxpayers' dollars.  And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will be the last one to 
allow, allow any misrepresentation if that kind of misuse is coming ahead 



 

 

of that committee. 
 
Even the chairman of the Public Accounts Committee full right knows that 
when we go through the annual reports in Public Accounts, that when we 
report to this Assembly, sir, that that report is done unanimously.  He 
moves it and I second it as vice-chairman. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I, as one member from the government side of that 
committee, have never forced any one of those members ever, ever to bring 
that motion forward into this House if they were not satisfied with the 
report, if they were never satisfied with what the Provincial Auditor has 
finalized and said that a lot of this that he had reported on has been 
finalized and it's no longer a concern. 
 
I'm proud of the Provincial Auditor's department and the private auditors 
that have sent the reports into this legislature.  They operate 
independently.  They don't operate on behalf of any minister.  They don't 
operate on behalf of any department.  They don't operate on behalf of the 
NDP.  They operate, sir, on behalf of the Legislative Assembly and the 
Speaker's office.  And yes, funding is allotted to the auditor's office; 
and yes, we have expanded that funding; and yes, there will be expanding of 
those fundings in the future and there will be more and  
 Dmore reporting from the auditor, and I look forward to those auditing 
reports. 
 
And with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I'd just like to thank you for giving me 
the opportunity to speak on it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I wasn't sure here 
whether the Minister of Finance wanted to get up again and speak on the 
issue.  But now that that's settled I assume that he isn't. 
 
I was interested -- I was going to say enlightened but that would be wrong 
-- certainly amused, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to hear the words of the previous 
speaker.  He would have us believe that after eight, what is it now, nine 
years . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Nine long years. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Nine long years as my colleague says. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Terrible long years. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Terrible years, it's being stated over here.  Eight, 
nine years of PC government; eight, nine years of deficit management, 
deficit creation, fiscal management or more appropriately fiscal 
mismanagement.  After eight, nine years of that -- and this is in the 
context of having 20 years of no deficit prior to this government assuming 
office -- eight, nine years of unparalleled waste and mismanagement; and 
eight, nine years of I think new standards, or new lows, in dealing with 
the whole question of accountability, if we look at things such as the 



 

 

attacks that have taken place on the office of the auditor and the 
individual auditors in Saskatchewan.  Eight, nine years of that, eight, 
nine years of denying accountability, having the people of Saskatchewan on 
the edge of a revolt against a government that they can no longer stomach, 
we have the member for Cut Knife-Lloydminster enlightening us with his 
remarks and saying that if it wasn't for them opening up the Public 
Accounts Committee in 1982 to the media, we would never have seen that. 
 
So we should disregard eight, nine years of deficit and an accumulated 
deficit, the likes of which the people of Saskatchewan have never seen 
before, never want to see again, and are fearful of the impact that it will 
have for future generations.  Eight, nine years of tremendous waste and 
mismanagement, the only thing that we should remember is that the PC 
(Progressive Conservative) government opened up the Public Accounts 
Committee to the media in 1982.  Because if we accept that and we remember 
that, we don't need to concern ourselves with any of the government's 
record. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have never heard such rationale, such logic 
before.  But I just want to make two minor points if I might with respect 
to the member's comments.  First of all, I recognize that it was the PC 
government in 1982 that opened up the Public Accounts Committee to the 
media.  I recognize that. 
 
But I might also say that this was done in the context of a number of other 
governments in Canada moving to do exactly the same thing.  And my guess is 
that no matter who the government had been after 1982, the Public Accounts 
Committee would have been opened up to the media because it's something 
that progressive governments throughout the country were doing at that 
time.  I think that the public demanded no less.  The public wanted to see 
that.  The public would have had its way; the media would have been allowed 
access to the Public Accounts Committee.  And if the member is saying that 
only a PC government would have brought that about, I beg to differ with 
him. 
 
I might point out in that context that it was the NDP government of the day 
in 1982 that made moves to televise the proceedings of the Legislative 
Assembly.  I have no doubt that there would have been other measures on the 
government's plate at that time in terms of opening up accessibility. But 
if the member wants to believe, if the member truly wants to believe that 
we can somehow ignore eight, nine years of fiscal mismanagement; eight, 
nine years of wasted mismanagement; eight, nine years of cruelty and 
hardship for the people of Saskatchewan; eight, nine years of a downright 
belligerent attitude towards provincial auditors; if he wants to believe 
that by opening up the Public Accounts Committee in 1982 somehow excuses 
them from an eight, nine-year record, then he can believe that. But I tell 
you, you're not fooling anybody in Saskatchewan. 
 
One other comment I want to make.  One other comment I want to make about 
this belief of the members that opening up the Public Accounts Committee in 
1982 is the greatest thing that's happened in Saskatchewan since sliced 
bread or whatever, Mr. Speaker, and that is that even though the government 
of the day moved to open up the Public Accounts Committee and recognizably 



 

 

so, moved to open up the Public Accounts Committee by giving the media and 
the public the opportunity to meet or to witness the proceedings, even as 
the member . . . you know, even as the government did that, it also moved 
on the other hand, to reduce the amount of information that was to be made 
public and which would be defeated by the committee. 
 
(1600) 
 
So on the one hand the committee is opened up; on the other hand you 
provide the committee with less information to debate, so that there's 
fewer embarrassments coming out.  Well it hasn't quite worked out that way.  
I mean if anybody's been following the proceedings of the government and 
followed the proceedings of the Public Accounts Committee and the 
proceedings of the Legislative Assembly in the last eight, nine years, we 
will know that there has been no end of embarrassments for this government 
when it comes to its wild and crazy spending behaviours, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But again if the member for Cut Knife-Lloydminster wants to delude himself 
he can, but the people of Saskatchewan will know that the government moved, 
as an example, to limit -- limit the amount of information that would be 
provided in volume 3 of the Public Accounts.  The Public Accounts is a 
document, Mr. Deputy Speaker, which is prepared by the Provincial 
Comptroller and is tabled in the Legislative Assembly and which provides 
the details of all expenditures for a certain fiscal year. 
 
Now it used to be that up until 1983 or so, shortly after the PCs were 
elected, that the government provided the details on all payments to 
employees over $20,000, all payments to suppliers over $10,000, and the 
details on all travels in excess of $2,000 by any one person.  That was the 
case. 
 
Since 1983-84, we've seen the government move to restrict that kind of 
information.  Where it was once provided for not only departments but for 
all government departments in the aggregate, we now have a situation where 
the government has refused to provide that information for the government 
at large. 
 
But again the member wants to take the point of view that the greatest 
thing that's happened in Saskatchewan was opening up the Public Accounts 
Committee in 1982 to the media.  He can take that approach, but again the 
people of Saskatchewan are not fooled because they know that even as they 
moved to open up the Public Accounts Committee, the government moved to 
restrict the amount of information that would be made available to the 
public.  And not only restrict the amount of information, Mr. Speaker, not 
only restrict the amount of information but also to delay, to drag out, to 
make questions such as the timeliness of information come to the forefront 
as was never the case before. 
 
So not only are we getting less information for the Public Accounts 
Committee to deal with, but the information that is provided is being dealt 
with much less later than had been the case previously, which has caused 
the auditor to raise questions about timeliness of the information being 
provided -- a very relevant point. 



 

 

 
It's one thing to be provided with the details of expenditures for any 
fiscal year; it's something else again to not be dealing with that 
information until some two years down the road.  There's certain questions 
of timeliness here.  You have an expenditure, you want it accounted for, 
but you should not drag your feet because it impairs the accountability 
cycle. 
 
So again, yes, the PC government opened up the Public Accounts Committee, 
and I want to congratulate them for that.  But again, if the member for Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster, having said that, if the member for Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster wants to delude himself that by that one action in the 
context of a number of other governments doing the same across Canada, and 
the likelihood that any government here would have done the same, if the 
member for Cut Knife-Lloydminster wants to delude himself with the belief 
that somehow we should excuse, forget, not remember, this government's 
eight, nine-year record of fiscal mismanagement, of waste and mismanagement 
and attacking the auditor and attacking the accountability process, then 
again the member for Cut Knife-Lloydminster may delude himself in that 
fashion, Mr. Speaker.  But he's not fooling anyone here and he's not 
fooling the public of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was, like the previous speaker, most interested to hear the 
remarks of the member for Saskatoon South.  The member for Saskatoon South 
speaks with a great deal of authority in this matter.  And his remarks were 
authoritative to say the least.  These were legitimate remarks, these were 
a solid contribution to the debate on the Bill at hand.  His remarks are 
remarks well worth reading, well worth savouring. 
 
And it should come as no surprise the member for Saskatoon South has played 
a very valuable role in the Standing Committee on Public Accounts.  He's 
always attended, he's been I would say exemplary, exemplary in his study of 
the issues and in his questioning of the witnesses before us -- at all 
times, at all times, Mr. Speaker, trying to get from the officials and the 
bureaucrats that appear before the committee the full truth and all the 
explanations about the expenditures that they have made as authorized by 
the Legislative Assembly.  So we are indeed grateful and fortunate to have 
someone like him speak in an issue like this. 
 
I might point out too that he is the critic for the Office of the 
Provincial Auditor, and that should come as no surprise that he is well 
versed in this matter, and that even the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster 
recognized this and recognized that he had paid attention to that member's 
remarks; these were good remarks. 
 
And I might say that in having singled out the member for Saskatoon South, 
Mr. Speaker, I want to hasten to add that in fact all members of the 
committee also make contributions to the . . . or the Public Accounts 
Committee make contributions that are valuable and well recognized.  And it 
helps to make the Public Accounts Committee function effectively, and to 
produce for the Legislative Assembly reports that are authoritative and 
reports which are some guidance to the government, if some previous reports 
are to be believed. Because we see now through this Bill -- through this 



 

 

Bill, the government beginning to move to accommodate some of the 
discussions, some of the proposals that have been put forward at the public 
accounts committees in the past. 
 
But I did want to single out the member for Saskatoon South, because his 
contribution was indeed a very solid one as befits his contribution in the 
Public Accounts Committee, and has done so over the years that I've been 
there, both as a member and as a chairman of that committee.  But again all 
members do contribute, do contribute. 
 
I note with interest, I note with interest that the member for Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster in speaking to this, while he made reference, while he 
made reference to the remarks from the member for Saskatoon South who is 
the critic for the Office of the Provincial Auditor for our side -- while 
he made reference to his remarks, and recognized the very voluminous and 
substantive remarks made by that member, I don't recall the member for Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster making any reference to the remarks made by the mover of 
the motion, the mover from his own side.  I can't quite recall if the 
member for Cut Knife-Lloydminster had anything to say about what it is that 
the Minister of Finance might have said about this. 
 
I might if I could, Mr. Speaker, with leave, introduce a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUEST 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure to introduce behind the 
bar, the Member of Parliament for Regina Qu'Appelle, formerly Regina East, 
an associate of mine and a friend of mine.  I'd like to recognize and have 
members welcome Simon de Jong. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 53 (continued) 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Mr. Speaker, carrying on with my remarks, I found it 
indeed ironic -- ironic, I suppose, is the right word -- that the member 
for Cut Knife-Lloydminster would refer to the remarks made by my friend and 
colleague, the critic for the opposition for the office of auditor, the 
member for Saskatoon South, would refer to his substantive contribution to 
this House but would neglect to mention the contribution made by the 
Minister of Finance who is in this case the responsible individual and the 
person who is moving the Bill.  I found that ironic. 
 
And the members ask, why is this the case?  Well we can only guess as to 
why the member would not make reference to the minister's comments.  One, 
it might be that the minister really didn't have anything to say of 
substance.  Now I don't want to go so far as to say that the Minister of 
Finance didn't have any good contribution to make, but it might also be 
that the minister's remarks were so brief as to be forgettable. 



 

 

 
I have yet to hear such a brief introduction to a Bill, the explanation for 
what are to be substantial changes in the Office of the Provincial Auditor, 
an explanation of the history, the debates in Saskatchewan that led up to 
the changes coming forward, an explanation of what it is that these changes 
mean and what implications they may have for not only the workings of the 
Legislative Assembly, not only for the various committees of the 
Legislative Assembly, not only for the office of the auditor, but what 
implications it might have for all of the people of Saskatchewan.  Because 
there are some implications, as we will get into, there are some 
implications for all of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
But I found it more than passing strange, Mr. Speaker, more than strange 
that the minister would not address or make a substantial contribution on a 
number of changes which are, to say the least, very substantial, very 
far-reaching, and are a marked departure from the way we have operated in 
Saskatchewan, at least in some respects, of the Office of the Provincial 
Auditor. 
 
It's almost like he was saying, we got to do it, but don't expect me to 
like it.  Maybe public opinion is forcing us to say these things and to put 
these things before you, but don't expect me to speak in support of it.  
It's almost as if he's saying, well it wasn't our agenda, and eight or nine 
years of this certainly wouldn't lead anyone to conclude that we like to do 
these kinds of things that we put before you in the Bill.  And it's only 
the kinds of things that the Reform Party and in this case the NDP has been 
saying, but we'll do it anyway.  But don't expect me to speak strongly, 
argumentatively, in favour of the various aspects of this Bill. 
 
I mean, these are major implications. To have for the first time in the 
history of this province an auditor being appointed for a term position as 
opposed to a lifetime position, for the first time in Saskatchewan history, 
yet not have the minister address that.  And as to the reasons for that 
change, I find more than passing strange. 
 
To not have the minister, for example, speak to the matter of the estimates 
for the Office of the Provincial Auditor, that -- as opposed to those funds 
now coming through the Executive Council and being debated and approved by 
the Legislative Assembly but coming from another source -- is no small 
departure from historical practice.  That the minister would not speak to 
that, I find more than passing strange. 
 
And again the people of Saskatchewan will be puzzled, will not understand 
why it is the minister was so reticent in his remarks, why he has left it 
up to the member for Cut Knife-Lloydminster to more fully explain the 
government's position, although I'm not quite sure that the member for Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster was fully explaining the government's position, not 
unless you say that a number of non sequiturs can masquerade successfully 
as a speech.  But that's what we had from the member for Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster, a number of non sequiturs and statements that didn't 
hang together but certainly could not be interpreted as being a clear 
explanation of the government's position. 
 



 

 

(1615) 
 
So again the people of Saskatchewan will have to ask themselves: why is it 
that the government is choosing this time, this time after eight or nine 
years, to put these changes before the public.  Why is it that now the 
government feels that it's appropriate to make these changes?  Why hasn't 
this been done before?  Are these new ideas?  Are these ideas of having a 
term position for an auditor, to have the auditor's office being funded by 
something else than the Executive Council or cabinet, or directly by 
cabinet, and approved as any other department in that process, but having 
those expenditures, those estimates approved by a committee of the 
legislature, ideas such as value-for-money auditing, economy effectiveness, 
efficiency?  Are those ideas so new?  Had they only arisen in the last year 
that it's only . . . that the government is moving at the first opportunity 
to introduce these reforms to the legislation which governs The Provincial 
Auditor Act; or are they johnny-come-latelies and is there more significant 
history that's not being told here?  And if so, why not?  Why didn't the 
Minister of Finance enlighten us?  Why didn't he at least put forward his 
own sorry version of a sorry history of waste and mismanagement and fiscal 
mismanagement in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
The people of Saskatchewan will be asking that question, and I hope that at 
some point, perhaps in closing the remarks on this Bill, that the Minister 
of Finance will have the fortitude to stand up and to explain to all of us 
here and the people of Saskatchewan the need for these changes; the reason 
why these changes are being brought before us now; what these changes will 
mean for the people of Saskatchewan; how the people of Saskatchewan should 
view these changes.  This would indeed be welcomed by the people of 
Saskatchewan.  I know that it would be welcomed by myself.  It would be a 
valuable contribution to the debate, a contribution along the lines that 
being which had been made previously by the member for Saskatoon South who 
was the opposition critic for the Office of the Provincial Auditor.  I 
think all of us would like to see that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would be remiss . . . I'm just barely here in my preamble 
and some introductory remarks, talking about the previous speakers to this 
Bill, and I have not yet taken the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to say how 
pleased I am to see you back in the Chair, sir.  And I want to congratulate 
you publicly on your election as Speaker.  I find that in your role as 
Speaker you have been no less than fair and honest with members of the 
House and you have displayed a great deal of integrity in the way that you 
have managed the House.  And all members from this side, myself, are very 
happy to see you back again. 
 
I might say also, Mr. Speaker, there's one other reason I'd like to see you 
back, because sometimes I find -- not often -- but there's the odd time, 
Mr. Speaker, when members find themselves speaking and you wonder, is there 
anyone listening.  We know that you are.  So we're pleased to see you back 
again, Mr. Speaker, and thank you for your attentiveness, your attention to 
all our remarks, and for your very valuable contribution that you make in 
the proceedings in this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in opening my remarks I want to deal at the outset with the . 



 

 

. . Perhaps a better way to frame this is to indicate to the public that 
the Bill we are dealing with is An Act to amend The Provincial Auditor Act.  
And The Provincial Auditor Act governs the operations of the Office of the 
Provincial Auditor and sets out not only things such as how the auditor is 
to be appointed, but what it is that the Legislative Assembly expects from 
the Provincial Auditor, that is to say, what roles and responsibilities the 
Provincial Auditor is expected to fulfil in the pursuit of his duties.  But 
it also sets out the expectations that we have for the management of the 
audit of the books of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And in that context I think that it's important to back up a little bit, to 
talk about the relationship of the auditor to the Legislative Assembly, the 
relationship of the Legislative Assembly to the government because there is 
a very important difference between those two, the relationship there to 
committees of the Legislative Assembly such as the Public Accounts 
Committee and the role of the Public Accounts Committee to the auditor.  
Because only if we understand those basic tenets upon which we operate, can 
the public and all members have a true appreciation for what it is that the 
government is trying to do with this Bill. 
 
And let me say at the outset, Mr. Speaker, let me say at the outset that I 
agree with the amendments that are being put before us.  I think these are 
good, sensible amendments.  My only regret is that they've come so late.  
My only regret is that they've come so late in the term of this government, 
that they've come eight or nine years into their mandate or their renewed 
mandate.  We would much have preferred to have seen these changes early on 
in their term to see how they might have benefitted from these amendments.  
We would all have liked to have seen that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I do want to indicate my support for the amendments before us.  Like 
the member for Saskatoon South, we see the need for a minor improvement to 
the Bill which we think will further improve the accountability cycle which 
we're all talking about and which I want to get to here in some detail in a 
minute. But having said that, Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate my support 
for the Bill.  I think it's a good Bill.  It can stand some minor 
improvement and we'll deal with that, I would think, at the appropriate 
time in committee. 
 
But again the role of the legislature and the government, in our 
orientation, Mr. Speaker, to the Public Accounts Committee, the Provincial 
Comptroller told us in 1987 -- and he provided us with an overview of the 
parliamentary control over public money, which is what we're talking about 
here, and the auditor's role in that, a very vital role in the 
parliamentary control of public moneys -- he stated that the major features 
in this system of parliamentary control over public moneys include: one, 
the right of the legislature to raise and spend moneys, and the concept of 
a Consolidated Fund. 
 
Now I just want to examine that.  He talks about the right of the 
legislature as opposed to the right of the government. These are important 
and distinct differences.  Not all members of the legislature are members 
of the government.  Only a small number of all of the members of the 
legislature are in fact members of the government or the executive 



 

 

government.  Only those who are members of the Executive Council or the 
cabinet are in fact members of the government.  The rest of us, opposition 
members and other government members, are all of course members of the 
Legislative Assembly. All of us have the right to say how the money should 
be raised and how the money should be spent. 
 
And that is why we have the government of the day putting before us its 
proposals as to how money should be spent through budget and through 
estimates.  The government says, we would like to spend money in a certain 
way and this is our plan for doing it, our budget, and here is the details 
of how we propose to do it, our estimates, but has to come to all of the 
members here to obtain approval. 
 
Now that approval is normally given.  In fact we talk about there being a 
government side which has more members than the opposition side, and we 
talk about an opposition side.  Normally that approval is given and in fact 
it's almost followed that all members who are elected as part of the 
government's party are in fact members of the government.  That is not the 
case. There is a very clear distinction there. 
 
 DBut it doesn't necessarily always follow that members . . . or that the 
spending proposals of the government will in fact be approved, will be 
approved by the Legislative Assembly. 
 
I think the last example of that was probably in Ottawa.  And it's 
interesting that our colleague, the Member of Parliament for Regina 
Qu'Appelle, is with us because I think that he will remember the events of 
1980 when we had a Canadian government, I believe the government of Joe 
Clark, putting a budget before the parliament and the parliament not 
agreeing with the budget that he had put before it, which then resulted, as 
you know, in an election.  Because not having the support of the parliament 
for its budget and for its spending plan is of course an indication to all 
concerned, not the least of which is the Governor General, that the 
Governor General should not have the confidence any more of the government 
and should call an election so there can be a new government that can enjoy 
his confidence. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance was interrupting; did he 
want to make a contribution at this point?  Did he want leave of the House 
to say or ask something, Mr. Speaker?  I'm not clear.  Anyway he was, as 
was his custom, chirping away.  And one sometimes wishes, Mr. Speaker, that 
he would spend the energy as he does in chirping away at others speaking in 
the House, that he would take the same amount of dedication and energy as 
he does in chirping away at other members to turning his attention to the 
accounts of the province and to the budget matter . . . fiscal matters of 
the province because we might be a stroke further ahead.  But having said 
that, he makes his own priorities and chooses in his own way as to what he 
wants to do and how he should spend his time. 
 
In continuing on with this overview of parliamentary control over public 
moneys, Mr. Speaker, the second aspect that I just want to review here is 
that there should be a Provincial Comptroller who ensures that spending is 
within legislative authority and budget, as distinct from a Provincial 



 

 

Auditor.  We have a Provincial Comptroller who ensures that . . . or in 
addition to the auditor, we have a comptroller to make sure that the money 
is being spent within legislative authority and budget.  And the 
legislature directs the Provincial Comptroller through The Department of 
Revenue and Financial Services Act to ensure the requisition for payments 
are rejected if there are insufficient moneys in the appropriation. 
 
Now that is perhaps, just as an aside here, that is something where members 
on this side of the House and members . . . I think all the people of 
Saskatchewan had wished that the Provincial Comptroller in these last 
eight, nine years would have had some real power and authority to in fact 
carry this out because what it says is that the legislature has directed 
the Provincial Comptroller to ensure that requisitions for payments are 
rejected if there are insufficient moneys in the appropriation.  So what 
it's saying is that the Provincial Comptroller can't authorize the 
government to spend any money if we don't have the money. 
 
Now looking at the record of the government, this is kind of news to them.  
They've always taken the position, judging from their fiscal record, that 
you spend today, you borrow tomorrow, and you say sorry the day after that.  
That's their record.  If only we had had a Provincial Comptroller with real 
teeth and authority to say, no you can't continue to spend here.  If the 
money isn't there, you'd better debate this publicly as to why you need 
more money. 
 
We might not have seen, for example, this gross and huge miscalculation of 
the budget that we saw before and after the last provincial election.  And 
who knows what miscalculations are afoot in the context of this coming 
election, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- What dark deeds. 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Who knows, as my colleague says, what dark deeds are 
being planned at this point.  We have no idea, but it's certainly . . . If 
the Provincial Comptroller had had the effective authority to stop the 
government, we might never have seen the kind of miscalculation because the 
government would then not have been allowed to spend the money if it wasn't 
provided for by the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Now another feature of parliamentary control is an annual accounting to the 
legislature on the financial activities of the government.  And the 
legislature has directed the Provincial Comptroller to prepare a Public 
Accounts which is an annual report to the legislature for every fiscal 
year, and gives in great detail the financial transactions of the 
Consolidated Fund, Saskatchewan Heritage Fund, and other special trust . . 
. trust and special funds, and provides information which assists the 
Legislative Assembly, through the Public Accounts Committee, to examine the 
accounts of the province. 
 
Because basically that's what it's all about.  Even as the government does 
not have the authority to spend money without the approval of the 



 

 

Legislative Assembly, and then supposedly can only spend in such a way as 
approved in some detail by the Legislative Assembly, so it is that the 
other aspect of the accountability cycle must be respected.  And this is 
what the comptroller talks about, and that is, that once the money has been 
spent, it should also be accounted for. 
 
And in a very real way the provisions of this Bill before us address the 
question of how the money has been spent.  And that's in the provisions in 
the Bill, Bill No. 53, on value-for-money auditing, talking about the 
acquisition and use of resources, that it has been efficient and 
economical, and where procedures could appropriately and reasonably be used 
to measure and report on the effectiveness of programs, satisfactory 
procedures have been established. 
 
But it's very important that not only the government be given the authority 
to spend money by the Legislative Assembly, but that the Legislative 
Assembly, as the true representatives of the people of Saskatchewan -- as 
distinct from the government -- that the members of the Legislative 
Assembly have the right to review the government's spending records and to 
report to the people of Saskatchewan on how the government has done in this 
way. 
 
Because only then can the people of Saskatchewan have some real and true 
and valid indication as to whether or not the government has spent their 
money wisely and appropriately and legally, and with due regard for 
management and hasn't wasted their money, because those are very important 
considerations. 
 
I mean whatever else we might expect of a government, we expect a 
government to spend money prudently.  We expect a government to spend money 
wisely.  We expect a government to not waste too much money.  And we know 
that in large organizations, whether it's government or private 
corporation, there's always some waste, but we expect to see less of that 
than more of that, which is not something that has been the case in the 
last eight or nine years, Mr. Speaker.  But that's an expectation the 
public has. 
 
But the public is ill prepared to be able to judge whether the government 
has done a good job in those respects. 
 
The public can't really tell if the government has spent money wisely if it 
doesn't have some body that reviews the activities of the government and 
reports back to the public, and that being the Legislative Assembly and its 
arm in this case, the Public Accounts Committee, and to some extent as 
well, the Crown Corporations Committee which reviews in greater detail the 
activities of Crown corporations, which are also an important part of 
government activities, as distinct from line departments, Mr. Speaker, 
which very directly get their appropriation and funds from the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
It's very clear what their money is to be spent on and it's very clear as 
to what they spent their money on, and it's very clear in the reporting 
mechanism back to the Legislative Assembly. 



 

 

 
We have, as you know, also these other entities which are called Crown 
corporations which are from time to time also funded by government, 
entities which in addition to funding are owned in total by the government.  
And of course there is a significant public debate in Saskatchewan, as 
there is in some other jurisdictions, Quebec being one and Canada being 
another, about the role of the Legislative Assembly and the right of the 
people to be able to expect some accounting of other entities in which the 
government has a significant interest and in which the government's role is 
indeed a vital one. 
 
And that is -- I refer to these as mixed corporations -- corporations in 
which the government has something less than a hundred per cent ownership 
but has more than, say, 10 per cent ownership, corporations such as 
WESTBRIDGE or Cameco. 
 
Even though these are not Crown corporations in the true sense of the word 
and there is individual private ownership in those companies as well, the 
extent of government ownership is such as to be significant.  And we have 
no accounting of the government's ownership of those companies in any real 
or significant way. 
 
And that is no small debate in the context of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
because of the large number of Crown corporations we have and the large 
government holdings that we have, shareholdings in a number of private 
companies here in Saskatchewan, whether it's WESTBRIDGE computers or Cameco 
or Saskoil or any number of companies like that. 
 
And it's also a matter of some debate in Quebec where also there's a large 
number of corporations such as that and of course in Ottawa as well.  It's 
not so much of an issue in other provinces, Mr. Speaker, because they seem 
to have much less reliance on Crown corporations than Saskatchewan's had.  
And that reflects, I think, something of the history and the culture of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But nevertheless, that's a significant debate here in the context of 
Saskatchewan and I suspect a debate that will be focused more sharply in 
the years to come.  It's a debate that the government has not seen fit yet 
to enter into.  Well, my colleague says they want to privatize.  Then 
privatize they do and privatize they will and privatize they did. 
 
Piratize, my colleague says.  And I'll get to this in a minute because when 
I talk about value for money -- which is one this Bill addresses, this Bill 
talks about value-for-money auditing -- one of the significant questions 
that comes to me is, when you talk about value for money, is in all the 
privatizations that have occurred in Saskatchewan -- and there have been 
very many in these last three years -- in all the privatizations that have 
occurred, did the people of Saskatchewan get value for their money?  Was 
the public interest served? 
 
As an example, and I'll deal with this in greater detail later on: the 
Department of Highways.  Everyone will recall that the very first act of 
privatization by this government was to privatize the Highways department.  



 

 

I think it was the former minister of Highways that said that we're 
transferring employees to the private sector. 
 
After having divested itself of the responsibilities and after cruelly, 
cruelly ended the employment of valuable and trusted and effective civil 
servants, after having booted them out the door with not so much as a word 
of thanks, but only disdain and sarcasm, and cynicism, and after having 
done that the government found itself with some highways equipment that it 
could no longer use because it said we don't want to have our employees run 
that equipment. 
 
So the government was faced with the challenge of how to divest itself of 
what was believed to be $40 million worth of highways equipment.  In fact 
the appraisal I believe was that it was close to, no, $40 million of 
highways equipment and what to do with that. 
 
And there are some real questions that are presented here for the people of 
Saskatchewan, such as: what process did the government utilize to divest 
itself of that equipment?  Was that process a sound and efficient process?  
Was it a process which was designed to get the most return on the 
investment that the people had in that equipment?  That's a very real 
question.  And in the final analysis, what kind of money did the government 
get for the Highways equipment that it sold off?  And are there other ways 
in which that might have been done so as to ensure that the people of 
Saskatchewan at some future time might get a better return on their dollar? 
 
And everyone will remember -- everyone will remember, Mr. Speaker, because 
it was a dark day that we all found out that the government sold $40 
million worth of Highways equipment for $6 million -- $40 million dollars 
of Highways equipment for $6 million.  And they thought it was a good deal.  
And there were some others around who thought it was a good deal too, but 
it wasn't the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And those are the kinds of questions which I think can be answered now; or 
at least greater focus can be given to questions such as that through one 
of the provisions in the Bill before us, and that is the whole question of 
value for money, or as the Bill puts it: 
 

 the acquisition and use of resources has been efficient and economical; 
and 

 
 where procedures could appropriately and reasonably be used to measure and 

report on the effectiveness of programs, satisfactory procedures have been 
established. 

 
But in this case certainly, the use of resources has been efficient and 
economical.  This is one of the features of the Bill that we look forward 
to. 
 
I want to move on, Mr. Speaker, to mention another aspect of the 
accountability cycle and the whole overview of parliamentary control over 
public money, and that is an independent audit by the Provincial Auditor.  
And I'll get to that in some greater detail as a separate chapter in my 



 

 

remarks as befits the subject of the Bill that we're addressing here, which 
is An Act to amend The Provincial Auditor (Act). 
 
But very briefly, I might say that the parliamentary control process also 
requires an independent audit of the financial transactions of the province 
by an independent auditor known as the Provincial Auditor.  And that the 
auditor is not a government employee but a servant of the legislature.  And 
the Provincial Auditor attests to the province's financial statements and 
also provides a separate report to the legislature on matters which he 
believes should be brought to their attention. 
 
And again we see this tie-in now, this connection between the Provincial 
Auditor and the Legislative Assembly as opposed to the government.  And it 
says that the books of the province are to be audited by the Provincial 
Auditor but that the results of that shall be given to the Legislative 
Assembly, as distinct from the government. 
 
So here again we see this accountability cycle taking place, where the 
government may in fact end up spending taxpayers' dollars, but it has to be 
approved by the Legislative Assembly and also must be reported on, or the 
government must report in various ways as to how the public's money has 
been spent, as I reported, through the Public Accounts and here again now, 
an independent audit by the Provincial Auditor. 
 
And it used to be that the Provincial Comptroller and the Provincial 
Auditor were the one and same person some years ago.  It was accepted that 
you could have one person fulfil both functions effectively on behalf of 
the people of Saskatchewan.  And I suppose in a simpler time, when 
government expenditures were far less and society was less complicated and 
functions of government were far less complicated that might well have been 
the case. 
 
And I might say too you might have had governments that had a few more 
scruples than has been demonstrated in the last few years.  Then that kind 
of separation of responsibilities, in roles and responsibilities, might not 
have been as pressing as is certainly now the case. 
 
But I wanted to mention that to you and also to emphasize that in this 
accountability cycle, the Provincial Comptroller has some distinct 
responsibilities outlined for him and that certainly when it comes to 
making sure that the government spends money as was appropriated by the 
legislature. 
 
Also an important part of the overview of . . . or the parliamentary 
control of the public money is an annual review by the Public Accounts 
Committee.  The Public Accounts Committee examines the Public Accounts 
documents and the Provincial Auditor's reports.  As you know, in fact there 
is a standing referral.  There's a standing . . . not a standing referral, 
but it's customary, and I believe it happened here again this spring.  On 
the first day that we sat the Government House Leader, the member for 
Melfort, moved the motion.  And the motion along the lines of, that when 
the Report of the Provincial Auditor is tabled before the Legislative 
Assembly, that it would then be referred to the Public Accounts Committee 



 

 

as tabled so that the minute that it was tabled in this House it would 
automatically . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Again I have the 
Minister of Finance interrupting my remarks, Mr. Speaker.  I don't know if 
he has a guest that he wants to introduce or if there's some question or 
some other comment that he wants to make but . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order, order.  Would the hon. member take 
his seat?  The minister will have an opportunity to rise, or he already had 
his opportunity, I'm afraid.  So he won't have that opportunity, except in 
closing the debate if he wishes.  However, allow the member for Regina 
Victoria now to continue. 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I might say that I kind of 
understand why the . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker.  I can understand why the minister might now be tempted to want . 
. . or at least wanting to get up and speak to the matter because, as I 
mentioned at the outset of my remarks, sir, the minister's contribution 
certainly set a record for brevity, brevity relative to the importance of 
the matters before us, but maybe he's now found that there is more reason 
for him to speak. 
 
But I would point out that, as is the custom and the rules here, that the 
mover of a motion certainly has the opportunity, after everyone else has 
had a turn, to speak again and, if you will, to close the debate on a 
matter, and that's the way it should be, Mr. Speaker.  That's the way it 
should be; for the mover to put his case before the public, before the 
Legislative Assembly, as was done in the briefest of ways by the Minister 
of Finance, and then for him to, or for any mover to listen to all the 
contributions that had been made and to integrate those into some 
meaningful contribution on the Bill or the motion in question.  And I'm 
sure that we will be seeing, I would think, in fact I would venture to 
suggest, that we will be seeing a very significant contribution yet by the 
Minister of Finance on this very Bill. 
 
I would be surprised if the Minister of Finance didn't get up for a couple 
of hours to talk in detail about the provisions of this Bill; the 
far-reaching implications that these amendments have for the accountability 
cycle in Saskatchewan, and why it is that these amendments are only being 
proposed now after eight or nine years of PC government, as opposed to 
having been done before.  But I'm sure that the Minister of Finance will at 
an early opportunity, sir, will at an early opportunity address the members 
of the Legislative Assembly in this matter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, earlier, in talking about parliamentary control over public 
moneys -- and that's a concept that's probably more than somewhat strange 
to the Minister of Finance and his government who have, I would say, 
exemplified anything but that these last eight or nine years, if we look at 
the record of fiscal mismanagement, and I think it's generally conceded by 
one and all that it has been a record of fiscal mismanagement -- that 
parliamentary control over public moneys, I mentioned that I would be 
talking in greater detail about the role of the Provincial Auditor in that, 



 

 

and I'd like to do that now, sir. 
 
In this very same orientation that members of the Public Accounts Committee 
received in 1987 -- September of '87, I believe it was -- that the members 
of the Public Accounts Committee received, orienting them to the role that 
they had to play within the context of the Legislative Assembly and within 
the context of the accountability cycle, we also had a presentation by the 
provincial auditor, Willard Lutz, the provincial auditor of the day.  And 
I'd like to briefly review some of his remarks because I think it's 
important for the public to understand what it is that the role of the 
auditor is and how that is then, or might be implicated -- and implicated, 
I would say very significantly, very significantly -- by the Bill before 
us. 
 
The auditor at that time indicated that his responsibility was to help the 
Assembly hold the government accountable by reporting to the Assembly on 
matters relating to the government's administration of public money.  He's 
making it very clear, very clear, that it's his role to help the Assembly 
and that he will report to the Assembly as to the government's 
administration of public money. 
 
In this statement he makes it very clear that he is a creature of the 
Legislative Assembly, that he reports to the Legislative Assembly but it's 
his role to review what it is that the government has done.  That's a very, 
very important distinction, and I think lies at the heart of our 
parliamentary system of government, a subject about which, sir, you 
probably know more than most members of the House; in fact, I've heard you 
at the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association speak at some length on these 
topics and you have shown indeed a very good grasp of these subjects.  And 
there are others in this House too who know and understand what it is that 
parliamentary government is all about and understand the accountability 
cycle.  But the auditor here is making it very clear what his job is. 
 
Now he states, in fact he goes on to talk about, in addition to his role, 
in explaining his role in some detail -- and I won't do that, I won't 
belabour the members at this point in great detail about the role of the 
Provincial Auditor -- but the auditor does go on to talk about the 
independence, the independence of the Provincial Auditor.  And he states 
that in order for the Provincial Auditor to be of real value to the 
Assembly, it is necessary that he be independent of the executive 
government.  There are a number of aspects of this Bill that address this 
very clearly, and one in a very major way, Mr. Speaker, and I'm going to 
get to that in some detail later on. 
 
But he states that he has the independence to run his office, to employ the 
staff that he wants to hire, to purchase goods and services without 
interference from the government, with the one exception, and that is that 
he must request his resources through cabinet as opposed to a committee of 
the Assembly.  Now this is a question that the Bill addresses.  There is a 
marked departure here from what has been the case that the auditor talks 
about and he mentions very clearly. 
 
I want to deal with that in some detail later on, as a separate heading, 



 

 

because this matter of the estimates for the auditor's office is very vital 
to the functioning in that office.  But he goes on to also explain the 
independence of the Provincial Auditor as provided for in the Act, and that 
the Provincial Auditor can be removed from office only for cause by the 
Lieutenant Governor in Council and on address of the Legislative Assembly.  
So again the Legislative Assembly needs to be consulted, or a part of the 
removal of any Provincial Auditor.  It must be done, the removal must be 
done in a public forum.  No sort of quiet in the night getting rid of the 
Provincial Auditor; no sort of using the tactics of Becket or More.  My 
colleague, the member for Regina Centre, will know more about those 
historical figures and the various ways in which they dealt with those 
servants that displeased them.  That is not the way that we do things here.  
In this case it's clear that it must be done openly. 
 
The Provincial Auditor's salary is established by statute, by a Bill, and 
is tied to the average salary of top public servants, and that the 
government may not change his salary without coming back to the Legislative 
Assembly.  So again, any change in salary for the Provincial Auditor must 
be done in a public forum, that is to say the Legislative Assembly, rather 
than in secrecy. 
 
The auditor's report, as I mentioned, is brought before you, is given to 
you, and submitted to you for tabling in the Legislative Assembly.  He 
states that the perceived independence of his office is enhanced by his 
annual report of being tabled by you in the Legislative Assembly as opposed 
to ministers of the Crown. 
 
And you will know and members will know, even if the public did not know, 
that on an almost daily basis we will receive reports of Crown 
corporations, departments, agency, other government entities and 
undertakings and funds and what-have-you.  We get these on an ongoing 
basis.  But these are all reports which are brought to the Legislative 
Assembly by ministers of the Crown or by members of the government, as 
distinct from yourself, who is not a member of the government but who is a 
servant of the Assembly. 
 
So again he's stating that independence is enhanced because you're tabling 
his report as opposed to having the government tabling his report, so that 
it is clear that he -- he -- is a servant of the Assembly, is a servant of 
the Assembly rather than being a servant of the public, which is very 
important, sir. 
 
He's also saying that his office has managerial independence from central 
agency controls imposed by treasury board, SaskCOMP, and so on, so that the 
government, as you know, in trying to find efficiency in the way it 
controls things, will set up central agencies to provide goods and services 
to other departments.  Such as we have one agency, for example, to help 
government departments find office space to rent as opposed to having each 
government department running off by itself and renting space and so on.  
We have one government agency to co-ordinate that. 
 
Computer services is another one that used to be run centrally as opposed 
to having each department engage for its own computer services.  It was 



 

 

done centrally.  That is to say, I believe it was through the Saskatchewan 
Computer Utility Corporation, which is something, incidentally, Mr. 
Speaker, when I talk about value for money . . . when I talk about value 
for money, Mr. Speaker, I would just point out and put you on notice that 
this is a subject that I'm going to be talking about later because this 
Bill provides value-for-money auditing.  That is to say that the people of 
Saskatchewan get the best bang for their buck. 
 
Well having mentioned SaskCOMP, I want to tell you I'm going to come back 
to that one in my remarks later on to talk about that one in some detail 
and ask the people of Saskatchewan, after reviewing some of the financial 
transactions that did take place and such has been reported to us, even 
though there is many more details that we would like to have, whether or 
not the people of Saskatchewan got the best deal possible under the 
circumstances and what implications it has for government that we now have 
this amendment to the auditor's Act before us, and which could change the 
kind of information that will be made available to the public, so that the 
government of the people of the province are in a better position to judge, 
to judge at election time whether the government has done the kind of job 
that they would like to see in terms of spending their tax dollars. 
 
Did they do it wisely?  Did they do it effectively?  The only way the 
people of Saskatchewan can really effectively judge that is if they're 
given more information as opposed to less information.  This Bill in a very 
clear and substantial way proposes to make more information available to 
the people of Saskatchewan to enable them to make a better judgement based 
on more facts as to whether or not the government did a good job. 
 
Maybe that's why the Bill is coming so late, because if the public had had 
benefit of some of those kinds of reviews in the past, they might have been 
a little bit less charitable than they were on the last provincial 
election, sir.  But that's only supposition on my part.  And I'm sure that 
the Minister of Finance will be addressing that in some detail in his 
remarks when he closes debate on this Bill. 
 
I might say that at that time the Provincial Auditor did his orientation 
for the members of the Public Accounts Committee, that the auditor 
mentioned that it would be preferable that he obtain his resources -- that 
is to say the funding for his offices -- through the Standing Committee on 
Public Accounts or some other committee of the legislature, as opposed to 
the executive government, the cabinet.  And of course the Bill addresses 
that matter and it's something that I want to deal with in some detail. 
 
The Speaker: -- It being near 5 o'clock the House stands recessed until 7 
p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


